Boyd K. Packer, Holy Temple ( 1980)

15

Sacred Covenants

The Lord in the revelation now known as section 132 of the Doctrine and Covenants announces:

For behold, I reveal unto you a new and an everlasting covenant; and if ye abide not that covenant, then ye are damned; for no one can reject this covenant and be permitted to enter into my glory.

For all who will have a blessing at my hands shall abide the law which was appointed for that blessing, and the conditions thereof, as were instituted from before the foundation of the world. (D&C 132:4-5.)

President Joseph Fielding Smith defines the new and everlasting covenant in these words:

What is the new and everlasting covenant? I regret to say that there are some members of the Church who are misled and misinformed in regard to what the new and everlasting covenant really is. The new and everlasting covenant is the sum total of all gospel covenants and obligations, and I want to prove it. In the 66th section of the Doctrine and Covenants, verse 2, I read:

"Verily I say unto you, blessed are you for receiving mine everlasting covenant, even the fulness of my gospel, sent forth unto the children of men, that they might have life and be made partakers of the glories which are to be revealed in the last days, as it was written by the prophets and apostles in days of old."

More definitely stated is the definition of the new and everlasting covenant given to us in section 132 of the Doctrine and Covenants. Now I am going to say before I read this that marriage is not the new and everlasting covenant. If there are any here that have that idea I want to say that right to them. Baptism is not the new and everlasting covenant. Ordination to the priesthood is not the new and everlasting covenant. In section 22 of the Doctrine and Covenants the Lord says that baptism is "a new and an everlasting covenant, even that which was from the beginning." Marriage in the temple of the Lord for time and for eternity is "a" new and everlasting covenant. (Doctrines of Salvation, 1:156.)

As to why it is called a new covenant, President Smith wrote:

Each ordinance and requirement given to man for the purpose of bringing to pass his salvation and exaltation is a covenant. Baptism for the remission of sins is a covenant. When this ordinance was

revealed in this dispensation, the Lord called it "a new and an everlasting covenant, even that which was from the beginning."

This covenant was given in the beginning and was lost to men through apostasy, therefore, when it was revealed again, it became to man a new covenant, although it was from the beginning, and it is everlasting since its effects upon the individual endure forever. Then again, whenever there is need for repentance, baptism is the method, or law, given of the Lord by which the remission of sins shall come, and so this law is everlasting. (Doctrines of Salvation, 1:152.)

This covenant includes all ordinances of the gospel-the highest of which are performed in the temple. To quote President Smith again:

Now there is a clear-cut definition in detail of the new and everlasting covenant. It is everything-the fulness of the gospel. So marriage properly performed, baptism, ordination to the priesthood, everything else-every contract, every obligation, every performance that pertains to the gospel of Jesus Christ, which is sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise according to his law here given, is a part of the new and everlasting covenant. (Doctrines of Salvation, 1:158.)

The Importance of Covenants

In the previous chapter we used the analogy of an insurance policy. It would be useless to buy insurance from a company if all claims had to be paid out of the pocket of the agent who sold the policies. You would not be very secure if your protection depended upon the financial resources of the salesman.

You should have some guarantee too that the company will honor the policies written by their agents. You should know what your policy requires the company to do, and what it requires you to do. For instance, how do you cancel out, if you decide not to continue? Remember, policies can be cancelled by the company as well. They cannot be obliged to keep their part of the contract forever if you willfully disregard yours.

This principle applies to spiritual matters. As was quoted above from President Joseph Fielding Smith, "Each ordinance and requirement given to man for the purpose of bringing to pass his salvation and exaltation is a covenant." With this in mind, we must be careful not to take the ordinances and covenants of the gospel lightly, nor to maintain them carelessly.

In the verse quoted previously (Doctrine and Covenants 132:4) the Lord spoke with unmistakable plainness: ". . . for no man can reject this covenant and be permitted to enter into my glory."

I learned a lesson regarding Church covenants many years ago. As a young married man I went ward teaching, as it was called in those days, to a very old man. He was a member of our high priests quorum and we occasionally worked together on projects. I can remember one day husking corn with him for a welfare canning project. On such occasions we would talk of spiritual things. One day he told me something that I shall always remember. It had great influence on me.

When he was a very young man he had attended a funeral. The man who had died had not been active in the Church, although he was regarded as "a good man." He was a very close relative of the President of the Church. The members of the tiny farming community who gathered for the funeral were surprised and felt greatly honored that the President of the Church, the prophet, had come a long distance to the funeral. The first speakers commented on the virtues of the departed brother. One told of some acts of charity that he had done. He had given flour to widows, for instance. Other kindnesses were mentioned.

When it came time for the President of the Church to speak, his sermon was very unsettling to some. This old brother told me that the President first made an expression of appreciation for his deceased relative. He acknowledged the good that the man had accomplished and said he placed full value on those things that had been mentioned by the previous speakers. But then he said, "All of this may be well and good, but the fact is he did not keep his covenants."

The President then soberly outlined the fact that this man had been to the temple, that he had made covenants. But he had not kept them. He had fallen into inactivity in the Church and had developed habits and attitudes not in keeping with the priesthood he held. Those things he had done this side of the veil that were not in harmony with his covenants, and those things that he had not done this side of the veil that were required by his covenants, stood in the way of his eternal progression. These matters would need to be settled before he could claim the blessings of his covenants. He had not kept his part of the promise.

It was an unusual funeral sermon, perhaps one that could only be given by the President of the Church. Although my friend told me the name of the deceased and his relationship to the President, it is not necessary to include that information to make a very sobering lesson of the incident as he described it to me. The experience had a profound effect on my friend. His conveying it to me had a similar effect on me. Perhaps my reciting it here will be sobering to you who read this and will motivate you to review and reevaluate your covenants and your observance of them.

Let me recount another interesting story, one from which we can draw an impressive analogy. Some years ago Elder O. Leslie Stone was in business in California. A prominent businessman called him to his office one day and told him that he was interested in starting a new business. This man had watched Brother Stone carefully, and he knew him to be a man of unusual talent in business. He had also come to admire him for his unquestioned integrity. To Brother Stone's surprise the man handed him a check made out to him for one million dollars.

The man explained that this was the amount he wanted to invest in the new business enterprise. The two men were to be partners. Brother Stone was to supply the management, his partner would supply the money. He did not dictate to Brother Stone how he should use the money; he was simply to start the business and operate as he pleased.

Did he not want to sign a contract? Did he not want a receipt for the money? No, Brother Stone's word was sufficient cob lateral for him. "If this business succeeds you'll get all the credit and if it fails you'll get all the credit."

But as Brother Stone left the office this wise man said to him: "Remember, if you fail, you stand to lose more than I do. All I will lose is the money, and I have more of that. You stand to lose your reputation."

That was an interesting covenant that those two entered into, essentially on a handshake. Those of us who know Elder Stone and have known him over the years know that there really was not a great deal of risk involved, for by supplying that money (and I remind you that the man had more) he tapped Brother Stone's resources of ingenuity, integrity, dependability, and decency, for all of those virtues characterize O. Leslie Stone.

With what little you have, how would you react to a similar invitation from someone who was known to possess a large fortune? Suppose he proposed a partnership in which he would supply the sustaining resource, you would supply your dedication, your personal attributes, and you each would share somewhat equally in the success of the venture. Who would not jump at such an opportunity? It would seem to be something of an unequal arrangement, with your partner supplying far more than you. But that is just the kind of arrangement the Lord makes with us when we make a covenant with Him.

The Temple Covenants

In 1831, before temple ordinances and covenants were available, the Lord commanded the early elders to "become instructed in the law of my church, and be sanctified by that which ye have received, and ye shall bind yourselves to act in all holiness before me-That inasmuch as ye do this, glory shall be added to the kingdom which ye have received." (D&C 43:9-10.)

Those who go to the temple have the privilege of taking upon themselves specific covenants and obligations relative to their exaltation and that of others. Elder James E. Talmage wrote:

The ordinances of the endowment embody certain obligations on the part of the individual, such as covenant and promise to observe the law of strict virtue and chastity, to be charitable, benevolent, tolerant and pure; to devote both talent and material means to the spread of truth and the uplifting of the race; to maintain devotion to the cause of truth; and to seek in every way to contribute to the great preparation that the earth may be made ready to receive her King,-the Lord Jesus Christ. With the taking of each covenant and the assuming of each obligation a promised blessing is pronounced, contingent upon the faithful observance of the conditions.

No jot, iota, or tittle of the temple rites is otherwise than uplifting and sanctifying. In every detail the endowment ceremony contributes to covenants of morality of life, consecration of person to high ideals, devotion to truth, patriotism to nation, and allegiance to God. (The House of the Lord, page 100.)

The Oxford Dictionary defines covenant as "a mutual agreement between two or more persons to do or refrain from doing certain acts; a compact, contract, bargain; sometimes, the undertaking, pledge, or promise of one of the parties." As a verb, covenant is defined as "to enter into a covenant or formal agreement; to agree formally or solemnly; to contract." And, interestingly enough, it provides a scriptural definition as "applied especially to an engagement entered into by the Divine Being with some other beings or persons." Thereafter the entry lists long columns of references relating to the subject of covenants in the Bible, reaching way back to ancient times when the Israelites carried with them the ark of the covenant. (Oxford English Dictionary, 2:1100-1102.)

The temple covenants are indeed "an engagement entered into by the Divine Being with some other beings or persons," and in human terms it is not always convenient when a call comes to honor the arrangement.

The Covenants Applied

Each year a number of men are called to preside over missions. In each case this requires the man's wife and family to accompany him to some distant place and live there for three years. This is a matter of great importance to the family. If the husband accepts the call he must leave his occupation, making such arrangements as he can to obtain a leave of absence from his employer or to find someone to carry on his business. Sometimes the later reentry into his employment is left unsettled. He gives up political preference, his other interests, his hobbies. He turns away from every worldly ambition in accepting the call.

His wife is equally affected. Her home, the garden, her social position, perhaps some of her family will be left behind for the years of the call. Frequently the call comes at a time when there is the promise of marriage for one of the children, or the coming of grandchildren. The probability is that the parents will not be present during these very important occasions in the lives of their children. Children who accompany the parents are affected too, sometimes more deeply and personally than are the parents. After several years of struggle a young man may have just made the athletic team. Or a young woman perhaps has achieved some position in the school or community that is very desirable to her.

What does a person do when he is asked to set aside every personal interest and go away for three years on call of the servants of the Lord? That depends on how he regards his covenants.

I have met mission presidents and their wives in the training session prior to their departure and have met them in the distant parts of the world in the mission field. I never fail to be impressed with one thought. We are here to receive a mortal body. We are here to be tested. Who will pass the test? Are there men and are there women and are there children in the world who will turn aside from all that they hold dear to respond to a call from the Lord? Is there such dedication in the world? Insofar as these mission presidents and their families are concerned, the question has to that time been answered.

We covenant with the Lord to devote our time, talents, and means to His kingdom. The faith of the members of the Church in earlier days was tested many, many times. In a Conference Report for 1856, we find the following. Heber C. Kimball, a counselor in the First Presidency, is speaking.

I will present to this congregation the names of those whom we have selected to go on missions. Some are appointed to go to Europe, Australia, and the East Indies. And several will be sent to Las Vegas, to the north, and to Fort Supply, to strengthen the settlements there.

Assignments notified in this way often came as a complete surprise to those in the audience whose names were read out. Because of their faith, I suppose the only question they had on their minds in response to such a call was "When?" "When shall we go?" I am not so sure but that, should a similar call be made today, some would not respond "When?" but "Why?" "Why should I go?"

On one occasion I was in the office of a counselor in the First Presidency when a phone call he had placed earlier in the day came through. After greeting the caller, he said, "I wonder if your business affairs would bring you into Salt Lake City sometime in the near future? I would like to meet with you and your wife, for I have a matter of some importance that I would like to discuss with you."

Though they were many miles away, that man all of a sudden discovered that his business would bring him to Salt Lake City the very next day. I was in the same office the following day when the counselor announced to this man that he had been called to preside over one of the missions of the Church. "Now," he said, "we don't want to rush you into this decision. Would you call me in a day or two, as soon as you are able to make a determination as to your feelings concerning this call?"

The man looked at his wife and she looked at him, and without saying a word there was that silent conversation between husband and wife, and that gentle, almost imperceptible nod. He turned back to the member of the Presidency and said, "Well, President, what is there to say? What could we tell you in a few days that we couldn't tell you now? We have been called. What answer is there? Of course we will respond to the call."

Then the Presidency member said, rather gently, "Well, if you feel that way about it, actually there is some urgency about this matter. I wonder if you could be prepared to leave by ship from the West Coast on the thirteenth of March."

The man gulped, for that was just eleven days away. He glanced at his wife. There was another silent conversation, and he said, "Yes, President, we can meet that appointment."

"What about your business?" he was asked. "What about your grain elevator? What about your livestock? What about your other holdings?"

"I don't know," said the man, "but we will make arrangements somehow. All of those things will be all right."

Such is the great miracle that we see repeated over and over, day after day, among the faithful who have made covenants with the Lord.

The First Presidency frequently report to the Quorum of the Twelve that when they have called a man and his wife in to counsel with them over whether or not they will accept a mission call the immediate answer is, "We've been to the temple!" Meaning: We are under covenant. That word covenant is a powerful, motivating word. It makes men and women and children rise above themselves, reach beyond themselves and come within grasp of celestial exaltation.

A Covenant People

Keeping our covenants will take courage on the part of each of us. It seems that, each generation or so, there comes a period of time when the faithful of the Church are under great criticism, even under attack. This has always been true of those who are under covenant with the Lord. We must expect, as part of our way of life, to stand condemned on occasion by those outside the Church who oppose the standards the Lord has directed us to keep.

Occasionally one inside the Church joins the ranks of the critics. It is one thing for nonmembers, who know little of ordinances or covenants, to criticize and attack the Church and its leaders. It is quite another when someone within the Church does so, after that person has entered into solemn and sacred covenants to do otherwise. It makes a very big difference indeed whether or not they do so in violation of sacred, specific covenants they have made.

Some years ago I attended a meeting at Ricks College with a group of seminary teachers. President Joseph Fielding Smith, who was then President of the Council of the Twelve, met with us. In the question-and-answer period one of the teachers asked about a letter that was being circulated about the Church from a dissident member who claimed that many of the ordinances were not valid because of some supposed mistake in procedure in conferring the priesthood. When President Smith was asked what he thought about the man's claim, he said, "Before we consider the claim, let me tell you about the man." He then told us several things about him and about the covenants he had not kept. He concluded with this statement: "And so you see, that man is a liar, pure and simple-well, perhaps not so pure."

Keeping covenants is a measure of those outside of the Church as well as those inside. Occasionally we find an individual who is seeking to hold high office in business, in education, or in government. Such a person may claim to be worthy of trust, may insist that he or she would not cheat the public, or misrepresent to them, or mislead them, or break faith with them. In assessing the sincerity of these expressions, the integrity of the person concerned, we may ask ourselves, What does that individual do with a private trust? A good measure is to determine how he keeps covenants relating to his family.

While one could not excuse, one perhaps could understand, that it would be somewhat easier to steal from, cheat on, or misrepresent to an anonymous stranger, or the "public," than it would be to do so to someone very close to you, someone with whom you live, someone with whom you have entered into covenants. But however that may be, one who is not faithful to his marriage partner and to his family is hardly worthy of confidence and trust. If he could cheat on marriage vows, counting perhaps on forgiveness and tolerance that may have been extended at times, surely he must stand unworthy of any great public trust. And he cannot reasonably claim that his dealings in this situation are a private matter, having no bearing on integrity before the public. They do indeed have a very great bearing.

So beware of covenant-breakers inside the Church and out. Beware of those who mock the prophets. When you have been to the temple you are under covenant to support the leaders of the Church, your local officers and the General Authorities. Keep your covenants. Keep your faith. Be loyal.

In Civil War days a performer named Blondin astonished the country by crossing Niagara River on a tightrope. On one occasion President Abraham Lincoln faced a delegation of critics and said:

Gentlemen, suppose all the property you possessed were in gold, and you had placed it in the hands of a Blondin to carry across the Niagara River on a rope. With slow, cautious steps he walks to the rope, bearing your all. Would you shake the cable and keep shouting at him, "Blondin, stand up a little straighter; Blondin, stoop a little more; go a little faster; lean more to the south; now lean a little more to the north?" Would that be your behaviour in such an emergency?

No, you would hold your breath, every one of you, as well as your tongues. You would keep your hands off until he was safe on the other side.

This government, gentlemen, is carrying an immense weight. Untold treasures are in its hands. The persons managing the ship of state in this storm are doing the best they can. Don't worry them with needless warnings and complaints. Keep silence; be patient, and we will get you safe across. (John Wesley Hill, Abraham Lincoln: Man of God [New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons], page 402.)

It is for each of us to be loyal and true, to keep our covenants. Keep your spiritual premiums paid up. Do not let your spiritual policy lapse. Do not cause it to be cancelled in some moment of rebellion. Extend your policy by adding endorsements as you qualify for the higher ordinances of the gospel. Make a list of them, keep them in mind, work to qualify for each of them. And pray earnestly for help to do so.

I was always impressed when President Joseph Fielding Smith was asked to pray. Invariably, he would make reference to the principles and ordinances of the gospel and always would include the expression, "May we remain faithful to our covenants and obligations."

On one occasion some years ago I served on an advisory committee to the Bureau of Indian Affairs in Washington, D.C. I had gone to Washington to attend a meeting of the committee. Mrs. Hildegard Thompson, who was Chief of the Branch of Education, announced at the beginning of our meeting that the government had determined to develop an educational program for underprivileged citizens, particularly those from the minorities. A large amount of money had been budgeted to fund the study. The study was to be directed by a lovely black woman educator who held a doctor's degree and who had obvious interest in the education of children. She had asked for an interview with the committee to seek our suggestions on what might be done.

I said to her, "Since this is the Indian Bureau, I suppose you have a particular interest in Indian education." She consented that that was reasonable to suppose.

"Let me tell you," I said, "about a program we have to educate Indian youngsters." I began an explanation of our Indian student placement program.

Everyone there was intrigued by the program and asked many questions. I explained that many thousands of Indian children had been brought from government Indian reservations into the homes of Latter-day Saints. There they were accepted as members of the family and provided with all the blessings the family enjoyed-particularly including an education. These children would always return during the summer months to be with the natural parents.

Two hours after the interview began we were interrupted by our chairman, who indicated that the time allotted for it had long since passed and that we must go on with other business. The interviewer protested, saying, "Just one more question, just one more question. I must ask this." She said, "This is the perfect answer to our problem. This is what we will do to educate our underprivileged minorities. But I need one more answer."

The question she asked was this: "How much do you budget for such a program? What do you pay the foster parents? They take care of these Indian children in their own homes as members of their own families. What do you budget? How much a month do they receive by way of compensation?"

It was then that I realized that I had missed the very point central to the whole discussion. "We pay them nothing," was my reply. "They give freely. We could not operate the program if we should have to pay them. We may not have money enough, in the first place. But more important than that, we could not persuade them to do for material compensation what they will do willingly and freely without the thought of being paid."

Church members will do for nothing what they could not be persuaded nor compelled to do for pay. Why? The answer is dedication and testimony. The answer is covenant. We are a covenant people. We covenant to give of our resources in time and money and talent-all we are and all we possess-to the interest of the kingdom of God upon the earth. In simple terms, we covenant to do good. We are a covenant people, and the temple is the center of our covenants. It is the source of the covenant.

The Lord has said, "I, the Lord, am bound when ye do what I say; but when ye do not what I say, ye have no promise." (D&C 82:10.)

Our people are under covenant. We expect little more than the privilege of doing our part. We find always that the Lord blesses us far in excess of what we might have earned from him, so long as we do not serve merely because we expect the blessing. We do it because we are under covenant to do it.

Come to the temple. You ought to come to the temple. Here, acting as proxy for someone who has gone beyond the veil, you will have reviewed before you the covenants that you have made. You will have reinforced in your mind the great spiritual blessings that are associated with the house of the Lord.

Be faithful to the covenants and ordinances of the gospel. Qualify for those sacred ordinances step by step as you move through life. Honor the covenants connected with them. Do this and you will be happy.

Your lives will then be in order-all things lined up in proper sequence, in proper ranks, in proper rows. Your family will be linked in an order that can never be broken.

In the covenants and ordinances center the blessings that you may claim in the holy temple. Surely the Lord is pleased when we are worthy of the title: A keeper of the covenants.

Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of eveil against you falsely, for my sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad: for great is your reward in heaven: for so persecuted they the prophets which were before you. (Matthew 5:11-12.)
