Boyd K. Packer, Holy Temple ( 1980)

16

Not Without Opposition

Once the Brethren had the keys and knew what ordinance work was to be performed in the temples, the building of temples became a preoccupation with them. This was the first thing on their minds when they moved from one place to another. Before chapels or schools, sometimes even before they thought of adequate homes for themselves, they were laying plans for the building of temples.

A refining would take place-a testing. During the early period of the Church the Lord allowed the tangible things the people had been able to build to be taken away from them. They were persecuted and driven from place to place. Time after time they lost all they had.

If there is anything you would think the Lord would protect, it would be a temple. They built the temple in Kirtland, erected to the theme "Holiness unto the Lord." It was so filled with manifestations of the Spirit that on one occasion for miles around the people thought the building was in flames. You might think the Lord would protect His temple with thunderbolts or earthquakes, if necessary. He did not! The Saints lost the Kirt-land Temple-that was to be something of a pattern for that generation. The Church does not have the Kirtland Temple now. But we have the keys we received within it.

Soon after the Latter-day Saints arrived in Missouri a temple site was selected, and this was dedicated at Independence, Jackson County, on August 3, 1831. The temple was never constructed. When the Saints were expelled from that area by the mobs in 1833 the site fell into other hands. Some day, however, in the Lord's own time, that site will be fully reclaimed and the house of the Lord built as we have been commanded to do it.

On July 3, 1837, ground was broken at Far West, Missouri. The cornerstones were laid on July 4, 1838. Nothing further was done until April 26, 1839, when the Twelve Apostles, in fulfillment of a revelation, quietly held a conference on the temple site and as a gesture rolled a large stone up to one of the comers as a symbol of beginning construction on the temple. The temple, which would have been 110 feet long and 80 feet wide according to the plan, was never built. The Saints were driven from Missouri at the end of 1838. After many years we repurchased the site and it is now owned by the Church.

Much of what happened at Kirtland was repeated in Nauvoo. We built a temple in Nauvoo. It was destroyed. It happened in Kirtland, in Independence, in Far West, and in Nauvoo. The Saints set about to build temples. In each case, either they were prevented from building the temple or it was taken away from them; and in Nauvoo the temple was defiled and destroyed.

Saints Retained What Mattered Most

Those who joined the unholy power to prevent temple work seemed to win. Time after time they had their way. They ended up, for a time at least, with the sites-leaving to the persecuted Saints nothing. Nothing? No! We have the keys, the ordinances. We have everything. They have nothing. They cannot baptize nor ordain. They cannot wash nor anoint nor endow nor seal. We came away with everything, and they have nothing. Our forebears were compelled, because of those deprivations in the early years, to focus on the things that mattered most.

In Nauvoo the temple was hardly completed when it was taken and defiled in the most offensive way by the mobs. But not before the Saints, in great numbers, had received their endowments.

Nauvoo, the city beautiful. An ideal place for the erection of a temple. The city of peace, the city of gathering. The ordinance work had been revealed there. There the blessings were at last made available to the people. Their washings, their anointings, their endowments, their sealings, were precious to them. Long before the temple was finished, the opposition and persecution came. This, we must understand, was not simply because the Latter-day Saints were a peculiar people, not because they were clannish or had different ideals or held strange new beliefs. There were other groups in other places with differences from the general population that were more extreme than those of the Latter-day Saints. The opposition was leveled at the Saints because the adversary was afraid of the temple. He would do anything to prevent their construction of it.

The Saints knew that they might not retain the temple. Even though they knew that, they gave of their means—not just of their surpluses-to the construction of the Nauvoo Temple. When it was ready for ordinance work they labored around the clock to give and to receive the blessings of the temple.

Brigham Young reported that, because of the pressures of persecution, it was felt necessary to close off the work. The Brethren had been working, performing endowments for endless hours with great fatigue. The Saints understood something of the significance of the temple. They stood by pleading with the Brethren not to stop. On February 3, 1846, only a day or two before the exodus from Nauvoo began, Brigham Young recorded:

Notwithstanding that I had announced that we would not attend to the administration of the ordinances, the House of the Lord was thronged all day, the anxiety being so great to receive, as if the brethren would have us stay here and continue the endowments until our way would be hedged up, and our enemies would intercept us. But I informed the brethren that this was not wise, and that we should build more Temples, and have further opportunities to receive the blessings of the Lord, as soon as the saints were prepared to receive them. In this Temple we have been abundantly rewarded, if we receive no more. I also informed the brethren that I was going to get my wagons started and be off. I walked some distance from the Temple supposing the crowd would disperse, but on returning I found the house filled to overflowing.

Looking upon the multitude and knowing their anxiety, as they were thirsting and hungering for the word, we continued at work diligently in the House of the Lord.

Two hundred and ninety-five persons received ordinances. (HC, 7:579.)

Those who look back on Church history sometimes grind their teeth at the injustice of the persecutions or weep over the loss of the temples. They were taken away from us. But those who took the temples and defiled them have nothing, comparatively, and we have everything. They have a building or a site or two; we have the keys, we have the ordinances, we have the authority.

That testing and tempering of the Church in the early days has not, in the eternal scheme of things, injured the kingdom. The Saints who were unjustly dealt with, those who lost their property, their loved ones, or their lives, will find compensation. Each will be blessed far beyond anything he might otherwise have gained in mortality.

Opposition to Be Expected

On the other hand, those who are guilty of those transgressions against this sacred work have earned the retribution of the Lord. Until their repentance is complete and the uttermost farthing has been paid, they will not be free to progress toward their ultimate salvation.

Lehi told his son Jacob "For it must needs be, that there is an opposition in all things. If not so, my first-born in the wilderness, righteousness could not be brought to pass, neither wickedness, neither holiness nor misery, neither good nor bad." (2 Nephi 2:11.)

The Lord told Oliver Cowdery through the Prophet Joseph Smith that "it must needs be that the devil should tempt the children of men, or they could not be agents unto themselves; for if they never should have bitter they could not know the sweet." (D&C 29:39.)

Temples are the very center of the spiritual strength of the Church. We should expect that the adversary will try to interfere with us as a Church and with us individually as we seek to participate in this sacred and inspired work. The interference can vary from the terrible persecutions of the earlier days to apathy toward the work. The latter is perhaps the most dangerous and debilitating form of resistance to temple work.

When President Brigham Young announced that a temple was to be built in the Salt Lake Valley, many were afraid. They had experienced terrible persecutions and hardships. They thought another temple would be an invitation to call it all upon them again.

Some say, "I do not like to do it, for we never began to build a Temple without the bells of hell beginning to ring." I want to hear them ring again. All the tribes of hell will be on the move, if we uncover the walls of this Temple. But what do you think it will amount to? You have all the time seen what it has amounted to. (Discourses of Brigham Young, page 410.)

All the angels in heaven are looking at this little handful of people, and stimulating them to the salvation of the human family. So also are the devils in hell looking at this people, too, and trying to overthrow us, and the people are still shaking hands with the servants of the devil, instead of sanctifying themselves and calling upon the Lord and doing the work which he has commanded us and put into our hands to do. When I think upon this subject, I want the tongues of seven thunders to wake up the people. (Discourses of Brigham Young, pages 403-4.)

I think there is a work to be done then which the whole world seems determined we shall not do. What is it? To build temples. We never yet commenced to lay the foundation of a temple but what all hell was in arms against us. That is the difficulty now: we have commenced the foundation of this temple. (Discourses of Brigham Young, page 402.)

The Devil will fight hard to hinder us, and we shall not take an inch of ground except by obedience to the power of, and faith in, the Gospel of the Son of God. (Discourses of Brigham Young, page 401.)

Temple work brings so much resistance because it is the source of so much spiritual power to the Latter-day Saints, and to the entire Church. Elder John A. Widtsoe said:

In view of this great temple activity, we may well prepare ourselves for opposition. There never yet has been a time in the history of the world when temple work has increased without a corresponding increase in the opposition to it. Some three or four years after the pioneers came to this valley, President Brigham Young said that it was time to begin the building of a temple; and some of the old timers here will probably remember that thousands of the Saints dreaded the command, because they said, "Just as soon as we lay the cornerstone of a temple, all hell will be turned loose upon us and we will be driven out of the valleys." President Young thought that was true, but that they also would have, if temple work were undertaken, a corresponding increase in power to overcome all evil. Men grow mighty under the results of temple service; women grow strong under it; the community increases in power; until the devil has less influence than he ever had before. The opposition to truth is relatively smaller if the people are engaged actively in the ordinances of the temple. ("Temple Worship," page 51.)

At the dedication of the Logan Temple, President George Q. Cannon made this statement:

Every foundation stone that is laid for a temple, and every temple completed according to the order the Lord has revealed for His holy priesthood, lessens the power of Satan on the earth, and increases the power of God and godliness, moves the heavens in mighty power in our behalf, invokes and calls down upon us the blessings of eternal gods, and those who reside in their presence. (George Q. Cannon, Logan Temple Dedication, 1877.)

From the dedicatory prayer for the Kirtland Temple, March 27, 1836, comes the following:

For thou knowest that we have done this work through tribulation; and out of our poverty we have given of our substance to build a house to thy name, that the Son of Man might have a place to manifest himself to his people. (D&C 109:5.)

No one takes hold of this work without being susceptible to the blessings of the Lord. If you have problems with your own immediately living family, do all you can for them. Begin working in behalf of the Lord's family and good things will start to happen. We should not shrink from trials and opposition. President Joseph F. Smith set the spirit for the Saints in this counsel to Church leaders.

Leaders must be courageous. One of the highest qualities of all true leadership is a high standard of courage. When we speak of courage and leadership we are using terms that stand for the quality of life by which men determine consciously the proper course to pursue and stand with fidelity to their convictions. There has never been a time in the Church when its leaders were not required to be courageous men; not alone courageous in the sense that they were able to meet physical dangers, but also in the sense that they were steadfast and true to a clear and upright conviction.

Leaders of the Church, then, should be men not easily discouraged, not without hope, and not given to forebodings of all sorts of evils to come. Above all things the leaders of the people should never disseminate a spirit of gloom in the hearts of the people. If men standing in high places sometimes feel the weight and anxiety of momentous times, they should be all the firmer and all the more resolute in those convictions which come from a God-fearing conscience and pure lives. (Gospel Doctrine [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1966], page 155.)

Opposition, as I have said, can be collective-directed at the Church-or focused on the individual. We must view the temple as the source of abundant spiritual strength.

Spiritual Blessings of the Temple

On one occasion I went to a Salt Lake City hospital to see a young man who was near death. I gave him a blessing and visited for some time with his wife. The doctors had told her that he could not recover. They have a large family; the oldest was then deacon's age. This brave little woman, soon to be widowed, showed great courage. "I have told the children what is about to happen," she said. "Last week I took them all to Temple Square." Although her children were too young to enter the temple, she wanted them to be near that source of strength and spiritual power. She continued: "There we saw the film, 'Man's Search for Happiness.' "This film depicts the cycle of life, with the death of a family member. "I think the children will accept it," she said. "I think we are ready for whatever may happen."

A few days later I received word that the husband had passed away. I talked with her again. She was determined to face with courage the responsibility of raising her little brood without her companion.

It is not without significance that when she faced a great trial she went to Temple Square.

When members of the Church are troubled or when crucial decisions weigh heavily upon their minds, it is a common thing for them to go to the temple. It is a good place to take our cares. In the temple we can receive spiritual perspective. There, during the time of the temple service, we are "out of the world."

A large part of the value of these occasions is the fact that we are doing something for someone that they cannot do for themselves. As we perform the endowment for someone who is dead, somehow we feel a little less hesitant to pray fervently to the Lord to assist us. When young married couples have decisions to make, if they are near a temple there is great value in attending a session. There is something cleansing and clarifying about the spiritual atmosphere of the temple.

Sometimes our minds are so beset with problems, and there are so many things clamoring for attention at once, that we just cannot think clearly and see clearly. At the temple the dust of distraction seems to settle out, the fog and the haze seem to lift, and we can "see" things that we were not able to see before and find a way through our troubles that we had not previously known.

On many occasions I heard President Harold B. Lee repeat the expression, "In the temple we are close to the Lord. Where is He more likely to be than here in His house."

Consider these words of Elder John A. Widtsoe:

Men may rise through temple work to high levels of character and spiritual joy. Once only may a person receive the temple endowment for himself, but innumerable times may he receive it for those gone from the earth. Whenever he does so, he performs an unselfish act for which no earthly recompense is available. He tastes in part the sweet joy of saviorhood. He rises toward the stature of the Lord Jesus Christ who died for all. Men who thus serve the dead go out of the temple into the marts of men with renewed power to deal fairly with others, to put into practice the golden command "Do ye unto others as ye would have them do unto you."

Yet there are immediate rewards for such vicarious service. Every time a person receives the temple endowment for another, he reviews the eternal journey of man, is reminded of the conditions of eternal progress and of his own covenants to obey God's law, is impressed anew with the necessity of making truth alive by use, and beholds again the glorious destiny of righteous man. His memory is refreshed, his conscience warned, his hopes lifted heavenward. Temple repetition is the mother of daily blessings. Wherever one turns, temple service profits those who perform it. (Improvement Era 39 [April 1936]: 228.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith, speaking of salvation for the dead, said "This glorious truth is well calculated to enlarge the understanding, and to sustain the same under troubles, difficulties, and distress."

I have the conviction that the Lord will bless us as we attend to the sacred ordinance work of the temples. Blessings there will not be limited to our temple service. We will be blessed in all of our affairs. We will be eligible to have the Lord take an interest in our affairs both spiritual and temporal.

Accomplishing the Work

In the face of the opposition we have described one might wonder how we will ever succeed in bringing the sacred ordinances of the temple to all the spirits of the world. But when the servants of the Lord determine to do as He commands, we move ahead. As we proceed, we are joined at the crossroads by those who have been prepared to help us.

They come with skills and abilities precisely suited to our needs. And we find provisions-information, inventions, help of various kinds-set along the way waiting for us to take them up. It is as though someone knew we would be traveling that way. We see the invisible hand of the Almighty providing for us.

President Brigham Young said:

To accomplish this work there will have to be not only one temple but thousands of them, and thousands and tens of thousands of men and women will go into those temples and officiate for people who have lived as far back as the Lord shall reveal. (Discourses of Brigham Young, page 394.)

I heard President Spencer W. Kimball, at the dedication of the temple in Washington, D. C., and again at the rededication of the St. George Temple, say:

The day is coming not too far ahead of us when all temples on this earth will be going day and night. There will be shifts and people will be coming in the morning hours and in the night hours and in the day hours, and we must reach the time when we will have no vacations, that is, no temple vacations. . . .

But there will be a corps of workers night and day almost to exhaustion, because of the importance of the work and the great number of people who lie asleep in the eternity and who are craving, needing the blessings we can bring them.

When there were just two or three thousand members in the Church, the Lord gave a commandment to Joseph Smith that they should build a temple. They built temples in those days before they built chapels. Wherever the Saints settled, the first concern was the building of a temple.

Brigham Young's first act in the Salt Lake Valley was to set his cane to mark the temple site. In 1838, when there were but 20,000 members of the Church, already four temple sites had been selected. By 1880, with 160,000 members, there were four temples in operation or nearing completion.

Today, at the same ratio, we would need hundreds of temples to represent the same emphasis, and that would be but the beginning.

If we face difficulties and frustrations and opposition, even persecution-both individually and as a church-it is of little moment in the eternal scheme of things. Do not let opposition deter you from your genealogical or temple work.

To those who sense the size of this challenge to provide temple ordinance work for all, both living and dead, and are overwhelmed by it, I say, "Have faith. We will win the day, and the Lord will provide." To those who are hesitant to move, I say, "Wake up and see the vision of it. We can accomplish the things we have been commanded, if we will but get started."

President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., said in a general priesthood meeting:

I have said to you brethren, over and over again, and I repeat it tonight, that if we were really united, if we really saw eye to eye, and then would move in unison, there is nothing in the world, in righteousness, that we might not do in accordance with the will of the Lord and not to defeat his purposes. (J. Reuben Clark, Jr., Conference Report, April 1949, page 184.)

Some years ago I learned a lesson that I shall never forget.

I had been called as an Assistant to the Council of the Twelve, and we were to move to Salt Lake City and find an adequate and permanent home. President Henry D. Moyle assigned someone to help us.

A home was located that was ideally suited to our needs. Elder Harold B. Lee came and looked it over very carefully and then counseled, "By all means, you are to proceed."

But there was no way we could proceed. I had just completed the course work on a doctor's degree and was writing the dissertation. With the support of my wife and our eight children, all of the resources we could gather over the years had been spent on education.

By borrowing on our insurance, gathering every resource, we could barely get into the house, without sufficient left to even make the first monthly payment.

Brother Lee insisted, "Go ahead. I know it is right."

I was in deep turmoil because I had been counseled to do something I had never done before-to sign a contract without having the resources to meet the payments.

When Brother Lee sensed my feelings he sent me to President David O. McKay, who listened very carefully as I explained the circumstances.

He said, "You do this. It is the right thing." But he extended no resources to make the doing of it possible.

When I reported to Brother Lee he said, "That confirms what I have told you."

I was still not at peace, and then came the lesson. Elder Lee said, "Do you know what is wrong with you-you always want to see the end from the beginning."

I replied quietly that I wanted to see at least a few steps ahead. He answered by quoting from the sixth verse of the twelfth chapter of Ether: "Wherefore, dispute not because ye see not, for ye receive no witness until after the trial of your faith."

And then he added, "My boy, you must learn to walk to the edge of the light, and perhaps a few steps into the darkness, and you will find that the light will appear and move ahead of you."

And so it has-but only as we walked to the edge of the light.

And so it is with this work. We can build those thousands of temples and we can work for the redemption of our dead by the thousands and tens of thousands and millions.

We have not yet moved to the edge of the light, either as individuals or as a church. We have not used all of the resources yet available to us.

I am confident that as we move to the edge of the light, like the cloud that led the Israelites, or like the star that led the wise men, the light will move ahead of us and we can do this work.
