Boyd K. Packer, Holy Temple ( 1980)

PART IV

Each a Savior

The keys are to be delivered, the spirit of Elijah is to come, the Gospel to be established, the Saints of God gathered, Zion built up, and the Saints to come up as saviors on Mount Zion. But how are they to become saviors on Mount Zion? By building their temples, erecting their baptismal fonts, and going forth and receiving all the ordinances, baptisms, confirmations, washings, anointings, ordinations and sealing powers upon their heads, in behalf of all their progenitors who are dead, and redeem them that they may come forth in the first resurrection and be exalted to thrones of glory with them; and herein is the chain that binds the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers, which fulfills the mission of Elijah. [^1]

Behold, I will reveal unto you the Priesthood, by the hand of Elijah the prophet, before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord. And he shall plant in the hearts of the children the promises made to the fathers, and the hearts of the children shall turn to their fathers. If it were not so, the whole earth would b utterly wasted at his coming. (D&C 2)

17

Turning the Hearts

Between the Prophet Joseph Smith himself and the administration of President Spencer W. Kimball, when new vigor and dimension were given to temple building, perhaps no man in this dispensation has made so strong an impression upon temple work and the supporting genealogical research as President Wilford Woodruff.

If I were to describe President Woodruff in one word that would best characterize him, I would choose the word spirituality. A man of deep spiritual attunement, from the days of his youth he had received and responded to spiritual guidance; and it was this trait, perhaps above any other, that qualified him for a call to be a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles.

Here we can give only a few insights into the life of this Church President. But that life was such that I recommend for inspirational reading the book Wilford Woodruff by Matthias Cowley, a biography that attests to the humility and obedience of one of the great prophets of this dispensation.

The baptism of Wilford Woodruff was attended with divine power. George Q. Cannon recorded in his history:

In view of all that has since occurred, it is a remarkable fact that the Prophet recorded in his journal of the 31st of December, 1833, the fact that "Wilford Woodruff was baptized at Richland, Oswego County, New York, by Zera Pulsipher," and this was before the Prophet and the future apostle and president had ever met in the flesh. This is not the only mention of Wilford Woodruff in Joseph's diary prior to their meeting. In one place the Prophet notices that Wilford had been ordained a teacher. (Matthias F. Cowley, Wilford Woodruff: History of His Life and Labors [Salt Lake City: Book-craft, 1964], page 37.)

That ordination to the office of teacher took place on January 25, 1834, when Zera Pulsipher organized the Saints in Richland, New York, into a branch of the Church. After ordaining Wilford Woodruff a teacher he gave him a written license, and what Wilford Woodruff wrote of that experience gives insight into the spiritual depths of this great man.

I felt that I could truly exclaim with the prophet of God, "I had rather be a door-keeper in the house of my God than to dwell in the tents of wickedness." The fulness of the everlasting gospel had come at last. It filled my heart with great joy. It laid the foundation of a greater and more glorious work than I ever expected to see in this life. I pray God in the name of Jesus Christ to guide my future life, that I may live to His honor and glory, and be a blessing to my fellowmen, and in the end be saved in His celestial kingdom, even so, Amen. (Wilford Woodruff, page 36.)

It was not until April 25, 1834, that Wilford Woodruff met the Prophet Joseph Smith, at Kirtland. From that time until the Prophet's martyrdom they were intimately associated. It was on July 8, 1838, at Far West, Missouri, that the Prophet received a revelation which concluded, "Let my servant John Taylor, and also my servant John E. Page, and also my servant Wilford Woodruff, and also my servant Willard Richards, be appointed to fill the places of those who have fallen, and be officially notified of their appointment." (D&C 118:6.)

One month later Wilford Woodruff was holding a meeting with the Saints at North Vinyl Haven, an island off the coast of Maine (then called the Fox Islands), when a letter arrived from President Thomas B. Marsh of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. Brother Woodruff recorded in his journal the contents of this letter, including the final comment, "Know then, Brother Woodruff, by this, that you are appointed to fill the place of one of the Twelve Apostles, and that it is agreeable to the word of the Lord, given very lately, that you should come speedily to Far West, and, on the 26th of April next, take your leave of the Saints here and depart for other climes, across the mighty deep."

Then Brother Woodruff added this very significant statement in his journal. "The substance of this letter had been revealed to me several weeks before, but I had not named it to any person." (Wilford Woodruff, page 93.)

I make a point of this spiritual qualification, for it was President Woodruff who was directed by the Lord to set in place the foundation of genealogical and temple work that would function in the Church to this day.

Progressive Revelation of Temple Doctrine

The Prophet Joseph Smith had set the foundation of the doctrine relating to temple work and the place it holds in the redemption of both the living and the dead. He had received the revelations (sections 124, 127, 128, and 132) which pertain directly to this work. And during the last part of his life he said, "This subject was upon my mind more than any other."

The cruel martyrdom left the work unfinished. Others must take up the task. From what the Prophet Joseph Smith had been given, the early Brethren knew that there should be baptism for the dead, that there should be a linking of the generations. They knew that the sealings were to take place. The full instructions had not been given, however, at the time the Prophet Joseph Smith was martyred.

Brigham Young, who succeeded the Prophet Joseph as the President of the Church, led the people through persecutions and danger to the relative safety of the West.

President John Taylor, his successor, might be described as an architect of priesthood government. He gave direction to the organization of the priesthood and to setting in order the functions of the Church. Then came Wilford Woodruff, who at the time of his appointment as Church President had served as an Apostle for half a century.

President Woodruff carried with him a restless concern for the matter of the temples and the ordinances carried on in them. He was deeply interested also in genealogical work, which is crucial to the support of the temple. He participated in the erection of temples. He gave the dedicatory prayer at the St. George Temple and later dedicated the Salt Lake Temple.

Some time after the dedication of the Salt Lake Temple President Woodruff prepared and signed a brief testimony concerning the St. George Temple. He wanted certain things to be remembered. I quote his statement:

President Brigham Young requested me to take charge of the Temple, which I did. He also requested me to write all the ordinances of the Church from the first baptism and confirmation through every ordinance of the Church. G. Q. Cannon assisted some in this writing, and when I had finished it to the satisfaction of the President, he said to me, "Now you have before you an ensample to carry on the endowments in all the temples until the coming of the Son of Man." (As quoted in Janice Force DeMille, The St. George Temple First 100 Years [Hurricane, Ut.: Homestead Publishers, 1977], pages 71-72.)

It may be that prior to that time the ordinances had been memorized and performed from memory or from other notes or records that we do not now have. Brother Woodruff was assisted in this work by President Brigham Young himself, and the records indicate that President Young carefully scrutinized the writing and counseled with Elder Woodruff on the preparation of the sacred documents.

It was at the St. George Temple that President Woodruff was visited by a congregation from the spirit world, many of whom had been prominent in the history of the United States of America. In a discourse given in the Salt Lake Tabernacle on September 16, 1877, he said:

In order that this work may be done, we must have Temples in which to do it; and what I wish to say to you, my brethren and sisters, is that the God of heaven requires us to rise up and build them, that the work of redemption may be hastened. Our reward will meet us when we go behind the vail.

"Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth: Yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors; and their works do follow them."

We have labored in the St. George Temple since January, and we have done all we could there; and the Lord has stirred up our minds, and many things have been revealed to us concerning the dead. President Young has said to us, and it is verily so, if the dead could they would speak in language loud as ten thousand thunders, calling upon the servants of God to rise up and build Temples, magnify their calling and redeem their dead. This doubtless sounds strange to those present who believe not the faith and doctrine of the Latter-day Saints; but when we get to the spirit-world we will find out that all that God has revealed is true. We will find, too, that everything there is reality, and that God has a body, parts and passions, and the erroneous ideas that exist now with regard to him will have passed away. I feel to say little else to the Latter-day Saints wherever and whenever I have the opportunity of speaking to them, than to call upon them to build these Temples now under way, to hurry them up to completion. The dead will be after you, they will seek after you as they have after us in St. George. They called upon us, knowing that we held the keys and power to redeem them.

I will here say, before closing, that two weeks before I left St. George, the spirits of the dead gathered around me, wanting to know why we did not redeem them. Said they, "You have had the use of the Endowment House for a number of years, and yet nothing has ever been done for us. We laid the foundation of the government you now enjoy, and we never apostatized from it, but we remained true to it and were faithful to God." These were the signers of the Declaration of Independence, and they waited on me for two days and two rights. I thought it very singular, that notwithstanding so much work had been done, and yet nothing had been done for them. The thought never entered my heart, from the fact, I suppose, that heretofore our minds were reaching after our more immediate friends and relatives. I straightway went into the baptismal font and called upon brother McCallister to baptize me for the signers of the Declaration of Independence, and fifty other eminent men, making one hundred in all, including John Wesley, Columbus, and others. (Deseret News, 27 March 1878.)

The others included nearly every president of the United States.

I should explain here that the Saints knew they were to perform baptisms for the dead. They knew that there was to be a linking of the generations. They knew that families were to be united through sealings or "adoptions." They were baptized for the dead, but kept only sparse records of this ordinance work. They were in some cases sealed or adopted to prophets of this dispensation.

During the several years that the Saints were on the move to the West and preoccupied with the troubles of the period, these matters were not clarified. When the Saints were established and temples (for the first time in the plural) were under construction, it was time to have these matters set in order. It was during the closing years of the ministry of President Wilford Woodruff that this instruction was given by revelation.

President Woodruff was a prophet uniquely qualified to accomplish this setting in order. In 1894, near the end of his ministry, having received instruction through revelation, he laid the foundation for genealogical work in the Church.

President Woodruff kept a meticulous journal. His pattern of writing was something between printing and a script. His diary might be referred to as a red-letter edition, for on important matters he would change the color of the ink to red.

Under the date of April 5, 1894, there appears a remarkable entry. "I met with the Presidency and Twelve Apostles on the subject of endowments and adoption, and the following is a revelation to Wilford Woodruff upon the subject." There followed more than a page of blank space obviously left to record the revelation. But, as is often the case, the revelation was not framed in scriptural language as many of the sections of the Doctrine and Covenants are framed.

While the space in the diary stands empty, the revelation was not lost to us. In the Deseret Evening News of April 9, 1894, there is a brief report on the annual conference. It was the sixty-fourth anniversary of the organization of the Church and the third day of the conference. The newspaper records:

President Wilford Woodruff addressed the conference. After he had made a few preliminary remarks upon the necessity of the servants of God being influenced by the power of His spirit in their ministrations, he announced that President George Q. Cannon would read from the 128th Section of the book of Doctrine and Covenants. This revelation treats upon the power of the priesthood to bind on earth and it is bound in heaven; also of the means of salvation or redemption of the living and the dead. After the reading President Woodruff resumed his remarks and delivered an important instructive discourse, throwing additional light upon the process, and of the law of adoption, by which the children and the fathers are to be united and bound together by the indissoluble ties. The method of the procedure for the accomplishment of this great purpose had been manifest by the Lord to the president and his counselors in the First Presidency, and also the Twelve Apostles had received a witness on the same subject. The presidents of the temples, their associates were to be henceforward governed by the principles of adoption enunciated by President Woodruff in their labors in that department. The subject is too important to admit of the presentation of a mere synopsis of the discourse in which it was embodied.

In President Woodruff's diary under the date of April 12, 1894, appears this sentence: "The Presidency met and read the discourse of Wilford Woodruff and made such corrections as were necessary before publication."

On April 21 the entire sermon was published in the Deseret Weekly. One month later it was printed in England in the Millennial Star. This attests to the great significance the Brethren placed on the sermon, for it would have been necessary for someone to take the text to England for it to appear that soon in print there.

The sermon contains the revelation that the President did not record in his diary.

As Latter-day Saints we are under commandment to listen to the prophet. Not all revelation is yet in the standard works. Three revelations have been added to the Doctrine and Covenants in recent years-the first in over a century. It is not without great significance that two of them-the Prophet Joseph Smith's vision of the celestial kingdom, and President Joseph F. Smith's vision of the redemption of the dead-relate directly to the subject of temple work.

The third new section in the Doctrine and Covenants announced the authorization to confer the priesthood upon all worthy male members of the Church regardless of race or national origin. This too has significance for temple work, since it makes these blessings available to all who will live for them, without restriction. That revelation was not included in the Doctrine and Covenants, but only the announcement of it. Such was true of the Manifesto given by President Wilford Woodruff in 1890.

President Woodruff's Sermon

Because of the signal importance of President Woodruff's sermon at the April 1894 General Conference, we will include here the substance of his words on that occasion. To set it apart from other sizable quotations in this book, we show his words in regular type with quotation marks. Here is the text of his sermon.

"I feel thankful for the privilege of meeting with so many of the Latter-day Saints this morning. In order to present my position before the Saints I wish to say that I have been a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints over sixty years, a member of the quorum of the Apostles fifty-five years, and the President of the Church for a short time. During all these years, and in all my travels, I have never seen a moment when I have had the power to preach the Gospel of Jesus Christ or to administer in any of the ordinances of the House of the Lord, acceptable to God or to myself, only by the assistance of the Holy Ghost; and I do not know of any other man that could ever do this. Even the Son of God, in referring to His work, said: 'I do nothing of myself, but as my Father hath taught me, I speak these things.' So it has been with all the prophets and patriarchs in every age of the world; they have had to be assisted by the power of God. I occupy that position today before this assembly. Therefore, as the Lord commanded us not to speak only as we are moved upon by the Holy Ghost, I desire that, and in order to obtain it I want the prayers and faith of the Latter-day Saints.

"I have some things resting upon me that I wish to present before the Latter-day Saints, and in order to do this I will call upon President George Q. Cannon to read from the book of Doctrine and Covenants concerning the subject which I wish to speak upon. (President Cannon read from Sec. 128, of Doc. and Cov. Resuming, President Woodruff said:)

"Thus you have before you the subject which is resting upon us, and which we wish to present to the Latter-day Saints. Let me say that age has very little to do with revelation. In an early age of the world, old Father Adam, three years previous to his death-he being nearly one thousand years of age-called together his posterity in the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman, and he stood upon his feet for hours, clothed with the power of God and the revelations of heaven, and blessed his posterity, some seven of whom, each representing a generation, were High Priests. Among them were Enoch and Methusaleh, both great men of their day and generation. He prophesied upon them what should transpire with their posterity unto the end of time. His old age did not have any effect whatever upon the revelations of God to him. Joseph Smith, when fourteen years of age, while calling upon God in the wilderness, had the heavens opened unto him. Both the Father and the Son presented themselves unto him in the clouds of heaven, and the Father said, 'This is my Beloved Son; hear Him.' The age of man is very short indeed in this day to what it was in ancient days. Men anciently lived to a very great age. When four or five hundred years old they took wives, begat children, and raised up posterity. Today our age is limited to something like three score years and ten.

"I wish to say to the Latter-day Saints that we live in a very important generation. We are blessed with power and authority, holding the Holy Priesthood by the commandment of God, to stand upon the earth and redeem both the living and the dead. If we did not do it, we should be damned and cut off from the earth, and the God of Israel would raise up a people who would do it. The Lord would not permit me to occupy this position one day of my life, unless I was susceptible to the Holy Spirit and to the revelations of God. It is too late in the day for this church to stand without revelation. Not only the President of the Church should possess this gift and give it unto the people, but his counselors and the Apostles and all men that bear the Holy Priesthood, if they magnify their calling, although they may not be called to give revelations to lead and direct the Church. The spirit of revelation belongs to the priesthood.

"But to come to the subject before us. Perhaps it may be said by the inquiring or the objecting mind, what have you to say about redeeming the dead, or about baptism for the dead, or the work of the Temples of our God, that is not already revealed? I will say this: When the Prophet Joseph had this revelation from heaven, what did he do? There are witnesses here of what he did. He never stopped till he got the fulness of the word of God to him concerning the baptism for the dead. But before doing so he went into the Mississippi river, and so did I, as well as others, and we each baptized a hundred for the dead, without a man to record a single act that we performed. Why did we do it? Because of the feeling of joy we had, to think that we in the flesh could stand and redeem our dead. We did not wait to know what the result of this would be, or what the whole of it should be. Finally the Lord told the prophet: 'When any of you are baptized for your dead, let there be a recorder, and let him be eye witness of your baptisms; let him hear with his ears, that he may testify of a truth, saith the Lord; that in all your recordings it may be recorded in heaven; whatsoever you bind on earth may be bound in heaven; whatsoever you loose on earth, may be loosed in heaven.' [D&C 127:6-7.] That was the beginning of this work.

"Joseph Smith, instead of living to be nearly a thousand years of age, as Adam did, lived to be about thirty-eight years of age. He brought forth the record of the stick of Joseph in the hands of Ephraim-the history of the ancient inhabitants of this continent. By the power of God he translated that, and it has been published in many languages. Besides this, he organized The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints upon the foundation of apostles and prophets, Christ Jesus being the chief corner stone. Men were ordained to the Priesthood and sent forth, from the various occupations of life, to carry this gospel to the world. God informed Joseph Smith that he was called to prune the vineyard once more for the last time before the coming of the Son of Man. Since that, thousands of Elders of Israel have been sent into the world to preach the Gospel. Joseph Smith did all this during the fifteen years he held the Priesthood. Let any man read the revelations in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, which were given through him during the little time he spent here in the flesh. It is one of the greatest records that any man ever gave to the human family. Not only this, but he organized the endowments and did a great deal of other work. Who could expect him, during the short time he lived in the flesh, to do more than he did? I received my endowment from under his hands. He brought forth all these ordinances that have been given unto the Latter-day Saints. In fact, it is a marvel and a wonder that he performed as much as he did.

"I want to say, as the President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, that we should now go on and progress. We have not got through revelation. We have not got through the work of God. But at this period we want to go on and fulfill this commandment of God given through Malachi-that the Lord should send Elijah the prophet, 'and he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers lest I come and smite the earth with a curse.' Ye sons of men, I say unto you, in the name of Israel's God, those very principles that God has revealed are what have stayed the judgment of the Almighty on the earth. Were it not for these principles, you and I would not be here today. We have had prophets and apostles. President Young who followed President Joseph Smith, led us here. He organized these temples and carried out the purposes of his calling and office. He laid the foundation of this great Temple on this block, as well as others in the mountains of Israel. What for? That we might carry out these principles of redemption for the dead. He accomplished all that God required at his hands. But he did not receive all the revelations that belong to this work; neither did President Taylor, nor has Wilford-ford Woodruff. There will be no end to this work until it is perfected.

"I want to lay before you what there is for us to do at the present time; and in doing this I desire particularly the attention of President Lorenzo Snow, of the Salt Lake Temple; President M. W. Merrill, of the Logan Temple; President J. D. T. McAllister of the Manti Temple, and President D. H. Cannon, of the St. George Temple, and those associated with them. You have acted up to all the light and knowledge that you have had; but you have now something more to do than you have done. We have not fully carried out those principles in fulfillment of the revelations of God to us, in sealing the hearts of the fathers to the children and the children to the fathers. I have not felt satisfied, neither did President Taylor, neither has any man since the Prophet Joseph who has attended to the ordinance of adoption in the temples of our God. We have felt that there was more to be revealed upon the subject than we had received. Revelations were given to us in the St. George Temple, which President Young presented to the Church of God. Changes were made there, and we still have more changes to make, in order to satisfy our Heavenly Father, satisfy our dead and ourselves. I will tell you what some of them are. I have prayed over this matter, and my brethren have. We have felt as President Taylor said, that we have got to have more revelation concerning sealing under the law of adoption. Well, what are these changes? One of them is the principle of adoption. ...

"Now, what are the feelings of Israel? They have felt that they wanted to be adopted to somebody. President Young was not satisfied in his mind with regard to the extent of this matter; President Taylor was not. When I went before the Lord to know who I should be adopted to (we were then being adopted to prophets and apostles), the Spirit of God said to me, 'Have you not a father, who begot you?' 'Yes, I have.' 'Then why not honor him? Why not be adopted to him?' 'Yes,' says I, 'that is right.' I was adopted to my father, and should have had my father sealed to his father, and so on back; and the duty that I want every man who presides over a Temple to see performed from this day henceforth and forever, unless the Lord Almighty commands otherwise, is, let every man be adopted to his father. When a man receives the endowment, adopt him to his father; not to Wilford Woodruff, nor to any other man outside the lineage of his fathers. That is the will of God to this people.

"I want all men who preside over these temples in these mountains of Israel to bear this in mind. What business have I to take away the rights of the lineage of any man? What right has any man to do this? No; I say let every man be adopted to his father; and then you will do exactly what God said when he declared He would send Elijah the prophet in the last days. Elijah the prophet appeared unto Joseph Smith and told him the day had come when this principle must be carried out. Joseph Smith did not live long enough to enter any further upon these things. His soul was wound up with this work before he was martyred for the word of God and testimony of Jesus Christ. He told us that there must be a welding link of all dispensations and of the work of God from one generation to another. This was upon his mind more than most any other subject that was given to him.

"In my prayers the Lord revealed to me, that it was my duty to say to all Israel to carry this principle out, and in fulfillment of that revelation I lay it before this people. I say to all men who are laboring in these temples, carry out this principle, and then we will make one step in advance of what we have had before. Myself and counselors conversed upon this and were agreed upon it, and afterwards we laid it before all the Apostles who were here (two were absent-Brothers Thatcher and Lund, the latter being in England), and the Lord revealed to every one of these men-and they would bear testimony of it if they were to speak-that that was the word of the Lord to them. I never met with anything in my life in this Church that there was more unity upon than there was upon that principle. They all feel right about it, and that it is our duty. That is one principle that should be carried out from this time henceforth. 'But,' says one, 'suppose we come along to a man who perhaps is a murderer.' Well, if he is a murderer, drop him out and connect with the next man beyond him. But the Spirit of God will be with us in this matter. We want the Latter-day Saints from this time to trace their genealogies as far as they can, and to be sealed to their fathers and mothers. Have children sealed to their parents, and run this chain through as far as you can get it. ... This is the will of the Lord to his people, and I think when you come to reflect upon it you will find it to be true.

"Another principle connected with this subject I want to talk about. A man has married a woman, and they have a family of children. The man lays down in death without ever hearing the Gospel. The wife afterwards hears the Gospel and embraces it. She comes to the temple and she wants to be sealed to her husband, who was a good man. The feeling has been to deny this and to say, 'No, he is not in the Church, and you cannot be sealed to your husband.' Many a woman's heart has ached because of this, and as a servant of God I have broken that chain a good while ago. I have laid before every woman this principle and let her have her choice. Why deprive a woman of being sealed to her husband because he never heard the Gospel? What do any of us know with regard to him? Will he not hear the Gospel and embrace it in the spirit world? Look at Joseph Smith. Not one of Joseph Smith's fathers or brothers or sisters were in the covenant when he received the keys of the kingdom of God and translated the Book of Mormon. They afterwards received it. Every brother and sister that he had, and his father and his father's brothers, except Uncle Jesse Smith, embraced the Gospel. Now, suppose that any of these had died before they had the opportunity of entering into the covenant with the Lord through the Gospel, as his brother Alvin did; they would have been in the same position as Alvin, concerning whom the Lord, when Joseph saw him in the celestial kingdom, said: 'All who have died without a knowledge of this Gospel, who would have received it if they had been permitted to tarry, shall be heirs of the celestial kingdom of God; also all that shall die henceforth without a knowledge of it, who would have received it with all their hearts, shall be heirs of that kingdom, for I, the Lord, will judge all men according to their works, according to the desire of their hearts.'

"So it will be with your fathers. There will be very few, if any, who will not accept the Gospel. Jesus, while his body lay in the tomb, went and preached to the spirits in prison, who were destroyed in the days of Noah. After so long an imprisonment, in torment, they doubtless gladly embraced the Gospel, and if so they will be saved in the kingdom of God. The fathers of this people will embrace the Gospel. It is my duty to honor my fathers who begot me in the flesh. It is your duty to do the same. When you do this, the Spirit of God will be with you. And we shall continue this work, the Lord adding light to that which we have already received. I have had friends adopted to me. We all have, more or less. But I have had peculiar feelings about it, especially lately. There are men in this congregation who wish to be adopted to me. I say to them, if they can hear me, Go and be adopted to your fathers, and save your fathers, and stand at the head of your father's house, as saviors upon Mount Zion and God will bless you in this. This is what I want to say, and what I want carried out in our temples.

"The Almighty is with this people. We shall have all the revelations that we will need, if we will do our duty and obey the commandments of God. When any of us get so that we cannot receive these revelations, the Lord will take us out of the way and put someone in our places who can. I am here today, on borrowed time, I may say. I would have been in the spirit world today, mingling with the spirits in the presence of God, had it not been for the cry of this people for my life when I lay at the gates of death a year ago. I have been preserved by the power of God. How long I shall live I do not know. It does not make any difference to me. But while I do live I want to do my duty. I want the Latter-day Saints to do their duty. Here is the Holy Priesthood in these mountains. Their responsibility is great and mighty. The eyes of God and all the holy prophets are watching us. This is the great dispensation that has been spoken of ever since the world began. We are gathered together in these mountains of Israel by the power and commandment of God. We are doing the work of God. This is not our home. As far as mortality is concerned, we shall soon pass away. But while here let us fill our mission. I want to say to Brother L. Snow, Brother M. W. Merrill, Brother J. D. T. McAllister and Brother D. H. Cannon, and all associated with you, carry these things before the Lord and see for yourselves. If you are not satisfied with this order of things, go and ask the Lord about it, and the Holy Ghost will reveal to you the truth of these principles.

"This is all I ought to say at this time, perhaps upon this subject. I am glad to meet with you. I have had a great anxiety over this matter. I have had a great desire that I might live to deliver these principles to the Latter-day Saints, for they are true. They are one step forward in the work of the ministry and in the work of the endowment in these temples of our God. ... A man may say, 'I am an Apostle, or I am a High Priest, or I am an Elder in Israel, and if I am adopted to my father, will it take any honor from me.' I would say not. If Joseph Smith was sealed to his father, with whom many of you were acquainted, what effect will that have upon his exaltation and glory? None at all. Joseph Smith will hold the keys of this dispensation to the endless ages of eternity. It is the greatest dispensation God ever gave to man, and he was ordained before the world was to stand in the flesh and organize this work. He was martyred for the word of God and testimony of Jesus, and when he comes in the clouds of heaven he will wear a martyr's crown. Those of you who stand here-I do not care whether you are apostles or what you are-by honoring your father you will not take any honor from your heads; you will hold the keys of the salvation of your father's house, as Joseph Smith does. You will lose nothing by honoring your fathers and redeeming your dead. It is a glorious work.

"When I returned from England in 1841 and heard Joseph Smith give this revelation, that we had power to redeem our dead, one of the first things I thought was, 'I have a mother in the spirit world.' My father was in the flesh. I baptized and ordained him and brought him up to Zion, where he is buried. But I never saw my mother to know her. She died when I was an infant. I had power to seal my mother to my father. Was that not a satisfaction? It was to me. I have gone to work with the assistance of my friends and redeemed my father's and my mother's house. When I went to inquire of the Lord how I could redeem my dead, while I was in St. George, not having any of my family there, the Lord told me to call upon the Saints in St. George and let them officiate for me in that temple, and it should be acceptable unto Him. Brother McAllister and the brethren and sisters there have assisted me in this work, and I felt to bless them with every feeling of my heart. This is a revelation to us. We can help one another in these matters, if we have not relatives sufficient to carry this on, and it will be acceptable unto the Lord.

"Brethren and sisters, lay these things to heart. Let us go on with our records, fill them up righteously before the Lord, and carry out this principle, and the blessings of God will attend us, and those who are redeemed will bless us in days to come. I pray God, that as a people our eyes may be opened to see, our ears to hear, and our hearts to understand the great and mighty work that rests upon our shoulders, and that the God of heaven requires at our hand. Great and glorious are these principles which God has revealed to us concerning the redemption of our dead. I tell you when the prophets and apostles go to preach to those who are shut up in prison, and who have not received the Gospel, thousands of them will there embrace the Gospel. They know more in that world than they do here. I pray God that as a people we may have power to magnify our calling in this great and mighty dispensation while we dwell in the flesh that when our work is done we may be satisfied with this life and this work. This is my prayer and the desire of my heart, in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen." (Wilford Woodruff, "The Law of Adoption," pages 146-52.)

Genealogical Research Essential to Temple Work

Thus the fundamental principles for temple sealings and for genealogical research were announced. It was established that thenceforth sealings should be done according to family lineage. We are to be sealed to our parents, they to their parents, and so on.

So it was established that we should search the records for the names of our kindred dead. We are to run that chain of lineage sealings back as far as we can obtain the information. We are to do the ordinance work for our progenitors.

The Church was prompt in following through on President Woodruff's revelation. Archibald F. Bennett, who devoted his entire life to genealogical and temple work, gave the following historical summary:

On the thirteenth of November [1894], a meeting was held in the old historian's office. That office was located across the street south from the present Church Administration Building and just a little to the east, where the Medical Arts Building now stands. There were present on that occasion all members of the First Presidency, Wilford Woodruff, George Q. Cannon, Joseph F. Smith, the president of the Twelve, Franklin D. Richards, and other apostles, and a few others. They organized the Genealogical Society of Utah. It was incorporated under the laws of Utah and it was to be "benevolent, educational, and religious" in purpose-benevolent in gathering together into a library books that would help the people trace their ancestry; educational in teaching the people how to trace their ancestry and do temple work properly, including the sealings, and to avoid duplication; religious in that they would do all in their power to encourage the people to perform in the temples all the necessary ordinances to make it possible for people everywhere, if they were willing, to obtain the greatest gift of God, eternal life.

The president of the Society, according to the articles of incorporation, was to be appointed by the First Presidency.

Brother Bennett continued with this important clarification:

It should be emphasized that the Genealogical Society is not an auxiliary. I have some words here from President Anthon H. Lund when he was president of the Society: "The work done by the Genealogical Society cannot be classed as an auxiliary. It is a basic part of the work of the Church. Take away the power of the priesthood to seal for time and eternity husbands, wives, and children; take away the binding power of the families of the nations, past, present, and future; and the bringing to the dead the ordinances of the gospel; and you will take away the means of a perfect salvation for us all." (Address to seminary and institute faculty, Brigham Young University, 2 July 1958.)

Someone wrote and asked President Joseph Fielding Smith if the Genealogical Society was an auxiliary of the Church-some-one in the correspondent's stake had said it was. President Smith replied as follows: "Genealogical work is part of the regular temple work. This work is not auxiliary. We do not look upon it as auxiliary, except in the sense it is an aid to temple work. The Genealogical Society is not an auxiliary organization."

Over the years the Genealogical Society or the Genealogical Department of the Church has been directed by a member of the First Presidency. It has been generously funded. The Temple Index Bureau was organized to give system to the processing of names for ordinance work and to avoid duplication insofar as possible. Enormous effort has gone into the microfilming and collecting of records from all over the world. Local genealogical libraries have been established. The forms and procedures for recording genealogical information have been developed. Negotiations continue around the world for access to the records of the human family. Worldwide conferences have been held to exchange information and to promote an interest in this work.

In accordance with changing legal requirements, the Genealogical Society was reorganized into the Genealogical Department of the Church. It is one of the largest departments of the Church, measured both by the size of the budget and the number of employees.

Every piece of equipment that becomes available that is useful in genealogical work is carefully studied with the hope of speeding up the work. Every system and procedure that can help with the collecting, the processing, and the recording of genealogical information is tested for use in this work.

As the years have passed since Elijah restored the keys of the sealing power, the determination of the Latter-day Saints to turn their hearts to their fathers has become increasingly evident.

This is not just a philosophical idea to be debated. It is a work to be performed.

We receive further light and knowledge as the work requires. We can each receive inspiration-the spirit of Elijah-as we involve ourselves in this sacred labor of love.

Will not a man who keeps the commandments of the Lord, who is faithful and true so far as he himself is concerned, receive perfection? Yes, provided his worthy dead also receive the same privileges, because they must be a family organization, a family unit, and each generation must be linked to the chain that goes before in order to bring perfection in family organization. (Joseph Fielding Smith.)

---
Notas:
[^1] (Words spoken by Moroni, the angel, to Joseph Smith the Prophet, while in his father's house at Manchester, New York, on the evening of September 21, 1823.)
