Boyd K. Packer, Holy Temple ( 1980)

18

The Spirit of Elijah

On January 21, 1844, the Prophet Joseph Smith recorded: "Preached at the southwest comer of the temple to several thousand people, although the weather was somewhat unpleasant. My subject was the sealing of the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the hearts of the children to the fathers." (HC, 6:183.)

Wilford Woodruff recorded that sermon and the Prophet Joseph Smith included in his history the following from Brother Woodruff's record:

The Bible says, "I will send you Elijah the Prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord; and he shall turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the hearts of the children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a curse."

Now, the word turn here should be translated bind or seal. But what is the object of this important mission? or how is it to be fulfilled? The keys are delivered. The spirit of Elijah is to come, the Gospel to be established, the Saints of God gathered, Zion built up, and the Saints to come up as saviors on Mount Zion. (HC, 6:183-84.)

The spirit of Elijah spoken of by the Prophet here and on other occasions is something very real. When a member of the Church comes under its influence, it is a powerful, compelling force which motivates him with a desire to be attending to genealogical and temple work. It leaves him anxious over the well-being of his forebears. When that spirit comes, somehow we desire to know more about those forebears-we desire to know them.

If we can literally be "caught up" in any work in the church, it is this work relating to genealogical research and to the temples. This, because there is the spirit of Elijah. The prophets have spoken of it. The Saints have felt it; and following the inspiration of it they have come to the temple to do the sacred work for both the living and the dead.

Persistence Despite Overwhelming Assignment

Somewhere I heard of an incident that happened in World War II. A group of commandos were sent across the English Channel to accomplish a military mission. They were sent ashore at night in high seas and had to make their way across a treacherous reef.

When the first of them reached the beach, led by a sergeant, they heard a companion calling for help. He was caught up on the reef and was unable to free himself. If left to himself he would be dashed to pieces by the heavy seas against the reef.

The sergeant pulled off his gear in preparation for an attempt to rescue the man. One of those on the beach said, "Don't go out there-it's too dangerous and difficult. If you go out there you'll never come back."

The sergeant replied, "I don't have to come back. I just have to go out there."

This illustrates something of our position with regard to our doing the work of the Lord. We are commanded to preach the gospel to all the living, for example. We see no way to accomplish this task in our lifetime. Many refuse to listen, some turn away, others resent and even persecute us. Nevertheless we are not released from the assignment to try. We are to do the best we can. If we do, the honest in heart can be found and sifted out of the world.

As for those who have died, there seems no way we can find them all. We have no way of knowing whether they will accept the work we do for them. We are sure some will reject it. There may be those who are not eligible to receive it. We can only do as we do in missionary work-set our hand to the task, be about the work, do all we can to seek out the names of our kindred dead and prepare these names for temple work. Insofar as we can, too, we gather the identifying data of all who have lived in mortality.

Those who would have received the gospel had they heard it in this life surely will accept it. As for the others, the Lord will provide a reward and a kingdom that pays full regard to both justice and mercy. Many are hung up on the reef, as it were. They cannot free themselves. It is for us to go to them.

They are otherwise described as being in prison. We can assist in setting them free. We can be their saviors.

We in the church must not retreat before the overwhelming assignment of extending the gospel to all men, both living and dead. Not all those living to whom we preach the gospel may accept it. But we are obliged to extend it to them. If we go out to do it, that part which is consistent with the will of the Lord will be accomplished and we will stand approved of Him. President Spencer W. Kimball emphasized the importance of this work in these words:

We are a Church that is actively engaged in temple and genealogy work for ourselves and for the infinite numbers of our Father's children who have the promise but not as yet the opportunity, for the ordinances of salvation. This is a work that makes even more meaningful the great corresponding missionary work being carried out in the spirit world. ("The Things of Eternity-Stand We in Jeopardy?" Ensign [January 1977]:4.)

Speaking of the redemption of those in the spirit world, President Woodruff said:

They are shut up in prison, awaiting the message of the Elders of Israel. We have only about a thousand millions of people on the earth, but in the spirit world they have fifty thousand millions; and there is not a single revelation which gives us any reason to believe that any man who enters the spirit world preached the Gospel there to those who lived after him; but they all preach to men who were in the flesh before they were. Jesus himself preached to the antediluvian world, who had been in prison for thousands of years. So with Joseph Smith and the Elders-they will have to preach to the inhabitants of the earth who have died during the last seventeen centuries; and when they hear the testimony of the Elders and accept it there should be somebody on the earth, as we have been told, to attend to the ordinances of the house of God for them. (Discourses of Wilford Woodruff, page 151.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith said, "It is not only necessary that you should be baptized for your dead, but you will have to go through all the ordinances for them, the same as you have gone through to save yourselves." (HC, 6:365; italics added.)

President Joseph Fielding Smith outlined the conditions under which all were to receive the gospel:

The Lord has made it known that his mercy extends to the uttermost bounds and that every soul is entitled to hear the gospel plan, either in this life or in the spirit world. All who hear and believe, repenting and receiving the gospel in its fulness, whether living or dead, are heirs of salvation in the celestial kingdom of God.

Those who reject the gospel, but who live honorable lives, shall also be heirs of salvation, but not in the celestial kingdom. The Lord has prepared a place for them in the terrestrial kingdom.

Those who live lives of wickedness may also be heirs of salvation, that is, they too shall be redeemed from death and from hell eventually. These, however, must suffer in hell the torments of the damned until they pay the price of their sinning, for the blood of Christ will not cleanse them. This vast host will find their place in the telestial kingdom where their glories differ as the stars of the heavens in magnitude.

Sons of perdition are those who have rejected the light and the truth after having received the testimony of Jesus, and they are the only ones who are not redeemed from the dominion of the devil and his angels. (Doctrines of Salvation, 2:133-34.)

We cannot know the full outcome of our efforts. We are commanded to bring the gospel message to the living, and to make provision for ordinance work to be performed for those who have died. We do not know how many of them will be redeemed in the celestial kingdom. We only make it possible for those to progress who can qualify.

It might be likened to putting spiritual resources in a bank to be held in escrow under the name of an ancestor. When and how much he will be eligible to withdraw and claim we do not know. We just know that we are to provide the account for the use of the worthy.

The Lord commanded His Apostles, "Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost." (Matthew 28:19.)

There is no doubt that His commandment meant everyone, for He included "all nations, kindreds, tongues and people." (See D&C 42:58, Revelation 14:6, Mosiah 3:13.) That was an all-inclusive assignment. It was clear that not all may accept, but those who did believe, repent, and submit to baptism would be eligible for salvation. Those who would not believe but would reject His word would be damned.

There was reluctance, even resistance on the part of some early Christian leaders to expand their vision as wide as humanity is wide. Were they not Israel? Were they not the Lord's chosen people? Were they not the children of the covenant? Was not the gospel for them, to the exclusion of the others? Because the Lord sent the Apostles first to the "lost sheep of the house of Israel" (Matthew 10:6), they were not willing to include all. Later, when they asked the Lord if it was time for Him to restore again the kingdom to Israel, He told them that it was not for them to know the times and the seasons "but ye shall receive power, after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you: and ye shall be witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem, and in all Judaea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth." (Acts 1:8.)

His specific reference to Samaria, whose inhabitants the Jews resented, was a lesson to them. And later, when contention arose on the matter of Jewish Christians mixing with Gentiles, Peter told of a vision in which he had resisted the commandment of the Lord because he wanted only that which was chosen. "But the voice answered me again from heaven, What God hath cleansed, that call not thou common." (Acts 11:9.)

They were the chosen people. They were chosen to assist with the redemption of all nations. They were to be prepared to bring the saving message and the saving ordinances to every living soul.

Chosen to Be Saviors

President Joseph Fielding Smith pointed out that not all of the dead will be eligible to receive the effect of all of the ordinances.

We are going to do the temple work for those who are entitled, through their faith and their repentance, to enter into the celestial kingdom. But somebody says, "How do we know? We search our records for hundreds of years and do the work for all of them." Of course we do, because we cannot judge. I do not know whether one man is worthy and another is not.

The Lord has given us the privilege of doing the work for all of our kindred, with the hope, of course, on our part that all of them will receive the truth. (Doctrines of Salvation, 2:191.)

Brigham Young preached the same doctrine:

Never have I seen to so great an extent that willingness to labor for the cause of righteousness, as was witnessed in the Temple, at St. George, last winter. The Spirit of God pervaded the hearts of the brethren and sisters, and how willing they were to labor! This work will continue, and the brethren and sisters will go into the Temples of the Lord, to officiate for those who have died without the Gospel from the days of Father Adam to the winding-up scene, until every one is officiated for who can or will receive the Gospel, so that all may have the opportunity and privileges of life and salvation. (Discourses of Brigham Young, page 419.)

Wilford Woodruff had the same understanding. He stated:

God is no respecter of persons; he will not give privileges to one generation and withhold them from another; and the whole human family, from father Adam down to our day, have got to have the privilege, somewhere, of hearing the Gospel of Christ; and the generations that have passed and gone without hearing that Gospel in its fullness, power and glory, will never be held responsible by God for not obeying it, neither will he bring them under condemnation for rejecting a law they never saw or understood; and if they live up to the light they had they are justified so far, and they have to be preached to in the spirit world. But nobody will baptize them there, and somebody has got to administer for them by proxy here in the flesh, that they may be judged according to men in the flesh and have part in the first resurrection. (Discourses of Wilford Woodruff, page 149.)

Elder John A. Widtsoe expressed in an impressive way the spirit with which we approach this work, which is the spirit relating to all of the gospel. He stated:

The least of us, the humblest, is in partnership with the Almighty in achieving the purpose of the eternal plan of salvation.

That places us in a very responsible attitude towards the human race. By that doctrine, with the Lord at the head, we become saviors on Mount Zion, all committed to the great plan of offering salvation to the untold numbers of spirits. To do this is the Lord's self-imposed duty, this great labor his highest glory. Likewise, it is man's duty, self-imposed, his pleasure and joy, his labor, and ultimately his glory.

There is no place for forgetting the other man, in the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ. There stands my brother. It was for him that the whole plan was made, for him the Church was organized, for him all these blessings were given-not for me alone. Oh, I stand there too. The Church was made for me ... but my brother is entitled to them just as much as I am. He and I together and all of us must unitedly work together to fulfill the greater purposes of the Almighty Father.

Under the Gospel what is man's highest ideal? Under the Gospel it must be to become like the Father. If the Lord's concern is chiefly to bring happiness and joy, salvation, to the whole human family, we cannot become like the Father unless we too engage in that work. There is no chance for the narrow, selfish, introspective man in the kingdom of God. He may survive in the world of men; he may win fame, fortune and power before men, but he will not stand high before the Lord unless he learns to do the works of God, which always point toward the salvation of the whole human family.

In our preexistent state, in the day of the great council, we made a certain agreement with the Almighty. The Lord proposed a plan, conceived by him. We accepted it. Since the plan is intended for all men, we became parties to the salvation of every person under that plan. We agreed, right then and there, to be not only saviors for ourselves but measurably, saviors for the whole human family. We went into a partnership with the Lord. The working out of the plan became then not merely the Father's work, and the Savior's work, but also our work. (John A. Widtsoe, "The Worth of Souls," Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine 25 [October 1934]:189-90.)

If all were to be eligible for baptism, and if baptism is the gate to the celestial kingdom, and if all in the Church are commanded to seek after their kindred dead and to find them and to bind them to them by the sacred ordinances, then the mighty work of the salvation and exaltation of all the human family rests upon that church which bears the name of Jesus Christ with full authority.

The Prophet Joseph Smith was martyred at the time he was unfolding the doctrine and procedures relating to the redemption of the dead. He described it as "this most glorious of all subjects." (D&C 128:17.) The intensity of the persecution at the time of the martyrdom and during the generation that followed was accompanied by the determination of the Latter-day Saints to receive by revelation the instruction with reference to temple work. It is evident that the work relating to temples bothers the adversary the most.

When they received instruction that they could baptize for their dead, they went forth with great joy and baptized more or less without organization or order or records, as we learned from the sermon of President Wilford Woodruff. That was set in order by revelation. (See D&C 127:6.)

At first they made no distinction as to who would be baptized for whom, and males were baptized for females and vice versa. That was also corrected later.

They knew that there was to be a linking of the generations. They knew that they were to have their families put in proper order, both here and beyond the veil. Remember, the word order means to put in rows or in proper relationship. Ordaining is the process of doing it, and ordinance is the ceremony by which it is done.

The early Latter-day Saints seemed to understand, too, that the turning of the hearts to the fathers meant turning to the ancient ones, to Abraham and the prophets-the ancient fathers -for those prophets held the keys. Moses appeared in the Kirt-land Temple to commit the keys of the gathering of Israel. The gathering of the people is done so that the temples can be built; we gather to build temples. Elias committed to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery the keys to the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham, saying "that in us and our seed all generations after us should be blessed." (D&C 110:12.) The early Saints understood that they should be tied somehow to the prophets, that their hearts should be turned to "the fathers."

And so, without further light the Saints began the practice of being adopted-or sealed-to the prophets, the leaders of the Church. The revelation given to Wilford Woodruff recorded in the previous chapter corrected this practice and instructed that they were to be sealed to their fathers.

Thus, the revelation had a general meaning relating to the Church and the priesthood and the prophets. It had also a specific, individual meaning relating to our own families. President Wilford Woodruff said:

When I went before the Lord to know who I should be adopted to (we were then being adopted to prophets and apostles), the Spirit of God said to me, "Have you not a father, who begot you?" "Yes, I have." "Then why not honor him? Why not be adopted to him?" "Yes," says I, "that is right." I was adopted to my father, and should have had my father sealed to his father, and so on back; and the duty that I want every man who presides over a Temple to see performed from this day henceforth and forever, unless the Lord Almighty commands otherwise, is, let every man be adopted to his father. ("The Law of Adoption," page 148.)

So it was established. We were to be sealed to our own fathers. So it was established that our hearts are to be true to "the fathers," the prophets.

"If it were not so, the whole earth would be utterly wasted at his coming." While it may seem overwhelming that we have the responsibility to extend the gospel to the entire human family, that responsibility rests upon us. Through us and our posterity, all the nations of the earth can be blessed.

The Prophet Joseph Smith said:

Elijah! what would you do if you were here? Would you confine your work to the living alone? No: I would refer you to the Scriptures, where the subject is manifest: that is, without us, they could not be made perfect, nor we without them; the fathers without the children, nor the children without the fathers.

I wish you to understand this subject, for it is important; and if you will receive it, this is the spirit of Elijah, that we redeem our dead, and connect ourselves with our fathers which are in heaven, and seal up our dead to come forth in the first resurrection; and here we want the power of Elijah to seal those who dwell on earth to those who dwell in heaven. This is the power of Elijah and the keys of the kingdom of Jehovah. (HC, 6:252.)

Our Father's Business

In 1964 I was on assignment in South America and I went with President A. Theodore Tuttle of the First Quorum of the Seventy to Cuzco in Peru. It is a large city in a valley in the Andes, about thirteen thousand feet in elevation. The mountains rise above that high valley at every view. We were unable to get a regular room in a hotel, and finally arrangements were made that we would sleep on mattresses on the basement floor of an old house adjoining the hotel. They were not very inviting quarters, but we were grateful for the accommodations.

Our first stop in the city was to visit the missionaries. One of the missionaries had been ill for a long period of time. We went to the humble apartment, up several flights of stairs at the back of a large building. There we found him in bed, his companion nursing him and studying during his free time. We administered to the elder and blessed him to be healed. That night he came to the meeting.

At the meeting that night we had a most interesting experience. When I returned I told Elder Spencer W. Kimball of it. Since he has subsequently made reference to it in a conference sermon and on other occasions, I feel I can include it here. Perhaps his feeling for the experience is that it is somehow symbolic of the seeking for every soul to the very least and last. I include here an account of this incident as it was presented in a talk at a Brigham Young University Indian Week meeting.

Whenever I'm in South America, and that seems to be very often, I'm always looking for someone. I saw him first fourteen years ago. Brother Tuttle and I were in Cuzco at a meeting of the branch.

The meeting was held in a little room, and a door opened onto the street. At Cuzco, at an elevation of thirteen thousand feet, it is bitterly cold at night. The room was packed and the door was open to let a little air in.

Brother Tuttle was speaking. There were several chairs against the wall and I was sitting there. To our left, against the wall was a little sacrament table.

As Brother Tuttle was speaking, I saw a little Indian boy, perhaps six years old, come in the back door, perhaps for the warmth. He had on a ragged shirt and that was all. His little feet were so calloused that it was hard to tell that he had toes that were separated from one another.

Then he saw the sacrament table and the bread. He was inching along the wall and was almost to the sacrament table when an Indian woman, sitting in about the third row, saw him from the corner of her eye.

Without saying a word, but with just a look, and a shake of her head, she conveyed the message: "Get out of here! You don't belong here!"

That little fellow turned and ran out into the night.

Before Brother Tuttle had finished, the little boy appeared again at the door, and again, I suppose driven by that same hunger, he edged along the wall. He was almost to the place where that Indian woman would see him again. He was studying us very carefully.

I held out my arms to him, and he came willingly. I picked him up and held him. And then, to teach our Lamanite members in Cuzco a lesson, I sat him in the chair that had been reserved for Brother Tuttle.

When the meeting closed, the little boy darted out into the night before I could talk to him or do anything for him.

So every time I'm in South America I am looking for him. He's old enough now, I'm sure, to be married. When I am in a missionary meeting I look for him and wonder, could it be, could this elder be that boy, or could that one?

I watch for him in the market place as we travel. I look for him in the streets. And some say that it is a futile search, that I will never find him. But in this Church we will find him, if we have to sift through every soul in South America.

Some will say, "Perhaps he has died; you will never find him." To them we say, "We will find him. We will gather the names of every soul who ever lived and bring them to the temple. Perhaps his son will bring his name. We will find him."

Others will say, "Perhaps no record was kept." In that case we will depend on revelation.

We're looking for him with all the resources we can find. We send tens of missionaries, and hundreds of missionaries, and thousands of missionaries to find him. You must look for him.

Some of you have already been on missions, others will go. Some of you will go there to preside, perhaps in Cuzco or in Otavalo, or at Coban, or any of the other places among these missions. You have the power that can redeem them.

It was mentioned earlier that Joseph Smith was not given the complete plan for organizing the Church at the beginning of his ministry. Instructions on the progressive process of organization continue to be received to our day.

This principle governs all the operations of the kingdom. We do not now see how we can preach the gospel to every living soul. Nor do we yet know how we can find the names of those who did not have the opportunity to hear the gospel in mortality. But we can do what we can do now. And when we stand in need of further light and knowledge or more developed means of doing the work, the need will be supplied. Direction may be given on how we can hasten both the acquisition of names and the performing of the necessary vicarious ordinance work.

We will one day know more of how this work will be accomplished. In the meantime we move ahead, seeking out both the living and the dead. We extend to them an opportunity to accept baptism and qualify for the higher ordinances.

In it all, we are being tested. It would be well for all of us to be about our Father's business.

Again: The doctrine or sealing power of Elijah is as follows:—If you power to seal on earth and in heaven.—The first thing you do, go and seal on earth your sons and daughters unto yourself, and yourself unto your fathers in eternal glory. (Joseph Smith.)
