Boyd K. Packer, Holy Temple ( 1980)

19

Claiming Your Own

The Prophet Joseph Smith said:

I would advise all the Saints to go to with their might and gather together all their living relatives to this place, that they may be sealed and saved, that they may be prepared against the day that the destroying angel goes forth; and if the whole Church should go to with all their might to save their dead, seal their posterity, and gather their living friends, and spend none of their time in behalf of the world, they would hardly get through before night would come, when no man can work. (HC, 6:184.)

We repeat the instruction of President Wilford Woodruff.

We want the Latter-day Saints from this time to trace their genealogies as far as they can, and to be sealed to their fathers and mothers. Have children sealed to their parents, and run this chain through as far as you can get it. ... This is the will of the Lord to His people, and I think when you come to reflect upon it you will find it to be true. (General Conference Address, April 8, 1894.)

Many members of the Church live at great distance from temples. In many places the economy of the countries is such, or the means available to the individuals may be such, that there is little apparent hope that they will be able to go to the temple very soon. These members of the Church are not deprived of activity in the work to redeem the dead in fulfillment of their individual obligations. Indeed, there is a very substantial work that they can do. That work is in genealogical research, in the preparing of family records and family histories.

The records of the family are most available to the family. If you will start wherever you are in the world, no matter how far distant from the temple, you can contribute to the salvation of your kindred dead. Others may do the actual ordinance work, but the sealing of ancestral families and the linking of the generations cannot be done without what you are able to give.

Work for the Dead an Individual Responsibility

You should be about your genealogical research. No member of the Church needs to be left out of this work. If you wonder where to begin, begin with yourself. Complete your own records.

You cannot have regard for temple ordinance work without having great respect for genealogical work as well. Genealogical work is the fundamental service for the temples. The temples could not stay open without success in the genealogical program. The same spirit that characterizes the patrons and employees of the temples should be characteristic of the patrons and employees of the Genealogical Department of the Church. Members of the Church cannot touch this work without becoming affected spiritually. The spirit of Elijah permeates it. Many of the little intrusions into our lives, the little difficulties and the petty problems that beset us, are put into proper perspective when we view the linking of the generations for the eternities. We become much more patient then. So if you want the influence of dignity and wisdom and inspiration and spirituality to envelop your life, involve yourself in temple and genealogical work.

All that I have learned from the revelations and from reading the statements of the prophets has fixed two things in my mind. First, we are individually responsible to seek after our kindred dead and see that the temple ordinances are performed for them. Second, once those names have been found, we are to establish family relationships. Genealogical and temple work is lineage-linked. We are linking the generations together.

Our purpose for doing genealogical work is a proper one, a worthy one. The scriptures contain condemnation of "endless genealogies," rebuking the ancients for seeking their ancestry for the wrong purposes. Those things happen today when a search is made into the past to find some basis for prestige, to make connections with the "right" family, to run the thread of relationship simply to tie to royalty or to prominence, or to lay claim to properties in an unworthy way. We should be careful of this. The purpose for seeking the names of our kindred and running the chain back as far as we can find it is to give something to our progenitors, not to get something from them. We do it so that they can receive the sacred ordinances in the holy temple. Eventually the linking of the generations will be complete and the family of man will be sealed together. This is the obligation of this Church and kingdom.

The Prophet Joseph Smith said emphatically:

The greatest responsibility in this world that God has laid upon us is to seek after our dead. The apostle says, "They without us cannot be made perfect" [Hebrews 11:40]; for it is necessary that the sealing power should be in our hands to seal our children and our dead for the fulness of the dispensation of times-a dispensation to meet the promises made by Jesus Christ before the foundation of the world for the salvation of man. (HC, 6:313.)

He also said:

This doctrine presents in a clear light the wisdom and mercy of God in preparing an ordinance for the salvation of the dead, being baptized by proxy, their names recorded in heaven and they judged according to the deeds done in the body. This doctrine was the burden of the scriptures. Those Saints who neglect it in behalf of their deceased relatives, do it at the peril of their own salvation. (HC, 4:426.)

The Prophet made a similar statement concerning missionary work-preaching the gospel to the living. "After all that has been said, the greatest and most important duty is to preach the Gospel." (HC, 2:478.)

On occasions you hear one or the other of these quoted in a sermon. How can each of them be the greatest responsibility?

They are, of course, both parts of the overall work we are commanded to do. Genealogical and temple work may well be missionary work for the dead, and missionary work may constitute the initial part of genealogical and temple work for the living.

President Joseph Fielding Smith made this explanation:

The Lord has given to the Church the responsibility of preaching the Gospel to the nations of the earth. This is the greatest responsibility of the Church. Men are to be taught the Gospel and called to repentance and warned. When they refuse to heed the warning they must be left without excuse.

The Lord has also placed upon the individual members of the Church a responsibility. It is our duty as individuals to seek after our immediate dead-those of our own line. This is the greatest responsibility that we have and we should carry it through in behalf of our "fathers" who have gone before. ("Thoughts on Temple Work and Salvation," The Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine 20 [January 1929]:42-43.)

By this definition, missionary work is primarily a Church responsibility, with members being called to labor individually. Work for the redemption of the dead, on the other hand, is primarily an individual responsibility, with the Church assuming some of it when it can be done best collectively.

The Prophet Joseph Smith put these subjects together when he said: "We ought to have the building up of Zion as our greatest object." (HC, 3:390.)

The Church builds and maintains temples. This we could not do as individuals. That is why the people are gathered. The Prophet said:

It was the design of the councils of heaven before the world was, that the principles and laws of the priesthood should be predicated upon the gathering of the people in every age of the world. Jesus did everything to gather the people, and they would not be gathered, and He therefore poured out curses upon them. Ordinances instituted in the heavens before the foundation of the world, in the priesthood, for the salvation of men, are not to be altered or changed. All must be saved on the same principles.

It is for the same purpose that God gathers together His people in the last days, to build unto the Lord a house to prepare them for the ordinances and endowments, washings and anointings, etc. (HC, 5:423-24.)

There was a day when people were gathered to "Zion" to build up the Church, to build temples. Now temples are being constructed in many parts of the world.

The gathering now is not from the far reaches of the world to Nauvoo or to Salt Lake City; the gathering now is out of the world into the Church: the Saints of Mexico to gather in Mexico, into the Church; those in Japan to gather out of the world but to remain in Japan. And so it is for all the world to gather into the Church to build temples.

There are other things we can do collectively as a church. We microfilm records worldwide. We establish libraries for use of members and nonmembers. We build vaults to store records. As a Church we develop forms and procedures to help in research. We prepare research manuals. We program conferences, meetings and seminars to motivate, instruct, and inspire.

Nevertheless genealogical and temple work are basically individual responsibilities.

The name extraction program consists of reviewing records such as copies of parish registers and recording the required data for every name. That data then is processed for temple ordinance work. Name extraction becomes an important part of genealogical work. However, this does not relieve each member from the responsibility to seek after his own kindred dead. We are all responsible, individually, to link our families in proper order.

Consider this comparison. In the welfare program we have been counseled for generations by the leaders of the Church to secure for ourselves a year's supply of food and clothing, and if possible fuel, and to be concerned for our shelter. This is a responsibility laid upon the individual members of the Church, upon each family. The commodities are to be stored at home. They are to be privately purchased, privately stored, and in time of crisis privately used.

There also has been developed in the Church a system of bishop's storehouses. Here commodities are collected which are distributed by the bishop of the ward in times of emergency need. This is a collective or Church way of solving the problem. Welfare farms are maintained and members of the Church donate their labor to produce the various commodities that find their way into the bishop's storehouse.

It is not ever suggested that because we have bishop's storehouses there would be no need for the individual families to maintain their year's supply. The counsel for the individual to protect himself and his family has never been withdrawn. It has been continually emphasized.

There is something of a comparison in genealogical research. Name extraction is a collective way of contributing to the gathering of names. We have mentioned other examples of collective Church-sponsored and Church-funded answers to our obligation to seek the dead. But this does not excuse the individual member of the Church from the responsibility laid upon each one of us personally to see to it that our kindred dead are sought out and that proper ordinances are ultimately performed for them.

The Lord through His prophet has made this work an individual responsibility. We are to move forward with such information and records as we have or can obtain, whether or not we are assisted by the Church either locally or from Church headquarters.

Something of the spirit with which we should approach this work is illustrated by an incident I recall hearing from President Joseph T. Bentley, who presided over the Mexican Mission. It happened, I think, somewhere in Mexico. An eleven-year-old boy had been seriously injured in an automobile accident. By the time they got him to the doctor, he was dying from loss of blood. In looking for a donor for an emergency transfusion they decided on his seven-year-old sister. The doctor explained to the little girl that her brother was dying and asked whether she would be willing to donate her blood in order to save his life. The little girl turned pale with fright, but in a moment she consented to do it.

The transfusion was made. The doctor came to the little girl. "The color is coming back into his face," he said. "It looks as though he is going to be all right." She was happy her brother would be all right, but she asked, "But doctor, when am I going to die?" She had thought all the time that she was not just giving blood but literally her life to save an older brother. We learn great lessons from our youth.

There are several basic component parts to genealogical and temple work. Over the years, they may be rearranged somewhat in emphasis, or the approach in programming Church participation may change somewhat. But the responsibilities stay about the same.

Genealogical Work for Every Church Member

There somehow seems to be the feeling that genealogical work is an all-or-nothing responsibility. That is not so. Genealogical work is another responsibility for every Latter-day Saint. And we may do it successfully along with all the other callings and responsibilities that rest upon us.

The bishop can do it without neglecting his flock. A stake missionary can do it without abandoning his mission. A Sunday School teacher can accomplish it without forgetting his lesson. A ward Relief Society president can do it without forsaking the sisters in her ward.

You can fulfill your obligation to your kindred dead and to the Lord without forsaking your other Church callings. You can do it without abandoning your family responsibilities. You can do this work. You can do it without becoming a so-called "expert" in it.

As mentioned before, many Church members live far from a temple. Some are never able to attend, and others can do so only rarely. And yet Latter-day Saints have a feeling for the word temple and are drawn to it. Somehow temples and temple work are such a part of us that we find very few, if any, in the Church who object to the work, who resist it, or who are against it.

So it is not likely that you need to be converted to genealogical work. There are very few in the Church who are in this position. Most of us really don't understand the procedures, but somehow we sense that it is an inspired, spiritual work.

But many of us don't get started because, never having done any of the work, we don't feel we know how to. We just don't quite know how to take hold of it or where to begin. And those who have become experts in it are not always able to get down to the level of the beginner and wisely introduce this work to him.

Many a beginner has gone to a class with the feeling that he wants to start in this work, only to be confronted with a pedigree chart extending across the blackboard or taped to the wall, plus stacks of forms with blanks and numbers and spaces, lists of procedures and regulations, and so on. He has been overwhelmed. "Surely this is too difficult for me," he decides. "I could never be expert at it."

Genealogical work has, I fear, sometimes been made to appear too difficult, too involved, and too time-consuming to really be inviting to the average Church member.

Elder John A. Widtsoe said on one occasion:

In many a science, the beginning courses are so taught as if the whole class were intending to become candidates for the Ph.D. degree in the subject. Students fall out in despair ... the beginning courses ... are crowded with difficult, remote problems ... until the freshman loses interest in the whole subject.

Brother Widtsoe concluded:

It took some time to make them understand that a good teacher does such work as to enable his students to pass, with ordinary diligence. (John A. Widtsoe, In a Sunlit Land [Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1952], pages 90, 150.)

It is easy for one teaching a subject like genealogical research, which can become very involved, to assume that because he understands it everyone else understands it. There is the tendency for him to want everybody in the class to know everything about it all at once. But the beginner frequently doesn't follow it all. And as the little girl said, "it becomes complicateder and complicateder."

How to Begin

There is a way that it can be done. And there is a place to begin. You don't need to begin with the pedigree charts or the stacks of forms, or the blank spaces, or the numbers, or the procedures, or the regulations. You can begin with you, with who you are and with what you have right now.

It is a matter of getting started. You may come to know the principle that Nephi knew when he said, "And I was led by the Spirit, not knowing beforehand the things which I should do." (1 Nephi 4:6.)

If you don't know where to start, start with yourself. If you don't know what records to get, and how to get them, start with what you have.

If you can start with what you have and with what you know, it's a little hard to find an excuse to delay. And it may be spiritually dangerous to delay it too long.

The General Authorities attending stake quarterly conferences have carried with them the message that all Latter-day Saints are to prepare a life history and to make a record of events which have occurred in their lives. The responsibility to lead out in this work was placed on the priesthood bearers. They are to do it and see that all others are encouraged and helped to do it.

There are two very simple instructions for those who are waiting for a place to begin. Here's what you might do:

Get a cardboard box. Any kind of a box will do. Put it some place where it is in the way, perhaps on the couch or on the counter in the kitchen-anywhere where it cannot go unnoticed. Then, over a period of a few weeks, collect and put into the box every record of your life, such as,

your birth certificate,

your certificate of blessing,

your certificate of baptism,

your certificate of ordination,

your certificate of graduation.

Collect diplomas, all of the photographs, honors or awards, a diary if you have kept one, everything that you can find pertaining to your life; anything that is written, or registered, or recorded that testifies that you are alive and what you have done.

Don't try to do this in a day. Take some time on it. Most of us have these things scattered around here and there. Some of them are in a box in the garage under that stack of newspapers; others are stored away in drawers, or in the attic, or one place or another. Perhaps some have been tucked in the leaves of the Bible or elsewhere.

Gather all these papers together and put them in the box. Keep it there until you have collected everything you think you have. Then make some space on a table, or even on the floor, and sort out all that you have collected. Divide your life into three periods. The Church does it that way. All of our programming in the Church is divided into three general categories-children, youth, and adult.

Start with the childhood section and begin with your birth certificate. Put together every record in chronological order: the pictures, the record of your baptism, etc., up to the time you were twelve years of age.

Next assemble all that which pertains to your youth, from twelve to eighteen, or up until the time you were married. Put all of that together in chronological order. Line up the records-the certificates, the photographs, and so on-and put them in another box or envelope. Do the same with the records on the rest of your life.

Once you have done this, you have what is necessary to complete your life story. Simply take your birth certificate and begin writing: "I was born September 10, 1924, the son of Ira W. Packer and Emma Jensen Packer, at Brigham City, Utah. I was the tenth child and the fifth son in the family." Etc. etc. etc.

It really won't take you long to write, or dictate into a tape recorder, the account of your life, and it will have an accuracy because you have collected those records.

Now, don't say that you can't collect them. All you are asked to do is to collect that information that you have and what you know. It is your obligation.

What then? After you've made the outline of your life history to date, what do you do with all of the materials you have collected?

That, of course, brings you to your Book of Remembrance. Simply paste them lightly on the pages so that they can be taken out if necessary from time to time, and you have your Book of Remembrance.

Once you begin this project, very interesting and inspiring things will happen. You cannot do this much without getting something of the spirit of it, and without talking about it, at least in your family circle. Some very interesting things will start to happen once you show some interest in your own genealogical work. It is a firm principle. There are many, many testimonies about it. It will happen to you.

Aunt Clara will tell you that she has a picture of you with your great-grandfather. You know that cannot be so, because he died the year before you were born. But Aunt Clara produces the picture. There is your great-grandfather holding you as a tiny baby. As you check through the records you find that he died the year after you were born, an important detail in your family history.

That accurate data means something. The middle name written on the back of the picture means something too. You may not know it at the moment, but it is a key; the beginning of ordinance work in the temple for some of your ancestors.

You believe in the resurrection. You must know that baptism for someone who is dead is quite as essential as baptism for someone who is living. There is no difference in the importance of it. One by one it must happen. They must do it here while living or it must be done for them here after they die.

The whole New Testament centers on the resurrection of the Lord. The message is that all are to be resurrected. Every scripture and every motivation that applies to missionary work has its application to ordinance work for the dead.

Now you have your own family history written and you have your Book of Remembrance assembled. It sounds too easy -well it is, almost. But it does mean that you have to get started. Like Nephi, you will be "led by the Spirit, not knowing beforehand the things which [you] should do." (1 Nephi 4:6.)

Several years ago Sister Packer and I determined that we should get our records in order. However, under the pressure of Church responsibilities with my travels about the world, and the obligations with our large family and a home to keep up both indoors and outdoors, there just was not enough time. But we were restless about this genealogical responsibility, and finally we determined that somehow we would have to make more time in the day.

During the Christmas holidays when we had a little extra time, we started. Then as we moved back to a regular schedule after the holidays, we adopted the practice of getting up an hour or two earlier each day.

We gathered together everything we had, and in the course of a few weeks we were amazed at what we were able to accomplish. The thing that was most impressive, however, was the fact that we began to have experiences that told us somehow that we were being guided, that there were those beyond the veil who were interested in what we were doing. Things began to fall into place.

As I have traveled about the Church and paid particular attention to this subject, many testimonies have come to light. Others who assemble their records together are likewise having similar experiences. It was as though the Lord was waiting for us to begin.

We found things we had wondered about for a long time. It seemed as though they came to us almost too easily. More than this, things that we never dreamed existed began to show up. We began to learn by personal experience that this research into our families is an inspired work. We came to know that an inspiration will follow those who move into it. It is just a matter of getting started.

There is an old Chinese proverb which states: "Man who sit with legs crossed and mouth open, waiting for roast duck to fly in, have long hunger!"

Once we started, we found the time. Somehow we were able to carry on all of the other responsibilities. There seemed to be an increased inspiration in our lives because of this work.

Paths Open When We Start

But the decision, the action, must begin with the individual. The Lord will not tamper with our agency. If we want a testimony of genealogical and temple work, we must do something about that work.

Someone paraphrased Proverbs 4:7 in this way. "Wisdom is the principal thing; therefore get wisdom: and with all thy getting, get going!" Here is an example of what can happen when you do.

I once attended a conference in the Hartford Stake. An assignment had been made three months earlier to all members of the stake presidency to speak on this subject of genealogical work. One had been a counselor in the stake presidency but became stake patriarch at that conference. He told this interesting incident.

He had not been able to get started in genealogical work, although he was "converted" to it. He just didn't know where to start. When he received the assignment to prepare a life history from his own records, he was unable to find anything about his childhood and youth except his birth certificate. He was one of eleven children born to Italian immigrants. He is the only member of his family in the Church.

In fulfilling the assignment he tried to put together everything he could find on his life. At least he was started, but there just didn't seem to be anywhere to go. He could get his own life story put together from his own memory and from what few records he had.

Then a very interesting thing happened. His aged mother, who was in a rest home, had a great yearning to return once more to her homeland in Italy. Finally, because she was obsessed with this desire, the doctors felt nothing would be gained by denying her this request, and the family decided to grant their mother her dying wish. And for some reason they all decided that this brother (the only member of the family in the Church) should be the one to accompany his mother to Italy.

All at once, then, he found himself returning to the ancestral home. A door was opening! While in Italy he visited the parish church where his mother was baptized, and also the parish church where his father was baptized. He met many relatives. He learned that the records in the parish go back for five hundred years. He visited the town hall to look into the records and found the people very cooperative there. The town clerk told him that the previous summer a seminarian and a nun had been there together looking for records of this brother's family name, and they had said they were collecting the genealogy of the family. He was given the name of the city where they lived, and he now could follow that lead. He learned also that there is a city in Italy bearing the family name.

But this is not all. When he came to Salt Lake City to general conference he returned by way of Colorado, where many of his family live. There, with very little persuasion, a family organization was effected and a family reunion was planned, which soon afterwards was held.

And then, as always happens, some of his relatives, his aunts and uncles, his brothers and sisters, began to provide pictures and information about his life that he never knew existed. And, as always happens, he learned that this is a work of inspiration.

The Lord will bless you once you begin this work. This has been very evident to my family. Since the time we decided that we would start where we were, with what we had, many things have opened to us.

On one occasion I took to the Genealogical Society eight large volumes, manuscript genealogical work, consisting of six thousand family group sheets of very professional genealogical work, all on the Packer family. All of it was compiled by Warren Packer, originally from Ohio, a schoolteacher, a Lutheran. He has spent thirty years doing this work, not really knowing why. There are two more volumes now added to the others. He senses now why he has been involved in this work over the years and very much has the spirit of the work.

We have had the opportunity, too, of locating and visiting the ancestral Packer home in England. Many of the large manor houses in England in recent years have been opened to the public. This one is not. It is about a fifteen-minute drive from the London Temple and it is built on the site of an ancient castle, with a moat around it. It stands just as it was finished in the early sixteen hundreds. The portraits of our ancestors are hanging where they were placed nearly three hundred years ago. On the estate is a little chapel. In it is a stained glass window with the Packer coat of arms, put there in 1625.

Things began to emerge once we got to work. We still are not, by any means, experts in genealogical research. We are, however, dedicated to our family. And it is my testimony that if we start where we are-each of us with ourselves, with such records as we have-and begin putting those in order, things will fall into place as they should.

You can get started now! Find a cardboard box and put it in the way and begin to put things in it, and as the things unfold you will sense something spiritual happening and not be too surprised at that.

There is a common expression when some unusual good fortune befalls a person. They respond with, "Someone up there likes me," and credit to some divine providence the good thing that has come into their lives.

As the Heart Turns

Sometimes this work may become a little discouraging. How can we seek out all of our progenitors-and all the others? One day while pondering prayerfully on this matter I came to the realization that there is something that any one of us can do for all who have died. I came to see that any one of us, by himself, can care about them, all of them, and love them. That came as a great inspiration, for then I knew there was a starting point.

Whatever the number, we can love them and desire to redeem them. Any one of us has within him the power to expand his concern to include them all. If a billion more are added, we can care about them also. At least we can do that.

If the assignment seems impossible, we must move ahead. If the process is tedious, we must move ahead anyway. If the records have been lost, if the obstacles and opposition seem overwhelming, we will move ahead anyway. When we determine to do as the Lord commands, we move ahead.

As we proceed, we are joined at the crossroads by those who have been prepared to help us. They come with skills and abilities precisely suited to our needs. And we find provisions: information, inventions, help of various kinds, set along the way waiting for us to take them up. It is as though someone knew we would be traveling that way. We see the invisible hand of the Almighty providing for us.

Elder LeGrand Richards said: "Brethren, the Lord has inspired men to invent these great tools. Now, if we don't use them to teach His gospel, Satan will use them to lead the people astray." We must get the vision of this, for where there is no vision the people perish, and the dead go unredeemed.

Genealogical work has the power to do something for the dead. It has an equal power to do something to the living. Genealogical work of Church members has a refining, spiritualizing, tempering influence on those who are engaged in it. They understand that they are tying their family together, their living family here with those who have gone before.

Genealogical work in one sense would justify itself, even if one were not successful in clearing names for temple work. The process of searching, the means of going after those names, would be worth all the effort you could invest. The reason: You cannot find names without knowing that they represent people. You begin to find out things about people. When we research our own lines we become interested in more than just names or the number of names going through the temple. Our interest turns our hearts to our fathers-we seek to find them and to know them and to serve them.

In doing so we store up treasures in heaven.

Has the day of miracles ceased? Or have angels ceased to appear unto the children of men? Or has he withheld the power of the Holy ghost from them? Or will he, so long as time shall last, or the earth shall stand, or there shall be one man upon the face thereof to be saved? Behold I say unto you, Nay. (Moroni 7:35-37.)
