Boyd K. Packer, Holy Temple ( 1980)

20

Help from Beyond

I know of no work in the Church more conducive to spiritual refinement and communication than temple and genealogical work. In this work our hearts and our minds are turned to those beyond the veil. Such a work helps us to sharpen our spiritual sensitivities.

Each of us has the right to receive revelation concerning his personal affairs. The Prophet Joseph Smith said:

The spirit of revelation is in connection with these blessings. A person may profit by noticing the first intimation of the spirit of revelation; for instance, when you feel pure intelligence flowing into you, it may give you sudden strokes of ideas, so that by noticing it, you may find it fulfilled the same day or soon; (i.e.) those things that were presented unto your minds by the Spirit of God, will come to pass; and thus by learning the Spirit of God and understanding it, you may grow into the principle of revelation, until you become perfect in Christ Jesus. (HC, 3:381.)

Elder John A. Widtsoe has counseled us in these words:

The seen and the unseen worlds are closely connected. One assists the other. Those who fail to partake of the privileges and blessings of temple work deprive themselves of some of the choicest gifts within the keeping of the Church. ("The Urgency of Temple Service," The Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine 28 [January 1937]:5.)

President Heber J. Grant said:

I am sure, if we were to collect the various experiences that people have had in obtaining information that has led them to get a record of their forefathers, that it would be one of the most faith-promoting things that we could have. ("Service, the True Key to Happiness," The Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine 23 [January 1932]:10.)

Spiritual communication and inspiration and miracles are a vital evidence of the Lord's church upon the earth. Moroni, presenting the teachings of his father, Mormon, wrote:

And now, my beloved brethren, if this be the case that these things are true which I have spoken unto you, and God will show unto you, with power and great glory at the last day, that they are true, and if they are true has the day of miracles ceased?

Or have angels ceased to appear unto the children of men? Or has he withheld the power of the Holy Ghost from them? Or will he, so long as time shall last, or the earth shall stand, or there shall be one man upon the face thereof to be saved?

Behold I say unto you, Nay; for it is by faith that miracles are wrought; and it is by faith that angels appear and minister unto men; wherefore, if these things have ceased wo be unto the children of men, for it is because of unbelief, and all is vain.

For no man can be saved, according to the words of Christ, save they shall have faith in his name; wherefore, if these things have ceased, then has faith ceased also; and awful is the state of man, for they are as though there had been no redemption made.

But behold, my beloved brethren, I judge better things of you, for I judge that ye have faith in Christ because of your meekness; for if ye have not faith in him then ye are not fit to be numbered among the people of his church. (Moroni 7:35-39.)

Spiritual Guidance in the Work

It will be our purpose to consider the spiritual guidance that attends this work and to reverently explore the past for a few examples of help beyond the veil. Before we do so I wish to say something about spiritual experiences.

I have come to know that deeply spiritual experiences are usually given to us for our individual edification and it is best not to talk of them generally. Alma told Zeezrom: "It is given unto many to know the mysteries of God; nevertheless they are laid under a strict command that they shall not impart only according to the portion of his word which he doth grant unto the children of men, according to the heed and diligence which they give unto him." (Alma 12:9.) We may be prompted on occasion to tell of our spiritual experiences, but generally we should regard them as sacred. It is not out of order, however, to present some experiences from those who have lived in years past.

The fact that sacred spiritual experiences are not discussed widely-for instance, by the General Authorities-should not be taken as an indication that the Saints do not receive them. Such spiritual gifts are with the Church today as they were in years past.

Experiences which involve dreams or visions or visitations might be recorded and put away in family records to serve as a testimony and an inspiration to our descendants in the generations ahead.

I have been interested to see the continued indication of spiritual inspiration in temple and genealogical work, as evidenced by the large number of such experiences recorded in Church history, in Church publications, and in personal records. I began to gather them from these sources and found there is an abundance of them.

Here I will present a few examples. Earlier it was mentioned that the return of Elijah generated a worldwide awakening of interest in genealogical records. As further evidence that there is a special motivation in this work, I include the following report of "guidance" in genealogical research outside the Church. Such incidents are testimony that Elijah did return.

The average research genealogist who becomes either a successful amateur or professional investigator of family history, often meets with remarkable and unusual experiences. The writer knows one of the most successful research workers in this line in the country whose experiences would fill a book with marvelous tales of a most fascinating kind. Let us begin with one that has been duplicated but seldom, if at all.

Considerable correspondence with a woman in the South about the ancestry of a client of this investigator brought only word that they knew nothing more than they had already given, but would keep it in mind, as they felt later on they might obtain that which was asked for. Three, nearly four years passed before further word was received; and in the meantime, this individual had been forgotten and correspondence ceased with her.

One day the postman brought a rather heavy package addressed to this genealogical investigator, which, upon opening, was found to contain the name plate from the coffin of the ancestor buried nearly two generations ago, on which appeared his full name, date, and place of birth and death. In fact, it gave all the details sought for and which existed nowhere else but in the person's grave. A letter accompanying the plate stated that the remains had been moved to another burial ground, and that as a new coffin was used, the old plate was forwarded.

Again this research genealogist, who had been nearly forty years trying to find out the date of death of her own great-grandmother, and had never succeeded, one day when recently clearing a number of old magazines in her own home was looking through a copy of Scribners or Harpers. In snapping through the pages, suddenly her eye saw something that caused her to stop and take a second look. To her astonishment, she saw at the heading of one page the words:

In Memory of __________

Who Died _____________

To her further amazement she found that the poem had been written in memory of her great-grandmother, and the date of the grandmother's death was given as part of the heading. One would hardly expect to find genealogical material in a publication devoted exclusively to current literature. Nor would one expect to find it in a grave—at least find it accessible; but such instances go to prove one cannot actually place a limit on where such facts may finally be located.

Recently she unearthed an even more interesting case. In New York state there is a family association that is devoting a great deal of time and money to unearthing information to carry their family back to the Mayflower passengers. For years they had been stuck and could make no headway. In working out the lineage for a client this consulting research genealogist came in touch with this family association, and ran up against the same wall that was halting them. However, not to be daunted, she began to investigate the land records and finally located the old farm of the last known ancestor.

Following clews from the tax and other records of the times, she decided that if some one was to personally interview the oldest of the living persons at the farm, or near it, some information might be obtained. Making the suggestion to the head of the family association, who took kindly to it, a personal call by auto was made there. Questioning brought to light that the old woman still living on the farm was the grandchild of the ancestor last known, but she could offer nothing more, and so no family Bible or other records were in the place.

Disappointed, the interviewer arose to go. When at the door the old lady said, "Wait a moment," and with that went to the attic and from an old chest brought out a quilt on which the names of the members of the family, dates and locations by birth, marriage and death were first written, then sewed into it, not only the person sought for, but for several of the earlier generations as well, and many of the collateral lines of descent that had at this late date not been able to connect with what all evidence pointed to that of all being in one family. Needless to say, photographs and affidavits of this valuable find were secured without delay.

This is one of the most remarkable genealogical discoveries of its kind in late years and has opened up a tremendous field of family research for several thousand descendants belonging to the Standish family. (Pierson W. Banning, "Strange Experiences of a Genealogist," The Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine 13 [October 1922]: 179-80.)

Elder John A. Widtsoe recorded this experience:

I know of no work that I have done in the Church which has been so filled with testimonies of the divinity of this work as the little I have done in behalf of the salvation of our dead. I could tell you a number of experiences, but the one that impressed me most happened a few years ago when I accompanied Brother Reed Smoot to Europe.

We came to Stockholm; he had his work to do; I decided to see what I could do in the way of finding books on Swedish genealogy. I knew the names of the two big bookstores in Stockholm. I went to the one, made my selections, and then started across the city to the other bookstore in the hope that I might find some more suitable books. As I hurried along the street filled with people, I was stopped suddenly by some voice which said to me: "Go across the street and down that narrow side street." I looked across the street and saw a little narrow street. I had not been in Stockholm before. I thought: This is all nonsense, I have little time to spend here. I am not going down that street, I have to do my work, and I walked on.

Almost at once the voice came again, as distinctly as any voice I have ever heard. Then I asked myself: What is your business in this city? Are you not on the Lord's errand? And I crossed over; went down the little narrow street, and there, half-way down, found a little bookstore that I had known nothing about. When I asked for books on genealogy the lady said: "No, we do not carry books on genealogy. When we get such books we send them to the bookstore"—naming the store for which I was headed. Then, just as I was leaving in disappointment, she said: "Stop a minute. A leading book collector, a genealogist, died about a month ago, and we bought his library. Many of his genealogical books are in the back room ready to be sent to the bookstore, but if you want to buy them you may have them."

Thus we secured the foundation of Swedish genealogy in our library. I could relate many such experiences. ("Genealogical Activities in Europe," The Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine 22 [July 1931]:101.)

President Charles W. Penrose spoke of revelation attending this work.

Let us think over these things, and pray to the Lord to open the way, and the way will be opened by which we will learn about our ancestors. And when the time comes that we have done all we can in a natural way, the veil will be drawn aside, and the Priesthood behind the veil will minister to the Priesthood in the flesh, and reveal many things that we could not ordinarily obtain knowledge of here; but we will get them by this kind of revelation. ("Salvation for the Dead," The Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine 4 [January 1913]: 1-18.)

Elder Rudger Clawson spoke in General Conference of such an experience.

Some years ago, a brother approached me, and he said: "Brother Clawson, I am sixty-seven years of age; I have been a strong and active man in my life, and have done a great deal of hard work, but now I am somewhat feeble; I cannot engage in manual labor as heretofore. How shall I spend my time?" I said to him, "Go to the house of the Lord." "Thank you," he replied, "I will take your counsel."

About eight years later, I met this brother again. He appeared to be very happy indeed; and there was an expression of joy in his countenance. "Brother Clawson," he said, "during the past eight years I have been working for my ancestors, in the house of the Lord. After that conversation with you, I went east and I gathered up eight hundred names of my relatives; and during the past eight years I have personally officiated for three hundred of my ancestors, and I propose to continue on with the good work; I am happy for the Lord has blessed me."

He further said, "I saw in a vision, upon one occasion, my father and mother, who were not members of the Church, who had not received the Gospel in life, and I discovered that they were living separate and apart in the spirit world, and when I asked them how it was that they were so, my father said: 'This is an enforced separation, and you are the only individual that can bring us together; you can do this work; will you do it?'"-meaning that he should go into the house of the Lord and there officiate for his parents who were dead, and by the ordinance of sealing bring them together and unite them in the family relation beyond the veil; and he informed me that he had attended to the work, and I rejoiced with him and congratulated him. (Conference Report, October 1908, page 74.)

At the rededication of the Logan Temple in 1979 I recounted an incident in the life of my wife's grandfather, which I include here.

The Logan Temple is sacred to our family, for there my wife and I were married, and my wife's grandfather responded to the call and helped to construct that temple.

C. O. Law, the superintendent of construction for that temple, wrote on February 25, 1884: "This letter certifies that Brother Julius Smith of Brigham City has worked faithfully and honorably on the Logan Temple for nearly two years, and as the temple nears completion, his branch of the labor being terminated, he is now honorably released and we sincerely trust that Brother Smith may become a participant in the blessings of the House of the Lord which he has assisted to erect."

Brother Smith with his wife, Josephina, lived on a few acres of ground in Brigham City. There they raised fourteen children, my wife's father being the youngest. When the call came for workers to assist in the building of the temple, he responded.

Each Monday morning he left his family in the care of his wife and hiked up through Flat Bottom Canyon, down Dry Canyon to the south end of Cache Valley, and on to Logan. After his week's work on Saturday, he walked home to spend Sunday with his family.

He was not a young man, just over five feet tall, and very slight in build. He was, nevertheless, assigned as a hod carrier. For the younger readers I explain that a hod carrier would fill a V-shaped wooden box full of mortar or plaster. He would lift it to his shoulder and carry it to where the masons were working, often carrying this very heavy weight up long ladders.

On the afternoon of August 11, 1883, Brother Smith was supplying two plasterers who were finishing the ceiling a hundred feet above the ground in the northwest tower of the temple. Suddenly the scaffolding gave way, tipped to one side, and fell. The projections for the spiral staircase had been installed. The three men tumbled through these projections and landed at various levels amid the rubble. The record states that they were removed to their homes and soon returned to their work, having sustained only minor injuries.

The hope "that Brother Smith would participate in the blessings of the House of the Lord which he had assisted to erect" was amply fulfilled. He went there often.

As a young man he had lived among the Indians. In later years when Indian bands would visit Brigham City, one of the Indians would go to the home of Brother Smith. His visits were not welcomed by the rest of the family, for he would peer in every window intently until he determined that Brother Smith was home. And only then would he knock at the door.

One night, some years after the completion of the temple, Brother Smith was reading his newspaper. He heard a noise at the window, and he saw his Indian friend peering in with an unusually sad expression. He went to the door and found no one there, and the snow beneath the window had not been disturbed.

This incident bothered him greatly, and during the following week he tried to locate and get some information about this Indian friend. He learned that he had died.

In due time, he recorded, "Today I have taken care of his work in the temple." That very evening he was looking through the mail and again heard a sound at the window. When he looked up he saw his Indian friend, this time smiling. He counted that a very sacred experience, and in the record of a great amount of work done by this faithful grandfather in this temple is found the name Be-a-go-tia.

I have wondered over the years about the meaning of the scripture recorded three times in the Book of Mormon, that "the course of the Lord is one eternal round." (1 Nephi 10:19, Alma 7:20, Alma 37:12.)

I can see one meaning as it relates to our work for the dead. Genealogical work, the essential preparation for temple work, puts us to seeking through the records for those who have lived in the past. We look back to the past to find them. We perform temple ordinance work for them and then we look forward to the future to meet them. Something sacred is consummated when we have safely recorded, in the list of ordinances completed, the names of those who lived in our past and who yet live in our future. This ordinance work is crucial to us and to the Church.

Elder Harold B. Lee spoke at a genealogical research seminar and gave the following account of an experience of President George Albert Smith:

I remember the story that President George Albert Smith used to tell us. Now, as you remember Brother Smith, he was one of the friendliest men that I think we ever had in the Church. No one was a stranger to him. He'd get on a plane and within five minutes the man in the seat next to him was like an old friend. When he arrived in Chicago during the Chicago World's Fair he learned that the president of the fair was a man by the name of Dawes. He had been to Harvard University with a man named Dawes. He wondered if this could be his old class mate. So, prompted by this spirit of friendliness, he called up the office and asked the secretary if he could have an appointment to see Mr. Dawes.

There were three brothers-Charles Dawes who was the vice-president of the United States, you will recall; Henry Dawes; and Rufus Dawes. Now, he wasn't sure of the first name of his friend, and this smart young secretary said, "Well, there are 125 people lined up outside to see him, but I guess if you want to come and stand in line you can see him." "Well," said President Smith, "I didn't want anything; I'm just an old schoolmate and just wanted to pass the time of day." "Well," she said, "wait a minute. I think he'd want to meet somebody who doesn't want anything. All the rest of these people want something. You come around to the side door and I'll let you in to see him." So, President Smith caught a taxi and went out there.

Just as he got to the side door, as indicated, this man was ushering out a couple who had been in conference with him. One look told him this wasn't the man he knew. Now, here he was ushered into the busy man's office without a thing to say to him. He rubbed his hands a little bit and finally said, "Mr. Dawes, where do your people come from?" President Smith said, "Wasn't that an asinine thing to ask him." Mr. Dawes looked at him for a minute and asked, "Are you interested in genealogy?"

Well, here was President Smith's cue. He told him about the genealogical library, our great interest in genealogical research. Mr. Dawes said, "Let me show you something." He went into the back room and came out with a volume, a beautifully bound volume, and said, "This is the genealogy of my mother. I loved my mother and I was curious about her ancestors. So I had researchers go over to the old country and search out her genealogy. It cost me somewhere between $30,000 to $40,000 to make this research. And now that I have it done and have satisfied my curiosity I have no further use for it. How would you like if it I gave it to you to take back and put in your wonderful library?"

"My," President Smith said, "I think that would be a treasure."

This was the genealogy of the Gates family-one of our pioneer families. And that genealogy linked with many of the pioneer families. Within 15 minutes President Smith walked out of this man's office, within his arms $40,000 worth of research from a man he had never seen before. You tell me the Lord isn't opening the doors to genealogy work? It means merely that when you do all that you can, then you can expect the Lord to open the doors beyond our own efforts. (Genealogical Devotion Addresses-1970, Fifth Annual Priesthood Genealogical Research Seminar, Brigham Young University, 1970, pages 31-32.)

There is much evidence that the work goes on beyond the veil. From his vision of October 3, 1918, President Joseph F. Smith records:

And as I wondered, my eyes were opened, and my understanding quickened, and I perceived that the Lord went not in person among the wicked and the disobedient who had rejected the truth, to teach them;

But behold, from among the righteous, he organized his forces and appointed messengers, clothed with power and authority, and commissioned them to go forth and carry the light of the gospel to them that were in darkness, even to all the spirits of men; and thus was the gospel preached to the dead. (D&C 138:29-30.)

There is an incident in which President Lorenzo Snow raised a young girl from the dead. She gave a vivid account of her visit in the spirit world-including a meeting with her grandfather, who was so busy working on records that he had little time for her.

In the early days of Brigham City a stake conference was being held. President Lorenzo Snow, of the Box Elder Stake, a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, was speaking in the meeting. Behind him on the stand was Elder Rudger Clawson. A note was delivered to the meeting and handed to President Snow at the pulpit. He read the note. It asked that he announce the funeral services for Ella Jensen, who had passed away that morning.

Instead of making the announcement, President Snow announced to the audience that there was trouble in the community and he and Brother Clawson would be excused from the meeting for a time.

They went by buggy the several miles to the Jensen home. There they found the grieving parents and the body of the nine-teen-year-old girl washed and laid out for burial.

President Snow told the parents not to be troubled, and these two Brethren blessed the girl. They stood around for some time, but nothing happened; and then they left.

Some time after they had gone, the girl stirred and opened her eyes and said, "Where is he? Where is he?"

"Where is who?" the parents asked.

"Where is President Snow? He called me back."

She then left a detailed account of her experiences in the spirit world, including a meeting with her grandfather, whom she confronted with great joy. He, in turn, greeted her with polite affection, but was very busy and excused himself because of the weight of responsibility he was carrying.

A detailed account of this miraculous experience, including the testimonies of President Snow and Elder Clawson, was published in the Improvement Era in two issues (32 [September, October 1929]:881-86, 972-80.)

Brother Widtsoe reaffirmed that "those who give themselves with all their might and main to this work [genealogical work] receive help from the other side. Whoever seeks to help those on the other side receives help in return in all the affairs of life." ("Genealogical Activities in Europe," page 104.)

Of course, you cannot force spiritual things. The Lord said that such things as these come in His own time and in His own way and according to His own will; and if we will live as we should and endeavor to keep His commandments, what ought to happen to us can happen to us.

President Wilford Woodruff left this testimony of help from beyond the veil:

Joseph Smith continued visiting myself and others up to a certain time and then stopped. The last time I saw him was in heaven. In the night vision I saw him at the door of the Temple in heaven. He came and spoke to me. He said he could not stop to talk to me because he was in a hurry. The next man I met was Father Smith; he couldn't talk to me because he was in a hurry. I met a half a dozen brethren who held high positions on earth, and none of them could stop to talk with me because they were in a hurry. I was much astonished.

By and by I saw the Prophet again, and I got the privilege to ask him a question. "Now," said I, "I want to know why you are in a hurry? I have been in a hurry all my life, but I expected my hurry would be over when I got into the Kingdom of Heaven, if I ever did."

Joseph said, "I will tell you, Brother Woodruff, every dispensation that has had the priesthood on earth and has gone into the celestial kingdom, has had a certain amount of work to do to prepare to go to the earth with the Savior when he goes to reign on earth. Each dispensation has had ample time to do this work. We have not. We are the last dispensation, and so much work has to be done and we need to be in a hurry in order to accomplish it."

Of course, that was satisfactory with me, but it was new doctrine to me. (Discourse delivered at Weber Stake Conference, Ogden, 19 October 1896; as published in Deseret News Weekly, vol. 53, no. 21.)

On one occasion when Elder Harold B. Lee spoke to the seminary and institute teachers, he was stressing to us the reality of spiritual communication and of the help and guidance we may receive from beyond the veil. But, he warned, we must be attuned in order to receive it.

Here is an excerpt from his address:

A few weeks ago, President McKay related to the Twelve an interesting experience, and I asked him yesterday if I might repeat it to you this morning.

He said it is a great thing to be responsive to the whisperings of the Spirit, and we know that when these whisperings come it is a gift and our privilege to have them. They come when we are relaxed and not under pressure of appointments. The President then took occasion to relate an experience in the life of Bishop John Wells, former member of the Presiding Bishopric.

A son of Bishop Wells was killed in Emigration Canyon on a railroad track. Brother John Wells was a great detail man and prepared many of the reports we are following up now. His boy was run over by a freight train. Sister Wells was inconsolable. She mourned during the three days prior to the funeral, received no comfort at the funeral, and was in a rather serious state of mind.

One day soon after the funeral services while she was lying on her bed relaxed, still mourning, she says that her son appeared to her and said, "Mother do not mourn, do not cry. I am all right." He told her that she did not understand how the accident happened and explained that he had given the signal to the engineer to move on, and then made the usual effort to catch the railing on the freight train; but as he attempted to do so his foot caught on a root and he failed to catch the hand rail, and his body fell under the train. It was clearly an accident.

Now, listen. He said that as soon as he realized that he was in another environment he tried to see his father, but he couldn't reach him. His father was so busy with the duties in his office he could not respond to his call. Therefore he had come to his mother. He said to her, "You tell father that all is well with me, and I want you not to mourn any more."

Then the President made the statement that the point he had in mind was that when we are relaxed in a private room we are more susceptible to those things; and that so far as he was concerned, his best thoughts come after he gets up in the morning and is relaxed and thinking about the duties of the day; that impressions come more dearly, as if it were to hear a voice. Those impressions are right. If we are worried about something and upset in our feelings, the inspiration does not come. If we so live that our minds are free from worry and our conscience is clear and our feelings are right toward one another, the operation of the Spirit of the Lord upon our spirit is as real as when we pick up the telephone; but when they come, we must be brave enough to take the suggested actions. The Lord will approve it and the Brethren will approve it, and we know it is right. He said, it is a great consolation in this upset world today to know that our Savior is directing this work. Then the President concluded: "I value that testimony." If you forget all else I have said, you remember that lesson and that admonition. (Address to seminary and institute faculty, Brigham Young University, 6 July 1956.)

A Work Pleasing to the Lord

Temple and genealogical work constitutes a living testimony of the ministry of the Lord Jesus Christ. He wrought the Atonement, He set in operation the resurrection.

If men were really "dead" when they die, why concern ourselves? Why the vast resources of time and money and effort directed at this work? If there were no resurrection, why would we do it?

But there is life beyond the veil. Every thought or word or act we direct at this sacred work is pleasing to the Lord. Every hour spent on genealogical research, however unproductive it appears, is worthwhile. It is pleasing to the Lord. It is our testimony to Him that we accept the doctrine of the resurrection and the plan of salvation. It draws us close to those who have gone before. It welds eternal links in family associations and draws us closer to Him who is our Lord and stands in the presence of Him who is our Eternal Father.

Shall we not go on in so great a cause? Go forward and not backward. Courage, brethren; and on, on to the victory! (D&C 128:22.)
