Boyd K. Packer, Holy Temple ( 1980)

21

Toward the Veil

I have a letter that I read periodically. It is now nearly a hundred years old. It was written from Safford, Arizona, to Martha Packer Pierce, a sister of my grandfather. It was written by her sister-in-law, Mary Ann Packer, wife of William J. Packer. She wrote to report the condition of her dying father-in-law, Johnathan Taylor Packer. He was my great-grandfather and the first of my progenitors to join the Church. When he was eighteen years old he with two of his brothers journeyed from Ohio to Nauvoo to meet the Prophet Joseph Smith. There he was baptized, and from then on, through his entire hard, eventful life, he followed the Brethren.

Through this letter more than through any other record I came to know my great-grandfather. The letter is dated January 17, 1889. He died twelve days later.

Safford Graham Co. Jan. 17th 1889

Dear Sister Martha

As your Father is not able to answer your most welcome letter I will do so instead. He is living with me he is very sick and have been for some five weeks. Do not know exactly what is the matter with him but dropsy is one complaint and he is troubled very much for breath and such a disstress in his Stomach and unless their is a change in him before long I do not think he will stand it much longer for he grows weaker everyday. But I will do all I can for him for I consider it my duty. I will do for him as I would like someone to do for my dear Mother for I am afraid I shall never see her again in this World.

Tell your Mother I often think of her, If I do not write, and of the comforting words she have spoken when I lay on my bed of sickness. I have good health this winter the best for the last six years. I trust your Mothers health will be good and that she will enjoy life. I so often look at her picture and it looks like it might talk. I wish I had yours also the boys. It would be a great comfort to me to have a picture to look at if I cannot see you all but I hope we will meet again. I am glad you enjoyed yourselves Holiday. We did not have much enjoyment on Christmas. Annie got a dinner invite all their and on News Years. Your Father says for you all to be faithful to the principles of the Gospel and asks the blessings of Abraham Isaac and Jacob upon you all and bid you all good bye until he meets you in the morning of the resurrection. Well Martha I can't hardly see the lines for tears so I will stop writing give my love to yourself from your loving sister.

Mary Ann Packer

I guess you know Aleathea my sister she live about eighty miles from here she stayed with me two months last summer she has four children.

It is quite an ordinary letter. But I see in it things that are extraordinary in importance. The most valuable message of the letter is from my great-grandfather, his parting message: "Your Father says for you all to be faithful to the principles of the Gospel and asks the blessings of Abraham Isaac and Jacob upon you all." His heart was turned to the fathers, the ancient ones, the prophets.

More than once I have shared Mary's deep feelings as she concludes: "Well Martha I can't hardly see the lines for tears."

Consider the note to Martha about her mother-my great-grandmother-and her "comforting words she have spoken when I lay on my bed of sickness."

The letter is dominated by the theme of family love strengthened in time of trouble. How the significance of such family feelings is deepened by time and experience!

It is so also with the temple ordinances. They have different meanings to the young and to the old. I often think, when I perform the sealing for a young couple, that it is a beginning for them; their hearts and minds are set upon those parts of the covenant that have to do with their marriage which is just beginning. A young husband and wife accept one another, not quite knowing what life holds for them. They do not know at this point how many children they will have or whether they will have any at all. They do not know where circumstances will lead them. They are not sure where the husband will be employed or what their fortunes will be. They move ahead in faith.

I always look around the sealing room for a grandmother or a grandfather, one perhaps whose partner has gone ahead. The sealing ordinance means something much different to the older ones. They too are looking ahead. But they are more interested in resurrection than they are in the creating of a family. Some uncertainty is present with them, too. But there is a serenity about them, a confidence and a faith. Words that held little meaning for a person as he or she first came to the altar as bride or groom now shine brightly as a beacon and a promise. The words "the Holy Spirit of Promise" take on a depth and a dimension that the person could not have felt in youth.

Care for Parents

Mary gave to her father-in-law a tender care; for she hoped someone would treat her mother with equal tenderness. My wife and I have learned from that, and we have tried-really tried-to care for our parents with tender regard in their declining years.

When I was a boy my grandfather came to live with us-my father's father, Joseph Alma Packer. He was having problems with his eyesight. He always walked with a cane. He was a typical old man. I did not appreciate what had to be done to order the household for Grandpa. As I look back now, that was one of the choice experiences of my life, to have an intimate relationship and memory with my grandfather. He died in our home.

When my wife's father became incapacitated after major surgery, and it was dear that he would need a great deal of care, we brought him to our home. He only lived for a short time, but the experience we had was a great blessing to our family. Our children helped to care for their grandfather, administer to his every need. I am sure this experience will be a great influence for good in their lives.

When we say temple I would list what in essence are Latter-day Saint synonyms for the word: Marriage, family, children, happiness, joy, eternal life, resurrection, redemption, exaltation, inspiration, revelation. All of these words in their own way are synonyms for the word temple. The word temple to the Latter-day Saint suggests a reverence for life. It embraces a concern for the young and the very old in the family. The world now fosters another view of these family connections. There is a growing tendency to establish centers for the care of the very young and of the very old. This responsibility is being shifted outside the home and family. There may be times when institutional help is needed for the care of the infirm. But we are becoming too free nowadays to shift from the family the privilege (I call it a privilege rather than a burden) of caring for family members. It is wrong. We should not disconnect the generations in this way. We should not unlink ourselves from our generations.

On one occasion Alex Haley the noted author was in our home. As we went over our family records he commented on the influence of the Church in holding the generations together.

Although he was being sought after to speak to large and prominent groups, he told me he preferred to speak to elementary school children because he took a message to the young people. The message: "Talk to the older people." He said he wanted to help his people, and that his people particularly had been threatened by the dissolution of the family. He said to us, "I like to tell the young people that they will not get bad advice from the old people." He said that from his experience in his own life, and from the experience that he'd observed in others, good comes from tying the young to the old. Tying the little folks with the older folks is a great and powerful tool to preserve and to protect the family and the individual.

Some of our most comforting memories of our parents for my wife and myself center around the service we were able to extend to them in their final years. We have not felt to send them away for others to care for. It is good to have the older ones around. They move toward the veil. Where they are now, surely we shall be.

When we know what we ought to know we will seek to weld those links, not just in genealogical research on paper, but here in mortality with our family, with our parents and our grandparents, with our children, and with our grandchildren.

Care for Children

I remember well the dedication of the Oakland Temple, particularly the remarks of Elder Harold B. Lee. When we returned to Salt Lake City I went to his office and talked with him about his comments. "You were inspired," I told him. He replied that he had felt that and said he had another subject prepared but felt prompted to speak as he did. In his address, after quoting the prophecy of Malachi that Elijah would return to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children and the hearts of the children to the fathers, he said:

I ask you to consider a Church-wide family teaching program about which we're talking today. Under the direction of President McKay we are sending throughout the Church a program to strengthen the relationship of parents and children in the home. Not that it is something new. It has been talked about, to use President McKay's language, "for fifty years" since President Joseph F. Smith and his counselors promised Church members that if they would gather their children around them once a week and instruct them in the gospel, those children in such homes would not go astray.

And so today there is being prepared instruction to do what? Is it not to turn here upon the earth the hearts of the parents to children and the hearts of the children to parents? Can you conceive that when parents have passed beyond the veil that that is the only time when parents should have their hearts turn to their children?

... I'd have you consider seriously whether or not that binding with your family will be secure if you have waited until you have passed beyond the veil before your hearts then yearn for your children whom you have neglected to have helped along the way. It is time for us to think of turning the hearts of parents to children now while living, in order that after they have gone to the beyond there might be the bond between parents and children that will last beyond death. (Harold B. Lee, talk at dedication of the Oakland Temple.)

There is a principle of great importance in what Brother Lee said on that occasion. As we move toward the veil we can prepare ourselves and our families.

President Kimball has continually recommended that there be a picture of a temple in the children's room. From their earliest day they should look forward to the temple.

If we do these things, as we progress through life we may look forward with faith, with our covenants made and kept.

There is another important thing we learn as we become acquainted with our forefathers. We develop a respect for the decency, integrity, and goodness of many of our ancestors who did not have the gospel. We find how proud we can be of them, living as well as they did with so little to go on, relatively speaking. We can come to develop a great sympathy and love and respect for our ancestors, and for all of God's children.

Mary Ann Packer wrote, "It would be a great comfort to have a picture to look at if I cannot see you all." A picture is a record-an important one.

Notes like her mention of Aleathea, giving a clue as to where she lived and the number of her children, have provided many a researcher with a clue which has opened the way to find hundreds, sometimes thousands, of names which after verification have been sent to the temples.

Understanding Comes Through Obedience

Not long before President McKay died, he spoke to the General Authorities in the Temple meeting just prior to a general conference. He talked of the temple ordinances and quoted at length from the ceremonies. He explained them to us. (That was not inappropriate, considering that we were in the temple.) After he had spoken for some time, he paused and stood gazing up to the ceiling in deep thought.

I remember that his big hands were in front of him with his fingers interlocked. He stood gazing as people sometimes do when pondering a deep question. Then he spoke: "Brethren, I think I am finally beginning to understand."

Here he was, the prophet-an Apostle for over half a century and even then he was learning, he was growing. His expression "I think I am finally beginning to understand," was greatly comforting to me. Perhaps if he was learning still, I might not be quite so much condemned for my state of relatively little understanding on many spiritual matters, provided that I'm still striving and learning.

Brigham Young said it well: "I will not say, as do many, that the more I learn the more I am satisfied that I know nothing; for the more I learn the more I discern an eternity of knowledge to improve upon." (Discourses of Brigham Young, page 250.)

Consider these verses from the Pearl of Great Price:

And he gave unto them commandments, that they should worship the Lord their God, and should offer the firstlings of their flocks, for an offering unto the Lord. And Adam was obedient unto the commandments of the Lord.

And after many days an angel of the Lord appeared unto Adam, saying: Why dost thou offer sacrifices unto the Lord? And Adam said unto him: I know not, save the Lord commanded me.

And then the angel spake, saying: This thing is a similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father, which is full of grace and truth.

Wherefore, thou shalt do all that thou doest in the name of the Son, and thou shalt repent and call upon God in the name of the , Son forevermore. (Moses 5:5-8.)

The angel explained to Adam the purpose of the sacrifice. He would thereafter not only obey the commandment, but he would know why it was required of him.

I can imagine that after Adam knew why the sacrifices were given to him by way of commandment he went forward with greater determination. I can imagine that he began to see a meaning and a purpose and a necessity for the commandment. It is quite possible that thereafter he approached his duty with great reverence and dedication-even determination.

We also should be obedient! The fact that we have received a commandment from God is reason enough in itself to go and do as we have been directed to do.

I have come to know that if we will do so, even though we may not understand at first, the Lord will tell us, as he told Adam, why we are so commanded.

We must gain some feeling for why we build temples, and why the ordinances are required of us. Thereafter we are continually instructed and enlightened on matters of spiritual importance. It comes line upon line, precept upon precept, until we gain a fullness of light and knowledge. This becomes a great protection to us-to each of us personally. It is a protection also for the Church.

Nephi in a vision saw the Lord's church in our day. He saw that "its numbers were few." He saw the Saints "upon all the face of the earth." He also saw that "their dominions upon the face of the earth were small." He described the assembling of the powers of evil:

And it came to pass that I beheld that the great mother of abominations did gather together multitudes upon the face of all the earth, among all the nations of the Gentiles, to fight against the Lamb of God. (1 Nephi 14:13.)

To counterbalance these monstrous forces of evil the Lord did not arm his people with weapons or military forces. But arm them he did, as Nephi said:

And it came to pass that I, Nephi, beheld the power of the Lamb of God, that it descended upon the saints of the church of the Lamb, and upon the covenant people of the Lord, who were scattered upon all the face of the earth; and they were armed with righteousness and with the power of God in great glory. (1 Nephi 14:14.)

No work is more of a protection to this Church than temple work and the genealogical research which supports it. No work is more spiritually refining. No work we do gives us more power. No work requires a higher standard of righteousness.

Our labors in the temple cover us with a shield and a protection, both individually and as a people.

Blessings Both Here and Beyond

It is in the ordinances of the temple that we are placed under covenant to Him-it is there we become the covenant people.

If we will accept the revelation concerning temple ordinance work, if we will enter into our covenants without reservation or apology, the Lord will protect us. We will receive inspiration sufficient for the challenges of life.

For a number of years the Church had negotiated with the government of Israel for permission to microfilm the archives of that nation. These records, including many carefully kept genealogies, are priceless records of the human family and have a tie to great events in the history of the world.

The officials had learned all they wanted to know about the Church storage procedures and were impressed. They insisted however that someone be sent to talk to them about the doctrine relating to our desire for their records. They wanted to know why we wanted their records.

In 1977 I received the assignment to go to Israel and meet with their official archivists and scholars on the matter. I went in company with Brother Ted Powell, the director of acquisitions of records for the Genealogical Department of the Church.

A meeting was held in the Peace Building at Hebrew University on Mount Scorpius. Nine archivists and scholars represented the Israelis. I explained to them our great interest in the Old Testament and our kinship with Israel. We talked of family, of patriarchal lineage and blessings. We talked of the doctrine of agency.

But all of these things were not central to the point. It might seem that in order to obtain a favorable decision we would have to be "diplomatic" and not mention ordinances-especially baptism.

But we were on the Lord's errand, and so I told them—plainly, bluntly—that we desired their records in order to provide baptism, Christian baptism, for their forebears and for ours. The reaction was immediate and intense.

The meeting thereafter was most interesting! We came away uncertain as to the outcome. But we were on the Lord's errand. We were serving the work of redemption for the dead. We had told the truth without any shade of misrepresentation.

In due time the answer came. We received approval to microfilm and preserve those records which were sanctified by the suffering of our brethren of the house of Israel.

On many occasions I have been present—when sealings were to be performed, when temple ordinance work was being clone, when funeral sermons were being preached-in circumstances when the veil was very thin. The gratitude of those who have gone beyond found its way through that misty barrier and was communicated as spiritual things are communicated.

The time will come when each one of us will be invited to pass through that separating veil. If we have done our duty in this great work for those who have passed on, well might we look forward with great anticipation to that time, for a great reward awaits us there. With all assurance, it awaits. I will meet my forebears and you will meet yours.

I cannot close this chapter and this book without bearing you my testimony concerning temple work and the genealogical work associated with it.

I have long since learned that there are no special compelling words set aside to be used only by the Brethren in the bearing of testimony. We use the ordinary words. They are often very inadequate to convey the very depth of feelings. I feel deeply-very, very deeply-this inspiration in the work of the temples. I have a profound regard for it.

I know as surely as I know that I live that the work relating to the temples is true. I know that it was revealed from beyond the veil. I know that that revelation continues.

I know also that revelation may come to each member of the Church individually concerning temple work. It has been my privilege to work very closely with the First Presidency of the Church in preparation for the announcement of small temples. My part, however meager, however insignificant, I have regarded with a greater depth of reverence and a deeper feeling of gratitude than any assignment of which in my ministry I have had a part. Once again ponder these verses:

Brethren, shall we not go on in so great a cause? Go forward and not backward. Courage, brethren; and on, on to the victory! Let your hearts rejoice, and be exceedingly glad. Let the earth break forth into singing. Let the dead speak forth anthems of eternal praise to the King Immanuel, who hath ordained, before the world was, that which would enable us to redeem them out of their prison; for the prisoners shall go free.

Let the mountains shout for joy, and all ye valleys cry aloud; and all ye seas and dry lands tell the wonders of your Eternal King! And ye rivers, and brooks, and fills, flow down with gladness. Let the woods and all the trees of the field praise the Lord; and ye solid rocks weep for joy! And let the sun, moon, and the morning stars sing together, and let all the sons of God shout for joy! And let the eternal creations declare his name forever and ever! And again I say, how glorious is the voice we hear from heaven, proclaiming in our ears, glory, and salvation, and honor, and immortality, and eternal life; kingdoms, principalities, and powers!

Behold, the great day of the Lord is at hand; and who can abide the day of his coming, and who can stand when he appeareth? For he is like a refiner's fire, and like a fuller's soap; and he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver, and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness. Let us, therefore, as a church and a people, and as Latter-day Saints, offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness; and let us present in his holy temple, when it is finished, a book containing the records of our dead, which shall be worthy of all acceptation. (D&C 128:22-24.)

Come to the temple—come and claim your blessings. It is a sacred work. Of this I give my witness.

(D&C 124:37-38.)
