R. Q. Shupe, Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, My Servant Brigham: Portrait of a Prophet ( 1997)

Acknowledgments

We appreciate the encouragement and the efforts of many individuals in helping to bring this project to its conclusion. These include Wendy Agle; Leonard J. Arrington; Aimee Boglietto; Joseph Bauman; Davis Bitton; Gregory Christofferson; Truman Clawson; Lindsey S. Curtis; Steve Edmunds; Mary E. V. Hill; Jeni, Nathan, and Zachary Holzapfel; Winifred Cannon Jardine; Karna Jones; Matthew Moore; Kirsten Reid; Steve Smoot; Gene and Deila Taylor; Nelson Wadsworth; and Elden J. Watson.

We also want to thank Cory Maxwell, Jana Erickson, and George Bickerstaff of Bookcraft; and the following individuals from the Church Archives, the Church Library, the Museum of Church History and Art, and the Visual Resource Library, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City: Ron Barney, Randall Dixon, Mel Bashore, Dale Beecher, Gaylen Chapman, Chris Cox, Robert Davis, Linda Haslam, Glen Leonard, Veneese Nelson, Bruce Pearson, Merri Platt, Brian Reeves, Larry Skidmore, William Slaughter, Steve Sorensen, Ronald Watt, and April Williamson.

Many other individuals, representing various organizations and institutions, kindly and professionally assisted us. These include Curt Bench, Benchmark Books, Salt Lake City; Chris Hodges, Charlotte Stewart, and Kim Thompson, Borge B. Anderson & Associates, Salt Lake City; Rick Grunder, Rick Grunder Books, Syracuse, New York; Margaret Adams, Beehive House, LDS Church, Salt Lake City; Geri Tiedeman, Lion House, LDS Church, Salt Lake City; Richard L. Anderson, Alex Baugh, Susan Easton Black, Gary Bunker, Donald Q. Cannon, Richard O. Cowan, Scott Duvall, Lawrence Flake, Linda Godfrey, David W. Hawkinson, Dean Jessee, E. Dale Lebaron, Larry Porter, Thomas Wells, Dennis Wright, and Raymond Wright, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah; Jeffery Johnson, Utah State Archives, Salt Lake City; Susan Wetstone, Information Center, Utah State Historical Society, Salt Lake City; Lorraine Crouse, J. Willard Marriott Library, University of Utah, Salt Lake City; Peter Schmid, Special Collections, Utah State University, Logan,Utah; Jennifer A. Watts, Huntington Library, San Marino, California; Jennifer Brathoude, Library of Congress, Washington, D.C.; John McMahon, National Portrait Gallery, Smithsonian Institute, Washington, D.C.; Sandra Hildebrand and Tiffany Malone, Thomas Gilcrease Institute, Tulsa, Oklahoma.
