R. Q. Shupe, Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, My Servant Brigham: Portrait of a Prophet ( 1997)

Introduction

A note in the handwriting of Thomas Bullock found in volume A-1 of the "Manuscript History of the Church" records something Joseph Smith said about Brigham Young shortly after their first meeting in 1832:

"About the 8th of November I received a visit from Elders Joseph Young, Brigham Young, and Heber C. Kimball from Mendon, Munroe [Monroe] County, New York. They spent four or five days at Kirtland [Ohio], during which we had many interesting moments. At one of our interviews, Brother Brigham Young, and John P. Greene spoke in Tongues, which was the first time I had heard this gift among the brethren, and others also spoke, and I received the gift myself. Brother Joseph Young is a great man, but Brigham is a greater, and the time will come when he will preside over the whole Church." [^1]

Apparently during Brigham's same visit to Kirtland and just after their first meeting, Joseph Smith was chopping wood with Levi Hancock. Brother Hancock later reported that as Brigham approached the two men, and before Brigham was within hearing, the Prophet turned to Levi and said: "There is the greatest man that ever lived to teach[redem[p]tion to the world and will yet lead this People." [^2] Few, including Brigham himself, could have imagined his future role in the kingdom at this early period and what lay before the Church and the Young family.

Brigham's life has been reviewed by many authors and historians, some more helpful than others. These portraits range from depicting him as a dictatorial tyrant to a non-polygamist western colonizer, contributing to an unfair stereotype. Since the 1970s, major positive steps have been made toward capturing the totality of Brigham's personality. Two of the best book-length efforts are Eugene England's excellent introductory biography, Brother Brigham, in 1980, and Leonard J. Arrington's comprehensive and now standard biography Brigham Young: American Moses, published five years later. [^3] Other historians have contributed insightful details of his life and labors since the publication of these two books, thus adding to our appreciation of Brigham's legacy. [^4]

During Brigham's long life he devoted himself to numerous enterprises. In addition both his personal and his public papers contain an impressive amount of documents. While it is difficult to adequately capture any person's life in its fulness and complexity-let alone someone like Brigham, whose life is so well documented-little details can open huge windows into Brigham's heart and mind, thus providing us with the opportunity to move beyond the stereotype. For example, in 1854 Brigham asked the local Salt Lake City bishops to provide a "swing in each ward for the benefit of the children." [^5] Because of his concern for the children's safety, Brigham asked the bishops to not allow anyone to use the swing after dark. [^6] In 1858 the Historian's Office clerk noted: "September 28, Prest. Young went into his garden and looked at the Comet. . . . September 30, Evening called upon the President, he was in the back yard, observing the 'Comet' through a Telescope." [^7] Several months later the clerk observed: "Prest. Young was reading the life of Napolean 1st. most of the evening. He retired about 1. a.m." [^8]

Brigham Young artifacts. From top right: Young family photograph album and carte de visite of Young family members and Church leaders, monogrammed gold cuff links, jewelled shirt stud, green sun goggles, framed lock of hair, and leather wallet. Courtesy Museum of Church History and Art, Salt Lake City.

The purpose of this book is not to supplant the important scholarly literature on Brigham's life and world, but from the rich sources available today to provide some lesser-known word pictures and visual images, photographs and artifacts. Of course, we are including here some of the classic stories, quotes, and images, but the heart of this book is the images, many of which have never been published before and were known only to historians, archivists, and curators. The endnotes will lead the reader to the rich and important historical work on Brigham for a more detailed and useful analysis of his life and ministry.

Brigham Young, by John Willard Clawson. Courtesy Museum of Art, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah. On display on the second floor of the Joseph Smith Building on the BYU campus.

As to the organization of the book, part 1 is thematic in approach, covering such aspects of Brigham Young's world as his public image, his leadership style, and his personality. Part 2 is a chronological presentation of the important events and accomplishments of his life. Throughout, the attempt has been to give the reader, through text and images, a better feeling for what Brigham's life and world were like.

Each day I (Richard Holzapfel) leave my office on the second floor of the Joseph Smith Building on the Brigham Young University campus and walk down a hallway that makes a jog around an atrium before continuing on to an elevator, or further along to the north stairwell in the building. Hanging on the wall at the jog is a full-size painting of Brigham Young created by his grandson, John W. Clawson. Brigham stands near a table with his left hand holding a book on the table, his right arm to a square with the hand holding his coat. He gazes beyond the canvas with deep blue eyes that contrast with the graying beard. Depicting him during his last years, when Clawson knew him best, Brigham's image grows larger and larger as one approaches the wall before making the turn at the atrium.

My regular walk down the hall is symbolic of the experience I had as I began to examine the sources in the various important archive collections about Brigham's life and world. As with the painting on the wall, the more closely one begins to examine the sources the larger Brigham looms over you. It is hard to fathom the depth and breadth of his work and life. Sometimes research left me exhausted as I made my way through the massive collection of letters, minutes, telegrams, records, journals, and reports. At other times the experience of spending the day in the archives left me feeling jubilant as I found something that gave me a new perspective or insight about him and his world.

Hours of reading and research turned into days, days turned into weeks, weeks into months, and months into years. Now this journey, with numerous stops along the way, has reached another milestone, and what I have discovered to this point is best expressed in a comment by Moses Thatcher. He honored Brigham for his many achievements and then made this observation: "Brigham Young was human and no doubt had human imperfections. . . . The sun has spots. . . . I am not able to bear more light and heat than comes from the king of day with all the spots that obscure his face! I have seen Brigham Young at times when he appeared, much as I can conceive, a greater than mortal man to be. But for my own, and the sake of others I was glad to realize then, and am glad to know now that he was human and doubtless had human frailties." [^9]

Brigham, like the sun, had spots. He was the first to admit to human weakness and to the necessity for everyone, including himself, to rely upon the Lord's goodness, mercy, and help. One can choose to dwell on those spots (like the scientist who spends his or her entire professional career on sunspots) or one can enjoy the light and warmth his life and teachings impart. One thing is certain: everything about Brother Brigham was real.
