R. Q. Shupe, Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, My Servant Brigham: Portrait of a Prophet ( 1997)

Part 1

The World of Brigham Young

Chapter 1

Public Image

An amazing number of people and groups from all over the world (Europe, South America, Asia, and North America) visited Utah during Brigham Young's lifetime. [^1] One such visitor frankly admitted, "It is very difficult, if not almost impossible, to speak of the Mormons with feelings perfectly balanced." [^2] Prejudice often got in the way of seeing Brigham as he was. Additionally, some visitors spent less than one hour with him and only a day or two in Salt Lake City before making up their minds about him and the Saints. Frequently their impressions were filtered through their own lenses, which often were based upon what they already believed about the claims of the restored Church.

Charles W. Carter, one of the photographers who captured Brigham's image during this period, noted in his "Journal Record of Photographs Taken" an insightful comment about visitors: "Of course, he is the [Lion] of Utah and when in Town all tourists have not considered to have seen all the sights without seeing B.Y. Some parties expect to see all his wives and children, as well-one lady asking to see his wives, in his quiet way, [he] politely informed her that we are not on exhibition." [^3]

A double-page spread from the 16 August 1866 issue of an increasingly important American illustrated newspaper, the Harper's Weekly, featured this illustration of Salt Lake City and LDS Church leaders. By 1870 Harper's Weekly had a circulation of more than 170,000. Courtesy Gary L. and Carol B. Bunker, Orem, Utah.

The mail brought news reports and books to Utah, and within a short time it became obvious that Brigham made "good copy." It seems that every month produced some new story, generally fitting the stereotype being created about him and the Church during a period of strong anti-Mormon activity. [^4] Even the great mountain walls in Utah could not protect Brigham and his family from constant abuse and from the gaze of the unscrupulous.

Non-Mormon Elizabeth Cumming, wife of the newly appointed territorial governor, noted in a letter to her sister-in-law written after her arrival in Utah in 1858: "We have all been amused with the New York & other papers to-day. The quantity of news about Utah-but amid all the falsehoods, it is strange that not one single truth should be told-yet such is the fact." [^5] One senses from examining the Historian's Office Journal (a daily record kept in the LDS Church Historian's Office located across the street from Brigham Young's home and offices) the apprehension existing in the room as newspapers arrived from the East and were read, only to reveal a situation similar to the one described by Elizabeth Cumming.

Elizabeth Cumming. Courtesy Special Collections-Manuscripts, Marriott Library, University of Utah, Salt Lake City.

Brigham did not generally answer every false charge, vindictive rumor, or obvious distortion. However, when eastern critics raised a cry against him charging him and the Saints with conspiracy in the tragic killing of Captain John W. Gunnison and some of his men near the Sevier River by a local native Indian band, he wrote the secretary of war, Jefferson Davis, in September 1855:

"Contrary to my usual custom in regard to the various false Malicious and slanderous reports set in motion against my character by wicked and designing men I consider the one in regard to the Gunison Masacre . . . [as] one calling for a reply and vindication on my part. I am often made aware of the utter uselessness and folly of seeking to vindicate my character from such foul aspersions as are occasionally raised against me, from the simple fact that although the foul aspersions can be bruited far and wide held to the fluttering breeze by every press and rolled as sweet under every tongue yet when the vile slander is fairly refuted and truth appears in the most incontestible manner it is permitted to lie quietly upon the shelf to slumber the sleep of death or if by chance it should get published in some obscure nook or corner of this great republic be most religiously suppressed as tho in fear that the truth should be known and believed. Still in the case under consideration I feel it a duty incumbent upon m for my own satisfaction and that of my friends as well as the relatives of the lamented Gunison who have desired me to furnish all the details and particulars of that unfortunate occurrence." [^6]

Englishman John Mortimer Murphy visited the western United States in 1875 and later published his travel narrative in Rambles in North-Western America. During his visit to Utah he took the opportunity to meet Brigham in the Lion House. "He greeted me cordially, though in a dignified manner, and when he read my letter of introduction, told me that anything he could do to make my stay pleasant would afford him pleasure. He said that he was always glad to meet strangers who were visiting the country, and was willing to show them any kindness he could, but that in most instances he was repaid in slander and sarcasm." [^7]

When Murphy asked him if he thought all people treated him that way, Brigham replied "that nearly all did, especially newspaper writers and bookmakers," making exceptions for British Lords, and adding, "If we had men like that come here often . . . we should soon be known to the world for what we really are-a sober, chaste, God-fearing people, whose only desire is to be let alone, and to be allowed to worship the Creator according to the dictates of our conscience." [^8]

Ironically, when Murphy published the interview in England he added to the stereotype with this critical conclusion: "Thanking him for his kindness, I shook hands and retired, rather prepossessed in his favour; but when I analysed his features mentally, I could apparently see that the suave smile and gloved hand concealed a spirit that would dare and do anything to attain an object once wished for, and that the desire to appear well in the eyes of the world was only for the purpose of gaining converts and confidence." [^9]

There was no question about it-news reports, articles, and books discussing Brigham sold. Just months before Brigham's death in 1877, newspaper owner Frank Leslie announced the following to his readership: "The Frank Leslie transcontinental excursion party, whose departure from this city on April 10th was announced in these columns . . . returned safely on June 7th, having in the interval twice traversed the breadth of the Continent. Every place of interest on the route was visited, and its points of significance intelligently studied, and an enduring record made of them by photograph, pencil and pen. . . . The series will be continued regularly until the entire trip from New York to San Francisco and the Yosemite region, including a visit, on the homeward route, to Brigham Young, at Great Salt Lake City, has been illustrated." [^10] Brigham equaled the great sites in America as a point of interest.

Few events generated as much interest for visitors, newspaper reporters, and the nation at large than the 1857-58 Utah War and Brigham's arrests and trials in the 1870s.

In the 1850s many federally appointed judges and territorial officers returned East from Utah complaining in the most bitter terms of the LDS Church's influence in the territory. For whatever reason, they were unwilling to accept the fact that the territory, which had been founded by the Mormons, contained an overwhelming Mormon majority and that the economic, political, and social development of the region by the Mormons would reflect Latter-day Saint values. Additionally, many in the nation were shocked in 1852 when Church leaders officially announced the practice of plural marriage.

Proclamation dated 5 August 1857. Courtesy Special Collections-Manuscripts, Marriott Library, University of Utah, Salt Lake City.

By the spring of 1857 the nation's capital was abuzz with rumors and allegations charging the Mormons with murder, destruction of legal records, religiously biased courts, and conspiracy with the native American Indians to promote conflict against non-Mormon immigrants. In response U.S. President James Buchanan, without informing Governor Brigham Young, sent a large army to quell a purported Mormon rebellion. When news arrived that the army was on its way, Brigham felt the army was no more than another anti-Mormon mob bent on destroying the Mormon religious community and society.

The earlier experiences of persecution in New York, Missouri, Ohio, and Illinois were still fresh in the memory of many Latter-day Saints in Utah, and the recent murder of Apostle Parley P. Pratt in Arkansas only added to the tension. The muster rolls of the local militia (Nauvoo Legion) swelled from several hundred volunteers to several thousand men. [^11] Secretary of War John Floyd, one of many southerners serving in the Buchanan administration, viewed the mission against the Utah Territory as an opportunity to divert national attention from the sectional struggle over slavery.

Citing a history of federal outrages against the Mormon people and the advance of an "armed mercenary mob," Brigham put the territory on full military alert in the early fall of 1857. The Utah War put Brigham on the spot like nothing had before; his words and image appeared dozens of times during the crisis, making Brigham more famous than ever. After a peaceful conclusion to the conflict, the nation's attention turned towards the East on the eve of the Civil War.

Anti-Mormonism now took second place to the larger issues that divided the nation into two separate and distinct societies-one in the northern states and the other in the southern states. However, once the Civil War was concluded the U.S. Congress looked west again, and by 1871 Utah had become one of the focuses of the nation. The new Grant Administration in Washington, D.C., plagued with criticisms ranging from corruption in the government to problems dealing with Reconstruction in the South, saw the "Mormon problem" as a way to divert attention away from pressing difficulties, just as the Buchanan Administration had done before.

President Grant appointed James B. McKean to take the lead in vigorously fulfilling the Republican pledge to end "plural marriage" in Utah. McKean targeted Brigham for prosecution and with religious zeal moved forward to arrest and punish him by stacking juries with avowed anti-Mormons, accepting virtually any testimony, no matter how dubious, that might bring him to court. On 2 October 1871 U.S. marshals arrested seventy-year-old Brigham and two other Church leaders on charges of "lewd and lascivious cohabitation and adultery." Soon thereafter, McKean secured indictments from a grand jury against Brigham Young and Daniel H. Wells, charging them with murder also. Incidently, some non-Mormons who had opposed Brigham's policies of self-sufficiency earlier in the territory now came to Brigham's support during this time, feeling that the government was using questionable means to accomplish its goal. Brigham was placed under house arrest for 120 days during the ordeal. Eventually the U.S. Supreme Court overruled cKean's methods, nullifying grand jury indictments against Brigham and others.

In one last bizarre courtroom confrontation, McKean presided over what was undoubtedly one of the most publicized divorce proceedings in the United States during this period. In 1873, Ann Eliza Webb Young, a plural wife of Brigham, sued for divorce and demanded a large financial settlement, which Brigham refused to pay. On 11 March 1875 McKean ordered Brigham to pay a $25.00 fine and spend a day in the territorial prison at Sugar House for contempt when he did not comply with a court order to pay a $500.00 a month alimony while the trial was proceeding. Finally, on payment of $3,600 alimony, the case was dismissed on the ground that, as a plural wife, Ann Eliza could never have been legally married to Brigham.

Ann Eliza Webb Young. Courtesy Information Center, Utah State Historical Society, Salt Lake City.

Brigham himself saw the irony in it all. "One day a man is threatened with fine and imprisonment for entering into what they term an illegal marriage, and the next day it is adjudged that he pay alimony to the woman who the day before, it was claimed, was no wife at all. Consistency is said to be a jewel, but it is certainly a treasure not possessed by the aiders and abettors of the anti-Mormon crusade." [^12]

Such inconsistency in how he was treated and viewed by the outside world would continue throughout Brigham's life. And so it was that his public image as portrayed in the popular media of the day usually bore little resemblance to the man whom the Latter-day Saints sustained as a prophet of the Lord.

Upon Brigham's death, George Q. Cannon wrote: "Posterity will yet do him the justice which those who now live have refused him, and in the annals of the Church his Presidency will be pointed to as a remarkable epoch." [^13]
