R. Q. Shupe, Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, My Servant Brigham: Portrait of a Prophet ( 1997)

Chapter 2

In the Lord's Service

In his role as a Church officer, Brigham Young was known to be a powerful speaker. There may be more than one thousand reports of talks, sermons, and public addresses of Brigham found in the LDS Church Archives. Of these, many extemporaneous public addresses were published in the Journal of Discourses, the Deseret News, and the Millennial Star during his lifetime.

After taking time to properly edit his spontaneous discourses, Brigham published many of them so that the Saints who were not able to hear him directly would have the opportunity to read his sermons carefully, believing them to be of value. Brigham wrote in 1858: "I would recommend the Journal of Discourses. Bro. George D. Watt has reported my discourses and others and sent them to England and had them printed, which can now be obtained here in volumes. Take them and read them, and if you can, search the volumes of eternity-the volumes of heaven-and see if my teachings do not agree in principle and truth with all the truth of eternity. If they do they are the words of life and salvation to all who will believe, and every man who rejects my words rejects life and salvation to his own soul." [^1]

George D. Watt. Courtesy Ronald Watt, Salt Lake City. Old Tabernacle and Bowery, ca. 1863. Most visitors and Saints had the opportunity to hear Brigham speak in the Old Tabernacle (an adobe structure to the left) and the Bowery (to the right) before the New Tabernacle was completed in 1867. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City. "West Side of Salt Lake City, From Arsenal Hill," by Charles R. Savage, 3 May 1873. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

Brigham's public speaking career began shortly after his baptism. He recalled: "I was but a child, so far as public speaking and a knowledge of the world was concerned; but the Spirit of the Lord was upon me, and I felt as though my bones would consume within me unless I spoke to the people and told them what I had seen, heard and learned-what I had experienced and rejoiced in; and the first discourse I ever delivered I occupied over an hour." [^2]

Brigham's reputation as a speaker among the Saints and the nation at large only increased as his sermons were reported widely. Some listeners and readers were disappointed. [^3] Some others were shocked. [^4] Recalling something Joseph Smith had taught, he said: "When you speak to a people or person you must use language to represent your ideas, so that they will be remembered. When you wish the people to feel what you say, you have got to use language that they will remember, or else the ideas are lost to them. Consequently, in many instances we use language that we would rather not use." [^5]

"Sacrament in the Mormon Tabernacle" with Brigham preaching, Harper's Weekly, 30 September 1871. Courtesy Gary L. and Carol B. Bunker, Orem, Utah.

Recent emigrant Martha Spence [Heywood] noted in her diary in 1850: "Attended meeting and heard the President speak on the principle of receiving the truth in the love of it, his remarks were truly delightful to me and I know that I have always loved the principles he advanced and taught the people." [^6] A few weeks later, she recorded, "Last Sabbath of the year of 1850. . . . Regret that I did not attend meeting today as Brigham Young preached." [^7]

Two years later another one of Brigham's clerks noted in the official Historian's Office Journal: "Sunday 14 March 1852. Brigham Young rolled out revelation upon revelation." [^8]

Even for seasoned Saints, Brigham's sermons often caused moments of reflection as they recorded their feelings. For example, one member of the Church noted: "Sunday afternoon. President B. Young delivered a discourse, equaled by none that I have ever listened to on 'Space-the Eternities-of matter of duration.'" [^9] The Deseret News adds: "Sunday, Oct. 8, [1854]. . . . An immense congregation were comfortably seated in the open air. . . . While the [sacramental] emblems were being passed, President Brigham Young delivered a highly interesting discourse, which held the vast audience as if it were spellbound." [^10] Finally, Wilford Woodruff noted in his journal: "Oct. 8th President Young preached to a congregation of several thousand out of Doors And I Believe that He preached the greatest sermon that ever was delivered to the Latter Day Saints since they have been a People." [^11]

In minutes of a family meeting on 25 December 1857, Brigham's long discourse, given at the behest of his sick and homebound sister Fanny, was recorded. At the end of the evening Brigham asked her if the talk was what she wanted: "Sister Fanny, am I not talking to you? Fanny replied, yes, this is my feeling; this day is worth a thousand to me. Let persons be shut up for days and weeks as I am, and they will feel the want of preaching. I read, but I want to hear the scriptures expounded." [^12]

Brigham's power to move people through his sermons is discovered in comments found in hundreds of diaries. For the collective body of the Saints, many situations demonstrate Brigham's ability to rally the people. One such time was in October 1856 when news arrived of the late-starting handcart companies' troubles. After listening to Brigham, Lucy Meserve Smith recalled: "Just at the session of our October Conference, news came where [the] hand cart companies were. President Young and others were so excited and anxious for fear those companies would be caught in the snow in the mountains, they would not go on with Conference. The President called for men, teams, clothing and provisions, and they were soon on the way to meet the companies with President Young himself till he got into the Canyon. There he took sick and was obliged to turn back. The sisters stripped off their petticoats, stockings, and everything they could spare, right there in the Tabernacle and piled into the wagons to send to the Saints in th mountains. . . . I never took more satisfaction and I might say pleasure in any labor I ever performed in my life, such a unanimity of feeling prevailed. I had only to go into a store and make my wants known; if it was cloth, it was measured off without charge." [^13]

Lucy Meserve Smith. Courtesy Special Collections-Manuscripts, Marriott Library, University of Utah, Salt Lake City.

The clerk in the Historian's Office across the street from Brigham's home and offices made the following entry in the Office Journal regarding the Saints' response to Brigham's plea at the October 1856 conference to help the handcart pioneers: "During the last 3 days in reply to a call by Prest. Young the following offerings were made. 26688 lbs flour. 31 bushels & 1 peck onions. 12 lbs dried meal. 5 bushels Oats. $8 Cash-54 teams 6 Horses. 4 Wagons 51 Teamsters 106 Quilts & Blankets. 8 Cloaks. 53 Coats. 51 prs Pants 50 vests 134 prs Boots & Shoes 29 shawls. 57 Dresses. 72 Skirts. 67 hoods 174 prs Stockings. 72 prs. Stocks 9 pr Mitts. 14 Socks. 1 small Buffalo Robe 40 Bundles Clothing (kind not specified) 2 overshirts. 2 Chemises 4 Neckties 13 Hats & Caps 3 Boys Suits. 8 prs Drawers. 15 Jackets 12 Bonnets. 7 Shirts. 4 Handkerchiefs. 1 Rug. 1 Victorine 5 yds Linsey 2 Aprons. 1 pr Gloves-The list of Clothing is defective as many persons put in clothing & did not wish their names to appear." [^14]

Of course, Brigham understood his limitations. As Paul Peterson noted, after the Reformation (1856-57), Brigham came to "realize that he could not 'drive a man or woman to heaven.'" [^15] Later, in 1861, Brigham said: "People are not to be driven, and you can put into a gnat's eye all the souls of the children of men that are driven into heaven by preaching hell-fire. . . . Take that intelligent course, and learn to instruct people until they increase in knowledge and understanding, until their traditions pass away, and they will become of one heart and mind in the principles of godliness." [^16]

During the tense period of the Utah War (1857-58) one Saint noted his feelings about Brigham's sermons and life after attending a meeting in Salt Lake City: "September 20, 1857 (Sunday). To day has but been a repetition of previous Sundays. Revelation and inspiration upon inspiration & President Young presents to my comprehension the many attributes of the Deity and my constant anxiety is to make him my copy." [^17]

The Saints were particularly interested in hearing from their leader after a long absence, as was the case in April 1859: "Pres. B. Young gladdened our hearts by his appearance and speaking on the stand causing quite a sensation." [^18]

Non-Mormon visitors often took time to evaluate not only the content of his sermons but also Brigham's delivery. In June 1865 Samuel Bowles "had a week and an extra Sunday in Salt Lake City, all passed under the most favorable circumstances for acquiring knowledge of its people, its institutions, and the natural beauties and phenomena of the neighborhood." [^19] He briefly described Brigham as "a well-preserved, good-looking man of now near seventy years; stout, smooth-faced, self-controlled; slow and careful of speech; with a light gray eye, cold and uncertain; a thin, short under-lip and chin." [^20] He further reflected: "When his eye did sparkle and his lips soften, it was with most cheering, though not warming, effect; it was pleasant but did not melt you." [^21] He then took time to describe a talk he heard Brigham Young give in the Tabernacle while on his visit to Salt Lake City: "It was a curious medley of scriptural exposition and exhortation, bold and bare statement, coarse denunciation and vulgar allusion, chep rant and poor cant. . . . It was a very material interpretation of the statements and truths of Scripture, very illogically and roughly rendered; and calculated only to influence a cheap and vulgar audience." [^22]

Hamilton Hill, another visitor, reported in 1871: "Brigham Young's address was evidently given off-hand, but he spoke with a good degree of fluency; his manner was conversational; his gestures were awkward, but they were infrequent; his voice filled the hall, and he was listened to by all with the closest attention." [^23]

Apparently, Brigham's "voice filled the hall" often, as a comment regarding a meeting in 1868 noted: "Conference met at 10 a.m. . . . Pres. B. Young delivered a fine preach. No person has ben so well heard in the New Tabernacle as Prest. Young." [^24]

Thus one can find comments by a visitor who enjoyed a particular talk and another, like Bowles, who did not. Most recognized that Brigham did not prepare a text, and therefore his sermons were much different from what one expected to hear from the pulpit of a Protestant church. There were a few exceptions to the general rule, however. The Historian's Office Journal notes: "Friday, Oct. 8. The weather was fair and temperate in Salt Lake City, the thermometer registering 73 degrees at noon in the shade. The general conference of the Church was continued in Salt Lake City. Prest. Brigham Young said he had prepared a short discourse on the subject of the resurrection, which he had called upon Elder Geo. Q. Cannon to read." [^25]

Brigham Young pamphlet, The Resurrection: A Discourse by Brigham Young, dated 8 October 1875. Courtesy R. Q. and Susan Shupe, San Juan Capistrano, California.

And while generally the talks were extemporaneous, Brigham usually took the time to review and edit them for publication, as noted earlier. First, he did so because the reporters were not always able to take down the talk exactly as it was given. Second, direct quotes sometimes lost something without the context, and editing helped Brigham get his message across exactly as he wanted it to come out for an unseen audience. Finally, what Brigham might say in one setting would not necessarily be helpful in a published form. In a few instances a sermon went to press before he had the opportunity to do this editing, and this apparently upset him.

His free use of scriptures in his discourses suggests that Brigham had taken the time to study them. Of course, Brigham lived in a biblical environment-the King James Bible was quoted in everyday speech and its stories permeated the air. In his discourses Brigham often quoted and paraphrased the teachings of Joseph Smith. Among his personal papers is a document identified as "Scriptural Quotations." Apparently it is written in his own hand and characterized by his phonetic spelling.

- there is Lords meney and Gods meney but to us there is but one living and true God Elohem Yeho Mikel

- this is life eternal to know the only wise God and Jesus Christ whom he has sent

- the God and Father of our Lord Jesus and the Father of our spirits

- God hath made of one flesh all the inhabetence of the earth

- can eney person officiate in eney of ordenence or laws pertaining to the eternal kingdoms of God with one first pasing through them him self [^26]

Brigham's gospel knowledge and his ability to stir the Saints with his inspiration, revelation, and vision of the profound gospel message are evident throughout his entire ministry. Church members saw him as their prophet, called to lead them in their efforts to build the kingdom and to prepare for what lay beyond this life.

Brigham's leadership style may best be understood by placing him in the role of a father who loves his family but is often required to teach, instruct, and correct. Certainly, Brigham felt responsibility for the Saints at various times and in different circumstances. However, it was upon his return from the East following the Martyrdom that one can see the relationship develop between himself as the father figure and the Saints as children: "The Brethren ware over joyed to see us come home, for they ware littel children without a Father, and they felt so you may be sure. All things are now reviving up agan. The Brethren prayed with all faith for us to return. . . . I have ben in Councel all most all the time sence I arived here." [^27]

Later, while the Saints were gathered at Winter Quarters on the Missouri River in February 1847, he reflected again: "I feel like a father with a great family of children around me, in a winter storm, and I am looking with calmness, confidence and patience, for the clouds to break and the sun to shine, so that I can run out and plant and sow and gather in the corn and wheat and say, Children, come home, winter is approaching again. . . . I am ready to kill the fatted calf and make a joyful feast to all who will come and partake." [^28]

On another occasion he said, "Although I may get up here and cuff them about, chastising them for their forgetfulness, their weaknesses and follies, yet I have not seen a moment when they did not love me. The reason is, because I love them so well." [^29] A month later, he stated, "Though I may sometimes chastise my brethren, and speak to them in the language of reproof, there is not a father who feels more tenderly towards his offspring, and loves them better than I love this people." [^30]

Because he loved them dearly, he noted: "As to the opinion of men concerning myself as a man I care no more about it than I do the dust under my feet. I don' t care what you say about me if you will only serve the Lord our God." [^31] Having attended a meeting in Salt Lake City, Charles L. Walker noted in his diary: "I felt glad to be there and for the first time in my life after being in the valley over 5 years I had the pleasue [of] shaking hands with Bro Brigham." [^32]

Some ten years later, upon the completion of the transcontinental railroad in 1869, Brigham called some two hundred missionaries east during the 1869 "70 winter, utilizing the new railway system that linked Utah with the nation.

Thomas Higgs, by J. E. James, ca. 1870. Courtesy Roberta Sleater Baker, Salt Lake City.

Elder Thomas Higgs, one of the missionaries called east, wrote President Young from New York with a not uncommon greeting for the Church President that gives us a sense of what many of the Saints felt about Brigham: "Dear Brother and Father, for sutch you have allways been to me. It is with Great pleasure that I address these few lines to you to let you known how and ware I am. . . . [I] arrived in Utica on the eleventh, found my foks all well and glad to see me and I was glad to see them. They received us very kindly. . . . My youngest Bro and Oldist sister I believe will embrace the Gospel. . . . My self and Br Galloway are doing the best we can for the Kingdom of God and it is the Kingdom of God or nothing with your servant and br. In the Gospel of Peace, Ths. Higgs." [^33]

Charles Marshall surmised after a visit to Salt Lake City in 1871: "There can be no question that Brigham Young is both revered and beloved by the mass of the people." [^34]

In July 1876 a newspaper reporter described Brigham's appearance at the meeting in the New Tabernacle in Salt Lake City: "President Brigham Young addressed the assembled concourse in a kind, fatherly and instructive manner, his words and the feeling that prompted them going direct to the hearts of his hearers. At the conclusion of his brief discourse he blessed the people, every one in his place and station, in the name of Jesus Christ, and by the authority of the priesthood he holds, according to his right and privilege." [^35]

Upon Brigham's death, a missionary to the native American Indians, D. B. Huntington, telegraphed Salt Lake asking for a request in behalf of a leader of one of the local Indian bands: "To Whom It May Concern: Fisherman wants to see President Young's remains, so that he can tell his people their father and friend is dead. They will cry hard. He says 'What shall we do? Who will be our friend?'" [^36]

How did Brigham engender such feelings among the Saints and those friendly nonmembers in the region, especially in light of the demanding sacrifices he often required of people? Because he himself, by personal experience, knew the "cost of discipleship," he was totally aware of the struggles, privations, and stress that came from gathering, colonizing, and doing the work of building the kingdom. As Ronald Esplin insightfully observed, "Such shared experience helped create the bond between Brigham Young and his people. At his request and under his direction they gave their all." [^37] As Brigham himself said, "I ask not that of my brethren but what I am willing to give myself; and what I do as your leader, or president you should be willing to do the same." [^38]

Additionally, Brigham had a knack for putting things in context for the Saints. On 6 October 1859, after the setbacks and disappointments of personal losses, and group losses such as the death of Joseph and Hyrum (1844); the exodus from Nauvoo (1846); suffering and death at Winter Quarters (1846-47); the handcart experiences (1856); the famines (1855-56); and the invasion of Utah by federal troops (1857-58)-after all these difficulties, he said: "We talk about our trials and troubles here in this life: but suppose that you could see yourselves thousands and millions of years after you have proved faithful to your religion during the few short years in this time, and have obtained eternal salvation and a crown of glory in the presence of God; then look back upon your lives here, and see the losses, crosses, and disappointments, the sorrows . . . , you would be constrained to exclaim, 'But what of all that? Those things were but for a moment, and we are now here.'" [^39]

Such fatherly wisdom was appreciated and, as the incoming correspondence files and President's Office Journals at the LDS Church Archives demonstrate, was sought for often by thousands of Saints and non-Mormons.

During Brigham's presidency in Utah, he traveled tens of thousands of miles visiting the Saints. [^40] It was an opportunity for them to meet Brother Brigham and receive counsel and direction. These visits were important affairs, and the Saints, especially those living beyond Salt Lake City who did not have the opportunity of seeing him as often, celebrated Brigham's arrival.

Hundreds of accounts of these visits survive. One of the most interesting is a report by non-Mormon Elizabeth Kane of a visit to southern Utah just before Christmas 1872. Not only was she an astute observer of life in the Mormon settlements visited but she captured a portrait of the Mormon leader during the visit:

"Brigham Young, 'President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints,' makes an annual journey of inspection south, visiting the settlements of his people from the Great Salt Lake to the Arizona border.

"My husband was invited to join his party last winter, and I accompanied him with my two children, boys of eight and ten.

"We left Salt Lake City early one December morning, while the stars were still shining in the frosty dawn. . . .

"I strolled out on the platform afterwards, to find President Young preparing for our journey-as he did every morning afterwards-by a personal inspection of the condition of every wheel, axle, horse and mule, and suit of harness belonging to the party. . . . He wore a great surtout, reaching almost to his feet, of dark-green cloth (Mahomet color?) lined with fur, a fur collar, cap, and pair of sealskin boots with the undyed fur outward. I was amused at his odd appearance; but as he turned to address me, he removed a hideous pair of green goggles, and his keen, blue-gray eyes met mine with their characteristic look of shrewd and cunning insight. I felt no further inclination to laugh. His photographs, accurate enough in other respects, altogether fail to give the expression of his eyes. . . .

"It was the brass band from Parowan come out to meet us, escorted by a troop of many youths. The horses danced and plunged as the band-wagon fell into line, and we entered Parowan in great state to the music of 'John Brown's Body.' . . .

"At these informal audiences, reports, complaints, and petitions were made; and I think I gathered more of the actual working of Mormonism by listening to them than from any other source. They talked away to Brigham Young about every conceivable matter, from the fluxing of an ore to the advantages of a Navajo bit, and expected him to remember every child in every cotter's family. And he really seemed to do so, and to be at home, and be rightfully deemed infallible on every subject. . . . I noticed that he never seemed uninterested, but gave an unforced attention to the person addressing him, which suggested a mind free from care. . . .

"The saints who are more used to his presence take Brother Brigham's arrival at a village tranquilly, but new-comers in Utah greet him much more deferentially than if he were the President of the United States. There was a bright-eyed woman at Parowan with snow-white hair who tried to kiss his hand, and went round to all the party shaking hands with both hands and patting us. She had only been in Utah three months. . . .

"Brigham Young on His Travels," 1873 illustration from T. H. B. Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints.

"There were also plain farmers who had come to seek counsel of 'Brother Brigham,' whether to sell their farms to speculators, or to go shares with them in seeking minerals." [^41]

Even upon his return to Salt Lake City, Brigham's traveling party was often met by supporting Saints to welcome him home: "Tuesday [January] 28 [1851] About 10 a m. Gen Wells, Staff & Band go out to meet [Brigham] & escort him to Town. They went out with a large escort about 13 miles north, met the Governor [Young] at Judson Stoddard's when they immediately returned. Arrived in the City at Sundown. The band playing nearly all the way. The cannon roaring until he arrived opposite the State House. On ascending to the Governor's house Mr. Kinkead let fly a number of Sky Rockets [and] Fire Wheels [and] set the air in motion with fire balls. Prest. Young blest the people & thanked them for their kind attentions. His reception was of the heart & not lip service & was truly good." [^42]

As a servant in the Lord's kingdom Brigham was either involved in or supervised many significant developments in the Church. He participated in the building and dedication of both the Kirtland and the Nauvoo Temples, and the laying of the cornerstones for the temple at Far West, Missouri. Within a few days after his arrival in the Great Basin in 1847 he identified the site of the Salt Lake Temple. While not completed during his lifetime, the temple in Salt Lake was one of his great architectural legacies.

Salt Lake Temple architectural rendering, 1855, by William W. Ward from a design by Truman O. Angell, which hung in President Brigham Young's office for over twenty years. Courtesy Museum of Church History and Art, Salt Lake City.

Before his death in August 1877, Brigham oversaw the construction and dedication of the St. George Temple and identified sites for temples at Logan and Manti. Brigham also foresaw the completion of other temples throughout the world, [^43] and, in particular, one in Provo, Utah, as the following account explains: "We were among those present and President Young addressing us said, 'We have ascended to the summit of this beautiful hill and now you are standing on Holy ground, the day will come when a magnificent Temple will be erected here to our God and I want you to look and behold the scenic beauty of this wonderful Valley, with these grand old Mountains of Ephraim to the North and to the East of us, with their rugged Canyons and towering peaks and to the West, we have a wonderful Lake of fresh water adding more beauty, and by building the Temple here on this spot of ground, there is plenty of room away from the edge of the hill for all needed purposes.'" [^44]

Missionary Certificate signed by First Presidency, dated 7 December 1874. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

During his ministry among the Saints, Brigham contributed to strengthening and organizing priesthood quorums. He called, set apart, and ordained hundreds to offices and missions. Of particular interest is Brigham's calling or ordination of several Apostles: John Taylor (1838); Wilford Woodruff and John E. Page (1839); Willard Richards (1840); Amasa M. Lyman (1842); Ezra Taft Benson, Charles C. Rich, Lorenzo Snow, Erastus Snow, and Franklin D. Richards (1849); Jedediah M. Grant (1854); George Q. Cannon (1860); Brigham Young Jr. (1864); Joseph F. Smith (1866); and Albert Carrington (1870). Of these, four became President of the Church-John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, Lorenzo Snow, and Joseph F. Smith.

Furthermore, with "death knocking loudly at his door," as William Hartley puts it, "President Brigham Young labored restlessly in his last five months of life to reorganize the Church's government structures." [^45] These events during the last year of his life are some of Brigham's most lasting contributions to the Church.
