R. Q. Shupe, Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, My Servant Brigham: Portrait of a Prophet ( 1997)

Chapter 3

Family and Personality

Brigham Young's family provided him with much of his happiness in life. Less than a year after Joseph Smith visited his home in Nauvoo and told Brigham that he would not be required to leave his family for long periods of time again, Brigham noted in his diary: "This evening I am with my love alone by my fireside for the first time for years. We injoi [enjoy] it and feele [feel] to prase [praise] the Lord." [^1]

Brigham Young's diary entry for 18 January 1842. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

The 11 September 1873 edition of The New Hampshire Gazette, reportedly the oldest continuous newspaper in the United States at the time, featured nearly three columns of information on Brigham Young's family.

Later, he wrote to his wife Mary Ann Angell: "I due think the Lord has blest me with one of the best famelyes [families] that eney [any] man ever had on the Earth." [^2] His sermons, conversations, and letters, compiled over a lifetime, reveal these feelings time and time again.

When William H. Seward, former governor of New York and secretary of state in the Lincoln cabinet, visited Brigham he noted the special feelings Brigham had for his family as the Young children were introduced: "Brigham Young's manner toward his wives is respectful, and toward his children dignified and affectionate. In presenting them severally as they came in groups, with a kind smile for the particular mother, he spoke this way: 'This is our delicate little Lucy,' 'This is our musical daughter,' 'This is our son George, who has a mathematical genius,' and so on." [^3]

Throughout his life, Brigham's family was the subject of intense ridicule and malicious gossip. Almost everyone who came to see him was, as Dean Jessee so aptly writes, "motivated by an inordinate obsession or depraved curiosity to know how many wives he had. Even some of the Saints were inquisitive on this point." [^4] On occasion Brigham made reference to this fixation: "A great many men and women have an irrepressible curiosity to know how many wives Brigham Young has. I am now going to gratify that curiosity by saying, ladies and gentlemen, I have sixteen wives. If I have any more hereafter it will be my good luck and the blessing of God. 'How many children have you, President Young?' I have forty-nine living children, and I hope to have a great many more. Now put that down. I impart this information to gratify the curiosity of the curious." [^5]

In light of such intense interest in his personal life, Brigham's efforts to shield his family from continued degradation is understandable. [^6] In the end, fifty-six children, one hundred and forty-six grandchildren, and twenty-two great-grandchildren were born during Brigham's lifetime. By the time of his death Brigham had married numerous times (some for time and others for eternity). [^7] Sixteen women gave birth to Brigham's children. Emmeline Free had ten; six wives had only one child. The oldest child, Elizabeth Young Ellsworth, was fifty-two at Brigham's death, and the youngest, Fannie Young Clayton, was seven. Of the forty-six children he raised to maturity, seventeen were sons and twenty-nine daughters. Eight wives, fourteen children, and twenty-three grandchildren preceded him in death.

Given the social reality of the nineteenth century, Brigham's love and attention for his family were remarkable. His family responded to his attention. On Brigham's seventieth birthday they greeted him at the Lion House and read a special tribute:

"PRESIDENT BRIGHAM YOUNG, BELOVED HUSBAND, FATHER AND FRIEND: Wishing to carry out to the letter, the programme of this auspicious day, in which a brief address is included, we beg your indulgence for a few moments.

"Realizing our inability to bestow as much honor, and as high a tribute of affectionate respect as the occasion demands, we have adopted the form of a surprise in order to add to the effect, and enhance the pleasures resulting from our efforts to give you an agreeable entertainment in celebrating this, the seventieth anniversary of your birthday.

"It is a subject of mutual congratulation that your eventful life has been prolonged to this period; and no testimonial that we can confer is capable of truthfully representing our appreciation of your worth and goodness. If the world knew you, as we know you, all parts of the inhabited civilized earth would, this day, echo one grand, universal expression, wishing you long life and happiness; and your broad heart, overflowing with love and kindness, would meet a corresponding warm response from the appreciative bosom of humanity.

"No man living has been invested with as many responsibilities involving the interests and welfare of mankind, and no man ever discharged public duties more faithfully; and yet, with all this, your kindness to, and care for the comfort, convenience and well-being of your numerous family, are deservedly proverbial. But on this subject, silence might be most appropriate, for surely, all the powers of language couched in the most eloquent strains of expression would fall so far short of reality and the deep feelings of our hearts, as to seemingly desecrate the holy altar of gratitude. Words are insufficient; may God help us to fully illustrate the sentiment in our lives.

"Although your life has already numbered the years which have heretofore designated the allotted time of human existence, as we are now living under the New Dispensation, comprising the prolongation of the life of man, we may, through the blessing of God, anticipate many future years added to your life. In wishing you many returns of the day, we are not prompted entirely by personal and selfish motives, for we realize that you are a mighty instrument in the hand of God for the good of Zion, in the establishment of His Kingdom, and the promulgation of truth for the amelioration of the condition of degenerated humanity.

"In the full exercise of all your mental and physical faculties, may you live many years and continue to battle with ignorance and error until the Priesthood of God is triumphant; and may you enjoy the satisfaction of seeing your family emulate your noble example. May you live till the rulers of every nation on earth shall acknowledge the wisdom of God in your administration, seek unto you for counsel, and recognize you as you truly are, the friend of God and man.

"May you live till your soul is satisfied.

"Lion House, June 1st, 1871." [^8]

Brigham's emotional response on this special occasion reveals the deep bond that had developed between himself and his family:

"To my family, as well as to the friends who have honored me with their presence, it is perhaps due to say, that this celebration is truly a 'surprise' to me; and, indeed, I must say it is a most agreeable one.

Brigham Young and his wives. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

"The whole affair has been quite unexpected, not a word has been said to me, nor a hint given by any person in relation to it.

"The kind feeling evinced in the address which has just been read, and which is manifestly participated in by my family and the friends now seated before me, together with the scene presented, is very affecting to me. I am too full of thought and reflection to give expression to my feelings. But I hope to show, in my future life by example, that I merit your good feelings and wishes; and I trust to see my children and family continue to abide by the counsel given them.

"God bless you all, peace be with you." [^9]

In one of the many letters written to family members, Brigham's closing salutation reveals his feelings toward them: "Believe me, still, Your best friend, and the benefactor of the faithful. Brigham Young." [^10]

President Brigham Young and his seventeen sons, by Charles Ellis Johnson. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

Love for his family was an undeniable aspect of Brigham's personality. Another observable characteristic was his sharp wit. Sometimes Brigham's reaction to situations reflected a subtle humor, and at other times his reaction demonstrated an overt effort to produce a little laughter for himself and others.

Brigham Young and his daughters. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

William Van Orsdel visited Salt Lake City in 1875 to attend the Rocky Mountain Conference of the Methodist Church. He and a friend were admiring some of the houses near Brigham's home when they "saw the Mormon leader himself pacing the walk. . . . The spirit of adventure prompted them and they dared each other to cross the street, speak to, and shake hands with the August leader of Mormonism. No sooner said than done. In a moment the two men were bowing and introducing themselves as Methodist preachers from the West, and proffering eager hands. Brigham Young looked at them with an amused twinkle in his eyes, and cordially shook hands, saying, 'I certainly am glad to shake hands with you. I was a Methodist once myself!'" [^11]

In 1851 Mormon convert Elizabeth Green wrote Brigham asking him to remove her name from the records of the Church because she had become a spiritualist. Brigham's reply in part was: "Madam: I have this day examined the records of baptisms for the remission of sins in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, and not being able to find the name of 'Elizabeth Green' recorded therein I was saved the necessity of erasing your name therefrom. You may therefor consider that your sins have not been remitted you and you may consequently enjoy the benefits therefrom." [^12]

Several versions of the following story exist, but in one account Brigham addressed the Saints in Salt Lake City in July 1850 informing them of Zachary Taylor's death. Taylor had been elected twelfth president of the United States in November 1848, but died suddenly on 9 July 1850 from an attack of cholera. He had been somewhat sympathetic to the Latter-day Saints at first, but eventually became an outspoken critic of them, vowing never to let the Saints have a state or territory of their own.

U.S. president Zachary Taylor, ca. 1850. Courtesy Library of Congress, Washington, D.C.

Brigham arose and reportedly said, "We have just received word that Zachary Taylor is dead and has gone to hell.+ Some federally appointed officers present on the occasion objected and asked Brigham to apologize during the afternoon meeting. Brigham obliged in that meeting. He again walked to the pulpit, where he said, "We announced this morning that Zachary Taylor was dead and gone to hell-I am sorry!" [^13]

The often-published story told by Mark Twain about his visit with Brigham, when Twain was still Samuel Clemens, is one of the best stories revealing this side of Brigham: "The second day, we made the acquaintance of Mr. Street (since deceased) and put on white shirts and went and paid a state visit to the king. He seemed a quiet, kindly, easy-mannered, dignified, self-possessed old gentleman of fifty-five or sixty, and had a gentle craft in his eye that probably belonged there. He was very simply dressed and was just taking off a straw hat as we entered. He talked about Utah, and the Indians, and Nevada, and general American matters and questions, with our secretary and certain government officials who came with us. But he never paid any attention to me, notwithstanding I made several attempts to 'draw him out' on federal politics and his high handed attitude toward Congress. I thought some of the things I said were rather fine. But he merely looked around at me, at distant intervals, somewhat as I have seen benignant old cat look around to see which kitten was meddling with her tail. By and by I subsided into an indignant silence, and so sat until the end, hot and flushed, and execrating him in my heart for an ignorant savage. But he was calm. His conversation with those gentlemen flowed on as sweetly and peacefully and musically as any summer brook. When the audience was ended and we were retiring from the presence, he put his hand on my head, beamed down on me in an admiring way, and said to my brother: 'Ah-your child, I presume? Boy or girl?'" [^14]

While such humor could be used to put the pretentious in their place, Brigham also used his keen wit to open the minds and hearts of the Saints to their own shortcomings so that they might feel the desire to improve. No doubt, too, the smiles that he brought to their faces helped to lighten burdens and make the people glad to find themselves in the world of Brigham Young.
