R. Q. Shupe, Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, My Servant Brigham: Portrait of a Prophet ( 1997)

Part 2

The Life of Brigham Young

Chapter 4

The Early Years

Born in Whitingham, Vermont, on 1 June 1801, Brigham was the ninth of eleven children born to John and Abigail (Nabby) Howe Young. [^1] As a young boy Brigham moved with his parents to central New York state and then to south-central New York, before his mother died of tuberculosis in 1815, when he was fourteen.

Brigham left home, after only eleven days of formal schooling, and became an apprentice carpenter, painter, and glazier (window and glass maker) in Auburn, New York. Following five years of work in that community he moved to Port Byron, where he continued in his occupation. He married sixteen-year-old Miriam Works on 5 October 1824, and within a year his first child, Elizabeth, was born. Three years later the Young family moved to Oswego, a port on Lake Ontario, and a year later to Mendon, New York. Here Brigham experienced both joy and sorrow. His second child, Vilate, was born in 1830; he and his wife were baptized in 1832; and later, his wife died in September 1832.

At some time during this period Brigham began to keep a small diary, in it reflecting on his baptism and subsequent short missions. The latter included a visit to Kirtland, where Joseph Smith made the observation regarding Brigham's prophetic calling. The dating of Brigham's baptism is complicated by the fact that he apparently attempted to clarify the date. [^2] Elsewhere it had been published as 14 April. Brigham's later correction, however, as already noted, gives the date as 15 April 1832. Yet his earliest diary and a fragment of a membership certificate suggests 9 April 1832 as the date of the baptism.

Brigham's tools and promissory note from the New York period. Courtesy Museum of Church History and Art, Salt Lake City. Apparently a small portion of Brigham's original membership certificate, dated 9 April 1832. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

"Apriel 9th 1832. I was Baptized under the hand of Ebezer [Eleazer] Miller and ordained, preact [preached] as opertunity prezented Baptized Rachel Flumerfielt. June went to Hector, preacht [preached] at hener < July <<6> Baptized John D. Morgan. oct went to Reding from their to Hornby, held < 3 metings then retur< to Pattin held 2 metings from their to Reding held 1 meting, from their to Hektor held 1 meting, from their home, from their to Arvon held metin and in the ajacents towns Baptized 4 in Arvon Brother Heber Kimbel [Kimball] and Brother Joseph Young, and my self went to Ohio Baptized Sister Whitney' Father and then returned hom [home] then to woresaw [Warsaw] held several meting." [^3]

In January 1833 Brigham went to Canada on a brief mission with his brother Joseph. From July through September he was in the eastern states. By September 1833 he had moved to Kirtland, and on 18 February 1834 Brigham married Mary Ann Angell. Between May and July 1834 he participated in Zion's Camp, which traveled to Missouri under Joseph Smith's leadership. Within a year he was called to be a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. He helped build the Kirtland Temple, applying his training as a carpenter and glazier. He also acted as superintendent for the painting work on the upper and lower interior courts in February 1836.

Kirtland Temple window, ca. 1975. Brigham and Joseph Young built the frames and installed and glazed the original windows, demonstrating their high skill on the curved mullions and frames of the Gothic and the elliptical-shaped windows on the east and west facades, which were difficult to produce with the simple hand-planes available to them. Brigham later attended the dedication of the building on 27 March 1836. Courtesy RLDS Church Archives, Independence, Missouri.

Brigham was busy during the next few months when he went on a summer mission to the eastern states and New England. On 18 December 1836 his wife bore him twins, son Brigham Young Jr. and daughter Mary Ann Young. In March-June 1837 he went on a business mission to the eastern states with Willard Richards, and then between June and August on a mission to New York and Massachusetts. During the fall disaster struck when shock waves caused by a general economic collapse in the United States hit the financial institution the brethren had organized in Kirtland. After its failure, some Latter-day Saints turned against Joseph Smith. Because of Brigham's continued support of the Prophet, he was forced to leave Kirtland on 22 December. He made his way to the new gathering site, arriving in Far West, Missouri, on 14 March 1838.

Brigham Young's Elder's Certificate, dated 30 March 1836. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

Brigham, like the other Saints, did not stay long in Missouri. Following Joseph Smith's arrest and incarceration in 1838, as senior member of the Quorum of Twelve Brigham directed the evacuation of the Latter-day Saints from Missouri when they were driven from the state during the winter.

By mid-March 1839 Brigham had moved his own family to Quincy, Illinois. Within a few months he returned briefly to Far West to fulfill the revelation received by Joseph Smith on 8 July 1838. That revelation instructed the members of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles to assemble in Far West, Missouri, on 26 April 1839 and thereafter "depart to go over the great waters, and there promulgate" the gospel (see D&C 118).

In May, upon his return to Illinois, Brigham moved his family again, this time to Montrose, Iowa, preparing to make the long journey to the British Isles. On 4 September his daughter Alice Young was born, and within a few days he left for his mission to England. In October, Brigham's father died. On 7 March 1840 Brigham finally left New York for England, landing there on 6 April. On 14 April, Brigham officially succeeded to the presidency of the Quorum of the Twelve.

Brigham Young's English Justice of the Peace Certificate, dated 8 April 1840. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

In twelve short months these stalwart missionaries were instrumental in converting literally thousands to the Church. Brigham left England on 21 April 1841, arriving in Nauvoo on 1 July with Heber C. Kimball and John Taylor.

Within a week after Brigham's arrival home from the successful mission in the British Isles, Joseph Smith visited him and said: "Dear and well-beloved brother, Brigham Young, verily thus saith the Lord unto you: My servant Brigham, it is no more required at your hand to leave your family as in times past, for your offering is acceptable to me. I have seen your labor and toil in journeyings for my name. I therefore command you to send my word abroad, and take especial care of your family from this time, henceforth and forever. Amen." [^4]

Brigham took advantage of the opportunity to stay close to the Prophet in Nauvoo. He recalled in 1868: "I never did let an opportunity pass of getting with the Prophet Joseph and of hearing him speak in public or in private, so that I might draw understanding from the fountain from which he spoke, that I might have it and bring it forth when it was needed.... Such moments were more precious to me than all the wealth of the world. No matter how great my poverty . . . I never let an opportunity pass of learning what the Prophet had to impart. This is the secret of the success of your humble servant." [^5]

Brigham Young, 1841; copied from the Young Woman's Journal 8 (July 1897): 438. This painting apparently represents the first known visual image of Brigham Young.

On 4 September he was elected to the Nauvoo City Council, and on 8 November he offered the dedicatory prayer for the baptismal font in the Nauvoo Temple, which was being built at the time.

The year 1842 was an important one for Brigham, for it was then that he received his washings, anointings, and endowments from Joseph Smith on 4 May in Joseph's store on Water Street, known today as the Red Brick Store. He recalled those events at the dedication of the first temple in Utah more than thirty-five years later:["[It was before the Temple was completed and in the upper room over Joseph's Red Brick Store] where we [received] our [endowments] under the hands of the Prophet Joseph in Nauvoo. We had only one room [in which to receive the ordinances], with the exception of a little side room or office. [In this side office] we were washed and anointed, [and] had our garments placed upon us. . . . After he had performed these ceremonies . . . we went into the large room over the store. . . . Joseph [had] divided up the room the best he could. [He] . . . gave us our instructions as we passed along from one department to another. . . . And after we [were] through,[Bro[ther] Joseph turned to me and said,['Bro[ther] Brigham, this is not arranged right. But we have done the best we could under the circumstances in which we are placed. And I wish [for] you to take this matter in hand, and organize and systemize all these ceremonies. . . .' [We performed the ordinances under Joseph's supervision many times] and each time I got something more, so that when we [performed them in] the Temple at Nauvoo, I understood and knew how to place them there. We had our ceremonies pretty correct." [^6]

Joseph Smith's Red Brick Store, ca. 1885. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

Brigham and the Quorum of the Twelve continued to receive additional assignments and responsibilities from Joseph Smith, and on 18 May he was appointed to serve on a committee to aid immigrants.

During this period Brigham struggled with and finally accepted the revelation on plural marriage. With Mary Ann's consent, Brigham married Lucy Ann Decker Seeley in June 1842, the first of several women brought into his family. Shortly thereafter, Brigham's daughter Elizabeth Young married Edmund Ellsworth. Now Brigham entered a new phase of life as a father-in-law.

In 1843, Brigham as the President of the Twelve began the attempt to bring Oliver Cowdery back to the Church. In a letter dated 19 April 1843, Brigham and members of the Twelve wrote "An epistle of The Twelve, in Council assembled, to Oliver Cowdery, one of the witnesses to the Book of Mormon." [^7] Addressing Oliver as "Dear Brother," Brigham and his brethren told Oliver that they "reflected upon the time when we had met together, when we were brethren, when we were one, & took sweet counsel together." [^8] They added: "We thought perhaps our old [and] esteemed friend might by this time have felt his lonely solitary situation; might feel that he was a stranger in a strange land, & had wandered long enough from his Fathers house, & that he might have a disposition to return." [^9]

They hoped Oliver was ready to return and informed their brother: "If this is the case, all that we have got to say, is, your brethren are ready to receive you, we are not your enemies, but your brethren. Your dwelling place you know ought to be in Zion-Your labor might be needed in Jerusalem, & you ought to be the servant of the living God." In closing, they added: "In the bonds of the New and Everlasting Covenant we remain your unchangeable friends in the Gospel." [^10]

In July Brigham entered another phase of life, as his first grandchild was born, granddaughter Charlotte Ellsworth. During July-October he traveled in eastern states to raise money for the temple and for the Nauvoo House.

On 28 December he said:["[N]ever suffer anger to find a seat in your breast, never get angry at all, treat all mildly, govern yourself, your passions, and it will give you power." [^11] On 7 March 1844 he was "at the temple all day-the Prophet, Patriarch, B. Young, Taylor &c spoke-both large meetings-a most splendid day-& an attentive congregation-received much instruction-got home about 5." [^12]

In an unsigned document, members of the Quorum of the Twelve recounted events of March 1844, just months before the deaths of Joseph and Hyrum Smith. The document begins: "We the undersign, do hereby solemly, sincerely, and truly testify before God, Angels, and men, unto all people whom this certificate may come, that we were present at a Council in the latter part of the month of March last, held in the city of Nauvoo in the upper part of the brick building situate upon Water Street, commonly known here as 'Joseph's Store,' [known today as the Red Brick Store] in which Council Joseph Smith did preside; and the greater part of the Twelve Apostles were present." [^13]

During this meeting, "Joseph Smith seemed somewhat depressed in Spirit, and took the liberty to open his heart to us concerning his presentiments of the future." [^14] The document then reports the substance of Joseph's word to those present: "'Brethren, the Lord bids me hasten the work in which we are engaged. . . . It may be that my enemies will kill me, and in case they should, and the keys and power which rest on me not be imparted to you, they will be lost from the Earth; but if I can only succeed in placing them upon your heads, then let me fall a victim to murderous hands if God will suffer it, and I can go with all pleasure and satisfaction, knowing that my work is done, and the foundation laid on which the Kingdom of God is to be reared in this dispensation of the fulness of times. Upon the shoulders of the Twelve must the responsibility of leading this Church hence forth rest until you shall appoint others to succeed you. . . .' After this appointment was made, and confirmed by the holy anointing under he hands of Joseph and Hyrum, Joseph continued his speech unto them, saying, while he walked the floor and threw back the collar of his coat upon his shoulders, 'I roll the burden and responsibility of leading this Church off from my shoulders on to yours. Now, round up your shoulders and stand under it like men; for the Lord is going to let me rest awhile.'" [^15]

"Joseph Smith and His Friends," by William W. Major, ca. 1845. William Warner Major, a self-trained artist from Bristol, England, converted to Mormonism and emigrated to Nauvoo in 1844. Within a year he began working on several projects, including this one of the Church leaders completed some time after the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith. It depicts several members of the First Presidency and of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. They are, from left to right, Hyrum Smith, Willard Richards, Joseph Smith, Orson Pratt, Parley P. Pratt, Orson Hyde, Heber C. Kimball, and Brigham Young. Courtesy Museum of Church History and Art, Salt Lake City.
