R. Q. Shupe, Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, My Servant Brigham: Portrait of a Prophet ( 1997)

Chapter 5

The Prophet's Mantle

Within a few months of the "Last Charge" meeting with the Twelve in March 1844, Brigham went on a short-term mission. While in the East he received word that Joseph and Hyrum had been murdered in Carthage. Later, in an 1849 meeting where several new Apostles were ordained, Brigham revealed what had happened and how he had felt during that critical period of Church history.

"Previous to attending to the ordinations I want to lay certain principles before the Brethren concerning our present situation. In the first place, say here what never said since Joseph's death till now. I was in Bro. Beamants house in Petersborough. They received letters from Nauvoo giving account of mob, death &c. When we got that letter Orson Pratt and I were there and read the letter. I felt then as I never felt in my life. All disappointments, losses, and crosses never bring a tear. Bringing it to mind brings tears. My head felt so distressed I felt as though it would crack. It come to me Joseph and Hyrum are gone, is the Priesthood taken from the Earth. I had forgot myself. The organization of the Kingdom and Church passed before me. It came like a clap. It come to me like Revelation-the keys of the Kingdom are here and was satisfied it was all right. No man ever loved another man more than I did Joseph. When I came to Nauvoo I knew by visions of the Spirit from Twelve there would be a First Presidency I knew who would be there as well as now. Joseph told the story himself." [^1]

Brigham Young, probably by Lucian Foster, ca. 1844-1845. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

Wilford Woodruff recorded in his journal on 17 July 1844: "Elder B. young arrived in Boston this morning. I walked with him to 57 Temple st and called upon sister Voice. Br. Young took the bed" where he gave vent to his feeling in tears. [^2]

While the loss of the Prophet had a profound effect upon Brigham, he seemed always to be able to put things in perspective and move forward even in the midst of crushing obligations. In Utah he once reflected: "I feel like shouting hallelujah, all the time, when I think that I ever knew Joseph Smith, the Prophet whom the Lord ordained, and to whom He gave keys and power to build up the kingdom of God on earth and sustain it. These keys are committed to this people, and we have power to continue the work that Joseph commenced, until everything is prepared for the coming of the Son of Man." [^3]

Upon his arrival in Nauvoo in August 1844, Brigham moved to reassure the Saints that the Twelve held the keys and hence they were not leaderless. One observer at the important August meeting recalled:["[Brigham] then went to work as a workman understanding his business. He called for the quorums of Priesthood to be seated together, in order, as much as the circumstances would permit, and then presented the matter under consideration in a manner so plain and convincing that all could readily understand that Joseph's mantle had fallen upon Brigham Young. It was self-evident that the power and influence that had rested upon Brother Joseph in the performance of his official duties, rested upon him. This became at once so satisfactory that he, at that meeting, became the unanimous choice of all present. In other words, the quorum of the Twelve Apostles became as the First Presidency of the Church, Brigham Young being the President of that quorum made him the first representative man, or President of the Church." [^4]

In a letter written to his daughter, Vilate, Brigham noted: "This much I can say-the spirit of Joseph is here, though we cannot enjoy his person. Through the great anxiety of the church, there was a conference held last Thursday. The power of the Priesthood was explained and the order thereof, on which the whole church lifted up their voices and hands for the twelve to move forward and organize the church and lead it as Joseph had. This is our indispensable duty. The brethren feel well to think the Lord is still mindful of us as a people." [^5]

Restored Brigham Young Home. Courtesy Special Collections-Manuscripts, J. Willard Marriott Library, University of Utah, Salt Lake City. Interior view of restored Brigham Young Home. Courtesy Special Collections-Manuscripts, J. Willard Marriott Library, University of Utah, Salt Lake City.

Among the many aspects of "the work Joseph commenced" was the building of the Nauvoo Temple. One of the decisions that had to be made was whether the Saints should remain in Illinois and finish the temple, or should depart before there was more trouble. Brigham was confident that he had the keys, as the President of the Twelve, to find out the Lord's will. "Friday, January 24. Brothers Heber C. Kimball and Newell K. Whitney were at my house. We washed, anointed, and prayed. Had a good time. I inquired of the Lord whether we should stay here and finish the Temple. The answer was we should." [^6]

During the next two years Brigham directed the continued missionary work, the gathering of the Saints, and the building of the temple in Nauvoo. Privately, he and the Twelve also prepared for the Saints' departure from the city to a location in the West.

About this time W. W. Phelps, a poet and well-known hymn composer in the Church, published a list of titles he suggested for the members of the Twelve, including one for Brigham: "I know the Twelve, and they know me. Their names are Brigham Young, the lion of the Lord; Heber C. Kimball, the herald of grace; Parley P. Pratt, the archer of paradise; Orson Hyde, the olive branch of Israel; Willard Richards, the keeper of the rolls; John Taylor, the champion of right; William Smith, the patriarchal Jacob staff; Wilford Woodruff, the banner of the gospel; George A. Smith, the entablature of truth; Orson Pratt, the gauge of philosophy; John E. Page, the sun dial; and Lyman Wight, the wild ram of the mountain. And they are good men; the best the Lord can find; they do the will of God, and the saints knew it." [^7]

William Wines Phelps, ca. 1853. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

Through the fall and winter Brigham was busy preparing for the exodus from Nauvoo and completing the temple. The first meeting in the temple was held during the Church's conference that began on 5 October 1845:

"Meeting opened at five minutes to eleven by President B. Young as a form of dedication prayer. Great joy and gratitude was felt by the Saints to realize this blessing which they had so long looked for. There were five thousand persons seated comfortably. . . .

"Monday, 6th. Our general conference assembled in the temple for the first time; much business was done. The Twelve met in council and for prayer, morning and evening, to our Heavenly Father to stay the wrath of our enemies, and to overthrow all their designs, which He has done thus far, and we thank His holy name. Tuesday, 7th. In the morning the Twelve met for prayer in the usual place. Conference met in the Temple. . . . In the afternoon, when the Conference was assembled, Major Warren came in with his posse of troops and surrounded our cannon, supposing it was a mob, President Young dismissed the conference and told the brethren to go home, and let every man be prepared. . . .

Nauvoo Temple, by Thomas Easterly, ca. 1846. Courtesy Missouri State Historical Society, St. Louis, Missouri.

"Wednesday, 8th. President Young spoke. . . . This day was the close of the conference. All things went off in union, not a dissenting voice in the congregation, and a perfect union exhibited by the Saints to remove from the country the coming spring. All these things transpire in answer to the prayers of the Saints, who meet together constantly after the holy order; and the glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost for His blessings upon Israel." [^8]

Eventually the temple was close enough to being finished that Brigham began administering the ordinances. Before he left Nauvoo some six thousand individuals had passed through the rooms receiving the blessings of the house of the Lord.

During 1846 Brigham personally directed the movement of thousands of Latter-day Saints to the Missouri River Valley, where he established a temporary Church center at Winter Quarters. Brigham reminded the Saints there that the covenants revealed in the Nauvoo Temple were not just some theological concept to be played out in the world to come. He argued that they had practical application, especially in regard to the poor Saints lagging behind them: "Let the fire of the covenant which you made in the House of the Lord, burn in your hearts, like flame unquenchable till you, by yourselves or delegates . . . [can] rise up with his team and go straightway and bring a load of the poor from Nauvoo . . . [for] this is a day of action and not of argument." [^9]

When the Saints decided to leave Nauvoo, the movement became known as the "Exodus to Greatness." Many people then saw parallels between their movement and that of the children of Israel. The crossing of the Mississippi was analogous to the crossing of the Red Sea. The bitterly cold days during which the river was frozen were likened to the "parting of the Red Sea." Additionally, when the poor camp of Saints were able to gather the quails that had landed in their midst, it was seen as a miracle similar to the sending of manna from heaven.

On 14 January 1847 Brigham Young received the "Word and the Will of the Lord." [^10] In this revelation the Lord again drew a comparison between the modern Saints and the ancient Israelites: "The Word and Will of the Lord concerning the Camp of Israel in their journeyings to the West." [^11] Additionally, the revelation utilized language similar to that in the book of Exodus: "covenant," "commandments," "statutes," and "ordinances." [^12] Also, the organization of the camp with "captains of hundreds, captains of fifties, and captains of tens" reminded the Saints of the passage in the book of Exodus: "Moreover thou shalt provide out of all the people able men, such as fear God, men of truth, hating covetousness; and place such over them, to be rulers of thousands, and rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens." [^13]

"Brigham Young's First View of the Valley," 1850 print from Howard Stansbury's Exploration and Survey of the Valley of the Great Salt Lake.

Again, the revelation echoed the language of the book of Exodus: "I am the Lord your God, even the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham and of Isaac and of Jacob." [^14] And more explicitly the Lord referred to himself as "he who led the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt; and my arm is stretched out in the last days, to save my people Israel." [^15] Brigham Young became the "American Moses" who led his people to a "promised land" in the Great Basin.

Only four days after Brigham Young completed the 1847 trek to Salt Lake Valley, he walked to a spot between two creeks, waved his hand, and said, "Here is the [ten] acres for the temple." [^16] In April 1853 President Young recalled the visionary experience he had at the site: "I scarcely ever say much about revelations, or visions, but suffice it to say, five years ago last July [1847] I was here, and saw in the Spirit the Temple not ten feet from where we have laid the Chief Corner Stone. I have not inquired what kind of a Temple we should build. Why? Because it was represented before me. I have never looked upon that ground but the vision of it was there. I see it as plainly as if it was in reality before me. Wait until it is done. I will say, however, that it will have six towers." [^17]

Copy of an original daguerreotype. Dating of this image is unknown. It may have been taken in Nauvoo by Lucian Foster just before Brigham Young left the "City of Joseph" in February 1846, or by Marsena Cannon in Salt Lake City sometime around 1850. Courtesy Utah State Historical Society, Salt Lake City.

Creating a sense of holiness in the new promised land, the Saints utilized powerful and emotionally laden symbols-such as the all-seeing eye, crowns, the handclasp of fellowship, and the phrase, "Holiness to the Lord," reminding them of the covenant relationship between themselves and God, reflecting these scripture passages in Exodus and Zechariah:

"And thou shalt make a plate of pure gold, and grave upon it, like the engravings of a signet, HOLINESS TO THE LORD. And thou shalt put it on a blue lace, that it may be upon the mitre; upon the forefront of the mitre it shall be. And it shall be upon Aaron's forehead." [^18]

"In that day shall there be upon the bells of the horses HOLINESS UNTO THE LORD; and the pots in the Lord's house shall be like the bowls before the altar. Yea, every pot in Jerusalem and in Judah shall be holiness unto the Lord of hosts. [^19]

Brigham Young's pen with inscription "Holiness to the Lord" engraved on it. Courtesy Museum of Church History and Art, Salt Lake City.

Brigham identified the new promised land, but did not stay in the valley very long. Soon he was on his way back to help organize the mass exodus from Winter Quarters. In December he was sustained as President of the Church, and he called Heber C. Kimball and Willard Richards to serve as his counselors in the First Presidency. On 26 May 1848 he left Winter Quarters for the last time and headed to the Salt Lake Valley with some twelve hundred persons following him. Brigham arrived on 20 September. He spoke to the Saints shortly after his return about his feelings of being there with them:

"I trust I shall have strength to speak to be understood . . . I also trust to have command over my feelings to speak in a childlike spirit yet with the confidence and courage of a man although it may be hard to suppress my feelings. . . . I venture [to say] not another person that has the sensations that I have. . . . having to guard every moment [to keep] from bursting into tears and sitting down like a child. We are here! Thank the Almighty God of Israel! . . . From the days of Oliver Cowdery and Parley Pratt went over boundary of Jackson County [1831] Joseph Smith had longed to be here. . . . They would not let us come and at last we have accomplished it. We are in the midst of the Lamanites! We are here thank the Almighty God. Glory to the Lord . . . for here is the place of beginning." [^20]

Gold coins. Brigham Young, John Taylor, and John Kay prepared the inscriptions for the gold coins to be minted from the California gold dust brought to Salt Lake City. On one side is the motto "Holiness to the Lord," with the emblem of the priesthood (crown) over the all-seeing eye. On the reverse of this coin were two clasped hands, initials GSLCPG (Great Salt Lake City Pure Gold), Two and half Do (Two and half dollars), and the date 1849. Courtesy Museum of Church History and Art, Salt Lake City.

That the land was sacred and truly a promised land given by the Lord to the Saints is not better expressed than in a talk Brigham gave to the Saints in June 1855: "How long have we got to live before we find out that we have nothing to consecrate to the Lord-that all belongs to the Father in heaven; that these mountains are His; the valleys, the timber, the water, the soil; in fine, the earth and its fulness?" [^21] Brigham was satisfied that the Great Basin was the place, as he noted later: "We have been kicked out of the frying-pan into the fire, out of the fire into the middle of the floor, and here we are and here we will stay. God . . . will temper the elements for the good of His Saints; He will rebuke the frost and the sterility of the soil, and the land shall become fruitful." [^22] The desert would blossom as a rose and the new promised land was "a good place to make Saints." [^23]

The Saints were not in Salt Lake Valley very long before visitors started to stream into the newly established settlement in the Great Basin. Among them was Captain Howard Stansbury. He had been given a specific mission by the U.S. Government to provide a technical survey of a mile-by-mile examination of the Great Salt Lake and Utah valleys. During an extended stay in the City of the Saints during the winter of 1849-50, Stansbury developed a friendly relationship with forty-eight-year-old Brigham. He recalled: "Upon the personal character of the leader of this singular people, it may not, perhaps, be proper for me to comment in a communication like the present. I may nevertheless be pardoned for saying, that to me, President Young appeared to be a man of clear, sound sense, fully alive to the responsibilities of the station he occupies, sincerely devoted to the good name and interests of the people over which he presides, sensitively jealous of the least attempt to undervalue or misrepresent them, and indefatgable in devising ways and means for their moral, mental, and physical elevation. He appeared to possess the unlimited personal and official confidence of his people; while both he and his two counsellors, forming the presidency of the church, seemed to have but one object in view, the prosperity and peace of the society over which they presided." [^24]

During the first general conference of the decade in April 1850 Brigham said, "Let us spend a few days and worship-the heavens are full of days and we have nothing to do but enjoy them." [^25]

Brigham Young, by Marsena Cannon, 12 December 1850. Taken in the old pioneer fort by Marsena Cannon about the time Brigham learned of his appointment as the new territorial governor. Courtesy LDS Church Archives. Brigham Young's Governor Certificate signed by U.S. President Millard Fillmore and Secretary of State Daniel Webster, dated 28 September 1850. Courtesy Utah State Historical Society, Salt Lake City.

U.S. President Millard Fillmore appointed Brigham as the first governor of the new Utah Territory on 20 September 1850. However, Brigham did not learn of the appointment till several months later. On 3 February 1851 he officially took the oath of office.

Brigham Young's oath of office, 3 February 1851. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City. Gold cane head, a gift from the Utah territorial delegate to Congress, William H. Hooper. Courtesy Museum of Church History and Art, Salt Lake City. 1850 map of the United States. The map shows the boundaries for the Territory of Utah established by Congress in the Compromise of 1850. Courtesy R. Q. and Susan Shupe, San Juan Capistrano, California.
