R. Q. Shupe, Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, My Servant Brigham: Portrait of a Prophet ( 1997)

Chapter 6

Challenges and Progress

While rumors abounded about the Church's marriage practices, it was not until 1852 that Brigham presided at a meeting in Salt Lake City where the revelation recorded by Joseph Smith in 1842 that outlined the doctrine of plural marriage was publicly read. This particular Church announcement was reported wide and far throughout the world, and soon plural marriage and Brigham became inseparably connected.

Not only was Brigham's name becoming well known, but his visual likeness was also being printed for an audience hungry to know what the Mormon prophet looked like.

The year 1853 was an important one for Brigham. On Valentine's Day, 14 February, he broke ground for the Salt Lake Temple. A few months later, on 6 April, he presided over the laying of the cornerstones for the temple. He closed the services by blessing the people: "Brethren and Sisters, I bless you in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, and pray my Father in Heaven to encircle you in the arms of his love and mercy, and protect us until we have finished this Temple, received the fulness of our endowments therein, and built many more." [^1]

The First Presidency and Twelve Apostles, by Frederick Piercy, 1 January 1853. Piercy's famous illustration of "The First Presidency and Twelve Apostles of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" was printed in January 1853 in England. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

The eastern United States got one of its first views of Brigham in the 3 January 1854 edition of the Gleason's Pictorial Drawing-Room Companion. The magazine also furnished a brief overview of the Church's history, including information on Brigham:

"The Mormons. The territory of Utah is well known as the residence of the sect called the Mormons. This communion was first organized in 1830, under Joseph Smith at Kirtland, Ohio. After a temporary establishment there, it was removed to Jackson county, Missouri, thence to Caldwell county, and afterward to Illinois, where they founded the city of Nauvoo. Here they flourished for several years, when a strong public excitement was raised against them, and they resolved to abandon Nauvoo, and find an asylum elsewhere. After various changes they finally located themselves in the valley of the great Salt Lake, and the nucleus was formed by them of the present territory of Utah. In 1850, Brigham Young, a portrait of whom is here given, was appointed territorial governor by Congress.

Salt Lake Temple Ground-breaking Services, by William A. Smith, 14 February 1853. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City. Brigham and Margaret Pierce Young, ca. 1851. One of two known photographs of Brigham Young posing with a spouse. This is a copy of a daguerreotype originally taken by Marsena Cannon in Salt Lake City. Margaret Pierce married Brigham Young in January 1845 and bore him one son-Brigham Morris Young, in 1854. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

"Young is the present leader of the Mormon community, and the country is rapidly filling up with emigrants from every part of the world, but principally from the Welsh counties of England, where Mormonism has made a very deep impression. The city of the Great Salt Lake, the head-quarters of the Mormon community, stands in the lower valley of the Jordan, about twenty miles from the lake. It is laid out upon a magnificent scale, being nearly four miles in length and three in breadth. The municipal regulations as to building and streets are of a sagacious character, and if followed out, will make the city a beautiful location. It is surrounded by scenery of agreeable, picturesque variety; on the northern confines a warm spring arises from the base of the mountains, the water from which is conducted by pipes into the city, while an unfailing stream of pure water flows through the city, and is made to traverse every street." [^2]

Brigham Young, ca. 1854; illustration in Gleason's Pictorial Drawing-Room Companion. Courtesy R. Q. and Susan Shupe, San Juan Capistrano, California.

Soon, travelers beyond the English-speaking world came to Zion to visit one of the most famous religious leaders of his time.

After the completion of the Beehive House and the offices of the Church President and territorial governor, most visitors held their interviews in the buildings that are still standing in Salt Lake City.

Beehive House, Louis R. Chaffin, ca. 1855. The earliest known photograph of the Beehive House is this daguerreotype taken by Mr. Chaffin, one of Marsena Cannon's companions, at about the time of its completion. The wooden beehive atop the house, a Utah pioneer symbol of industry, gave the home its name. The pine-wood and sun-dried adobe house was designed by Truman O. Angell. To the left of the house are the offices for Brigham Young as governor (note sign above first door to the left) and as Church President (note sign over second door). Additionally a sign was placed over the President's office, "Tithing Office." The Lion House, Brigham Young's largest house, is shown prior to its 1856 completion. Notice that the lion is not yet on the portico. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

Brigham spoke to the Saints at the beginning of the October 1857 General Conference regarding the handcart pioneers on their way into the valley:

"I wish the most strict attention of the entire congregation. . . . I will now give this people the subject and the text for the Elders who may speak to-day and during the Conference, it is this, on the 5th day of October, 1856, many of our brethren and sisters are on the Plains with hand-carts, and probably many are now seven hundred miles from this place, and they must be brought here, we must send assistance to them. The text will be-to get them here! I want the brethren who may speak to understand that their text is the people on the Plains, and the subject matter for this community is to send for them and bring them in before the winter sets in. That is my religion; that is the dictation of the Holy Ghost that I possess, it is to save the people. . . . This is the salvation I am now seeking for, to save our brethren that would be apt to perish, or suffer extremely, if we do not send them assistance. I shall call upon the Bishops this day, I shall not wait until to-morrow, nor until next day, for sixty god mule teams and twelve or fifteen wagons." [^3]

Jules Remy and Julius Brenchley's calling card. Frenchman Remy and Englishman Brenchley spent a month in Utah and met with Brigham Young on at least four occasions. Later they published their impression in Voyage au pays des Mormons (Paris: E. Dentu, 1860). Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

Former Mormon turned anti-Mormon T. B. H. Stenhouse noted years later his impressions of Brigham's efforts in the handcart rescue and admitted frankly that it was Brigham's finest hour: "When news reached Brigham Young, . . . he did all that man could do to save the remnant and relieve the sufferers. Never in his whole career did he shine so gloriously in the eyes of the people. There was nothing spared that he could contribute or command. In the Tabernacle, he was 'the Lion of the Lord.'" [^4]

"The Hand-Cart Emigrants in a Storm," from T. B. H. Stenhouse's 1873 The Rocky Mountain Saints: A Full and complete History of the Mormons (New York: D. Appleton and Company, 1873).

In November, after the rescue efforts had been several weeks under way, members of the Martin Company were about to enter Salt Lake City. Brigham arose and told the Saints:

"I have a few words to say, before this meeting is brought to a close. We expect that the last hand-cart company, br. Martin's will soon be in the streets by the Council House. What preparations the Bishops have made for their comfortable reception and temporary disposal I know not, but I know what I desire and am going to tell it to the people.

"When those persons arrive I do not want to see them put into houses by themselves; I want to have them distributed in this city among the families that have good and comfortable houses; and I wish the sisters now before me, and all who know how and can, to nurse and wait upon the new comers and prudently administer medicine and food to them. To speak upon these things is a part of my religion, for it pertains to taking care of the Saints.

". . . The afternoon meeting will be omitted, for I wish the sisters to go home and prepare to give those [immigrants] who have just arrived a mouthful of something to eat, and to wash them and nurse them up. You know that I would give more for a dish of pudding and milk, or a baked potato and salt, were I in the situation of those persons who have just come in, than I would for all your prayers, though you were to stay here all the afternoon and pray. Prayer is good, but when baked potatoes and pudding and milk are needed, prayer will not supply their place on this occasion; give every duty its proper time and place." [^5]

Brigham Young, by Marsena Cannon, ca. 1857. The ambrotype, taken about the time of the Utah War, reveals as much as any written document could the stress and burden Governor and President Young experienced when the federal government "invaded" Utah. Courtesy Special Collections-Manuscripts, J. Willard Marriott Library, University of Utah, Salt Lake City.

In a talk delivered on 26 July 1857 Brigham reflected on the rumors and accusations about him that were spreading across the nation in print as well as by word of mouth. "What is now the news circulated throughout the United States? That Captain Gunnison was killed by Brigham Young, and that Babbitt was killed on the Plains by Brigham Young and his Danite band. What more? . . . According to their version, I am guilty of the death of every man, woman, and child that has died between the Missouri river and the California gold mines." [^6]

Brigham Young illustration from 10 October 1857 edition of the Harper's Weekly. This illustration appeared with an article, "Scenes in an American Harem." Courtesy Gary L. and Carol B. Bunker, Orem, Utah.

As the nation at large waited to hear news of the invasion of Utah, the army itself moved closer to Salt Lake City and then was forced to winter in Wyoming. It was during this period that Brigham received a blessing under the hands of his brother John, a blessing of comfort and reassurance from the Lord:

"Brother Brigham, In the name of the Lord Jesus Christ I lay my hands upon your head and bless you in the name of Israel's God, and you shall be blest from this time henceforth and forever. I seal upon your head the blessings which were given to you by our natural Father. You are a lawful heir according to the promises made over unto the Fathers, for you are a literal descendant of Joseph through the loins of Ephraim, and have a right to the blessings of the everlasting gospel and to the fulness of the priesthood, the power of which shall rest upon you henceforth and forever. Your mind shall expand, the visions of the heavens shall be opened before you that you may comprehend the fulness of the truths of heaven. You are blest with many great and precious blessings, for the Lord has had his eye upon you, and you are a chosen vessel to bear the weight of the kingdom and the vessels of the Lord, to stand as a mighty man upon the earth.

"Thou shalt be qualified for all the duties which thou art or ever shall be called to perform; thou shalt be blest with knowledge, wisdom and understanding; the revelations of Jesus shall be with you; you shall have power to control yourself, your household, and to manage all the affairs of the Church of Jesus Christ agreeably to the mind of the heavens, in connection with those that are associated with you, and no power shall overcome you; you never shall fall by the hand of an enemy for that is not the mind of the Spirit, but the mind of the Lord is that you shall escape, and be able to circumscribe the wisdom of the world. You shall be able to administer the words of eternal life to the saints, and of eternal death to your enemies, and the time shall come when the great men of the Earth who think themselves wise shall seek unto you for knowledge and safety, and you shall have power over them, and the time also shall come when you shall not only have power over the United States, but over the Nations of theearth, and you shall do a mighty work, your name shall be honorable, you shall rise in the scale of intelligence until you become associated with the Gods. From your loins Apostles, Prophets and Kings shall spring; your posterity, shall be very numerous, even as the sands of the Sea, and they shall call you blessed, and you shall bless them.

"Be of good cheer, for thou shalt always have strength according to thy day. Notwithstanding your enemies may hunt you like a Roe upon the mountains yet you shall escape as the bird from the hands of the Fowler, and not a hair of your head shall fall, but you shall be sustained in all times and places, and you shall yet converse with the Lord as did the brother of Jared; you shall do the work whereunto the Lord has called you, and that is to establish righteousness and truth.

"I confer upon you the blessings of the heavens and of the earth; you shall be blest in your family, be able to administer health and life to the afflicted. If you keep humble, which you will, you shall have a fulness of joy, live on the earth many years, even till your head is white as the pure wool or as snow, and your mouth shall continue to speak words of life to thousands and millions of the inhabitants of the earth, who shall rejoice to hear your voice. You shall come forth in the first resurrection, be numbered with the great and good, with Joseph the Prophet and Seer, and all that innumerable company and the blood washed throng [sic] which no man could number.

"This is thy lot, brother Brigham, therefore be glad and rejoice, for thou canst have these and every other blessing, privilege and mercy thy heart may desire in righteousness. The Spirit of God like a river shall be bestowed upon you continually, because you have walked uprightly before the Lord in the days of your youth; you have also past through sorrow and grief, and made sacrifices for the kingdom of heaven's sake, therefore all is yours, and I seal them upon you in the name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, even so: Amen." [^7]

Marsena Cannon. A copy of a daguerreotype purportedly taken in the Beehive House in July 1858, shortly after Brigham returned to Salt Lake from the "Move South" on 30 June 1858. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

In September, Brigham and Lucy's son Feramorz Young was born. Several months later Brigham blessed him: "Feramorz in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ we lay our hands upon thee and bless thee according to the order of the Holy Priesthood; and ask our Father to pour out of his Spirit upon you, heal up your body, and bless you abundantly. We bless you with all the blessings of Abraham Isaac and Jacob, and say live, and have power over death and disease, and foul spirits, and we seal upon you the blessing of life, and health, with the full use of your mental faculties; and also seal upon you the power of the Holy Priesthood which shall rest upon you from your faith, and say be thou blessed, and thy mind shall be quick and open to receive the things of God. Thou shall be preserved in the hour of dangers for the angel of the Lord shall guide and bear thee up that thou shalt not be destroyed, but live to be a mighty instrument in the hands of the Lord of doing good to the House of Israel, in gathering their remnans to Zion; and thou shall become a saviour upon Mount Zion to save the house of Esau, and all blessings pertaining to life and salvation-pertaining to this world and to the world to come, and in the eternal priesthood we seal upon you in the name of Lord Jesus Christ, Amen." [^8]

As the nation began to focus upon the problems of sectionalism in the East, Brigham still received attention in the newspapers and magazines of the day. He noted in April 1859: "Don't fret your gizzard over that. I care nothing about my character in the world. I do not care what men say about me. I want my character to stand fair in the eyes of my Heavenly Father." [^9]

The 3 September 1859 Harper's Weekly contained Horace Greeley's interview with Brigham in Salt Lake City. Greeley, editor of the New York Tribune, conducted a two-hour interview with fifty-eight-year-old Brigham on 13 July 1859 that captured national attention as the two discussed plural marriage, slavery, and Mormon doctrine. The "Two Hours with Brigham Young" is reportedly the "first full-fledged modern interview with a well-known public figure printed in an American newspaper." Greeley's dispatch first appeared in the New York Tribune for August 20, 1859 (an issue that probably sold more copies than any previous issue) and a few weeks later in Harper's Weekly.

Brigham Young and Horace Greeley illustration; Harper's Weekly 3 September 1859. Left to right: Brigham Young and Horace Greeley. Courtesy R. Q. and Susan Shupe, San Juan Capistrano, California.

In March 1860 Brigham told the Saints: "The last time I spoke to you here I told you that I found my religion just as sweet to me in my private capacity, in my secret meditations upon my bed, and in my closet, in my office, or with my family, as it is when I am in this stand. I love it as well-esteem it as highly; it is as precious to my understanding, and it invigorates, buoys up, strengthens, and fills every power of my capacity with unspeakable joy, just as much at home as it does here. I hope this is the case with you all." [^10]

Probably one of the most significant events of the year occurred on 25 August 1860: "George Quayle Cannon was ordained a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, under the hands of Presidents Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and Daniel H. Wells and Elders John Taylor, George A. Smith, Wilford Woodruff, and Franklin D. Richards, President Brigham Young being mouth." [^11]

Plagued with persistent dental problems, Brigham finally had Dr. Dunyon pull five teeth on 28 April 1862, "being all the remaining teeth he had left in his head. The President is getting a new set of teeth." [^12] This not only affected his facial features (easily detected in the photographic record) but also caused him some discomfort and embarrassment from time to time. Yet he was able to keep a positive attitude about the whole thing, as an experience at the St. George home of Erastus Snow demonstrates.

The Illustrated London News issue of 16 November 1861 featured a long article and two illustrations on Brigham Young and the Saints. This is the earliest known image of Brigham Young wearing a beard. Courtesy Gary and Carol Bunker, Orem, Utah.

It appears that one morning Brigham was cleaning his dentures at the family wash bench just outside a back door when one of the little Snow girls caught sight of him. Brigham quickly plopped his teeth into his mouth as she stood staring in amazement. Little Flora bounced up and down pleading: "Oh, Brother Brigham, show me your teeth! Show me your teeth, Brother Brigham!" [^13] Brigham satisfied her childhood curiosity by kindly consenting and pulling out his teeth for her to examine.

In 1863 Brigham made one of his annual trips from Salt Lake City to St. George. A. J. Allen, who accompanied the President's party, noted: "May 9th Held conferance also the 10th held conferenace Bro John Taylor proffecied in the name of the lord the people in that place should be blest and Bro. Brigham testyfied to it also he also state that he had seen in the vision of his mind a large citty built where St. George now stands with towers and [steeples] one hundred and fifteen (feet) high etc." [^14] Brigham dedicated a temple there in 1877.

As had been his tradition since Nauvoo days, in 1866 Brigham met regularly in a prayer circle. On the first day of July 1866, Wilford Woodruff recorded having attended Brigham's prayer circle that day and made note of a singular event:

"I met at the Prayer Circle with Presidet Young John Taylor W. Woodruff G. A. Smith G. Q. Cannon & Joseph F Smith. John Taylor Prayed & President Young was mouth. At the close of the Prayer Presidet Young arose from his knees. . . . Of a sudden he stoped & Exclaimed hold on, 'Shall I do as I feel led? I always fell [feel] well to do as the Spirit Constrains me. It is my mind to Ordain Brother Joseph F Smith to the Apostleship, and to be one of my Councillors.'

"He then Called upon Each one of us for an Expression of our Feelings and we Individually responded that it met our Harty approval. . . . After which Brother Joseph F Smith knelt . . . we laid our hands upon him, Brother Brigham being mouth." [^15]

One of two known photographic images of Brigham Young with a spouse, ca. 1863. Harriet "Amelia" Folsom married Brigham in January 1863. They had no children. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

Joseph F. Smith, son of Hyrum and Mary Fielding Smith, was twenty-seven years old at the time of his ordination. Later, on 8 October 1867, Brigham set him apart as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve, but he continued as a counselor to the First Presidency until Brigham's death in 1877.

Joseph F. Smith, by Charles W. Carter, ca. 1866. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

In 1868, as the new "Iron Highway" made its way towards Utah, Brigham passed into another phase of life. On 7 August 1868 Edmund Ellsworth Jr. was born to Edmond Ellsworth and Ellen Camilla Blair. Edmond Ellsworth was Brigham's grandson, born to Elizabeth Young and Edmond Lovell Ellsworth. Brigham lived to see another twenty-one great-grandchildren born before his death in 1877.

In the late 1860s most Saints lived in small, quiet rural communities that spread out from Salt Lake City like spokes of a wheel. While differences could be observed between the various settlements, such as terrain and climate, most towns were remarkably similar. The local church was the physical center of the community, and the social, economic, political, and religious center as well. Wide streets were lined with Lombardy poplars, and ditches carrying water could be found on both sides of the roads. Based on Joseph Smith's plat of Zion, the community was laid out on a grid pattern, with streets running east and west and north and south from the central square, where the meetinghouse usually stood. Fences, roads, public buildings, and irrigation ditches had all been built by cooperation.

Brigham knew that the railroad would bring wonderful opportunities, especially helping in the effort to gather converts to Zion faster, easier, and less dangerously. Additionally, Brigham knew that the coming of steam would help build the Salt Lake Temple. On the other hand he also knew that the railroad would bring large numbers of non-Mormons who would be seeking to exploit the natural resources of the region, and that the Latter-day Saints' effort to be self-sufficient would thus be undermined.

Painted by the first woman artist in Utah, "Brigham Young and His Friends," reminds one of the William W. Major painting "Joseph Smith and His Friends," ca. 1845. The artist, Sarah Ann Burbage Long, was an 1854 English convert and the wife of Brigham's clerk, John V. Long. From left to right: John V. Long, John Young, Edwin Woolley, George A. Smith, Lorenzo Snow, Heber C. Kimball, Brigham Young, and Daniel Wells. Behind the group are images of Jedediah M. Grant, Joseph Smith, and Hyrum Smith, and a bust of Willard Richards. Courtesy Museum of Church History and Art, Salt Lake City.

In an effort to check as much as possible the negative impact the railroad would have, Brigham revived the School of the Prophets for the men and the Relief Society for the women, and expanded the cooperative movement.

Theological Lectures [School of the Prophets] pass, dated 13 March 1868. Courtesy Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah. Brigham Young, ca. 1864; in private possession. According to the family tradition this painting was done by a visiting artist from Europe or the eastern United States.

The School of the Prophets, which had originally been organized by Joseph Smith in Ohio, became a tool by which not only to teach the doctrine of the kingdom but also to help further the social, economic, and political self-sufficiency of the Saints. In a meeting held in May 1868, a clerk noted: "Prest. Young gave to the School of the Prophets the terms of the Railway contract and acknowledged the hand of the Lord in giving this people the privilege of performing the work; thus keeping away from our midst the swarms of scalliwags that the construction of the railway would bring here. A good influence pervaded the meeting and all seemed to feel the same. When the Prest. expressed the hope that the job might be completed creditably to the Saints, that in the halls of congress it might be announced that no part of the national highway was completed more satisfactorily, the brethren clapped their hands en masse." [^16]

Illustration from the 28 July 1866 edition of the Frank Leslie's Illustrated Newspaper. Courtesy Museum of Church History and Art, Salt Lake City. Brigham Young, by Charles R. Savage, ca. 1866. Courtesy R. Q. and Susan Shupe, San Juan Capistrano, California. The Young brothers, by Charles W. Carter, ca. 1866. Left to right: Lorenzo, Brigham, Phineas, Joseph, and John. All the members of the immediate family living at the time the Church was established joined it and died faithful members, including father, John Young; sisters Nancy, Fanny, Rhoda, Susannah, and Louisa; and these five brothers. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City. Brigham Young, by Edward Martin, ca. 1867. Courtesy R. Q. and Susan Shupe, San Juan Capistrano, California. Women leaders, ca. 1880. Left to right: Zina D. H. Young, Emeline Partridge, Eliza R. Snow. Courtesy Special Collections-Manuscripts, J. Willard Marriott Library, University of Utah, Salt Lake City.

Eliza R. Snow, chosen as the new president of the Relief Society in 1867, moved to promote women's rights, education, and the cooperative movement. Eliza also reached out to younger women through the retrenchment associations.

Brigham had initiated the retrenchment movement in 1869 when he appointed Mary Isabella Horne to establish a semimonthly women's meeting to promote a reform in "diet and dress." Later, Brigham organized the Young Ladies Retrenchment Association among his own daughters and planned it to be copied throughout the Mormon settlements.

Caroline "Carlie" Partridge Young, ca. 1868. Brigham Young's daughter in "retrenchment dress." Courtesy Winnifred Cannon Jardine, Salt Lake City.

Brigham made another tour in October and November 1869, visiting the Saints in Utah, Juab, and Sanpete counties. In a letter to his son, who was serving a mission in England at the time, he gave a report of the trip: "On the 26th ult. I started (accompanied by some of the brethren) on a trip to the settlements. . . . The people everywhere received us with demonstrations of welcome. At Ft. Ephraim we had a grand torchlight reception, & the Chinese Canters & transparencies were very effective. Take it altogether, it was season of rejoicing. The teachings given were of a thoroughly practical character, adapted to the instruction of all, & on a variety of subjects of interest. In eleven days we travelled about 300 miles-visited 20 Settlements & held 27 meetings." [^17]

"Prest. B. Young & Party on the Colorado Plateau," by Charles R. Savage, 18 March 1870. Seated in the center, left to right: John P. Squires (next to the rifles), John W. Young, Brigham Young Jr., Daniel H. Wells (on the chair), unknown, Brigham Young, and George A. Smith. Standing behind center row, left to right: (beginning with man in white coat, just behind John W. Young) Lorenzo Dow Young, unknown, Amelia Folsom Young, John Taylor, unknown, Minerva W. Snow (wife of Erastus Snow), Bathsheba Smith (wife of George A. Smith). Brigham Young is often mis-identified in this image as the man sitting on the chair in the center of the photograph. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City. Eagle Gate, by Savage and Ottinger, ca. 1866. A State of Deseret law passed in 1851 required all land owners to fence their property as a restraint for their own livestock and a protection against their neighbors' cattle. Brigham Young therefore directed that a fence be built around his property, as can be seen in the earliest photograph of the Beehive House. Within a short period a cobblestone wall nine feet high replaced the original wood enclosure, as shown in the photograph. The much-photographed Eagle Gate was carved by English emigrant Ralph Ramsey in 1859. Assisted by fellow countryman William Bell, Ramsey utilized a design by Hiram B. Clawson, a convert from New York, business manager and son-in-law of Brigham Young. The large copper-covered wooden eagle is atop the gate to City Creek Canyon. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City. Brigham Young, by Enoch Perry, 1866. Some time in late 1865, Enoch Wood Perry Jr. obtained another commission, this time from the city fathers of Salt Lake. For a full-length life-size portrait of Brigham Young he was paid $1,000 in gold. Courtesy the Salt Lake City and County Building, Salt Lake City.

On 10 January 1870 Brigham participated in the ceremonies celebrating the completion of the railroad connection to Salt Lake City from Ogden. Some 15,000 people gathered to witness the laying of the last rail and the driving of the last spike by Brigham. Photographer Charles R. Savage noted: "Grand Finale to track laying Pres. B. Young drove the last spike. Many visitors came from different points. Everything passed off very lively and pleasant. Took 2 photos of the ceremony. Speeches were delivered by G. Q. Cannon, Morris of UPRR & others. 36 guns were fired one for each mile of the road. In the evening we attended a great ball at the theater there was a pleasant atmosphere. Citizens of the city, Camp Douglas, our children saw the trains & locomotives for the first time." [^18]

Spike driven by Brigham Young at the completion of the Utah Central Railway (Ogden to Salt Lake City) on 10 January 1870. Courtesy Museum of Church History and Art, Salt Lake City. The first train to arrive on the new Utah Central Railway on 10 January 1870. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City. "The Prest. and directors of Zion's Mercantile co-operative Institution met at the Historian's office-Prest. Young presiding. The Directors instructed the Committee on appraisals to get up signs to be put over the Stores, the propriety of putting "Holiness to the Lord" over the Stores on the sign boards was discussed. The Prest. offered to get up a sign for Eldredge and Clawson, which would serve as a pattern."18 ZCMI sign, Charles W. Carter, about 1869. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

While this was a time of rejoicing, Brigham was also dealing with the new "movement," a break-off group seeking to redefine the mission of the kingdom. For Brigham, it was an additional heart-break because some of his close friends and associates joined the group, including former Apostle Amasa Lyman. Brigham noted in a letter to Albert Carrington that "It is truly astonishing how men will suffer themselves to be blinded by the spirit of darkness, totally regardless of every principle of right, old associations, testimonies, & intimate acquaintance with the truth, but so it is with many, the cares of the world choke the good seed, & they are blinded & led captive to the will of the devil." [^19]

First Presidency and Quorum of Twelve. This may be the first photograph ever taken of the entire First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles together, possibly by Charles R. Savage on 9 October 1868. Left to right: Orson Hyde, Orson Pratt, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, George A. Smith, Ezra T. Benson, Charles C. Rich, Brigham Young, Lorenzo Snow, Daniel H. Wells, Erastus Snow, Franklin D. Richards, George Q. Cannon, Brigham Young, Jr., and Joseph F. Smith. Courtesy Utah State Historical Society, Salt Lake City. Illustration from the 25 November 1871 issue of the Harper's Weekly. Courtesy Gary L. and Carol L. Bunker, Orem, Utah.

In 1871 Brigham reached a milestone, his seventieth birthday. He was greeted by many guests. John Taylor spoke for the Quorum of the Twelve when they met briefly with him in the President's office on 1 June:

"Brother Brigham:

"We a few of the Twelve, who are now in the city, have called upon you to congratulate you upon this the Seventieth Anniversary of your Birthday. We are happy to find you in the enjoyment of good health, and that your bodily strength and general appearance indicate such remarkable preservation after an earthly sojourn of seventy years. We rejoice that through the blessings of Israel's God, you have been able to lead forth His people from the lands of the far-off East to these beautiful valleys of the mountains, which, under your counsel aided by the Spirit of our Heavenly Father, have spread and expanded to their present magnificent proportions.

"We look upon you, under the direction of Almighty God, as our Leader in the dictation of His Church and Kingdom in this land, and through the world; and as we have enjoyed your communion, counsel and fellowship for so many years past, we sincerely hope that your life may be prolonged to you for many years to come, and that we may have the pleasure of your associations in this world, and then be eternally united in the Celestial Kingdom of our God." [^20]

While Elder Taylor was speaking, a reporter noted, "The emotion of those present was so great, that there was scarcely a dry eye in the room." [^21]

Brigham Young, by Charles R. Savage, ca. 1871. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City. Brigham Young, by Charles R. Savage, 1 June 1871. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

As anti-polygamy pressures mounted, Brigham was arrested on a charge of "lascivious cohabitation." Shortly after his arrest, he found himself again making headline news throughout the nation. The 11 November 1871 issue of the Leslie's Weekly depicted Brigham, with a huge family, meeting U.S. President Grant. Under the title "The Mormon Problem Solved," Brigham Young asks Grant: "I must submit to your laws-but what shall I do with all these?" President Grant replies: "Do as I do-give them offices."

In April 1872 the U.S. Supreme Court nullified the actions of Utah Territory Supreme Court Justice James B. McKean. Soon thereafter Brigham was released after some 120 days under guard. He appeared before the Saints on 28 April.

Charles W. Carter's photograph of Brigham Young's carriage, possibly on 9 October 1871. Chief Justice McKean sent U.S. Marshal Patrick to arrest Brigham Young at his home on 2 October. On the 9th he appeared in court (held on the 2nd floor of a livery stable owned by Faust and Houtz, located on Second South) before Judge McKean. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City. U.S. Supreme Court, ca. 1876. Courtesy the Library of Congress, Washington, D.C. Illustration from the 11 November 1871 issue of the Leslie's Weekly. Courtesy Gary L. and Carol B. Bunker, Orem, Utah.

"A word to the Latter-day Saints. Good morning. (Congregation responded, 'Good morning.') How do you do? (Congregation replied, 'Very well.') How is your faith this morning? ('Strong in the Lord,' was the response.) How do you think I look after my long confinement? (Congregation replied, 'First rate.'). . . . I will say a few words to you. The Gospel of the Son of God is most precious. My faith is not weakened in the Gospel in the least. I will answer a few of the questions that probably many would like to ask of me. Many would like to know how I have felt the past winter, and so much of the spring as is now past. I have enjoyed myself exceedingly well. I have been blessed with an opportunity to rest; and you who are acquainted with me and my public speaking can discern at once, if you listen closely to my voice, it is weak to what it used to be, and I required rest. I feel well in body and better in mind. I have no complaint to make, no fault to find, no reflections to cast, for all that has been done has ben directed and overruled by the wisdom of Him who knows all things.

Brigham Young by an unknown artist, ca. 1872. Courtesy Museum of Church History and Art, Salt Lake City. Brigham Young, by Charles R. Savage, ca. 1872. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

"As to my treatment through the winter, it has been very agreeable, very kind. My associate, my companion in tribulation, I will say, has acted the gentleman as much as any man could. I have not one word, one lisp or beat of the heart to complain of him. He has been full of kindness, thoughtful, never intruding, always ready to hearken and, I think, in the future, will be perfectly willing to take the counsel of his prisoner. So much for Captain Isaac Evans. I will say this to you, ladies and gentlemen, you who profess to understand true etiquette, I have not seen a gentleman in my acquaintance that possesses more of the real spirit of gentility, caution and of true etiquette than Captain Evans." [^22]

The Harper's Weekly of 27 January 1872 reproduced a beautiful sketch of Brigham Young. The three-page article included views of Main Street (looking north), Main Street (looking west); the residences of Brigham Young and Daniel H. Wells; the Tabernacle; and additional portraits of Daniel H. Wells and George A. Smith, both counselors to Brigham Young in the First Presidency at the time. Courtesy R. Q. and Susan Shupe, San Juan Capistrano, California. Published in 1872 in Philadelphia by William Flint & Co., this wood engraving is titled "Brigham Young, Head of the Mormon Church, and a portion of His wives and Children". Courtesy Gary L. and Carol B. Bunker, Orem, Utah. Illustration from the 16 April 1873 issue of The Daily Graphic. Courtesy Gary L. and Carol B. Bunker, Orem, Utah.

The Daily Graphic introduced their readers to Brigham, depicting him as Moses in the 16 April 1873 issue. The positive article stated:

"Our ILLUSTRATION. Away from the reach of locomotive and telegraph, 'The Mormon Moses' takes his pilgrimage to Arizona, to turn the wilderness into a garden and convert the Apaches to his faith. The civilization he created in Utah was peculiar, but it taught sobriety, industry, and just dealing. Its cause was polygamy, and its successor, while losing none of the old Mormon virtues, should add social purity as proof of its superiority. Brigham Young tells his own story: 'For over forty years I have served my people, laboring incessantly, and am now nearly seventy-two years of age and I need relaxation.' A farm laborer at thirty, he has stamped his name upon the age as one of its executive chiefs. The record of his forty years of labor entitles him to a place in the group of GRAPHIC Statues. A correct portrait of Brigham Young with a sketch of his life, and a picture of the Mormon Tabernacle at Salt Lake City, are given on the fourth page. The scene in the Tabernacle is taken on occasion of the recent semi-annul conference of the Saints, when the Mormon Prophet resigned his position as director of the business interests of his people." [^23]

During November 1873 Brigham prepared instructions regarding his funeral and burial. This "Last Will and Testament" was followed upon his death in August 1877.

"I, Brigham Young, wish my funeral services to be conducted in the following manner:

"When I breathe my last I wish my friends to put my body in as clean and wholesome state as can conveniently be done, and preserve the same for one, two, three or four days, or as long as my body can be preserved in a good condition. I want my coffin made of plump 1 1/4 inch boards, not scrimped in length, but two inches longer than I would measure, and from two to three inches wider than is commonly made for a person of my breadth and size, and deep enough to place me on a little comfortable cotton bed, with a good suitable pillow for size and quality; my body dressed in my temple clothing, and laid nicely into my coffin, and the coffin to have the appearance that if I wanted to turn a little to the right or to the left, I should have plenty of room to do so. The lid can be made crowning.

Brigham Young, by Dan Weggland, 1873. Courtesy Museum of Church History and Art, Salt Lake City.

"At my interment I wish all of my family present that can be conveniently, and the male members wear no crepe on their hats or on their coats; the females to buy no black bonnets, nor black dresses, nor black veils; but if they have them they are at liberty to wear them. The services may be permitted, as singing and a prayer offered, and if any of my friends wish to say a few words, and really desire, do so; and when they have closed their services, take my remains on a bier, and repair to the little burying ground, which I have reserved on my lot east of the White House on the hill, and in the southeast corner of this lot, have a vault built of mason work large enough to receive my coffin, and that may be placed in a box, if they choose, made of the same material as the coffin-redwood. Then place flat rocks over the vault sufficiently large to cover it, that the earth may be placed over it-nice, fine, dry earth-to cover it until the walls of the little cemetery are reared, which will leave me in the southwes corner. This vault ought to be roofed over with some kind of temporary roof. There let my earthly house or tabernacle rest in peace, and have a good sleep, until the morning of the first resurrection; no crying or mourning with anyone as I have done my work faithfully and in good faith.

"I wish this to be read at the funeral, providing that if I should die anywhere in the mountains, I desire the above directions respecting my place of burial to be observed; but if I should live to go back with the Church to Jackson County, I wish to be buried there. Brigham Young, President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Sunday, November 9th, 1873, Salt Lake City, Utah." [^24]

Brigham Young, by Samuel Jepperson, 1875. Utah County artist and musician Samuel Hans Jepperson went to St. George in October 1874 to assist in the completion of the temple being reared there. Brigham arrived in the Mormon settlement on 11 November 1874 and stayed in Southern Utah until 10 February 1875. Some time during the winter season Jepperson picked up a piece of wood discarded by the temple carpenters and painted this oil portrait of Brigham. Whether or not Brigham sat for the portrait cannot be determined. Courtesy Museum of Church History and Art, Salt Lake City.

In 1875 Brigham confronted the death of long-time friend and counselor, George A. Smith, his eldest son, Joseph A. Young, and his wife Emmeline Free Young; visited the President of the United States; was arrested for contempt of court; and visited Baron Lionel de Rothschild.

George Q. Cannon wrote to Brigham's long-time non-Mormon friend Thomas L. Kane a short letter updating him on happenings in Utah. Elder Cannon included a personal reflection regarding Brigham: "Our friend has had a series of afflictions to bear since this year [1875] opened which would be very trying [to] an ordinary man; but which he has borne with exemplary patience, meekness, and equinimity. His daughter Alice, his wife Emeline, his son Joseph A. and his trusted friend and counselor George A. Smith, have all gone. Probably not more than two events of his life ever afflicted him so deeply as did the sudden departure of Joseph A. . . . One might imagine [that] these events, with the other annoyances to which he has been subjected of late, would way him down. . . . I am happy in being able to say to you that he is as cheerful and courageous as ever. Even when recently suffering from the disease which attacked him in the fall of 1874, he was buoyant and lively. He never seems to me, like an old man, or I wouldcall him a grand old man. At no time in his life did he ever seem to me to be a more resolute, [commendable] soldier of righteousness than at the present period. The Lord has endowed him with extraordinary strength and nerve. Having just been released from confinement when I left he was able to take his accustomed exercise and his health was improving." [^25]

Brigham Young, by Fox and Symons, ca. 1875. Courtesy Special Collections, Merrill Library, Utah State University, Logan, Utah.
