R. Q. Shupe, Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, My Servant Brigham: Portrait of a Prophet ( 1997)

Conclusion

Brigham knew, as well as anyone did, how intrusive journalists and writers cound be, since he found himself time and time again the focus of critical reviews of almost everything he did, said, wrote, or tried to accomplish. On 10 April 1873 Brigham responded to an opportunity to answer a series of questions from the New York Herald. In concluding his reply, his optimism surfaced as he contemplated future generations: "My whole life is devoted to the Almighty's service, and while I regret that my mission is not better understood by the world, the time will come when I will be understood, and I leave to futurity the judgment of my labors and their result as they shall become manifest." [^1]

In our day Elder Neal A. Maxwell has reflected: "Many think of President Brigham Young as primarily a great colonizer and governor, and excellent he was in those roles. But President Young, much more than being a colonizer and a governor, was a seer and a profound teacher of gospel doctrines and principles. The more one encounters his key teachings, the larger he looms." [^2] Certainly Brigham is being evaluated more fairly today, and in some cases appreciated more than in the past.

Brigham Young, possibly John Willard Clawson. Courtesy Museum of Church History and Art, Salt Lake City.

While vilified repeatedly in the press during his life, Brigham nevertheless willingly met with almost all who came to Salt Lake City. Many came away from brief encounters with Brigham with a reverent respect if not downright admiration for him, his people, and what they had accomplished. What they subsequently wrote about these visits gives us a glimpse of Brother Brigham from a non-Mormon perspective. These recollections, the reminiscences and diary accounts of members of the Church, and Brigham's own words added to the visual images and help give us both a physical and a character reference point that makes Brigham real and personal. His comments were often candid, his pronouncements insightful, his spirituality deep, and his humor delightful. Many observed the depth of the man's intellect and sincerity in his eyes, his determination in his chin, and his love for the Saints in his words of exhortation, counsel, and direction.

When asked why we are sometimes left alone and often sad, Brigham told the small gathering at the President's office in January 1857: "Man is destined to be a God and has to act as an independent being-and is left without aid to see what he will do, whether he will be for God and to practice him to depend on his own resources, and try his independency-to be righteous in the dark-to be the friend of God and do the best I can when left to myself-act on my agency as the independent Gods, and show our capacity." [^3]

As the ancient Apostle Paul reflected, "For now we see through a glass, darkly; but then face to face; now I know in part; but then shall I know even as also I am known," [^4] so Brigham's image is only imperfectly reflected in the mirrors of the black ink of the primary sources left behind and the flat photographic record and portrait paintings of him that have survived the ravages of time. In contrast, the day will come when Brigham will be seen and known as the Lord knows him full and infinitely now. Then we too will see Brigham as he really was-"righteous in the dark."

Above: Brigham Young artifacts. From top right: Young family photograph album and carte de visite of Young family members and Church leaders, monogrammed gold cuff links, jewelled shirt stud, green sun goggles, framed lock of hair, and leather wallet. Courtesy Museum of Church History and Art, Salt Lake City.

Right: Brigham Young, by John Willard Clawson. Courtesy Museum of Art, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah. On display on the second floor of the Joseph Smith Building on the BYU campus.

Above: A double-page spread from the 16 August 1866 issue of an

increasingly important American illustrated newspaper, the Harper's Weekly, featured this illustration of Salt Lake City and LDS Church leaders. By 1870 Harper's Weekly had a circulation of more than 170,000. Courtesy Gary L. and Carol B. Bunker, Orem, Utah.

Right: Elizabeth Cumming.

Courtesy Special

Collections-Manuscripts, Marriott Library,

University of Utah,

Salt Lake City.

Right: Proclamation dated 5 August 1857. Courtesy Special Collections-Manuscripts, Marriott Library, University of Utah, Salt Lake City.

Right: Ann Eliza Webb Young. Courtesy Information Center, Utah State Historical Society, Salt Lake City.

Left: George D. Watt. Courtesy Ronald Watt, Salt Lake City.

Below: Old Tabernacle and Bowery, ca. 1863. Most visitors and Saints had the opportunity to hear Brigham speak in the Old Tabernacle (an adobe structure to the left) and the Bowery (to the right) before the New Tabernacle was completed in 1867. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

Above: "West Side of Salt Lake City, From Arsenal Hill," by Charles R. Savage, 3 May 1873. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

Above: "Sacrament in the Mormon Tabernacle" with Brigham preaching, Harper's Weekly, 30 September 1871. Courtesy Gary L. and Carol B. Bunker, Orem, Utah.

Left: Lucy Meserve Smith. Courtesy Special

Collections-Manuscripts, Marriott Library,

University of Utah,

Salt Lake City.

Right: Brigham Young pamphlet, The Resurrection: A Discourse by Brigham Young, dated

8 October 1875. Courtesy R. Q. and Susan Shupe, San Juan Capistrano, California.

Left: Thomas Higgs, by J. E. James, ca. 1870. Courtesy Roberta Sleater Baker, Salt Lake City.

Above: "Brigham Young on His Travels," 1873 illustration from

T. H. B. Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints.

Above: Salt Lake Temple architectural rendering, 1855, by William W. Ward from a design by Truman O. Angell, which hung in President Brigham Young's office for over twenty years. Courtesy Museum of Church History and Art, Salt Lake City.

Above: Missionary Certificate signed by First Presidency, dated

7 December 1874. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

Right: Brigham Young's diary entry for 18 January 1842. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Left: The 11 September 1873 edition of The New Hampshire Gazette, reportedly the oldest continuous newspaper in the United States at the time, featured nearly three columns of information on Brigham Young's family.

Above: Brigham Young and his wives. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

Above: President Brigham Young and his seventeen sons, by Charles Ellis Johnson. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

Above: Brigham Young and his daughters. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

Right: U.S. president Zachary Taylor, ca. 1850. Courtesy Library of Congress, Washington, D.C.

Above: Brigham's tools and promissory note from the New York period. Courtesy Museum of Church History and Art, Salt Lake City.

Right: Apparently a small portion of Brigham's original membership certificate, dated 9 April 1832. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

Left: Kirtland Temple window, ca. 1975. Brigham and Joseph Young built the frames and installed and glazed the original windows, demonstrating their

high skill on the curved mullions and frames of the Gothic and the

elliptical-shaped windows on the east and west

facades, which were

difficult to produce with the simple hand-planes available to them. Brigham later attended the dedication of the building on 27 March 1836. Courtesy RLDS Church Archives, Independence, Missouri.

Above: Brigham Young's Elder's Certificate, dated 30 March 1836. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

Above: Brigham Young's English Justice of the Peace Certificate, dated 8 April 1840. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

Right: Brigham Young, 1841; copied from the Young Woman's Journal 8 (July 1897): 438. This painting apparently represents the first known visual image of Brigham Young.

Above: Joseph Smith's Red Brick Store, ca. 1885. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

Above: "Joseph Smith and His Friends," by William W. Major, ca. 1845. William Warner Major, a self-trained artist from Bristol, England, converted to Mormonism and emigrated to Nauvoo in 1844. Within a year he began working on several projects, including this one of the Church leaders completed some time after the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith. It depicts several members of the First Presidency and of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. They are, from left to right, Hyrum Smith, Willard Richards, Joseph Smith, Orson Pratt, Parley P. Pratt, Orson Hyde, Heber C. Kimball, and Brigham Young. Courtesy Museum of Church History and Art, Salt Lake City.

Above: Brigham Young, probably by

Lucian Foster, ca. 1844-1845. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

Below: Restored Brigham Young Home. Courtesy Special Collections-Manuscripts, J. Willard Marriott Library, University of Utah, Salt Lake City.

Right: Interior view of restored Brigham Young Home. Courtesy Special Collections-Manuscripts,

J. Willard Marriott Library, University of Utah, Salt Lake City.

Left: William Wines Phelps, ca. 1853. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

Above: Nauvoo Temple, by Thomas Easterly, ca. 1846. Courtesy Missouri State Historical Society, St. Louis, Missouri.

Above: "Brigham Young's First View of the Valley," 1850 print from Howard Stansbury's Exploration and Survey of the Valley of the Great Salt Lake.

Left: Copy of an original daguerreotype. Dating of this image is unknown. It may have been taken in Nauvoo by Lucian Foster just before Brigham Young left the "City of Joseph" in February 1846, or by Marsena Cannon in Salt Lake City sometime around 1850. Courtesy Utah State Historical Society, Salt Lake City.

Left: Brigham Young's pen

with inscription

"Holiness to the Lord"

engraved on it.

Courtesy Museum of

Church History and Art,

Salt Lake City.

Above: Gold coins. Brigham Young, John Taylor, and John Kay prepared the inscriptions for the gold coins to be minted from the California gold dust brought to Salt Lake City. On one side is the motto "Holiness to the Lord," with the emblem of the priesthood (crown) over the all-seeing eye. On the reverse of this coin were two clasped hands, initials GSLCPG (Great Salt Lake City Pure Gold), Two and half Do (Two and half dollars), and the date 1849. Courtesy Museum of Church History and Art, Salt Lake City.

Above: Brigham Young, by Marsena Cannon, 12 December 1850. Taken in the old pioneer fort by Marsena Cannon about the time Brigham learned of his appointment as the new territorial governor. Courtesy LDS Church Archives.

Above: Brigham Young's Governor Certificate signed by U.S. President Millard Fillmore and Secretary of State Daniel Webster, dated 28 September 1850. Courtesy Utah State Historical Society, Salt Lake City.

Above: Brigham Young's oath of office, 3 February 1851. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

Above: 1850 map of the United States. The map shows the boundaries for the Territory of Utah established by Congress in the Compromise of 1850. Courtesy R. Q. and Susan Shupe, San Juan Capistrano, California.

Left: The First Presidency and Twelve Apostles, by Frederick Piercy, 1 January 1853. Piercy's famous illustration of "The First Presidency and Twelve Apostles of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" was printed in January 1853 in England. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

Below: Salt Lake Temple Ground-breaking Services, by William A. Smith, 14 February 1853. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

Above: Brigham and Margaret Pierce Young, ca. 1851. One of two known photographs of Brigham Young posing with a spouse. This is a copy of a daguerreotype originally taken by Marsena Cannon in Salt Lake City. Margaret Pierce married Brigham Young in January 1845 and bore him one son-Brigham Morris Young, in 1854. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

Right: Brigham Young, ca. 1854; illustration in Gleason's Pictorial Drawing-Room Companion. Courtesy R. Q. and Susan Shupe, San Juan Capistrano, California.

Above: Beehive House, Louis R. Chaffin, ca. 1855. The earliest known photograph of the Beehive House is this daguerreotype taken by Mr. Chaffin, one of Marsena Cannon's companions, at about the time of its completion. The wooden beehive atop the house, a Utah pioneer symbol of industry, gave the home its name. The pine-wood and sun-dried adobe house was designed by Truman O. Angell. To the left of the house are the offices for Brigham Young as governor (note sign above first door to the left) and as Church President (note sign over second door). Additionally a sign was placed over the President's office, "Tithing Office." The Lion House, Brigham Young's largest house, is shown prior to its 1856 completion. Notice that the lion is not yet on the portico. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

Right: Jules Remy and Julius Brenchley's calling card. Frenchman Remy and Englishman Brenchley spent a month in Utah and met with Brigham Young on at least four occasions. Later they published their impression in

Voyage au pays des Mormons (Paris: E. Dentu, 1860). Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

Above: "The Hand-Cart Emigrants in a Storm," from T. B. H. Stenhouse's 1873 The Rocky Mountain Saints: A Full and complete History of the Mormons (New York: D. Appleton and Company, 1873).

Right: Brigham Young, by Marsena Cannon, ca. 1857. The ambrotype, taken about the time of the Utah War, reveals as much as any written document could the stress and burden Governor and President Young experienced when the federal government "invaded" Utah. Courtesy Special Collections-

Manuscripts,

J. Willard Marriott Library, University of Utah,

Salt Lake City.

Left: Brigham Young illustration from 10 October 1857 edition of the Harper's Weekly. This

illustration appeared with an article, "Scenes in an American Harem." Courtesy Gary L. and Carol B. Bunker, Orem, Utah.

Left: Brigham Young, July 1858, by Marsena Cannon. A copy of a daguerreotype purportedly taken in the Beehive House in July 1858, shortly after Brigham returned to Salt Lake from the "Move South" on 30 June 1858. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

Left: Brigham Young and Horace Greeley illustration; Harper's Weekly 3 September 1859. Left to right: Brigham Young and Horace Greeley. Courtesy R. Q. and Susan Shupe, San Juan Capistrano, California.

Left: The Illustrated London News issue of 16 November 1861 featured a long article and two illustrations on Brigham Young and the Saints. This is the earliest known image of Brigham Young wearing a beard. Courtesy Gary and Carol Bunker, Orem, Utah.

Left: One of two known photographic images of Brigham Young with a spouse, ca. 1863. Harriet "Amelia" Folsom married Brigham in January 1863. They had no children. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

Right: Joseph F. Smith, by Charles W. Carter, ca. 1866. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

Above: Painted by the first woman artist in Utah, "Brigham Young and His Friends," reminds one of the William W. Major painting "Joseph Smith and His Friends," ca. 1845. The artist, Sarah Ann Burbage Long, was an 1854 English convert and the wife of Brigham's clerk, John V. Long. From left to right: John V. Long, John Young, Edwin Woolley, George A. Smith, Lorenzo Snow, Heber C. Kimball, Brigham Young, and Daniel Wells. Behind the group are images of Jedediah M. Grant, Joseph Smith, and Hyrum Smith, and a bust of Willard Richards. Courtesy Museum of Church History and Art, Salt Lake City.

Right: Theological Lectures [School of the Prophets] pass, dated

13 March 1868. Courtesy Special Collections, Harold B. Lee

Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.

Left: Brigham Young, ca. 1864; in private possession. According to the family tradition this painting was done by a visiting artist from Europe or the

eastern United States.

Left: Illustration from the 28 July 1866 edition of the Frank Leslie's

Illustrated Newspaper. Courtesy Museum of Church History and Art, Salt Lake City.

Below: Brigham Young, by Charles R. Savage, ca. 1866. Courtesy R. Q. and Susan Shupe, San Juan Capistrano, California.

Above: The Young brothers, by Charles W. Carter, ca. 1866. Left to right: Lorenzo, Brigham, Phineas, Joseph, and John. All the members of the immediate family living at the time the Church was established joined it and died faithful members, including father, John Young; sisters Nancy, Fanny, Rhoda, Susannah, and Louisa; and these five brothers. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

Left: Brigham Young, by Edward Martin, ca. 1867. Courtesy R. Q. and Susan Shupe, San Juan Capistrano, California.

Left: Women leaders, ca. 1880. Left to right: Zina D. H. Young, Emeline Partridge, Eliza R. Snow. Courtesy Special Collections-Manuscripts, J. Willard Marriott Library, University of Utah, Salt Lake City.

Right: Caroline "Carlie" Partridge Young, ca. 1868. Brigham Young's daughter in "retrenchment dress." Courtesy Winnifred Cannon Jardine, Salt Lake City.

Below: "Prest. B. Young & Party on the Colorado Plateau," by Charles R. Savage, 18 March 1870. Seated in the center, left to right: John P. Squires (next to the

rifles), John W. Young, Brigham Young Jr., Daniel H. Wells (on the chair), unknown, Brigham Young, and George A. Smith. Standing behind center row, left to right: (beginning with man in white coat, just behind John W. Young) Lorenzo Dow Young, unknown, Amelia Folsom Young, John Taylor, unknown, Minerva W. Snow (wife of Erastus Snow), Bathsheba Smith (wife of George A. Smith). Brigham Young is often mis-identified in this image as the man sitting on the chair in the center of the photograph. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

Above: Eagle Gate, by Savage and Ottinger, ca. 1866. A State of

Deseret law passed in 1851 required all land owners to fence their property as a restraint for their own livestock and a protection against their neighbors' cattle. Brigham Young therefore directed that a fence be built around his property, as can be seen in the earliest photograph of the Beehive House. Within a short period a cobblestone wall nine feet high replaced the original wood enclosure, as shown in the photograph. The much-photographed Eagle Gate was carved by English emigrant Ralph Ramsey in 1859. Assisted by fellow countryman William Bell, Ramsey utilized a design by Hiram B. Clawson, a convert from New York, business manager and son-in-law of Brigham Young. The large copper-covered wooden eagle is atop the gate to City Creek Canyon. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

Above: Brigham Young, by Enoch Perry, 1866. Some time in late 1865, Enoch Wood Perry Jr. obtained another commission, this time from the city fathers of Salt Lake. For a full-length life-size portrait of Brigham Young he was paid $1,000 in gold. Courtesy the Salt Lake City and County Building, Salt Lake City.

Left: Spike driven by Brigham Young at the completion of the Utah Central Railway (Ogden to Salt Lake City) on 10 January 1870. Courtesy Museum of Church History and Art, Salt Lake City.

Above: The first train to arrive on the new Utah Central Railway on 10 January 1870. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

Right: "The Prest. and directors of Zion's Mercantile co-operative Institution met at the Historian's office-Prest. Young presiding. The Directors

instructed the Committee on

appraisals to get up signs to be put over the Stores, the propriety of putting "Holiness to the Lord" over the Stores on the sign boards was discussed. The Prest. offered to get up a sign for Eldredge and Clawson, which would serve as a pattern."18

Above: First Presidency and Quorum of Twelve. This may be the first photograph ever taken of the entire First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles together, possibly by Charles R. Savage on 9 October 1868. Left to right: Orson Hyde, Orson Pratt, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, George A. Smith, Ezra T. Benson, Charles C. Rich, Brigham Young, Lorenzo Snow, Daniel H. Wells, Erastus Snow, Franklin D. Richards, George Q. Cannon, Brigham Young, Jr., and Joseph F. Smith. Courtesy Utah State Historical Society, Salt Lake City.

Above: Illustration from the 25 November 1871 issue of the Harper's Weekly. Courtesy Gary L. and Carol L. Bunker, Orem, Utah.

Above: Brigham Young, by Charles R. Savage, ca. 1871. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

Above: Brigham Young, by Charles R. Savage,

1 June 1871. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

Above: Charles W. Carter's photograph of Brigham Young's carriage, possibly on 9 October 1871. Chief Justice McKean sent U.S. Marshal Patrick to arrest Brigham Young at his home on 2 October. On the 9th he appeared in court (held on the 2nd floor of a livery stable owned by Faust and Houtz, located on Second South) before Judge McKean. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

Below: U.S. Supreme Court, ca. 1876. Courtesy the Library of Congress, Washington, D.C.

Above: Illustration from the 11 November 1871 issue of the Leslie's Weekly. Courtesy Gary L. and Carol B. Bunker, Orem, Utah.

Left: Brigham Young by an unknown artist, ca. 1872. Courtesy Museum of Church History and Art, Salt Lake City.

Above: Brigham Young, by Charles R. Savage, ca. 1872. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

Left: The Harper's Weekly of

27 January 1872 reproduced a beautiful sketch of Brigham Young. The three-page article

included views of Main Street (looking north), Main Street (looking west); the residences

of Brigham Young and Daniel H. Wells; the Tabernacle; and additional portraits of Daniel H. Wells and George A. Smith, both counselors to Brigham Young in the First Presidency at the time. Courtesy R. Q. and Susan Shupe, San Juan Capistrano, California.

Below: Published in 1872 in Philadelphia by William Flint & Co., this wood engraving is titled "Brigham Young, Head of the Mormon Church, and a portion of His wives and Children". Courtesy Gary L. and Carol B. Bunker, Orem, Utah.

Left: Illustration from the 16 April 1873 issue of The Daily Graphic. Courtesy Gary L. and Carol B. Bunker, Orem, Utah.

Right: Brigham Young,

by Dan Weggland, 1873. Courtesy Museum of Church History and Art, Salt Lake City.

Right: Brigham Young, by Samuel Jepperson, 1875. Utah County artist and musician Samuel Hans Jepperson went to St. George in October 1874 to assist in the completion of the temple being reared there. Brigham arrived in the Mormon settlement on 11 November 1874 and stayed in Southern Utah until 10 February 1875. Some time during the winter season Jepperson picked up a piece of wood discarded by the temple carpenters and painted this oil portrait of Brigham. Whether or not Brigham sat for the portrait cannot be determined. Courtesy Museum of Church History and Art, Salt Lake City.

Left: Brigham Young, by Fox and Symons, ca. 1875. Courtesy Special Collections, Merrill Library, Utah State University, Logan, Utah.

Above: Brigham Young, by Charles R. Savage, ca. 1876. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

Above: St. George Temple under construction, March 1876. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

Left: Brigham Young, by Charles. R. Savage, 1877. Apparently the last photograph taken of Brigham some time after his arrival in Salt Lake City on 29 April 1877, having spent the winter in St. George. Courtesy Special Collections-

Manuscript, J. Willard Marriott Library, University of Utah, Salt Lake City.

Right: Salt Lake Temple under construction, by Charles W. Carter, ca. 1877. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

Above: Lion House bedroom, ca. 1930, from Susa Young Gates's The Life Story of Brigham Young. The bedroom where Brigham Young died on 29 August 1877, containing some of the original furnishings belonging to his family.

Below: Brigham Young's death mask and hand cast prepared by George M. Ottinger, 1 September 1877. Courtesy Museum of Church History and Art, Salt Lake City.

Left: "Proportions of President Brigham Young," ca. 1877. It is not certain when George M. Ottinger prepared this outline of Brigham Young's proportions. Possibly it was at the time of death. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

Below: Tabernacle, by Charles W. Carter, 1877. Courtesy LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City.

Right: Wild flowers from Brigham's casket made into an arrangement by his daughters. Courtesy Museum of Church History and Art, Salt Lake City.

Left: Funeral ribbon, possibly prepared for the

funeral, ca. 1877. Courtesy Museum of Church History and Art, Salt Lake City.

Left: Print "Order of Procession" for funeral. Courtesy Utah State Historical Society, Salt Lake City.

Right: Brigham's grave, ca. 1878. Courtesy Information Center, Utah State Historical Society, Salt Lake City.

Below: The 3 September 1877 issue of the Millennial Star containing an obituary by Henry W. N. Naisbitt.

Left: The Phrenological Journal published a brief obituary in the October 1877 issue and an article that included a line drawing of Brigham Young in the November 1877 issue. Courtesy R. Q. and Susan Shupe, San Juan Capistrano, California.

Overleaf: Two pages from the 15 September 1877 issue of the Frank Leslie's Illustrated Newspaper. Courtesy Gary L. and Carol B. Bunker, Orem, Utah.

Left: Brigham Young, possibly John Willard Clawson. Courtesy Museum of Church History and Art, Salt Lake City.

"You promised in the blessing," she said, "that I could nurse this baby."

I said, "It was a throw-away line. What are you talking about?"

She said, "You promised, the Lord promised I could nurse this baby. I can't nurse him and take medication so you have to do something about this."

I said, "Look, get a bottle. Your husband can get up in the middle of the night. It'll be terrific. Take the medication; you're home free—the baby's fine. Rejoice, you've got a beautiful boy."

She would not have any of that. She wanted another blessing to take away this disease so she could nurse her baby. I wished I were not her home teacher, not her stake president. But I put my hands on her head, and I heard myself telling her that her disease would go away and she would be able to nurse her baby. Then I left for New York—not just because of that. I had a meeting in New York, but I was glad not to be there hour by hour to see how it worked out.

I gave the blessing on a Sunday evening. Wednesday at two o'clock in the morning, I got a telephone call while I was in a deep sleep. I was president of this national organization and worrying about the next night when I was to give my presidential address. It was hard to sleep, but I was doing my best. The call woke me, and she said, "You promised me these spots would go away, but they're worse. I visited the doctor today, and he says they're worse. Nothing's going well. You promised. I've done everything I know to do. I've been on the telephone all day to people that I might have offended, even in my childhood. 'Please, please, if there's anything I've done to offend you, please forgive me.' I'm trying to think of anything I've ever done in my life and to set it right. But my spots haven't gone away. Why?"

"I don't have any idea why," I said.

She retorted, "Well, don't you think you ought to have an idea. You gave me that blessing."

I felt terrible. I did something I've never done before or since—I stayed up the rest of the night, what there was of it, praying. I said, "Lord, this woman's faith hangs on the blessing she received at my hands. I felt your Spirit at the time. If I was wrong, don't penalize her. Cover me." (And I started thinking of the people I should be calling.)

But she didn't call again, and I thought maybe it's all right. I got home Saturday night late, flying all day from New York, exhausted from the trip. I walked into the house, and there was a note that said, "No matter what time you arrive, call sister so-and-so." I didn't dare not do it, so I phoned her. She said, "You get on over here." Is that any way to talk to a stake president?

It was two o'clock in the morning, but I went over. She was bitter and empty. She said, "I want you to know that I have no faith left. I felt the Spirit of the Lord, the same Spirit when you gave me that blessing, that I've felt in sacrament meetings, in testimony meetings, when I read the scriptures, and in prayer. I felt that same Spirit, and here's my testimony." She raised her hands, which were covered with spots. "Well," she said, "what have you got to say?"

"Nothing."

"Don't you think you owe me an explanation?"

I said, "I have no explanation. I prayed all night. I don't have any idea why. I feel awful that I've been the instrument of your loss of faith. I cannot think of a worse thing that could have happened, that I could have spent my priesthood on, than to destroy your faith."

"Don't you think you owe me an explanation?"

"I tell you I have no explanation."

"You and the Lord—don't you think you owe me an explanation?"

"I'm not giving you any more blessings."

She said, "I think you owe me that, don't you?"

I never did anything with less grace in my life than when I laid my hands on her head. The Lord spoke to her, not of her disease and not of nursing babies, but of his love for her—that she was his daughter, that he cared for her, that he had died for her. He said that he would have died if she had been the only one. He would have suffered at Calvary for her sins, if hers had been the only ones. He didn't say one word about healing her.

The next day was fast Sunday. She came to church although she had said she never would again. With the spots she looked awful. It was not easy; she was not an overly proud woman, but it was not easy for her to appear in public looking as she did. She got up in testimony meeting, and her spots were worse than ever. She told the story and at the end she said, "I do not know why I have these spots, why my breasts have dried, but I do know this." And she bore a powerful witness of the Savior's love for her. That afternoon the spots went away and the milk came in, but not until she understood the mysteries of the kingdom, which don't have much to do with spots or milk or even with blessings, but have a lot to do with who we are and who our Father is, who our Savior is, and the relationship among the three of us.

I'm going to tell just two more stories. My mother, I trust, did not have a typical Mormon woman's life. She married three times, but she got better at it as she went along. I've been grateful to her that she didn't stop until she got a good man. He wasn't a member of the Church when she married him, but he did join the Church and eventually became a bishop—a very good man. I'm sealed to him, and I love him. I wear his ring. He wanted me to have it because in his family when somebody died, people quarreled over the tea cups. He wanted me before he died to have the ring so no one would quarrel over it, and I could have it. I wear it with love.

He died, in some ways, in a bad way, a hard way. He was a strong man—a man who'd been a sickly youth, but he'd done some of the Charles Atlas exercises. I used to love to hear him tell about how eventually he'd turned the table on the bullies. I was one who always ran away from bullies, walked to the other side of the street and went home the other way, but I loved to hear his stories about how he'd finally gotten strong enough to take them on and beat them at their own game. I had a lot of vicarious satisfaction from his stories.

But at the end his lungs filled up with fiber so he had only five percent of his lungs to breathe with. With only five percent of the oxygen that he needed to metabolize his food, he just got weaker and weaker. His bones showed everywhere on his body. This big, beefy, all-solid-muscle man got to the point where all of his muscle had been eaten alive. I could easily carry him in my arms, although I'm not a strong man physically. He became petulant and childish because he could hardly breathe. He was constantly asphyxiated. He could hardly eat or go to the bathroom because he didn't have the oxygen to close his mouth that long. What a strain to see this strong, good man waste away.

A week before he died I asked him for a father's blessing. He could reach over only one hand because he couldn't find a position where he could breathe and get both hands together. He gave me a blessing; I'd never had one in my life before. With one hand, he gave me a father's blessing, which I treasure. Then I asked him—and it was more talking than he had done for a long time in one space—I asked, "Vic, what have you learned from this six months of wasting away?"

He said, "Patience; I was never patient. The Lord has taught me patience. I wanted to die six months ago, and he left me. I've had to wait upon him. You know those stories I used to tell?"

"Yes, the ones I liked so well."

"Son, those aren't good stories; they're full of revenge. They're not loving stories. I repent of them."

That man did not waste those six months. How many of us would have gotten bitter at God? "Why don't you take me? I've done everything; all I want to do is come home." That man spent those months being refined. I know he's presiding today over his family. We've done genealogy for his forebears and sent them up to him to work on in the spirit world. I know he presides over them today, and I know he's a better president of his familial branch in the spirit world than he was a bishop, and he was a good bishop. But, I know he was refined by his pain, by his adversity. He needed to go through that suffering. He could have been embittered; he could have been destroyed. His faith could have soured and left him, but he chose to learn from his pain. I do not want you to think that it was the pain that was good. It was the man that was good and that made the pain work for him, as indeed our Savior did.

Last Easter a friend, after having brought two boys, then four and two, into the world, had a baby daughter. While she was in the hospital, her husband wanted to come to see the baby, but he had those little children at home. So his home teacher was kind enough to say, "Hey, bring the kids over. We've got a bunch of kids at our house. Bring the two kids over; my wife'll watch them." (That's not quite what King Benjamin said about service, but it's one step off.) "You go and see your baby."

So he did. While he was in the hospital seeing his new baby, his two-year-old got away from that woman's care and drowned in the pool. Through CPR she was able to bring him back to his heart beating and his lungs working but never to real functioning. For two months he lay in a hospital bed, breathing, with his heart beating on machines that helped. His little knees somehow (I don't understand the mechanics of this) bent backwards. His feet bent backwards. I don't know why. In the rigidity of his coma he became deformed. He had been a perfectly whole, wonderful child, but now it was hard for me to go visit him. I would go and sit beside him, looking at his mother who was rubbing him and singing to him. It was hard.

The ward fasted every Sunday for a month for that child. The members kept a twenty-four-hour vigil so that there'd be somebody he knew there when their faith made him whole. He was blessed by the stake patriarch, by the stake president, by a visiting General Authority who was kind enough to add that additional duty to his busy schedule. In all those blessings the mother took hope. I will not say that she was promised flatly, but she took hope by what was said, that the child would live, that she would raise him in this life, and that he would perform many gracious acts and achievements. She would not even tolerate anyone's raising the possibility that he would not get better because she felt that everyone's faith had to be whole and focused.

I never saw so many people at the hospital—dozens of people kept vigil, fasted, and prayed for this child. After two months it became clear the child was wasting away and was not going to get better. His mother was the last to finally acknowledge what everyone else had come to see—he was not going to live. It was costing, I forget how many, thousands of dollars a day. So they finally decided to do the gracious thing and let him return to his Father. It was the hardest thing they ever did. They prayed, fasted, consulted with priesthood leaders, and finally, finally, decided the only thing to do was to pull the tubes. His mother said, "I can't stand it. I don't want to kill that little boy again. How many times is he going to die?"

So his grandmother went and held him in her arms when they pulled the tubes, but he didn't die. He lived another two weeks. I cannot express to you how spiritually exhausted everybody was when he finally died. The family had spent days and nights for weeks with him. Everybody had scarcely slept in two and a half months. Just a week before that child died, the newborn got a temperature of 105 and was taken to the hospital and diagnosed with spinal meningitis. It was a misdiagnosis, but they put the baby in the room just right down from the other baby.

Her husband said, "Honey, let me go bless the baby."

She said, "You get your priesthood hands off my baby." She didn't want God to take that baby too. She said, "God's got all the babies he wants. Why does he want my baby? God doesn't need him on a mission—don't tell me that." People are not always helpful with the things they say. "God needs him worse than I need him—don't tell me that. He's got billions of babies, and I only have one; I have one two-year-old. Don't tell me he has a mission that can't wait fifty or sixty years more on the other side. There's lots of work for him here. We'll keep him busy."

At the graveside the grandmother gave the opening prayer, and the grandfather dedicated the grave. In a somewhat unusual choice, both the boy's parents spoke. Can you imagine that? What they said was this: "We trust our faith will never again be tried as it has on this occasion. The things we have faith in have come down to a short list, but that list is immovable. We do not have faith that God must do what we entreat him to do." Earlier she had cried out to God, "I asked for a fish, and I got a serpent. I asked for a loaf, and I got a rock. Is that what the scriptures promise?"

But after it was all over, at her little son's graveside, she was able to say, "I am content that God be God. I will not try to instruct him on his duties or on his obligations toward me or toward any of his children. I know he lives and loves us, that he is God. He's not unmindful of us. We do not suffer out of his view. He does not inflict pain upon us, but he sustains us in our pain. I am his daughter; my son is also his son; we belong to him, and we are safe with him. I used to think we were safe from grief and pain here because of our faith. I know now that is not true, but we are safe in his love. We are protected in the most ultimate sense of all—we have a safe home forever. That is my witness."

And that is my witness to you, that God lives, and he does not live less though you have injustice and adversity and pain and unkindness and violence and betrayal. God is in his heaven. We chose to come to an unjust world and suffer. But God is God, and he loves us. His son died for us. There is for each of us, because of who we are and who he is and who we are together, hope. There is hope. The uses of adversity are whatever use we put them to—for you and for me, for the parents of the little boy, for the lady with Haverman's disease, and for the incest victims, for my dad, for all of us—the uses of adversity are the uses we put them to. May they hone us and purify us and teach us and not destroy us, because of who we are and who God is and what our relationship to him is, is my fervent prayer.

---
Notas:
[^1] Dean C. Jessee, The Papers of Joseph Smith, 2 vols., (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1989), 1:386 n. Placing English travel narratives into an interpretative framework is Edwina Jo Snow, "British Travelers View the Saints, 1847-1877," BYU Studies 31 (Spring 1991): 61-81. -14 November 1858," Brigham Young Papers, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City (hereafter cited as LDSCA). Brigham Young Journal, 18 January 1842, Brigham Young Papers, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City (hereafter cited as LDSCA). Much of what we know about Brigham comes from his own discourses and diaries and manuscripts. Brigham's early history, based on the "Manuscript History of Brigham Young, and History of Brigham Young, 1801-44," was originally published in the Deseret News in 1857 and 1858. Three holograph diaries in Brigham's own handwriting cover the period 1832 through 1844. Other diaries and journals, kept by clerks, cover later years. Finally, clerks worked for years to compile Brigham's history, some 57 volumes of material, which was of course edited material collected from various sources and placed in the first person. Reconstructed from two versions of minutes of the meeting; "Church Minutes," 12 February 1849, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City (hereafter cited as LDSCA). In Richard O. Cowan, Temples to Dot the Earth (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1989), 66. Seymour B. Young Diary, 18 April 1875, Utah State Historical Society. Millennial Star 35 (10 April 1873): 287.
[^2] Charles Lowell Walker Diary, 13 May 1876; see A. Karl Larson and Katharine Miles Larson, eds., Diary of Charles Lowell Walker, 2 vols., (Logan: Utah State University Press, 1990), 1:422. John Todd, The Sunset Land; or, The Great Pacific Slope (Boston: Lee and Shepard, 1870), 161. Journal of Discourses 13:211. Brigham Young to Mary Ann Angell, 20 April 1847, Brigham Young Papers, LDSCA. Journal of Discourses 9:219. Wilford Woodruff Journal, 17 July 1844; see Scott G. Kenney, ed., Wilford Woodruff's Journal, 1833-1898, 9 vols. (Midvale: Signature Books, 1983-85), 2:423. Gleason's Pictorial Drawing-Room Companion (3 January 1854), 345. Charles Lowell Walker Diary, 11 June 1876; see A. Karl Larson and Katharine Miles Larson, eds., Diary of Charles Lowell Walker, 2 vols. (Logan: Utah State University Press, 1990) 1:427. Neal A. Maxwell, "Brigham Young," in Heroes of the Restoration (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1997), 219.
[^3] Eugene England, Brother Brigham (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1980), and Leonard J. Arrington, Brigham Young: American Moses (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1985). Charles W. Carter, "Journal Record of Photographs Taken," LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City (hereafter cited as LDSCA). Years later, former Mormon Stephen Forsdick recalled his first experience in Salt Lake City in 1853: "On the sixth day of October, that being the semiannual conference of the Church, we as new comers had the chance to see and here some of the big men of the church. We saw and heard Brigham Young and the opinion I formed of him that day, I never had occasion to change. There is no question about it, he was a man of great executive ability, he knew this power and zealously maintained it. He knew that his word was accepted as law unto the people and he was very careful to cause his influence to increase. His talk was always in the positive and to the point and he showed no mercy to those who opposed him. . . . From the time I joined the church, I had thought of Brigham Young as little lower than the Angels and of Salt Lake as next door to heaven. I suppose that it was only natural that I should be disappointed, when I found Salt Lake far from being like my idea of Heaven and that after all Brigham Young was justa mortal man." Stephen Forsdick Autobiography, LDSCA. Samuel C. Chew, ed., Fruit Among the Leaves (New York: Appleton-Century Crofts, 1950), 264; as cited in James B. Allen, The Man-Brigham Young (Provo: Brigham Young University Press, 1968), 21. Brigham Young Journal, 1832, Brigham Young Papers, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City; hereafter cited as LDSCA. (<< > indicates material inserted by Brigham Young above the line as he went back to add material to the text.) Journal of Discourses 3:51. Journal of Discourses 4:112-13. Edward W. Tullidge, Life of Brigham Young (New York: n.p., 1876), 457-58. President's Office Journal, 28 January 1857, Brigham Young Papers, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City; emphasis added.
[^4] Historians James B. Allen, Davis Bitton, Susan Easton Black, Jill Mulvay Derr, Ronald K. Esplin, William G. Hartley, Richard L. Jensen, Paul H. Peterson, Larry Porter, Ronald Walker, and David Whittaker have each contributed greatly to interpreting Brigham's life and labors in numerous and important articles. Elden J. Watson has collected and published Brigham's manuscript histories and sermons, facilitating an examination of these important sources. In addition, John Welch and John Wm. Maddox have helped place Brigham's discourses into a larger context through their survey of Eugene Campbell' s, Hugh Nibley' s, and John A. Widtsoe's efforts to collect Brigham Young quotations. For a detailed and illustrated discussion of the public image of the Church in a broader context, see Gary L. Bunker and Davis Bitton, The Mormon Graphic Image, 1834-1914 (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1983). See the reactions to Brigham's sermon in September 1860, for example, in A Few Choice Examples of Mormon Practices and Sermons (n.p., 1907), 1. Dean C. Jessee, ed., Letters of Brigham Young to His Sons (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1974), xxxix. D&C 126. First published in the Deseret News (18 April 1855), this was included as D&C 126 in the 1876 and subsequent editions of the Doctrine and Covenants. Lyman Omer Littlefield, Reminiscences of Latter-day Saints (Logan: The Utah Journal Co., Printers, 1888), 166-67. T. B. H. Stenhouse, The Rocky Mountain Saints: A Full and Complete History of the Mormons (New York: D. Appleton and Company, 1873), 539. Frank Leslie's Illustrated Newspaper (30 June 1877): 1.
