Carlfred Broderick, My Parents Married on a Dare and Other Favorite Essays on Life ( 1996)

Sources

Chapter One, "My Parents Married on a Dare," is to be published in Marriage and Family Review, forthcoming. Used by permission.

Chapter Two, "The Core of My Faith," was first published in A Thoughtful Faith: Essays on Belief by Mormon Scholars, Philip L. Barlow, editor; Centerville, Utah: Canon Press, 1986. Used by permission.

Chapter Three, "Midlife Report," by Dr. Carlfred B. Broderick. First published in the Ensign magazine © The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (July 1979). Used by permission.

Chapter Four, "Summing It Up (Or, Why Let Somebody Else Write Your Obituary?)" is original to this book.

Chapter Five, "But What If Your Husband Is a Jerk?" was originally published in This People magazine, Spring 1995. Used by permission.

Chapter Six, "Marital Danger Zones," was originally published in This People magazine, Summer 1992. Used by permission.

Chapter Seven, "How Come Good People Can Have Bad Marriages?" by Dr. Carlfred B. Broderick. First published in the Ensign magazine © The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (July 1983). Used by permission.

Chapter Eight, "Surviving (Eternal) Marriage," was originally published in Eternal Companions, edited by Douglas E. Brinley and Daniel K Judd, Bookcraft 1995. Copyright © 1995 by Bookcraft, Inc. Used by permission.

Chapter Nine, "Reflections on Christmas," was originally published in The Magic of Christmas, Deseret Book, 1992. Copyright © 1992 by Deseret Book Company. Used by permission.

Chapter Ten, "The Brothers of Jesus: Loving the Unbelieving Relative," by Dr. Carlfred B. Broderick. First published in the Ensign magazine © The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (March 1986). Used by permission.

Chapter Eleven, "What Justification Can There Be for Innocent Children Being Born into Abusive Families?" by Dr. Carlfred B. Broderick was first published in the "I Have a Question" section of the Ensign magazine © The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (August 1986). Used by permission.

Chapter Twelve, "The Uses of Adversity," was originally published in As Women of Faith, edited by Mary E. Stovall and Carol Cornwall Madsen, Deseret Book, 1989. Copyright © 1989 by Deseret Book Company. Used by permission.
