4 Ways to Overcome Anger

anger against God in a full-force, I implore you today to

When I was first injured, I felt devastated by total paralysis—the

no-holds-barred way; although make the Psalms one of your

idea of never using my hands or walking overwhelmed me with grief,

despair, and hopelessness. Years later after I released my anger and

it’s wrong advice. they say you need to “forgive God,” favorite places to turn to in

began trusting God, I started having chronic pain. I couldn’t help

God’s Word. Let the Psalms

• Complain to God as the psalmist be an expression—a prayer

Resist the demand but think, God, do you know what you’re

to know God’s secret doing?! Then a few years ago, I received

on God’s good name. did, but never cast a dark shadow even—for your heartache

and hurt. Allow the comfort

things, and learn the diagnosis of stage three breast cancer.

I felt fearful of the future as I faced

• Bring your questions before God, and encouragement of the

to rest in God’s getting older in my wheelchair, and I

but never talk behind his back, Psalms to wash over you and

revealed things. struggled with anger when God piled on

spreading poisonous accusations get you moving in the right

direction toward the Lord

more problems on top of my quadriplegia.

about his character.

Jesus. Do it today… and you’ll

Like, Hello, God? What are you thinking

• Express your thoughts to Christian discover the purpose for not

here? Let me tell you what I did when I was tempted to angrily blame

friends with whom you’re intimate, only your anger, but also for

God for dealing too harshly with me…

but never sow seeds of discord every emotion.

their faith. about him among others, ruining

always seemed to creep up on me in the middle of the night);

when doubts started to choke out my confidence in God, I

• Invite Christian friends to help you wrestle through your

quickly turned it around and reaffirmed my belief in God’s care

feelings, but never try to get people “on your side” against God.

and provision in my life. I remembered his wisdom and goodness

toward me when times were Pondering the character of 3. I recognized my limited ability to understand God’s ways.

easier. And I remembered these God does not pacify anger;

I realize I have a finite and fallen mind that is incapable of

things quickly. I did not want it deepens it. Our struggle

comprehending God’s dealings with people. I had to recognize

to give the Enemy a foothold.

I’m not responsible for figuring out God’s plan—only for

Instead, I thought, God is good; is never that we are too

knowing, trusting, and pleasing him. Someone wisely said,

he has my best interests at heart; angry, but that we are

“Resist the demand to know God’s secret things, and learn to

he is kind and merciful, and he never angry enough. Our 4. I discovered a more accurate focus After a 1967 diving accident left rest in God’s revealed things.” That’s great advice.

doesn’t take his hands off the wheel

of my life for a nanosecond. He’s anger is always pitifully

for my anger. Satan. Satan was the Joni Eareckson Tada a spinal

allowing all this. in control, and he’s got reasons for small when it is focused

one who started this whole mess. cord-injured quadriplegic, she

Disease and death, deformities and embarked on a lifelong study to make sense of suffering

catastrophes of nature. He was the from God’s perspective. Joni

accuse God of plotting evil in it is meant to be turned

one who, because of pride, brought Eareckson Tada is now an international advocate for

my life. Although many so- against all evil and all sin.

called Christian counselors tell

of the curse. on himself—and us—every horror individuals with disabilities, and

people that it’s okay to vent your Dr. Dan Allender and

the founder of the non-profit

Dr. Tremper Longman III,

organization, Joni & Friends. Joni Eareckson Tada

The Cry of the Soul

This free eChart is taken from the pamphlet Anger: Aim It in the Right Direction by Joni Eareckson Tada. ISBN 9781596365117. Packed with © 2012 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies, but not post on the personal insights, practical advice, and scriptural guidance on how to find hope, security, and faith in the midst of your trials, this pamphlet reveals 10 internet or send via email. Your friends may sign up for FREE Rose Bible

practical ways to deal with anger. Save $5 on your $25 order enter coupon code: 5EC12 at www.rose-publishing.com.

eCharts & Newsletters at: www.rose-publishing.com/echarts

Making Sense of Suffering

God’s Hand in Our Hardship

Speaking God’s Language

(Suffering)

(God’s Sovereignty)

(Prayer)

A Thankful Heart in a World

Where’s My Miracle?

of Hurt (Finding Happiness)

(Unanswered Prayer)

Anger: Aim It in the Right Direction Rose Pamphlet Series: Joni Eareckson Tada

Packed with personal insights, practical advice, and scriptural guidance Joni Eareckson Tada has written a series of Rose pamphlets covering topics

from Joni Eareckson Tada, this pamphlet reveals how to find hope, security, that she’s very familiar with: loneliness and worry, fear and hopelessness,

and faith in the midst of your trials and provides 10 practical ways to depression and suffering.

overcome anger. Perfect for personal use and small group studies.

Suffering: Making Sense of Suffering ..................................9781596365018 ....$3.99

Pamphlet .......................................... 9781596365117 ................... $3.99 God’s Sovereignty: God’s Hand in Our Hardship ................9781596365032 ....$3.99

Prayer: Speaking God’s Language ......................................9781596365056 ....$3.99

Finding Real Joy: A Thankful Heart in a World of Hurt ........9781596365070 ....$3.99

Unanswered Prayer: Where’s My Miracle? ..........................9781596365094 ....$3.99

Sign up now to receive FREE Rose Bible eCharts at www.rose-publishing.com/echarts

ROSE PUBLISHING/ASPIRE PRESS

www.rose-publishing.com

info@rose-publishing.com

or call (310) 353-2100

Rose Publishing, Inc., publishes full-color, easy-to-use Bible reference materials, including charts, maps, time lines, and biblical reference pamphlets for pastors, Bible study leaders, new member classes & small groups.
