David Clark, Of Heaven and Earth: Reconciling Scientific Thought with LDS Theology ( 1998)

Introduction

Scientific questions interpreted to be in conflict with Latter-day Saint theology are centered on time and change. While there are many ramifications from these two themes that raise different but related questions, the age of the universe, our solar system, and Earth and the evolution of life on it are perhaps fundamental issues from which many, if not most, of the apparent and real controversies arise. It is not the purpose of this volume to redefine the details of all of the issues involved with time and change and the Church, for this has been done by many writers in a number of different ways. [^1] Rather, this volume is intended to illustrate how members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints who also have made significant contributions to their fields of scientific research reconciled challenging aspects of science and religion in their own lives.

There is a story concerning a man on the deck of the Titanic who watched as the few lifeboats quickly filled with frantic passengers. He proclaimed loudly that he was not the leaving the ship until someone explained to him exactly how the emergency had happened.

We all are probably sympathetic to this view because most of us feel the need to understand what is going on. If suitable explanations are not forthcoming, we may delay decisions because we look for explanations before we take serious action. The problem is that full explanations may come too late, and action may be needed before complete explanations are known.

Students of the physical and biological sciences who also are members of the Church often find themselves in an analogous circumstance to the man on the deck of the Titanic. Scriptural citations or even theological interpretations may appear to be in opposition to their scientific experiences. Full explanations for the apparent conflicts are not available or are unknown, and yet action in life is necessary before a complete understanding is attained. While looking for explanations should be encouraged, if we are really looking for excuses to justify weak faith, inactivity, bad actions, or just lousy attitudes, we need to alter our course. Probably it is a better idea to take positive actions on certain matters of life rather than wait for an explanation to save us.

It is said that going down with the ship is an accepted tradition for the ship's captain. For others on the deck, getting into the lifeboats before understanding everything may be the better idea.

It was late summer and I had just returned home from my lab where I had spent nine hours integrating newly generated 87 Sr/86 Sr isotope data with what little is known concerning the ventilation of the Arctic Ocean 65 million years ago. I had spent weeks trying to resolve a technical problem concerning the age of two Arctic Ocean samples that were critical for this research. One was either sixty-five or seventy million years old, and the other was either fifty or fifty-five million years old—certainly a minor point of interest for most folks, but of great significance for my interpretation of the history of the Arctic Ocean. In trying to resolve the question, I had used all of the tools of Earth science that were available to me, including stratigraphic position, age and correlation of fossils, geochemical dates with an error bar of five million years, and the comparison of these samples to similarly aged samples that had been collected from many parts of the world's oceans.

Many aspects of the questions were still on my mind when the phone rang and on the line was a committed member of the Madison Wisconsin Stake. After a brief chat, he asked for a short tutorial that addressed the age of Earth, the extent of Noah's flood, and the location of Kolob. After a few minutes of discussion, it was apparent that his real concern was the question of why science still appeared to be concerned with things that a number of prominent LDS writers claimed to be false. In response, I quickly drifted into an answer that had become routine during the past thirty-five years. I pointed him toward the writings of Elders James E. Talmage, John A.Widtsoe, and B. H. Roberts; quoted references to talks given by President David O. McKay and Elder Hugh B. Brown of the Quorum of the Twelve; told him to read a few essays of Henry Eyring and Lowell Bennion; and even reminded him of statements attributed to the Prophet Joseph Smith concerning the great age of Earth.

Although this seasoned response always provided me with a degree of instant gratification, it also created confusion in the mind of my caller, as was too often the case. He was still upset by the diversity of opinions, both past and present, concerning the age of Earth, life before Adam, and a variety of other things, and he was shaken to learn that faithful LDS scientists actually accept some of the most controversial aspects of what is considered to be the science/theology debate. Was it really possible that Earth was 4.5 billion years old, that Noah's flood did not explain all of geology, and that Abraham's discourse on Kolob was not necessarily the final answer for astrophysics? And if these things were true and believed by most twentieth-century LDS scientists (and at least some other faithful Latter-day Saints), why was this fact not more widely known? Why was there no recent statement referring to the Church's position on such things? Clearly confused by what he had anticipated would be a simple answer from his former bishop who was then a member of the stake presidency, the perplexed Church member promised to look up the references I had suggested and to get back to me with additional questions.

As the conversation ended, I thought about the number of times this kind of encounter probably was repeated daily throughout the Church. The long-awaited B. H. Roberts volume, The Truth, the Way, the Life, became available in 1994 (in two editions), [^2] but Elder Roberts was not a scientist, and much of his reconciliation of science and religion was based on nineteenth-century scientific thought. At the dawn of the twenty-first century, there are only a few compilations that address the apparent and real conflicts between LDS doctrine and current scientific thought, and it is evident that none of these texts is widely known or believed. How are many of the questions raised by modern science resolved by faithful LDS Church members who also are serious scientists?

There is a paradox in all of this, of course. Many LDS scientists spend their professional lives in research activity that is based on or assumes the validity of basic tenets that many Church members assume to be at best invalid and at worse a form of the doctrine of the anti-Christ. Yet these same scientists work side by side in a variety of Church callings with those who are suspicious of science and how it works. How does a paleontologist who devotes much of his life's energy and time studying the evolution of our planet's former inhabitants reconcile his research with the idea of special creation and no life before Adam? How does a geologist who works ten hours a day with the tools of science that indicate Earth is at least 4.5 billion years old confront the notion that Earth is young and that Noah's flood explains much of geology? Is it possible that astronomers who daily deal with light-years and the billions of years that this indicates, the Big Bang theory, and infinite space can even communicate with those who believe that Abraham's discourse on Kolob is about all that one needs to know about our galaxy? And what of other scientists whose research may not be directly involved with these traditional conflicts, at least on a daily basis, but who have needed to resolve some of these same problems for themselves and their students? What is their perspective on traditional and current science and theology problems?

What follows is a series of essays written by members of the Church who have specialized in Earth, Space, and a few related sciences and who have been concerned with the apparent and real conflicts of late-twentieth-century science and what has sometimes been assumed to be conventional LDS theology. These essays are written by internationally known scientists, a number of whom are members of the National Academy of Sciences, and all of whom have made significant contributions to their areas of research and yet are faithful Latter-day Saints. The contributors to this volume are researchers, professors, and university deans who also have served as bishops, stake presidents, Regional Representatives, and in a variety of other capacities. The writings presented herein are the personal resolutions of the century-old science and religion debate by some of the most outstanding scientists in the Church who also have served in the trenches of Church activity and have developed a strong testimony of the gospel. In none of the essays is there an attempt to define Church policy or a formal position on perceived theological problems. The essays are a personal account of how devoted LDS Church members interpret modern science and use it in their professional lives. This volume claims only one thing: that resolution of modern scientific thought with LDS theology is possible. These essays describe how a few believing scientists have accomplished this.

David L. Clark

Madison, Wisconsin

September 1997

Note

---
Notas:
[^1] False religion and true science. Max Planck, Scientific Autobiography and Other Papers, trans. Frank Gaynor (New York: Philosophical Library, 1949), pp. 33-34.
[^2] False science and true religion. J. Reuben Clark, "When Are Church Leaders' Words Entitled to Claim of Scripture?" Church News, 31 July 1954.
