David Clark, Of Heaven and Earth: Reconciling Scientific Thought with LDS Theology ( 1998)

Chapter 1

Perspectives on Science and Religion

Philip F.Low

For the forty-five years I was on the faculty at Purdue University, I taught classes on the physical chemistry of soils and conducted research on that subject. Throughout my life I have been an active member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and have served in several of its administrative offices, including district president, stake president, and regional representative. Being deeply involved in both science and religion for so long, I have often observed how they seem to reinforce and contradict each other. For peace of mind, I have been obliged to develop a philosophy in which science and religion can be integrated in a rational way. My purpose in writing the present article is to share this philosophy in the hope that it might be helpful to someone else. Naturally, the religious aspects of the philosophy are based on the tenets of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Uncertainty in Science and Religion

So much has been said about the conflict between science and religion that it is almost axiomatic that such a conflict actually exists. However, truth cannot be in conflict with itself. It follows that whenever a claim is made that science and religion conflict with each other, the claim—if it is a valid one—must be based on some kind of misunderstanding in science or religion or both. In this context, conflicts can exist only between

Since truth and error can be intermixed in any scientific or religious philosophy, the challenge is to determine which aspects are true and which are false. This seldom can be done with certainty.

Many people have the impression that scientific findings are indisputable because they can be repeated again and again and are obtained with the five senses or with instruments that extend those senses. But this impression is contrary to fact. Some degree of uncertainty always exists about the reliability of experimental results. This uncertainty may arise because the method of measurement disturbs the system being measured. For example, the arrangement of particles in the soil can be studied by obtaining a soil sample, but the act of removing the soil from the ground may disturb the delicate arrangement. Uncertainty also may arise because the measuring device used in an experiment may not be sufficiently sensitive. Although an analytical balance is not sensitive enough to detect the loss of mass in a chemical reaction, a loss of mass does in fact occur.

In addition, regardless of how many experiments support a given concept, there is always the possibility that the next experiment will disprove it or require that it be modified. Even Newton's laws had to be modified with the advent of the theory of relativity. Thus a scientist must be content with gathering evidence in favor of an idea. As evidence accumulates, the idea may achieve the status of a theory and, eventually, of a law. Even so, the idea can never be proved unequivocally.

In addition to any uncertainty about the reliability of experimental results, there is uncertainty about their interpretation. Experimental results are seldom so definitive that only one interpretation is possible. Depending on their previous experience and prejudices, different scientists will have different interpretations. Thus, opposing schools of thought develop, and reconciliation of these schools of thought occurs very slowly. I am inclined to agree with the famous German physicist Max Planck, who said, "A new scientific truth does not triumph by convincing its opponents and making them see the light, but rather because its opponents eventually die, and a new generation grows up that is familiar with it." [^1]

Members of the LDS Church are often unwilling to recognize any uncertainty in their religious beliefs. But uncertainty does exist. In Church history we see that beliefs once regarded as certainties had to be forsaken or substantially modified. In this regard, it is noteworthy that the return of the Saints to Jackson County, Missouri, was postponed, the United Order no longer exists, polygamy as an earthly practice was abandoned, and worthy males of all races may receive the priesthood. But why should we expect it to be otherwise? Conditions change, new problems requiring new solutions arise, and God reveals to his prophets what should be done. Only the most fundamental principles remain constant.

A factor that complicates the separation of truth from error and promotes uncertainty is the spread of information throughout the Church by word of mouth. In this process historical facts can become exaggerated or garbled, private scriptural interpretations may be accepted as doctrine, misinterpretations of the spoken or printed word may become widespread, and so on. Members of the Church constitute a close-knit group in which all kinds of information, true and false, are readily transmitted. Consequently, we often "know" something that isn't true and can be troubled by assumed conflicts that do not exist. To paraphrase a statement of Will Rogers: It isn't what you don't know that will hurt you—it's what you know that isn't so.

Although we would be well advised to heed the words of the prophets, uncertainty is not always eliminated when they speak. President J. Reuben Clark, former counselor in the First Presidency of the LDS Church, observed that there is only one way we can be certain that Church leaders are speaking the mind and will of the Lord: "I have given some thought to this question, and the answer thereto so far as I can determine, is: We can tell when the speakers are 'moved upon by the Holy Ghost' only when we, ourselves, are 'moved upon by the Holy Ghost.' In a way, this completely shifts the responsibility from them to us to determine when they so speak." [^2]

In the same address President Clark cited the following quotation from Brigham Young: "I am more afraid that this people have so much confidence in their leaders that they will not inquire for themselves of God whether they are led by Him. I am fearful that they settle down in a state of blind self security, trusting their eternal destiny in the hands of their leaders with a reckless confidence that in itself would thwart the purposes of God in their salvation, and weaken that influence they could give to their leaders, did they know for themselves, by the revelation of Jesus, that they are led in the right way. Let every man and woman know, by the whisperings of the Spirit of God to themselves, whether their leaders are walking in the path the Lord dictates, or not." [^3]

In addition to potential uncertainty about the spoken word, there can also be uncertainty about the written word as found in the scriptures. On one occasion the Prophet Joseph Smith said: "I believe the Bible as it read when it came from the pen of the original writers. Ignorant translators, careless transcribers, or designing and corrupt priests have committed many errors." [^4] Furthermore, the title page of the Book of Mormon includes this statement: "And now, if there are faults they are the mistakes of men." This is tacit admission that the Book of Mormon may not be entirely faultless. However, I hasten to add that it would be presumptuous as well as fruitless for any uninspired person to try to identify any faults in it.

In calling attention to the uncertainty that exists in both science and religion, it was not my intention to disparage either one. Quite the contrary, I have the utmost respect for both. My only purpose was to provide a basis for the assertion that dogmatism is unwarranted in both areas. Whenever a conflict seemingly exists between science and religion, the wise course is for one to remain open-minded and to reserve judgment until more information becomes available. Dogmatism can only serve as an impediment to true understanding. Like the apostle Paul, we should recognize that "now we see through a glass, darkly; but then face to face: now I know in part; but then shall I know even as also I am known" (1 Cor. 13:12).

The element of uncertainty in religion posed a problem for me when I was younger. To be scrupulously honest, I avoided using the phrase "I know the gospel is true" when I bore my testimony. Instead, I would use words to express my sincere belief or great confidence in the truthfulness of the gospel. My faith was strong, but it fell short of a perfect knowledge. As time passed, I realized that I knew the principles of the gospel to be true as much as I knew any set of principles to be true, including those espoused by science. Therefore, if the word know was to have any place in my vocabulary, I reasoned, I could legitimately and appropriately use it in bearing my testimony. Since then I have had no qualms when I have said, "I know the gospel is true." The foregoing experience illustrates the fact that, since absolute knowledge is seldom attainable in mortality, people may have different degrees of certainty when they say they know something.

Methods of Science and Religion

The methods of science and religion are similar in two important ways. Both require faith and experimentation. The necessity of faith is well recognized in religion but not in science, whereas the necessity of experimentation is well recognized in science but not in religion. Regarding faith in science, consider the following statement by Vannevar Bush, retiring president of the Carnegie Institute of Washington, in his final report to the board:

For the scientist lives by faith quite as much as the man of deep religious convictions. He operates on faith because he can operate in no other way. His dependence on the principle of causality is an act of faith in a principle unproved and unprovable. Yet he builds on it all his reasoning in regard to nature. . . .

So, back of all other motivations, there is a deeper one, vague in outline, seldom expressed, often denied, yet powerful in its influence. Its ultimate expression is beyond our ability. For the present it can be expressed in the faith that man can learn to know and to understand and that it is good to exercise that power and to strive for the extension of our wisdom. [^5]

Concerning experimentation in religion, the Book of Mormon prophet Alma had this to say:

Now, as I said concerning faith—that it was not a perfect knowledge—even so it is with my words. Ye cannot know of their surety at first, unto perfection, any more than faith is a perfect knowledge.

But behold, if ye will awake and arouse your faculties, even to an experiment upon my words, and exercise a particle of faith, yea, even if ye can no more than desire to believe, let this desire work in you, even until ye believe in a manner that ye can give place for a portion of my words.

Now, we will compare the word unto a seed. Now, if ye give place, that a seed may be planted in your heart, behold, if it be a true seed, or a good seed, if ye do not cast it out by your unbelief, that ye will resist the Spirit of the Lord, behold, it will begin to swell within your breasts; and when you feel these swelling motions, ye will begin to say within yourselves—It must needs be that this is a good seed, or that the word is good, for it beginneth to enlarge my soul; yea, it beginneth to enlighten my understanding, yea, it beginneth to be delicious to me.

Now behold, would not this increase your faith? I say unto you, Yea; nevertheless it hath not grown up to a perfect knowledge. . . .

And now, behold, because ye have tried the experiment, and planted the seed, and it swelleth and sprouteth, and beginneth to grow, ye must needs know that the seed is good.

And now, behold, is your knowledge perfect? Yea, your knowledge is perfect in that thing, and your faith is dormant; and this because you know, for ye know that the word hath swelled your souls, and ye also know that it hath sprouted up, that your understanding doth begin to be enlightened, and your mind doth begin to expand.

O then, is not this real? I say unto you, Yea, because it is light; and whatsoever is light, is good, because it is discernible, therefore ye must know that it is good; and now behold, after ye have tasted this light is your knowledge perfect?

Behold I say unto you, Nay; neither must ye lay aside your faith, for ye have only exercised your faith to plant the seed that ye might try the experiment to know if the seed was good. . . .

And because of your diligence and your faith and your patience with the word in nourishing it, that it may take root in you, behold, by and by ye shall pluck the fruit thereof, which is most precious, which is sweet above all that is sweet, and which is white above all that is white, yea, and pure above all that is pure; and ye shall feast upon this fruit even until ye are filled, that ye hunger not, neither shall ye thirst." (Alma 32:26-29, 33-36, 42)

Note from this scripture that faith, with its inherent uncertainty, must precede the attainment of perfect knowledge and that perfect knowledge is attained by performing the necessary experiments. In other words, we must experiment with the words of God if we are to know of their surety. For example, by putting the principles such as love, service, forgiveness, and repentance into practice, we become aware that these principles are valid. But it is self-evident that in our individual lifetimes we cannot perform all of the experiments required to substantiate for ourselves every principle of either science or religion. We must rely on the experience of others. In science we rely on the experience of people like Pasteur, Newton, Darwin, and Einstein. In religion we rely on the experience of people like Moses, Isaiah, Paul, and Joseph Smith. To advance our knowledge of the truth in either field, it is vital that we read the pertinent literature.

Science has revealed many physical laws that express the order found in the universe. Some scientific laws bear the names of the great scientists who discovered them—the laws of Mendel, Maxwell, Newton, van't Hoff, and Einstein, to name a few. There are also laws that express the order found in the universe of the spirit. These laws were revealed by God. Among them are the Ten Commandments and the laws that require us to love our neighbor, forgive one another, repent of our transgressions, and so on. Both kinds of laws have stood the test of time. It is generally recognized that physical laws are inviolate. However, it is not always recognized that spiritual laws, although not inviolate, cannot be violated with impunity. The ultimate penalty is always unhappiness.

Scientific truth is discovered by means of the five physical senses or by the use of instruments that extend these senses. However, man is more than a body of flesh and bones with physical senses. A divine spirit resides within him, and this spirit is sensitive to communications from the Holy Ghost. Thus it may be said that man has a sixth, or spiritual, sense. This sense can be the means by which he discovers religious truth. The scientific and religious methods of discovering truth are not mutually exclusive. However, the physical senses alone are not sufficient to discover religious truth, and the spiritual senses alone are not sufficient to discover scientific truth. For example, one can neither prove nor disprove the existence of God entirely by his physical senses. Nor can one determine the mechanism of a chemical reaction entirely by his spiritual senses. Religion and science are two complementary and equally important ways of finding the truth, and wisdom dictates that in order to fully understand ourselves and the universe about us we should use all of our senses. One who is willing to do this can be a scientist and yet be religious at the same time.

The Age of Earth and the Creation of Man

Conflicts between science and religion seem to arise mostly in regard to the age of Earth [^6] and biological evolution. I cannot speak authoritatively on how these conflicts can be resolved because I am not a geologist, nor a biologist, nor an official apologist for the LDS Church. Further, it is unlikely that sufficient information currently exists to allow any permanent resolution to be reached. If the scriptures could be entirely reconciled with the scientific theories of today, they could not be entirely reconciled with the scientific theories of tomorrow, because these theories are constantly changing. Nevertheless, I will offer a few tentative ideas about the creation of Earth and the creation of man.

Although the scriptures tell us that Earth was created (organized) as a habitat for God's children, they were not intended to be textbooks of geology, and so they do not tell us how our planet was created. The details of creation were left for us to seek as we search for truth. As some of these details have come into focus, they sometimes appear to contradict the scriptures. In particular, the scriptures seem to support the concept that Earth was created in a period of six days, but scientific findings support the concept that it took millions of years for Earth to reach its present state. The evidence for the latter concept is overwhelming, and I subscribe to it. Therefore, I am of the opinion that the scriptures in question have suffered from errors in writing, translation, or interpretation.

Regarding the scriptural account of Earth's creation, I would like to make two observations. Both are based mostly on the Pearl of Great Price because its account of the creation is more informative and likely more accurate than that given in the Bible. An excerpt from the creation account in Abr. 4:1-8 follows:

And then the Lord said: Let us go down. And they went down at the beginning, and they, that is the Gods, organized and formed the heavens and the earth.

And the earth, after it was formed, was empty and desolate, because they had not formed anything but the earth; and darkness reigned upon the face of the deep, and the Spirit of the Gods was brooding upon the face of the waters.

And they (the Gods) said: Let there be light; and there was light.

And they (the Gods) comprehended the light, for it was bright; and they divided the light, or caused it to be divided, from the darkness.

And the Gods called the light Day, and the darkness they called Night. And it came to pass that from the evening until morning they called night; and from the morning until the evening they called day; and this was the first, or the beginning, of that which they called day and night.

And the Gods also said: Let there be an expanse in the midst of the waters, and it shall divide the waters from the waters.

And the Gods ordered the expanse, so that it divided the waters which were under the expanse from the waters which were above the expanse; and it was so, even as they ordered.

And the Gods called the expanse, Heaven. And it came to pass that it was from evening until morning that they called night; and it came to pass that it was from morning until evening that they called day; and this was the second time that they called night and day.

One possibility is that after Earth was organized and formed, it may have remained in an empty and desolate condition before the accounting of time began. Hence, it could have aged in this condition for unmeasured eons. Now consider the creative periods that followed. In verses subsequent to those cited, the Gods continued to redefine night and day after each creative period, and they continued to equate the number of creative periods with the number of times they had defined night and day. What significance can be attached to this unusual procedure? Did the definition prescribe the units of time that should be used in measuring the duration of the creative period? Also, how long was the duration of each creative period in conventional units? The answers to these questions would certainly be helpful in resolving arguments about the age of Earth.

Now let's consider the creation of man in light of the following scriptures:

So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them. (Gen. 1:27)

And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul. (Gen. 2:7)

And God saw these souls that they were good, and he stood in the midst of them, and he said: These I will make my rulers; for he stood among those that were spirits, and he saw that they were good; and he said unto me: Abraham, thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born.

And there stood one among them that was like unto God, and he said unto those who were with him: We will go down, for there is space there, and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell;

And we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them. (Abr. 3:23-25)

So the Gods went down to organize man in their own image, in the image of the Gods to form they him, male and female to form they them. (Abr. 4:27)

And the Gods formed man from the dust of the ground, and took his spirit (that is, the man's spirit), and put it into him; and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and man became a living soul. (Abr. 5:7)

From these quotations we learn that spirits existed in the presence of God before Earth was organized, that man (and woman also) was formed in the image of God, that he was formed from the dust of the earth, that his spirit was put into his body, and that he became a living soul when the breath of life was breathed into his nostrils. But we do not learn the process by which the body of man was formed. I suggest that this process could have involved some aspects of evolution as described by modern science and that it could have continued until the body was "in the image of God," at which point it was a fit abode for a divine, preexistent spirit. Then the spirit of Adam, our common progenitor, was put into his body, and he became a living soul. By reason of his divine spirit, Adam was distinguished from all forms of life that preceded him. This spirit endowed him (and his progeny) with special attributes, particularly the ability to reason. As a result, he could "subdue" the earth and "have dominion . . . over every living thing that moveth upon the earth" (Gen. 1:28).

Regardless of the means by which Earth and man came into being, I believe that God was in charge. This belief stems from my religious philosophy, but there also is scientific support for it. In science there is a quantity called the entropy. This quantity is a measure of the degree of disorder, randomness, or disorganization of the matter in any system (region in space). The higher the entropy, the greater the degree of disorder. Thermodynamic theory dictates that the entropy of a closed system (a system with boundaries that are impermeable to matter) increases as the system proceeds spontaneously toward equilibrium and that the entropy is at maximum at equilibrium. If Earth was a closed system, the original Earth should have become progressively more disordered with the passage of time. But the opposite is true. Earth now exhibits order and beauty, whereas it was once chaotic according to science and "without form, and void" and "empty and desolate" according to religion (Gen. 1:2; Abr. 4:2). It is reasonable to conclude, then, that Earth's development from a chaotic condition to an orderly condition did not proceed spontaneously. Because of energy from the Sun, Earth is not a closed system. In my opinion that additional force or influence emanated from God.

Modern Scriptures and Scientific Principles

Science was in its infancy during the lifetime of the Prophet Joseph Smith. For example, little was known about atomic theory, the conservation of matter and energy, and the nature of light. Moreover, what was known to science was probably unknown to Joseph Smith, because his formal education did not extend beyond the third grade. Yet modern scriptures that have come forth through his instrumentality are remarkably consistent with scientific principles. This fact is illustrated by the following examples.

The Eternal Nature of Matter

"We will go down, for there is space there, and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell"(Abraham 3:24). In refuting the idea that Earth was created out of nothing, this scripture is consistent with the scientific principle of the conservation of matter, which, simply stated, is that matter cannot be created or destroyed.

"For man is spirit. The elements are eternal, and spirit and element, inseparably connected, receive a fulness of joy" (D&C 93:33). With only slight modification, this scripture, like the preceding one, is in harmony with the scientific principle of the conservation of matter.

The Extent of God's Creations

"And worlds without number have I created; and I also created them for mine own purpose; and by the Son I created them, which is mine Only Begotten" (Moses 1:33). The galaxy as viewed with modern telescopes testifies to the scientific truthfulness of this scripture. If God's purpose for creating other worlds was the same as that for creating this world, we may also assume that at least some of the other worlds are inhabited, i.e., that there is life on other planets. The question of life on other planets is one that is currently commanding scientific interest.

The Glory of God

"The glory of God is intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth" (D&C 93:36). This statement implies that God's glory was derived from his infinite knowledge of the truth. Contributing to this knowledge are all the spiritual laws, social laws, and physical laws presently known and yet to be discovered. This omniscience enabled him to be the creator of all things.

Light and the Spirit of Christ

He that ascended up on high, as also he descended below all things, in that he comprehended all things, that he might be in all and through all things, the light of truth;

Which truth shineth. This is the light of Christ. As also he is in the sun, and the light of the sun, and the power thereof by which it was made.

As also he is in the moon, and is the light of the moon, and the power thereof by which it was made;

As also the light of the stars, and the power thereof by which they were made;

And the earth also, and the power thereof, even the earth upon which you stand.

And the light which shineth, which giveth you light, is through him who enlighteneth your eyes, which is the same light that quickeneth your understandings;

Which light proceedeth forth from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space—

The light which is in all things, which giveth life to all things, which is the law by which all things are governed, even the power of God who sitteth upon his throne, who is in the bosom of eternity, who is in the midst of all things. (D&C 88:6-13)

In his book Joseph Smith as Scientist, Dr. John A. Widtsoe relied on the foregoing scripture when he compared the Spirit of Christ with the ether—a hypothetical medium through which light was supposed to be transmitted. Then, to reinforce the idea involved in this comparison, he quoted LDS Church apostle Parley P. Pratt:

As the mind passes the boundaries of the visible world, and enters upon the confines of the more refined and subtle elements, it finds itself associated with certain substances in themselves invisible to our gross organs, but clearly manifested to our intellect by their tangible operations and effects. . . . The purest, most refined and subtle of all these substances . . . is that substance called the holy spirit. . . . It is omnipresent. . . . It is in its less refined particles, the physical light which reflects from the sun, moon, and stars, and other substances; and by reflection on the eye makes visible the truths of the outward world. [^7]

Dr. Widtsoe also quoted President Charles W. Penrose, an accepted writer on Church doctrine: "It is by his holy spirit, which permeates all things, and is the life and light of all things, that Deity is everywhere present. . . . By that agency God sees and knows and governs all things." [^8]

Since Dr. Widtsoe wrote his insightful book, our knowledge about light has expanded, and it is now known that the ether does not exist. Nevertheless, some comparison of light with the Spirit of Christ may still be warranted. In the following paragraphs I have tried to bring this comparison up to date by using modern concepts of light.

The word light is commonly applied to electromagnetic radiation in the ultraviolet, visible, and infrared portions of the electromagnetic spectrum, but I will apply it to the entire electromagnetic spectrum from gamma rays to radio waves. The energy of the light is proportional to its frequency. Light of various frequencies, visible and invisible, comes from the sun, moon, and stars and travels through the immensity of space before it reaches Earth. When it strikes matter, the light is either reflected, absorbed, or transmitted, depending on the composition of the matter and the frequency of the light. So it may be said that the unreflected light either remains within or passes through the matter. In some cases the absorbed light is changed and induces photochemical reactions, such as photosynthesis, that are essential to life. Therefore, if we identify the Light of Christ with physical light, we see that the Light of Christ is in the sun, moon, and stars; that it fills the immensity of space; that it is in all things and through all things; and that it gives life to all things. Further, we can catch glimpses of how the energy in the Light of Christ might be used to govern all things.

In keeping with what has been said, I would like to hypothesize that light radiates from all three members of the Godhead, namely, God the Eternal Father, Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost. Although each of them is an individual being and can be in only one place at a time, the light radiating from them may be the common means by which they each may communicate with man and extend their influence throughout the universe. In this view it is easier to understand why the members of the Godhead are described as being surrounded by intense light and why such terms as the Spirit of God, the Spirit of Christ, and the Holy Spirit are often used interchangeably.

In regard to communication between members of the Godhead and man, the following scriptures are pertinent:

There is no such thing as immaterial matter. All spirit is matter, but it is more fine or pure, and can only be discerned by purer eyes. (D&C 131:7)

. . . that which is spiritual being in the likeness of that which is temporal; . . . the spirit of man in the likeness of his person. (D&C 77:2)

From these scriptures we see that the spirit of man is composed of matter that is finer and purer than the gross matter composing his body. It is possible, therefore, that the light that quickens a person's understanding has a frequency that his spirit is sensitive to, while his physical senses remain insensitive to it. Just as visible light in one part of the spectrum communicates information to the eye, nonvisible light in another part of the spectrum may communicate information to the spirit.

Biochemistry Affirms God's Creative Role

My son Philip S. Low holds the rank of Distinguished Professor of Chemistry at Purdue University, where he teaches and conducts research in biochemistry. He is an active, orthodox member of the LDS Church, and we often discuss the issues of science and religion. I would like to present a few of the ideas that he has shared with me.

The concept that life evolved from a single living cell may seem to simplify the theory of evolution, but it does not answer the fundamental question of how the living cell originated. The probability is infinitesimally small that (1) elements like carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen came together accidentally in the right proportions, arrangements, and energies to form simple molecules like amino acids; (2) that such simple molecules came together accidentally in the right proportions, arrangements, and energies to form complex molecules like proteins; (3) or that such complex molecules came together accidentally in the right proportions, arrangements, and energies to form extended, organized structures like the nucleus or mitochondrion.

And since the probability of a succession of events is the product of the probabilities of the separate events, the probability that the components of the living cell were formed accidentally is virtually zero. But even if this probability had a finite value, an intriguing question would still remain: what causes these components to perform the vital functions of the cell in a cooperative and harmonious way? In other words, what endows the cell with life? The above questions are more easily understood if we recognize the influence of an omnipotent, omniscient creator.

The concept that the spirit of man gives life to what would otherwise be an inanimate body is consistent with what is known about the chemistry of life's processes. Biochemists endeavor to understand and describe the molecular processes that collectively constitute a living organism. They have found that, with proper precautions, the organelles, cells, enzymes, and substrates within a tissue can be maintained in good functioning condition for hours, if not days, after their isolation from the tissue. This finding demonstrates the durability of the chemical structures and reactions that contribute physically to life. Virtually all biochemists will agree that the biochemical systems in the body lose their functionality slowly and that the biochemistry of the body remains unchanged from one second before death to one second after death. However, death is always an event that occurs in a moment, regardless of whether it is caused by heart failure or a severe blow to the head. Consequently, the most plausible explanation for the suddenness of death is the separation of the body from the spirit that gives it life.

Another religious concept that seems to defy scientific logic but that is actually consistent with scientific observations is the concept that our bodies will be immortalized following this earthly existence. Biological immortality has been a well-established fact for a long time. For example, many years ago a woman named Henrietta Lacks died of cervical cancer. So that the cause of her cancer could be studied, the malignant tissue was removed and cells derived therefrom were proliferated in a nutrient-rich growth medium. Since the cells multiplied rapidly, they were frequently separated into batches, transferred to fresh media, and shared with other interested scientists.

Now, decades later, these so-called HeLa cells are maintained in culture in numerous research laboratories around the world for use in the study of cancer. Simply stated, HeLa cells from the cancer of Henrietta Lacks are immortal and will live and grow for as long as they are nourished. Further, there are many other cell lines that have arisen from other patients' cancers that are equally immortal. It is important to note that this kind of immortality is not characteristic of normal, nonmalignant cells. Normal, nonmalignant cells express genes that ensure cell death at the end of a definite life span. To be specific, genes encoded in the DNA of normal cells ensure that the cells can divide fewer than one hundred times before they must die. In other words, they confer mortality on the cells. Cellular immortality arises when one or more of these genes mutates to a dysfunctional state, thereby allowing the cell to live indefinitely. Thus death is clearly a predetermined process prescribed by specific genes in all living organisms, and it is destined to occur unless these genes are changed or removed. Consequently, it is tempting to speculate that immortality can be imparted to man by the simple deletion of a select few mortality genes. It is also interesting to consider that the gradual shortening of the life span of man documented in the Old Testament could have arisen as mortality genes were gradually induced and expressed themselves.

The Soil Affirms God's Creative Role

Most living things depend directly or indirectly on the soil for their sustenance. This makes soil a very important part of nature, one that should manifest the handiwork of God if, indeed, he was the Creator. Let's consider how the soil lends support to the concept of a divine creation.

Clay particles in the soil are so small that the combined area of their surfaces can reach eight hundred square meters per gram. Many of these particles are composed of very thin crystalline layers that are stacked one above the other like the leaves in a book. When such particles are placed in contact with water, the water penetrates between their superimposed layers and forces them apart. As a result the clay swells. In a fully swollen clay, the interlayer of water can be forty times thicker than the layers themselves, and the weight of the water can be more than fifteen times that of the clay. Thus clay is able to hold enormous amounts of water. Moreover, the process of soil formation tends to concentrate the clay in a region just below the soil surface. The overall result is that rainwater is retained in the root zone of plants and thus is more available to them.

Clay particles carry a net negative charge of high density due to ionic substitutions within their crystalline layers. Consequently, cations (positively charged atoms) are strongly attracted to them. This attraction keeps the cations from moving away from the layers. Since many of the major and minor plant nutrients are cations, they tend to remain where the clay is concentrated, in the root zone of plants. In this manner plant nutrition is facilitated.

The source of many plant nutrients is the rocks from which the soil is formed. For these nutrients to become available to plants, the mineral constituents of the rocks have to dissolve in the soil solution. Water is the ideal solvent for this purpose. No other solvent known to man would be as effective. Furthermore, water is ubiquitous. Without its solvent action in the soils of Earth, the processes that sustain life would stop.

The amount of heat required to raise the temperature of a substance by one degree is called the specific heat capacity. Water has a high specific heat capacity, and this characteristic allows it to serve a useful purpose. The presence of water in the soil prevents sudden or extreme changes in soil temperature because more heat has to be absorbed or released to effect a given change in temperature. Therefore, water helps to ameliorate the climate of the soil.

The strong interaction between clay surfaces and the adjacent water depresses the freezing point of the water. As a result, water next to the clay surfaces remains unfrozen at sub-zero temperatures even though the water farther removed from these surfaces freezes. Thus, a film of unfrozen or liquid water is interposed between clay surfaces and ice in a frozen soil. The thickness of this film depends on the temperature. It becomes thicker as the temperature rises. Minerals can still dissolve in this water, ions can still diffuse through it, and it can still flow along a pressure gradient. This means that during the winter, plant nutrients can be replenished and active plant roots can be supplied with nutrients and water, albeit at a slow rate.

Microorganisms in the soil decompose organic matter incorporated therein. In the process of decomposition, plant nutrients are released from the organic matter. Also, organic acids are produced, and they promote the release of plant nutrients from soil minerals. But the decomposition does not go to completion. A residue of partially decomposed organic matter, called humus, resists further decomposition. Humus gives the soil its black color, which is conducive to the absorption of radiant energy. It also stabilizes soil aggregates and thereby improves the tilth and permeability of the soil.

Another important function of soil microorganisms is to decompose the vegetative litter that would otherwise accumulate and eventually kill the plants that produce it. Accumulated vegetative litter would prevent sunlight from reaching the plants and reduce their supply of oxygen.

From what has been said, soil is obviously much more than what appears to the naked eye. Its properties, and the reactions and processes that occur within it, make it an ideal medium for plant growth. Without it, life as we know it could not exist. In this regard it is important to note that although plants and animals may have adapted to the soil, the soil did not adapt to plants and animals. Consequently, the soil could not have evolved like life is supposed to have evolved, for example, by natural selection. Under any given conditions, the characteristics of soil millennia ago must have been the same as they are today. When Earth was formed, these characteristics came into being either by design or accident. In view of this, I believe they came into being by the grand design of God.

A Scientist's Testimony

The ideas presented in this article are arguable, and they may not be sufficiently convincing to change the beliefs of anyone who is predisposed to challenge them. It is my hope, however, that they will help persuade people with scientific convictions to be more tolerant of religion, and people with religious convictions to be more tolerant of science. It is also my hope that the material I have presented will help modify the impression that science and religion are inherently incompatible and help relieve the concerns of those who are troubled by presumed conflicts between science and religion. As one who is well acquainted with both science and religion, I have found them to be quite compatible. Indeed, they complement each other in my philosophy of life. I recognize both as being integral parts of the entire body of truth known and used by an omniscient God. Because my religious beliefs are more important than science to my eternal happiness, I would like to testify of their truthfulness.

In the many years I have lived, my experience with the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ has convinced me that they are valid. My knowledge of them is not perfect. I still have to exercise faith. But my knowledge is sufficient to justify the assertion, without any qualms of conscience, that I know the gospel is true. Its truthfulness has also been confirmed by the Holy Ghost. Therefore, I believe that there is a God in heaven who hears and answers my prayers. I believe that Jesus Christ is his divine Son, whose atonement made it possible for me to be forgiven of my sins. I believe that both God and Jesus Christ appeared to Joseph Smith in the Sacred Grove, revealed their true identities to him, and informed him that he would be the instrument by which the pristine truths of the gospel would be restored. I believe that Joseph Smith was this instrument and that he translated the Book of Mormon under divine direction. And I believe that, like Joseph Smith, his successors in the presidency of the Church have also been prophets. These beliefs are precious to me, and I recommend them to anyone who is seriously seeking truth.

Notes

Philip F. Low studied at Brigham Young University, the California Institute of Technology, and Iowa State University. Although most of his professional life was spent at Purdue University, where he taught soil chemistry, he also served as guest professor at the University of California, Berkeley; North Carolina State University; the University of Florida; and at universities in Argentina, Jerusalem, India, China, and Australia. He made significant contributions to his field through his more than one hundred published papers on different aspects of soil chemistry and clay mineralogy.

In 1992 he was elected to the National Academy of Sciences. In addition, Dr. Low served as president of the Soil Sciences Society and received the Distinguished Service Award from BYU, the Herbert Newby McCoy Award of Purdue University, the Bouyoucos Distinguished Soil Science Career Award, and the Distinguished Service Award of the Soil Science Society of America.

Dr. Low's family includes his wife, Mayda Stewart, six children, twenty-five grandchildren, and six great-grandchildren. He served as counselor in several Indiana district presidencies, as the first stake president of the Indianapolis Indiana Stake, and, from 1976 to 1983, as a regional representative of the Church. More recently he served as a stake missionary, high priests group instructor, and Gospel Doctrine instructor. Dr. Low passed away in 1997 while this volume was being prepared.

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 101:32-34.
[^2] Edward O. Wilson, "Evolutionary Biology and Religion," lecture given at Catholic bishops' meeting, 1987. See David M. Byers, ed., Religion, Science and the Search for Wisdom (Washington, D.C.: United States Catholic Conference, 1987), pp. 47-62.
[^3] Freeman Dyson, Infinite in All Directions (New York: Harper & Row, 1989), p. 11.
[^4] This statement is paraphrased from Henry Eyring, The Faith of a Scientist (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1967), p. 99.
[^5] See Bart J. Kowallis and Julia S. Heaton, "Fission-Track Dating of Bentonites and Bentonitic Mudstones from the Morrison Formation in Central Utah," Geology 15 (1987): 1138-42. See also Bart J. Kowallis, Eric H. Christiansen, and Alan L Deino, "Age of the Brushy Basin Member of the Morrison Formation, Colorado Plateau, Western USA," Cretaceous Research 12 (1991): 483-93.
[^6] See Bart J. Kowallis, Jeffrey Ferguson, and Gregory J. Jorgensen, "Uplift along the Salt Lake Segment of the Wasatch Fault from Apatite and Zircon Fission Track Dating in the Little Cottonwood Stock," Nuclear Tracks and Radiation Measurements 17 (1990): 325-29.
[^7] See Bart J. Kowallis et al., "Age of the Cenomanian-Turonian Boundary in the Western Interior of the United States," Cretaceous Research 16 (1995): 109-29.
[^8] See G. Wagner and P. Van den Haute, Fission-Track Dating (Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1992), p. 285.
