David Clark, Of Heaven and Earth: Reconciling Scientific Thought with LDS Theology ( 1998)

Chapter 2

Things of the Earth

Bart J. Kowallis

Yea, verily I say unto you, in that day when the Lord shall come, he shall reveal all things—

Things which have passed, and hidden things which no man knew, things of the earth, by which it was made, and the purpose and the end thereof—

Things most precious, things that are above, and things that are beneath, things that are in the earth, and upon the earth, and in heaven. [^1]

I wait anxiously for the day when these "things of the earth" will be revealed. But in the meantime, how can I, as a scientist, continue to practice and believe in my religion? Are science and religion "incompatible and mutually exclusive," as biologist Edward O. Wilson proposes?2 Or can they "live harmoniously together in the human soul," as suggested by author and eminent physicist Freeman Dyson?3

I certainly cannot do much toward helping resolve the debate on the compatibility of science and religion. However, my intent here is to provide some justification for why I continue to believe in God, in the Book of Mormon, in Joseph Smith, and in the modern hierarchy of the LDS Church when I have been trained in the fundamental tenets of science and accept them as being true. In my profession I teach and study geology. I have specialized in the study of Earth's architecture (structural geology) and in understanding the ages of rocks and minerals (geochronology). Much of what I have learned from my studies and believe to be true is seemingly incompatible with the scriptures. I say "seemingly" because I believe that all apparent contradictions between religion and science will disappear as our understanding approaches God's understanding.4

In particular I will focus on the concepts and challenges of determining the age of things, and I will discuss some religious implications of the enormous span of geologic time. During the past few years, my research has focused on determining the age of rocks and minerals. In 1983 I established a laboratory at Brigham Young University dedicated to geochronology, and during the past decade I have used isotopic dating techniques numerous times, such as to obtain more precise ages for the dinosaur bones found in Utah and Colorado,5 to determine the rate of movement along the Wasatch Fault zone,6 to help calibrate the geologic time scale.7 In all of my studies I have found no reason to doubt the reliability of the methods used. I believe that the ages obtained by these methods—often registering in millions or hundreds of millions of years—are reflecting events that happened on this world since its creation. The principles that govern isotopic decay and the use of this decay for determining ages are as well established, accepted, and understood as are the laws of motion and the law of gravity. These ideas cannot be dismissed as mere scientific nonsense, unless we are willing to throw out the whole of science itself.

My laboratory at BYU specializes in a type of isotopic dating called fission-track dating. Like all isotopic dating methods, fission-track dating relies on the decay of radioactive isotopes.8 In this kind of dating, the isotope of interest is uranium-238. When certain minerals (e.g. zircon and apatite) crystallize from liquid magma, they contain trace amounts of uranium-238. With the passage of time, the uranium-238 (called by scientists the parent material) decays to produce a new isotope (called the daughter material), usually by emitting an alpha-particle but occasionally by spontaneous fission. The rates (half-lives) of alpha decay and of spontaneous fission for uranium-238 have been measured independently in many laboratories around the world and are well known. When a uranium-238 atom decays by spontaneous fission, the atom breaks into two positively charged, highly energetic fragments. These fragments crash through the crystal that contained the uranium-238 atom and leave an ionization trail (called a fission track) behind. It is these tracks that are used in fission-track dating.

So how do we date a rock or mineral using fission tracks? And what does the age mean when we have obtained it? Let me use, as an example, granite from the Little Cottonwood stock located in the Wasatch Mountains east of Salt Lake City. This granite was quarried by the first settlers of Salt Lake City and used in building the Salt Lake Temple. The granite is mostly made of quartz, feldspar, and biotite, but it also includes small amounts of zircon, sphene, and apatite, minerals that contain enough uranium-238 to be useful in isotopic age determinations. A sample of granite is crushed and processed through a series of mineral separation techniques to obtain a concentrate of the uranium-bearing minerals. The minerals are then mounted in epoxy and carefully polished; the fission tracks are revealed by etching the mineral with acids or bases. The tracks found in a mineral grain are counted, and this number is used, along with data on the amount of uranium-238 in the grain and the isotopic decay rate, to calculate an age. The fission tracks tell us how much daughter product was created by the decay process, the amount of uranium-238 represents the amount of parent isotope remaining, and the decay rate (or half-life) allows us to link these two pieces of information into an age.

The fission-track ages we obtained from apatite grains in the Little Cottonwood granite ranged from about 6.5 million years to about 11 million years.9 This range in age for the granite is substantial and may appear as a failure of isotopic dating systems. Indeed, these differences in age obtained on the same rock body have been used by some to attempt to discredit geologic time and the science behind it. Why do we obtain different ages on the same rock body? Which age is right?

Actually, all the ages are correct. Each age is simply telling us something about the cooling history of the granite. The apatite fission-track ages on the temple granite change systematically from 6.5 million years near the base of the Wasatch Mountains at about 5,000 feet elevation, to 8 million years at about 7,000 feet elevation, to 11 million years at 11,000 feet elevation. This change in age with elevation reflects the fact that the Wasatch Mountains have been uplifted along the Wasatch Fault for millions of years. As the mountains were uplifted, the underlying granite was brought to the surface of Earth. Temperatures inside Earth are warmer, and so as the granite was uplifted it cooled. When the apatite grains in the granite cooled below about 100Â° C, they began to preserve fission tracks. This temperature is called the "closure temperature," and it is different for each mineral and each type of isotopic decay. Before the apatites cooled below 100Â° C, uranium atoms were still decaying and producing tracks, but the tracks were not stable because the temperature was too high. Only when the mineral cooled below 100Â° C did tracks begin to accumulate in the apatite grains. The reason the apatite fission-track ages are older at the top of the mountain than they are at the bottom is because the mountaintop came up to the surface of Earth first. The rock at the top cooled below 100Â° C about 11 million years ago, while the rocks at the bottom cooled below that temperature only 6.5 million years ago.

All isotopic dating systems are sensitive to temperature—some to fairly low temperatures like the apatites in my example above, and others only to much higher temperatures. It is important to remember, however, that the ages obtained are not the ages of the elements themselves, nor necessarily of the time the rock first formed. The ages obtained by using these isotopic clocks are ages of thermal events, ages for the last time the rock or mineral was heated above and then cooled below its closure temperature. Every isotopic dating system has its limitations, but once we understand them they can provide a wealth of information about the history of Earth.

Before I continue to discuss the concepts of geologic time, I would like to share with you a small part of my personal history.

First Encounters

My purpose in writing here is to strengthen the faith of my students, to understand more completely my own faith, and to build the faith of any others who may chance to read these pages. I write from the standpoint of a scientist who believes deeply in the truths and theories of science and yet sees no serious conflicts between science and religion. Others may have written as adversaries of some scientific ideas and theories. Nonetheless, we all agree that when the truth is known, all conflicts between science and religion, be they apparent or real, will disappear.

The variety of views on science and religion was a significant influence on my own early perceptions of science and scientists. However, in order to explain the influence of different views of science and religion in my life, I need to travel back for a few moments to my youth—to the time of my introduction to life, science, and religion in the small Mormon town of Pleasant View.

Pleasant View, Utah, spreads out like a warm and careworn patchwork quilt along the foothills at the base of a mountain called Ben Lomond. From almost anywhere in town you can see far out over the valley until the view disappears into the waters of the Great Salt Lake. It is indeed a "Pleasant View." The residents of nearby Plain City and Far West always claimed that the view was pleasant because we saw them when we gazed out from up on the hills. To me, however, the best view was not out over the valley, but straight up 900 West Street, past my home, and up into the towering Wasatch Mountains. Ben Lomond was almost like Pleasant View's own mountain; it defined the town and set us apart from all the other communities stretching out along the Wasatch Mountains. As a youth I did not know why Ben Lomond was different from the rest of the nearby mountains. I did not know that it marked the end of one segment of the Wasatch Fault and the beginning of another because it protruded prominently out to the west of the main trend of mountains marching on southward. I only knew that it was a beautiful mountain and that we were its guardians.

In the hills above Pleasant View, and in the narrow canyons cut back into Ben Lomond above these hills, I discovered something magnificent. I discovered rocks. I brought them home with me. They were my greatest treasures. Some, I was certain, were extremely valuable. Each one I collected had its own special personality and character. I still have many of those rocks on my shelves today. In fact, on a recent visit my father said he had discovered yet another box of rocks in a corner of the basement and suggested that I was now old enough to store them at my own home. Opening that box with two of my own children was like an early Christmas present. We talked and sorted and touched each rock while I told them what they were and where they came from.

My mother and father encouraged my interest in rocks while I was still very young. They let me bring rocks into the house and keep them in my room! Mother would often examine them with me and try to help me identify them. They bought me books and kits on mineral and rock identification; they took me to rock shops and to gem and mineral shows; they made stops of geologic interest a regular part of our family vacations; and, although I never realized it at the time, they enjoyed rock collecting as much as I did.

At fourteen, when I went to receive my patriarchal blessing, the stake patriarch asked me a number of questions before giving the blessing. The only question I still remember was "What do you want to be when you grow up?" My answer was sure and unequivocal: "I am going to be a geologist." My faith in patriarchal blessings increased substantially that day, for when he gave the blessing he told me that I would indeed be a geologist.

At the time of the blessing, I don't suppose I really knew what geologists did or what they believed. Had I known that, I might have chosen a different career. All I really had in mind as a young boy was that geologists got to collect rocks for a living, and I couldn't think of anything more wonderful than that. I knew nothing about controversies surrounding the age of Earth or evolution, concepts that are central to the science of geology. In fact, what little I did know of these topics came from my mother. I was taught that evolution was really "evil-ution"—a doctrine of the devil used to mislead us and destroy our belief in God. I was also taught that the scriptures were plain in describing the age of Earth; it was, at most, a few thousand years old. I firmly believed that these were fundamental teachings of the Church. As I grew up, I heard them repeated in Sunday School classes, in sacrament meeting talks, and during seminary. Warnings were given about the things we would be taught at school, but it was really not a problem. I don't remember these topics even coming up at school. Perhaps it was because the science teachers I had at school were Latter-day Saints and they steered away from evolution and other controversial topics. I had no idea that any alternative points of view existed in the Church or had been presented by other General Authorities. In my home these were questions that had already been answered.

The first time I was confronted by someone with a different perspective was during my mission to Quebec. The Quebec Mission was formed by splitting the Ontario-Quebec Mission about six months after I arrived in Montreal. Because the mission was new, we had a small group of only about fifty missionaries. I knew the names of all the missionaries and was well acquainted with most of them. One missionary, Elder Clayton, was exceptional in his work ethic. He was known mission-wide because he and his companions always worked more hours and wasted less time than anyone else. He would prepare enough food for the week (usually a big batch of franks and beans) on preparation day and store it in the refrigerator. He had no apparent fear of people and would stop and talk to anyone at anytime even in the most uncomfortable and unlikely settings. He always greeted every missionary with a warm handshake and the words "I love you, Elder." I always felt a little uncomfortable around Elder Clayton, as did many other missionaries. We referred to him as "Enoch"; we were certain he already had his application in for translation.

One day while I was working with Elder Clayton on an exchange, we tracted out some potential investigators in an apartment building. They invited us in, and we began to have a lively discussion. At one point in our conversation, one of them asked us what our church taught about evolution. I responded that we believed it to be a false theory and that as a church we could not accept it. Elder Clayton, in his calm and pleasant manner, interjected that he believed I was wrong. His understanding was that the LDS Church took no official stand on evolution. I was completely astounded and distraught, and I felt the blood rushing to my head as I checked my anger, for this was heresy to me. We left, and on the way back to our apartment I let him know that the Church could not tolerate such doctrine. I pointed out the obvious implications that evolution had for fundamental tenets of the gospel like the Fall and Atonement, the creation story, and our relationship to God. He said he understood what I was saying, but he stuck by his belief that the Church had not taken an official position. Although I felt vindicated that day, his comments had a profound effect on me: they opened a crack in my mind with thoughts that had not been there before; they helped me to be more open and willing to listen the next time a similar discussion occurred. I am indebted to him for the day we shared together.

The next encounter I had with these theories of Earth was on my return to BYU in the winter of 1974. I enrolled in a historical geology class taught by Dr. Lehi F. Hintze and was cruising along in the course, doing quite well, feeling only occasionally uncomfortable about the vast ages that were proposed for the periods of geologic time, when Dr. Hintze decided it was time to talk more pointedly about evolution and the age of Earth and to give us his view of the LDS Church's position. It was a difficult and challenging week for me. During our discussions, I again felt flushed and uncomfortable, but I couldn't simply ignore what Dr. Hintze was saying, for he had built a firm foundation of geologic facts and evidences during the earlier part of the course, and now he backed up his LDS views with quotes from apostles and other General Authorities. Elder James E. Talmage, he pointed out, had written and talked about the creatures that "lived and died, age after age, while the earth was yet unfit for human habitation."10 Elder John A. Widtsoe had written about the "vast periods of time" required for each class of animals to arise, dominate Earth, and then become extinct, and he felt that millions of years were needed to accomplish the task.11 Many other quotes and articles were presented, but perhaps the most significant for me was the copy of a letter sent by President David O. McKay to Professor William Lee Stokes, an LDS geology professor at the University of Utah. The letter, dated 15 February 1957, stated that "on the subject of organic evolution the Church has officially taken no position."12 Elder Clayton, my one-day mission companion, had been correct! I felt embarrassed by what I had said to him, and yet I began to feel a great sense of relief to know that I could continue to study geology and to learn and believe its fundamental theories without throwing out my religion in the process.

And so I became a geologist, as my patriarchal blessing said I would. I have never regretted the decision. As I have continued to learn, grow, and study in the two decades that have followed that historical geology class, I have found that my study of science has sometimes forced me to rethink other beliefs and to challenge other long-held tenets of my faith. But I believe the outcome of this process has always been to eventually strengthen my testimony of the gospel, to make me a better person and a more understanding teacher, and to bring me a bit closer to the truth.

Worlds and Time without End

Geologists today believe that Earth is about 4.5 to 4.6 billion years old.13 For most of us, including the scientists who determined these ages, this vast expanse of time is totally incomprehensible. What is a billion? How big of a number is it? Suppose that you could view the history of Earth in its entirety with only one change from the original version: each year of Earth's history would be viewed in just one second. How long would it take to see all 4.6 billion years? Well, if you didn't stop for eating, sleeping, or anything else, but just watched twenty-four hours a day, you could view just over 31.5 million years of Earth history each year. To see all 4.6 billion years at this one-year-a-second pace would take you almost 150 years!

Even big numbers like a billion don't seem so big when we begin to contemplate the numbers of stars, planets, and galaxies in the known universe. There are perhaps 400 billion stars in just our own Milky Way Galaxy, with an estimated 300 billion planets that could support some type of life.14 The number of total galax-ies is not known but has been estimated to be at least 100 bil-lion, and in each galaxy, on average, there are 100 billion stars. This gives us a rough estimate of 10 billion trillion stars—or 10,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 stars!15 Can the mind of man comprehend such numbers? It is certainly beyond my capabilities. But in attempting to understand these numbers, I think I begin to understand something about God. I begin to understand what he means when he says that his works are "innumerable . . . unto man"16 and that his name is "Endless," for he is "without beginning of days or end of years; and is not this endless?"17

In general I am a firm believer in the idea propounded by Galileo, and reiterated more recently by Elder James E. Talmage, that the holy scriptures are not textbooks of science, nor were they ever intended to teach scientific principles. Galileo, in his letter to Castelli on 13 December 1613, stated that "scripture deals with natural matters in such a cursory and allusive way that it looks as though it wanted to remind us that its business is about the soul and that, as concerns Nature, it is willing to adjust its language to the simple minds of the people."18 Elder Talmage said: "Let us not try to wrest the scriptures in an attempt to explain away what we cannot explain. The opening chapters of Genesis, and scriptures related thereto, were never intended as a text-book of geology, archaeology, Earth-science or man-science. . . . We do not show reverence for the scriptures when we misapply them through faulty interpretation."19

Most misconceptions that arise between science and religion could be avoided if we kept these ideas in mind. Sometimes, however, I believe we can gain useful and interesting insights by combining science and the scriptures. This is apparent in trying to understand how our belief in God is compatible with the vast stretches of geologic time, the huge numbers of stars and galaxies now known to exist, and the enormous reaches of space. The Book of Moses in the Pearl of Great Price describes one of the most glorious experiences that a mortal man could possibly have and gives some pertinent insights into these ideas of time, space, and very large numbers.

Moses was "caught up into an exceedingly high mountain."20 (There could have been no better place to have the type of vision Moses was about to have than up among the rocks—rocks that had probably been around during much of the history that Moses was about to witness.) And Moses "saw God face to face, and he talked with him."21 What he then saw was the world in intricate detail, from the beginning to the end. For God said to Moses:

"I will show thee the workmanship of mine hands; but not all, for my works are without end. . . .

" . . . [But] this one thing I show unto thee, Moses, my son, for thou art in the world, and now I show it unto thee.

"And it came to pass that Moses looked, and beheld the world upon which he was created; and Moses beheld the world and the ends thereof, and all the children of men which are, and which were created; of the same he greatly marveled and wondered."22

When the vision ended, Moses was drained and did not recover his strength for several hours. In contemplating this experience later, he stated, "Now, for this cause I know that man is nothing, which thing I never had supposed."23

Man was nothing! This was the Moses who gathered up a huge group of disorganized, uncooperative, and often belligerent people; led them out safely from the clutches of the Egyptians; and helped preserve them in the desert. This was the Moses who with God's help brought down devastating plagues on Egypt. This was the Moses who heard the voice of the Lord speak out of the burning bush and received instructions from him on many other occasions. This was the Moses, a former prince in Pharaoh's court, who may justifiably have thought that he was something, that he was somebody, that he had accomplished quite a bit in his life. What a shock this vision must have been! For now Moses realized man was nothing, something he had never supposed. I believe he was beginning to see the immensity of God's creation, and it brought home to Moses the same feeling I get when I stand outside on a clear night and contemplate the stars, or when I hike up into the mountains and look at rocks that were first formed billions of years ago.

Later in the Book of Moses, after Moses had been visited and tempted by Satan, his vision of God and the world reopened and God showed him the "earth, yea, even all of it; and there was not a particle of it which he did not behold, discerning it by the spirit of God."24 At this point Moses was bold enough to ask God a question. He asked him why he had made all these worlds and planets and people and how they were made. It appears that God was not going to give Moses a complete response. I often take this approach with my children when they ask me a question that will take too long to explain. God said, and I paraphrase, that he did it "just because." Yes, he had his reasons, but they were for his "own purpose" and according to the wisdom that "remaineth in [him]."25 However, God did explain, among other things, that the creative work had been accomplished by the "word of my power, . . . which is mine Only Begotten Son."26 Moses, like my children, wanted to learn more: "Tell me concerning this earth, and the inhabitants thereof, and also the heavens, and then thy servant will be content."27 At this point God revealed to Moses the great plan, the reason behind all of creation:

"And the Lord God spake unto Moses, saying: The heavens, they are many, and they cannot be numbered unto man; but they are numbered unto me, for they are mine.

"And as one earth shall pass away, and the heavens thereof even so shall another come; and there is no end to my works, neither to my words.

"For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man."28

This vision of Moses is simply packed with ideas that were unknown or only in their infant stages in the scientific community at the time of Joseph Smith. For example, what did God mean by "the heavens, they are many"? The wording of this passage makes me believe that God was not just referring to the stars we see in our own heavens at night, but to some other heavens as well. I can see other possibilities. First, the heavens spoken of here may represent galaxies, and we certainly know today that "they are many." However, it was not until the early part of the twentieth century that scientists were even certain that other galaxies existed.29 Will these galaxies "pass away"? Before the development of modern theories of cosmology, it was believed that the heavens were static and immutable. Today it is believed that galaxies have a finite lifetime—they are born, they live for several billion years, and then they will die in either a general collapse of our universe or in a slow burnout as the universe continues to expand.30

An alternative hypothesis is that the heavens spoken of in this passage of scripture represent different universes of which ours is only one of many, and that each of these universes has a finite lifetime. As strange as this idea may sound, it is today one of the prominent scientific theories for the origin and demise of the universe. Physicist Andrei Linde, one of the proponents of this theory, wrote: "Just a few years ago there was no doubt that the universe was born in a single Big Bang singularity. . . . Now it seems more likely that the universe is an eternally existing, self-producing entity, that is divided into many mini-universes much larger than our observable portion."31 Each of these mini-universes has a finite existence in space and time, appearing and disappearing over billions of years.

Moses also learned in his vision that there are worlds without number that come and go on the eternal stage, and he learned that the inhabitants of Earth are "numberless as the sand upon the sea shore."32 These were certainly not well-known facts in Moses' time, nor even in Joseph Smith's time, but they are beginning to be established today. These interesting concepts would make good items for further discussion, but I want to come back to the most important idea that Moses was taught during his vision—the purpose for all of creation, which was "the immortality and eternal life of man." I believe that in his vision Moses glimpsed what eternity was like, and this glimpse was one of the main reasons he was left to exclaim that "man is nothing." Eternity is a concept that is frequently talked about but seldom, if ever, comprehended. But what better way could God have found to impress upon Moses the idea of eternity and immortality than by showing him a small part of creation. Compared to eternity, a few billion years of Earth history are nothing—a mere drop in a huge bucket. Compared to infinity, what are a few billion trillion stars and planets? They do not even scratch the surface of the totality of creation.

So do we as members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints have a problem with an Earth that is 4.6 billion years old? Unequivocally no! How can we be concerned with a mere 4.6 billion years when we believe in an eternal God, when we believe in the immortality and eternal life of man?33 Elder Bruce R. McConkie, in a general conference address in 1982, suggested that the six days of creation were more properly thought of as periods of time. He said: "What is a day? It is a specified time period; it is an age, an eon, a division of eternity; it is the time between two identifiable events. And each day, of whatever length, has the duration needed for its purposes. . . . It seems clear that the 'six days' are one continuing period and that there is no one place where the dividing lines between the successive events must of necessity be placed."34

We should not, therefore, worry about accepting these concepts of science, concepts that deal with vast ages and very large numbers, for they help us to gain a small but important insight into one of the main characteristics of God and godhood: the concept of eternity. To me these wonderful discoveries of science add to the greatness of God, lift and inspire me, and help me to see that I am indeed nothing compared to God and his creations. Carl Sagan, the late eminent astronomer and unbeliever, had some interesting words of advice for those of us who are believers. He said:

How is it that hardly any major religion has looked at science and concluded, "This is better than we thought! The Universe is much bigger than our prophets said, grander, more subtle, more elegant. God must be even greater than we dreamed"? Instead they say, "No, no, no! My god is a little god, and I want him to stay that way." A religion, old or new, that stressed the magnificence of the Universe as revealed by modern science might be able to draw forth reserves of reverence and awe hardly tapped by the conventional faiths. Sooner or later, such a religion will emerge.35

I don't think we need to wait for that religion to emerge; it is here already. Dr. Sagan had obviously not read the Book of Moses, nor was he acquainted with the teachings of the modern prophets. We do not believe in a "little god," and our prophets have always emphasized the greatness and beauty of the universe God has created. For us, each new discovery of science should be as a new revelation; each discovery gives us a new and more complete understanding of how God works and teaches us his ways. Our God is not a God only of the supernatural, miraculous, or mysterious. He is a God of truth and knowledge; he encourages us and desires for us to learn and gain knowledge. Mormonism "embraces every true science and all true philosophy. . . . True science, true art, and true knowledge comprehend all that are in heaven or in Earth, or in all the eternities. . . . All truth is ours."36 "We are open for the reception of all truth, of whatever nature it may be, and are desirous to obtain and possess it, to search after it as we would for hidden treasures."37

We believe that "it is impossible for a man to be saved in ignorance,"38 that "whatever principle of intelligence we attain unto in this life, it will rise with us in the resurrection," and that "if a person gains more knowledge and intelligence in this life through his diligence and obedience than another, he will have so much the advantage in the world to come."39 We have been taught to "study and learn, and become acquainted with all good books,"40 to "seek not for riches but for wisdom,"41 and to ponder and study things out in our own minds before we ask God.42 After all, God has challenged us to become like him—to become gods,43 to gain his glory—and his glory is intelligence.44

As science demonstrates the order and law of the universe, we should not feel threatened but should gain through these natural descriptions a greater reverence and awe for the marvelous work of the Creator,45 for "he comprehendeth all things, and all things are before him, and all things are round about him; and he is above all things, and in all things, and is through all things, and is round about all things; and all things are by him, and of him, even God, forever and ever."46

Notes

Bart J. Kowallis received degrees from Brigham Young University and the University of Wisconsin and has taught geology at BYU since completing his doctoral work in 1981. In 1996 he was named chairman of the Department of Geology at BYU. He has done field work in Africa, Spitsbergen, Mexico, and western North America and has specialized in studies of rock microstructure and fission-track dating of rocks from different parts of the world. He has lectured in the United States, Australia, Japan, and France and has published extensively on his research interests.

He served as a missionary in Canada, counselor in a branch presidency at the Missionary Training Center, stake high councilor, elders quorum president, and in many positions in the Church's auxiliary programs. Currently he is a counselor in a Provo, Utah, bishopric. He has been active in youth activities, Scouting, and Utah politics. He married Julee Clark and is the father of four children.

"You take, for instance, our geologists, and they tell us that this earth has been in existence for thousands and millions of years. They think, and they have good reason for their faith, that their researches and investigations enable them to demonstrate that this earth has been in existence as long as they assert it has; and they say, 'If the Lord, as religionists declare, made the earth out of nothing in six days, six thousand years ago, our studies are all in vain; but by what we can learn from nature and the immutable laws of the Creator as revealed therein, we know that your theories are incorrect and consequently we must reject your religions as false and vain. . . . '

"In these respects we differ from the Christian world, for our religion will not clash with or contradict the facts of science in any particular. You may take geology, for instance, and it is a true science; not that I would say for a moment that all the conclusions and deductions of its professors are true, but its leading principles are; they are facts—they are eternal; and to assert that the Lord made this earth out of nothing is preposterous and impossible. God never made something out of nothing. . . .

"If we understood the process of creation there would be no mystery about it, it would be all reasonable and plain, for there is no mystery except to the ignorant . . . How long it [Earth] had been organized is not for me to say, and I do not care anything about it. As for the Bible account of the creation we may say that the Lord gave it to Moses, or rather Moses obtained the history and traditions of the fathers, and from them picked out what he considered necessary, and that account has been handed down from age to age, and we have got it, no matter whether it is correct or not, and whether the Lord found the earth empty or void, whether he made it out of nothing or out of the rude elements; or whether he made it in six days or in as many millions of years, is and will remain a matter of speculation in the minds of men unless he gives revelation on the subject" (in Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. [London: Latter-day Saints' Book Depot, 1860], 14:115-17).

---
Notas:
[^1] Reflections of a Scientist (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1969), pp. 63-80; The Faith of a Scientist (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1969), pp. 41-45.
