David Clark, Of Heaven and Earth: Reconciling Scientific Thought with LDS Theology ( 1998)

Chapter 3

World of Evidence, World of Faith

Henry Eyring

Essay 1: The Physical and Spiritual Worlds

My wife and I have a lot that is sixty feet across the front, one hundred feet deep, and extends straight up to the limits of space, so far as I know. Clearly, this qualifies me to speak on the broader aspects of the universe.

We live in a series of six worlds, from the infinitesimally small to the infinitely big. They can be represented by a point surrounded by five circles. This essay deals with the five physical worlds of the nucleus, the atom, the living cell, everyday experience, and the stars, as well as the sixth, or spiritual, world.

The Nucleus

The first, or central, world is the world of the atomic nucleus. The nucleus is where most of the weight of the atom is situated. One hundred thousand atomic nuclei touching each other in a line extend only across one atom, and it takes one hundred million atoms to make one inch! Vibrations inside the nuclei of atoms are about a million times more frequent than the vibrations between atoms.

It is natural to wonder how anything as small as the nucleus can have structure, and even if it does, how we can find out about it. The procedure for finding out is to shoot electrically charged atoms or electrons at nuclei and see how they bounce. This tells us a great deal about the kinds of forces that are acting between the colliding particles.

When a particularly violent collision results in penetration into the nucleus and causes it to fragment, we can watch the tracks left by the fragments in a cloud chamber. In this way we find out that the nucleus is made up of positively charged protons and uncharged neutrons of virtually the same weight.

For twenty-five years, scientists accepted parity, the principle that an atom does not know which end is up and has the same properties in all directions. However, an experiment suggested by Yang and Lee, for which they were given the Nobel Prize, showed otherwise. If we put radioactive cobalt sixty in a magnetic field, its nuclei line up with their south poles pointing toward the north pole of the earth. Every once in a while, one of the cobalt nuclei shoots out an electron. If the nuclei were indeed symmetrical, they would be equally likely to eject the electron through the north pole as through the south pole. However, a Geiger counter similar to the kindused to prospect for uranium reveals that the electrons are shot out preferentially through the nuclear south pole. Thus, the principle of parity must be given up.

Now the scientists have introduced quarks, fractional particles having a charge of one-third. When quarks were proposed in the early 1970s, they were conceived of as being undivided particles, although their charge was fractional. More recent observations have indicated the existence of one-dimensional conductors called solitons, which have fractional charge and a fractional electron number.

By such experiments we come to understand something of the complexity and intricacy of this almost unimaginably tiny world of the nucleus. One hesitates to speculate whether we have even yet found the indivisible building blocks of the physical world.

The Atom

The second world is the world of chemistry, made up of atoms and molecules. This, too, is a tiny world. I noted earlier that it would take one hundred million atoms placed side by side to make an inch. A molecule finishes one of its vibrations in about a ten million millionth of a second. We call this length of time a jiffy for lack of a better name. The quartz-crystal watch you wear on your wrist derives its great accuracy from such rapid vibrations.

An example of the exactness with which the universe works is found in the ammonia molecule. Ammonia consists of a nitrogen atom sitting on three hydrogen atoms. The startling fact is that this umbrella-like molecule turns wrong side out almost twenty-four thousand million times a second. If you beam radar through a tube containing ammonia, the signal fades just when the radar frequency equals the inversion frequency of the molecules. In this way the ammonia molecules can be used as a clock to break time up into twenty-four thousand millionths of a second with unprecedented accuracy. It is interesting that this ammonia molecule turns wrong side out just as often whether it is at room temperature or at the lowest temperature obtainable in the laboratory, whether in Soviet Russia or the United States, and whether this country is Democratic or Republican. Many things we think are important don't seem to affect the ammonia molecule much. The accuracy and order of the universe continue without regard to fashions in hairstyles, clothes, politics, science, or religion. What's true is true. What works, works.

When I went to Berkeley in 1925 to pursue my Ph.D., no one could explain more than a tenth of the attraction of two hydrogen atoms for each other. We knew that each hydrogen atom was uncharged, being made up of a positive nucleus whose charge was just neutralized by the charge on a negative electron. True, the atoms could distort each other and give about one-tenth of the observed binding energy, but the remaining part of the bond was a mystery.

The complete answer supplied by quantum mechanics was that the electron pair, by keeping out of the way of each other as they circulated around the two nuclei, could spend enough time between the two positive nuclei to glue them together to just the observed amount.

In order for the pair of bonded atoms to exchange partners with a similar pair, thus making a new compound, the pairs must approach each other closely. Accordingly, as two pairs of bonded atoms bump into each other, they can only approach and change partners if one or the other pair of electrons is pushed out of the way into an upper state. This collisional work that has to be done so a chemical reaction can take place is called the energy of activation.

Using this picture of the energy of activation accompanying a chemical reaction and building on the labors of my many able predecessors, it was possible for me, in 1935, to write down the general equation for the rate of all chemical reactions. This equation has become an integral part of chemistry, used universally.

The excitement of standing, in imagination, at a pass between two energy valleys representing the initial and final states in a chemical reaction and counting the activated complexes as they make their way over the pass in shattering collisions in which atoms are exchanged between the two colliding molecules is the thrill of a lifetime.

Further, to find that wave mechanics and thermodynamics, which have had so many other triumphs, are the same tools that enable us to quantitatively explain this all-pervading aspect of the material world in which we live brings a feeling of awe at the order and exactness of the universe that is never forgotten.

The Living Cell

The third world in which we live is the world of the living cell, the world of biology. Cells vary in size, but typically they are about a micron across, that is, about one ten-thousandth of a centimeter. An active cell divides into two cells about every twenty minutes.

The word life itself conjures up animation, movement, excitement, and perhaps a little mystery. Discussions of the origin of life disturb some people. Some are particularly disturbed by scientists who "tamper with creation" and actually try to start life in a laboratory. It would disturb me more to find that life couldn't be started in a laboratory. If life can't be started somehow in this physical world, then how did I get here? You see, I think I'm alive, although some of you might observe me dozing at my desk and wonder.

The human cell has near its center a nucleus containing forty-six chromosomes. Twenty-three of these come from the father and twenty-three from the mother. The chromosomes are made up of about a million genes that constitute our inheritance. A gene controls the synthesis of essential molecules, such as enzymes, that build and regulate our unbelievably complicated bodies.

A colleague, Frank Johnson, and I once wrote a paper of evolution and rate theory, "The Critical Complex Theory of Biogenesis." This paper outlines a theory of prebiological evolution. One of the principal questions addressed is why living things are optically active.

The body is made up of many types of molecules, just as a large building may be made up of many types of brick. Many of these molecules are asymmetrical, and frequently one optical isomer is found to occur in living things to the virtual exclusion to its mirror image. We can understand this selective choice of building blocks if we recognize that the body is built up by molecules that are incorporated into the body from the food we eat. This section is made by a process of fittingthe molecules to the enzyme much as a left hand selects a left-hand glove and rejects a right-hand glove.

Muscles and enzymes are made by joining amino acids together into long chains called proteins. There are twenty different amino acids that are joined together in different proportions to form the links in the various types of protein chains. Of these twenty amino acids used by the body, all but one are asymmetric. Further, all the nineteen asymmetric amino acids used are like the left-hand glove and are called l-amino acids. In every living thing, the opposite optical isomers, which are called the d-amino acids, if present in the food, are rejected by the enzymes that build proteins, and are eliminated from the body. We therefore call this world we live in an l-amino acid world. The l comes from laevo, the Latin word for left; and d stands for dextro, or right.

Using absolute rate theory, Johnson and I arrived at a reasonable rate of appearance of these optically active templates, given assumed concentrations of certain chemicals in the primordial "soup."

The interesting thing is that from any given pot of "soup" it is as likely that a d- as an l-type world will start up. We can readily imagine a d-amino acid world. In fact, if we look into a large mirror, the world we see is a d-amino acid world, since every object, including the molecules, is the mirror image of those in the real world. Obviously, everything in the d-amino acid world would work exactly as well as everything in our real world, and it is a matter of no obvious consequence which world we happen to have. If there are other worlds that support life, there is no reason for supposing that they may not be d-amino acid worlds. If so, such worlds would be completely inhospitable to us, since we could not digest their foods, and marriages between people coming from d and l worlds would necessarily be sterile. On the other hand, there is, of course, no reason why people from two such worlds might not converse with each other with complete understanding, and one could not tell the two types of people apart by their appearance.

The fact that in our world every living thing, from the tiniest living cell to man, uses only the l-amino acids along with the d-sugars highlights the unity running through the living world. Everything that grows collects those particular optical isomers needed for food and rejects the opposite isomers. Here again, we catch a glimpse of the unity that everywhere characterizes the cosmic design.

Everyday Experience

The fourth world is the world of everyday experience. Here, we measure time in seconds or minutes, and distances in feet or miles. This is the world we know most about.

Since Sir Isaac Newton discovered the universal law of gravitation and developed the laws of mechanics, his successors have been able to calculate the motion of the planets in their orbits to any desired degree of accuracy. Astronomers predict exactly when an eclipse will occur. Using this knowledge, men make great preparations, assemble expensive scientific equipment, and move to the ends of the earth when told that an eclipse is imminent. They get their cameras ready to take pictures and open the shutters at the right moment, and the eclipse begins at the predicted instant. If the eclipse were ever so little off schedule, it would make headline news around the world.

These same laws that enable astronomers to compute eclipses tell precisely, of course, how a satellite goes around in its orbit. A man who makes a good running broad jump only misses becoming an earth satellite by not running fast enough. Thus, if instead of running twenty miles and hour he ran twenty thousand miles an hour, he would find that as he jumped, the earth would curve away beneath him faster than he could fall toward it. Our jumper would settle into an elliptical orbit extending around the earth, except for one thing—the air resistance would slow his speed and set him on fire. To avoid air resistance, the satellite is shot above the atmosphere. This is the only reason for sending it up six hundred miles.

Satellites like Sputnik and the moon have a terrifically frustrating job. The moon has been falling toward the earth and overshooting the mark for billions of years and still has no prospect for a successful hit. Man has not succeeded in sending satellites up to such complete frustration yet. The reason is simple. Even at altitudes of six hundred or a thousand miles there is still a trace of hydrogen left. As the satellite circles the earth, it bumps into gas. When it has bumped into a weight of gas equal to its mass, its momentum is cut in half, except that by falling closer to the earth it picks up additional speed. Still, it is a remarkable human achievement to launch a satellite and in a small degree become a partner in creation.

All such achievements rely on the fundamental belief that the everyday world is exactly predictable. We may not yet know or completely understand the rules of when earthquakes occur, or what causes surprises for the weatherman, but we are sure that such events are not really capricious. The more we learn, the better we understand and the closer are our predictions.

The Stars

If we look at the stars, we see the fifth world. Men have probably always looked up and wondered: How far away are the stars? What makes them shine? How long have they been there? Will they exist forever? Some have believed that the stars were gods who controlled their destiny. Others noticed the regularity in the grouping of stars and used their knowledge of stellar movement to help mark the passage of the seasons and fix the times of planting and harvesting. The early Greeks believed the stars were fixed like nails to the vault of the heavens. Aristotle maintained that celestial objects were permanent, immutable, and perfect. He so convinced the Greeks of this that when a new star appeared in 134 b.c., it was attributed by its discoverer to an omission by his predecessors.

In the Middle Ages, Copernicus showed that the earth was not the center of the solar system. But Aristotle's thinking continued to dominate astronomy until the 1500s when new stars were discovered, and then in the seventeenth century when Galileo used his telescope to discover spots on the sun—demonstrating that the solar complexion was somewhat less than perfect—and to prove that the sky was filled with stars that could not be seen with the naked eye.

Just so you know how old I am, I can remember when astronomers, using ever-larger telescopes, discovered that some of the "stars" thought to be part of the Milky Way were actually other galaxies—each containing billions of stars and lying far beyond the Milky Way's outermost limits.

Even so today, as we look out at the universe, the first impression is one of stupendous size. By using such instruments as the huge two-hundred-inch optical telescope on Mount Palomar and new radio, X-ray, and gamma-ray telescopes, modern-day stargazers have pushed the frontiers of understanding ever closer to the edges of the universe and into the very cores of stars. We can see out so far that the light reaching our eyes started on its journey toward us almost twelve billion years ago. You remember how fast light travels: 186,000 miles a second; it goes around the earth, a distance of twenty-four thousand miles, seven and one-half times in a second. A light-year is the distance that light travels in a year—about six trillion miles. If you multiply twelve billion years by six trillion miles, you get a seven followed by twenty-two zeros for the number of miles you can see in any direction you care to look. The known radius of the universe in miles is even bigger than the national debt. It is a very long distance indeed.

When you walk outside on a clear moonless night, all the celestial objects you can see with the naked eye are either planets or stars, or, if you have superman vision, you might be able to see the Andromeda galaxy that looks like a fuzzy star. All the stars you see are part of our own Milky Way galaxy. The closest star, other than our own sun, is Proxima Centauri, four light-years away. At our present rates of space travel, this journey would require one hundred twenty thousand years. Consequently, we seem to be marooned in our solar system, at least for the time being. Present missile travel, which proceeds at a speed about a thousand times as fast as man can run, will need to be speeded up by another factor of a thousand before we can undertake trips beyond our solar system.

Some scientists believe that the universe is the expanding remnant of a huge fireball created 20 billion years ago by a giant explosion. The stars and planets are the products of that cataclysmic blast and its aftereffects. In 1929 astronomer Edwin Hubble used shifts in the spectral lines of light coming from distant galaxies to calculate that these islands of stars are moving at tremendous speeds away from the earth—and from each other—like dots painted on the surface of an expanding balloon. Scientists at Bell Laboratories have even listened with their sensitive radio antenna to radiation interference, which amounts to the hissing echoes of creation: "In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth. And the earth was without form, and void; and darkness was upon the face of the deep. And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters. And God said, Let there be light: and there was light" (Gen. 1:1-3).

Most cosmologists—scientists who study the structure and evolution of the universe—agree that the biblical account of creation, in imagining an initial void, is uncannily close to the truth. I might add, it is as if the one who wrote those words was there, or at least had talked to Someone who was.

Are we the only worshippers in this great cathedral called the universe? Professor Harlow Shapley, emeritus professor of astronomy at Harvard University, has written an interesting book, Of Stars and Men (New York: Washington Square Press, 1960), in which he estimates that there are one hundred million, million, million, million suns in space. Shapely has very conservatively estimated that at least one sun in a thousand should have acquired planets. Most of these satellites are at such distances from their suns that they are either too hot or too cold to support life as we know it. Still others lack life-giving water, while others lack the necessary oxygen. However, Shapley has estimated that of those suns with planets at least one in a thousand has a planet at the right distance for life.

Of those having a planet at the right distance, at least one in a thousand should have a planet large enough to hold an atmosphere; and, finally, one in a thousand of those having a large enough planet at the right distance should have an atmosphere of the right composition to support life. Thus, he concludes that there should be at the very minimum one hundred million planets that could support life, and the number is probably many times more. From the scientific point of view, it is hard to doubt that myriads of worlds are suitable for human habitation.

It is accordingly natural to conclude that the universe is filled with intelligent beings and, presumably, always has been. Any unfolding of intelligences on this earth only repeats what has happened previously elsewhere. Even if we believe beings on distant planets have progressed far beyond us, still the barrier to travel posed by interstellar distances seems quite sufficient to explain why mortal space travelers have not visited us.

So we envision a still-expanding universe that began almost twenty billion years ago, extends for twelve billion light-years, and contains ten billion galaxies—each one an island of hundreds of billions of stars. Actually, we also need to add the dimension of time. We see our nearby sun as it looked a little more than eight minutes ago. We see Proxima Centauri as it was about four years ago, and some of the farther galaxies as they looked billions of years ago. The farther out we look, the further we are looking back in time. Some objects we see may no longer exist.

With all that we do know, it is obvious to the serious student that there is a great deal more that we don't know. To the ultimate question—what existed before the big bang—most of modern science is mute. It's as if it were against the rules to ask questions when there isn't any scientific way to approach the answers. It's still a nice question though, isn't it?

From nucleus to galaxies, the universe is complex, orderly, consistent, and very, very interesting. It is also full of energy and motion. There is something peculiar about that.

If you picked up a watch far from human habitation and found it running, you would ask not only "Who made this watch?" but "Who wound it up?" So it is with the universe. The universe is running down. It is a universe of change. People are born and pass from the earth, and stars, too, come into existence and pass away.

The sun is about half hydrogen; the rest of it is composed of other materials. The hydrogen bomb shows us what happens to hydrogen down in the center of the sun where the pressures and temperatures are enormous. Four hydrogen atoms come together to make helium, andin the process a little of their weight is changed into energy. This energy falls on the earth as sunlight and makes the plants grow.

Thus, the sun is a giant furnace with a supply of hydrogen for fuel—quite a good supply. But if the sun ever burns out, it is going to be very cold in Salt Lake City. You might like an estimate of the fuel supply on hand. I would say the supply should last at least five billion years, so we don't need to worry about it right away.

This picture of the sun as a furnace with a limited amount of fuel poses interesting problems. The second law of thermodynamics is a formal statement of the familiar fact that if energy is being obtained continuously from some source, then the supply of energy must run out sometime unless it is replenished from an outside source. As with any woodpile, if you keep burning up the hydrogen on the sun, it must ultimately be used up unless it is replenished. There is evidence that in the last billion years the sun's temperature has never varied by the small amount that would make the earth unfit for habitation.

It is a well-known fact of experience that if we set a pot of boiling water on a table in a cool room, the pot cools, and when once cooled it never returns to the boiling point without being reheated. In just the same way, the sun is giving off its heat and very gradually growing colder. When the sun ceases to shine, all living things will die; all changes will cease, and the world will reach a deadly, monotonous uniformity. This state is called the heat death and is a consequence of nature always moving toward more probable states and never in the reverse direction toward less probable states.

An interesting calculation illustrates the complete improbability of a hot sun arising by change. We suppose that in order to become hot again, the sun must accumulate an amount of heat equal to that which it gives off during its lifetime. This must be accumulated from its surroundings, which we shall assume in the heat death drops to a temperature of seven hundred degrees centigrade. Then, using the straightforward theory of chemical reactions, we find that a length of time in years equal to at least one with a hundred thousand billion, billion, billion, billion, billion zeros must elapse before a hot sun has a 50 percent probability of occurring again by chance. This is almost no chance at all! A universe filled with hot suns is no more likely. It is evident that our hot sun, or this universe, did not arise by such a chance fluctuation.

In a very real sense, then, the universe is like a clock that has been wound up. If it is self-winding, it is unique in scientific experience. In a talk before the National Academy of Sciences, I raised the obvious question, "How did the universe get wound up?" No one chose to answer. After the talk, I repeated my question privately to three scientists. President Millikan of the California Institute of Technology said, "I, like you, am a religious man." Professor Van Vleck of the Harvard physics department said, "Of course, one doesn't know." The third man said, "Don't you believe in your religion?" I answered, "Yes, but I wondered about yours."

The Sixth, or Spiritual, World

The five physical worlds display order and complexity. The second law of thermodynamics tells us that, even if we can explain this complexity, we have a problem of how it all got started within the working of the natural laws as we understand them. This leaves scientists no better off than anyone else. We all have to rely on a very small measure of information and a very large measure of faith.

This brings us, then, to the sixth world, which includes and surrounds all the others. This is the world that existed before the "big bang." It is the world of the Creator, who provided the energy to wind up the watch and the knowledge and power to establish the complex order we have come to understand in the five physical worlds. As far as we know, this sixth world is without beginning and end of space and of time. Presiding over all is the Creator, whom we worship. Holding everything together are the eternal laws, which will require an eternity for us to master.

One of the first Soviet cosmonauts who circled the earth in space boasted on his return that he hadn't seen anything of God on his journey. This raises the interesting question of where the sixth world and its inhabitants are. Is heaven part of the physical universe as we know it, or is it in some other time and space—in another dimension?

Let's consider the notion of postulates. Postulates are those fundamental propositions that are assumed without proof, generally because there is no way to prove them other than to see if the theories built on them predict events that are then verified by experiments. For example, we all learned as part of our high school geometry class the postulate that parallel lines never meet. This is a postulate of euclidean geometry. However, if you're willing to walk far enough, I can show you a problem. If you and a friend both start out at the equator and walk due north, you are walking parallel paths. You both start out a right angles to the equator. But, you will meet at the North Pole! (You can check this out by looking at two different degrees of longitude on a globe. Each intersects the equator at a 90-degree angle, but they meet at the poles.) The problem is that plane geometry works only on a plane—a flat, two-dimensional world. It doesn't work when the plane curves into a third dimension.

This points up the importance of examining our postulate, our assumptions. Whether or not a particular theory actually predicts reality is more a function of the underlying assumptions than of the elegance of the proof itself. Thus, euclidean geometry is perfect for the flat world for which it was designed, but it results in poor predictions in a three-dimensional world.

The avenue to religious faith lies in the examination of evidence. The Lord himself outlined the procedure when He said, "If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself" (John 7:17).

The existence of the sixth world is necessary to an understanding of the other five. Put another way, the existence of the five worlds can be adequately explained only if we assume the existence of the sixth world. Of course, we can also look for evidence of the sixth world in history, and we can look for the evidence directly, by exercising that part of us that shares that other, spiritual dimension.

I worship the wisest being in the universe. I know there is a wisest being in the universe because you can take the wisest person in a room and say, "This is the smartest man in the room—and his wife is smarter." And then you can find the smartest person in the city, then state, then country, then world, then universe. I worship the wisest being in the universe. I know there is such a being. How could there not be? People are different in understanding, and there are lots of them. There must be one who is the smartest.

So I know there is a God. You say, "That still isn't religion." I say, "It is to me, because I can't believe that this wisest being in the universe wants anything except justice." You see, I know some things about Him. If you went out in your car tonight and were hit by a drunk driver and killed, there are others who would say, "Isn't it a tragedy that he couldn't live out his life, that he was cut off?" And do you know what they would do if they could? They'd give you another chance.

The wisest being in the universe is surely as compassionate as these good neighbors that we have. He must like justice and not injustice. So I know there is a God. Because otherwise the world would be unjust. This idea takes us a long way toward understanding God. He exists. He is compassionate. He loves justice and relates to us. We are His children. Isn't that a comforting thought? I'm sure of it, but you don't want to believe anything I say unless it's true.

I can say that I am certain that God is just as real as anybody I know, and that He likes me. And that He likes you too. Those are my postulates for the sixth, spiritual world. They perform exactly the same function in helping me understand the sixth world as the postulates of science do in helping me understand the other five.

Essay 2: Faith and God

The more I try to unravel the mysteries of the world in which we live, the more I come to the conception of a single overruling power—God. One can come to this point of view by prayer and the testimony of the Holy Ghost, or because there seems to be no other explanation of the unity and wonder of the universe, or by the pragmatic method of science that the Savior suggested long ago—try it and you will know.

I have often met this question: "Dr. Eyring, as a scientist, how can you accept revealed religion?" The answer is simple. The gospel commits us only to the truth. The same pragmatic tests that apply in science apply to religion. Try it. Does it work? The conception of a God ruling the universe and concerned with how it works is impossible for me without the corollary that He should be interested in man, the most remarkable phenomenon in the world. Being interested in man, God naturally provided a plan for man's development and welfare. This plan is the gospel of Jesus Christ.

This immediately raises many questions. At best, men are faltering and imperfect. The Savior stands alone as the perfect example. The gospel is indeed the plan which the Creator of the universe has devised to guide His children and bring them back to Him. Through the ages, He has chosen from among His worthy sons prophets to act as guides to his children. Today, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is presided over by good and wise men who instruct and counsel those who have the wisdom to listen.

In the great council of the premortal life, a tremendous decision was made that man was to have his free agency. This brings with it many interesting problems with tragic results. War and catastrophe are taken by some people to be evidence against the existence of God, or at least His unconcern for the evils that overtake man. I think this should be thought of in a completely different light.

Lucifer promised to bring salvation to every soul, whether the person to be saved desired it or not. Dictators have been operating in the same way from time immemorial. Never has there been a more concerted effort to take away free agency than in the modern communistic world where about 1 percent of the population rules through force and terror. God's non-intervention in human affairs is not a sign of His absence or His disinterest. Rather, it exemplifies one of His greatest gifts—free agency, which enables us to work out our individual salvation. If Lucifer were ruling the world, no one could doubt his presence.

There is a related argument that interests me. One sees good people cut off by death in their prime. This seems to me to be evidence for a life after death. It is impossible to reconcile such incompleteness with any other idea than that we will live again and that what we have lost through no fault of our own will be made up to us in full by a just God.

The wonderful gospel plan as advocated by the Savior in the premortal life, known by His prophets down through the ages and announced by him personally during his earthly ministry, has again been restored by the Prophet Joseph Smith, working as an instrument of the Father. With it we have a rational understanding of life. Eternal progression as a result of wise choices through the use of free agency gives the complete and satisfying explanation of the world in which we live and the struggles we are called upon to make. The success of man in sending satellites into space is arresting evidence of the great capabilities of and the destiny of man, the spirit child of God.

I, as mere man, instruct others. I am dedicated as a scientist, and the significant thing about a scientist is this: he simply expects the truth to prevail because it is the truth. He doesn't work very much on the reactions of the heart. In science, the thing is, and its being so is something one cannot resent. If a thing is wrong, nothing can save it, and if it is right, it cannot help succeeding.

So it is with the gospel. I had the privilege of serving with four other Church members in a conference in which, as a group, we undertook to answer the questions the assembled young folk might ask us.

One of the questions was addressed directly to me. A young man said: "In high school we are taught such things as pre-Adamic men, that kind of thing, but we hear another thing in church. What should I do about it?"

I think I gave the right answer. I said, "In this church, you only have to believe the truth. Find out what the truth is!"

If there is anyone else who is trying to teach anything else with authority, this church is not the least worried about that question or any other kind of question, because the Church is committed only to the truth. I do not mean to say that as individuals in the Church each one always knows the actual truth, but we have the humility sometimes to say we do not know the answers to these things. No Latter-day Saint needs to worry about any question of that kind, because the Church is committed to the truth.

Some have asked me: "Is there any conflict between science and religion?" There is not conflict in the mind of God, but often there is conflict in the minds of men. Through the eternities, we are going to get closer and closer to understanding the mind of God; then the conflicts will disappear.

In the great council in heaven, already referred to, two plans were offered—one whereby the minds of men would be compelled to accept the truth. There would be no choice. Man would make no error. The other plan was set forth by God. In His plan, man would have his free agency. He could decide between the Church of God and all other ways of operating in the world.

God rules from heaven. He does it with such silken threads that some think He has lost the reins. Some people do not even know that He exists. Others wonder whether He exists. I have often thought that a condition like this could never have come about if a dictator such as Hitler or Stalin were ruling.

God is so gentle, so dedicated to the principle that men should be taught correct principles and then govern themselves and take responsibility for their own mistakes, that His children can actually question whether He exists. I cannot think of anything that more wonderfully typifies His mercy, His kindness, His consideration for us, His concern for us, than that He does it all with bonds that are like the strongest steel but are so gentle that you cannot see them.

I do know that He exists. It is true, as great mean have known throughout the ages, that this great world we live in is governed by powers more powerful than those of the world. I ask you to look at the wisest man you know and ask yourself whether you believe he is the greatest intellect in the universe. Do you think the tremendous order and wonderful things that have come into the world were created by something with no more understanding than this wise man you know? Of course you do not. It is unthinkable.

I worship the Supreme Intelligence of the universe, and I am convinced that, wise as men are and in spite of the wonderful things they have done, the Creator of this universe goes so far beyond anything that men understand that it is ridiculous to talk of the two in the same terms. So far as I have been able to observe, those who study deeply into scientific matters are often of that persuasion.

The Prophet Joseph Smith was indeed the inspired instrument in restoring the gospel of the Savior, as is shown by the way it works in the lives of men. Since all truth has a single source, the apparent conflicts that often trouble us reflect only our incomplete understanding and must eventually be happily resolved. Eternal progress is man's destiny.

note

Henry Eyring received degrees from the University of Arizona and the University of California at Berkeley. Following a brief period at the University of Wisconsin, he taught at Princeton until 1946, when he became dean of the graduate school and professor of chemistry at the University of Utah. His publications number more than six hundred. He was awarded fifteen U.S. and international honorary degrees, and he received eighteen prizes that include the National Medal of Science, the Priestly Medal, the Berzelium Medal of the Swedish Academy, and the Israel Wolf Prize. He was a member of the National Academy of Sciences and served as president of the American Chemical Society and the American Association for the Advancement of Science.

Dr. Eyring married Mildred Bennion and raised three sons. Following the death of Mildred, he married Winifred Brennan. His Church work included service as a branch president, district president, and member of the General Board of the Sunday School of the Church.

Dr. Eyring, who passed away in 1981, wrote two books that record his views concerning the integration of twentieth-century science with LDS theology. The following two essays, "The Physical and Spiritual Worlds" and "Faith and God," are adaptedfrom those books, Reflections of a Scientist and The Faith of a Scientist, respectively.1
