David Clark, Of Heaven and Earth: Reconciling Scientific Thought with LDS Theology ( 1998)

Chapter 4

Science as a Way to God

Wilford R. Gardner

To conclude, therefore, let no man out of a weak conceit of sobriety, or an ill-applied moderation, think or maintain, that a man can search too far or be too well studied in the book of God's word, or in the book of God's works; divinity or philosophy, but rather let men endeavor an endless progress or proficience in both.—Francis Bacon, Advancement in Learning

And when ye shall receive these things, I would exhort you that ye would ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost.—Moroni 10:4

Introduction

The first quotation above is from my father's copy of the sixth edition of Charles Darwin's The Origin of the Species. The second will be recognized by most readers as a verse from the Book of Mormon. Together they define the themes I wish to address. Also on my bookshelf is a collection of essays by Henry Eyring, Carl J. Christensen, Harvey Fletcher, Joseph F. Merrill, Frederick J. Pack, John A. Widtsoe, and Franklin S. Harris. [^1] These men were among the most distinguished LDS scientists and educators of their generation, and they were also leaders among the members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. After one reads these thoughtful and eloquent discourses on the putative conflict between science and religion, one might well suppose that no more need be said on the matter. Science and LDS religious doctrine both seek and promulgate truth; and truth, by its very nature, cannot be in conflict with itself.

However, as an educator I am well aware that each generation must seek and learn truth for itself. Borrowed truth such as the truth we learn from our parents can carry us only so far through life. At some point we must find and live by our own truths. I will not try to defend science, although I would submit that it is useful and desirable to raise the scientific literacy of all members of society. Those who would defend their scientific or religious truths often do their cause a disservice with bad arguments, buttressed by bad science, bad religion, or both. This I will attempt to avoid, knowing that any scientific arguments I make at this time will sound sadly outdated in a very few years. I will not try to achieve what Eyring and his fellow authors accomplished, which is to demonstrate that science and the religious doctrines of the Church of Jesus Christ are not in conflict with the scientists' own personal philosophies. Rather I would like to discuss the process by which I came to similar conclusions.

For some scientists, there never has been a conflict in their minds. But seemingly very wise people on all sides of the issues have asserted that there is or has been a conflict. I have always desired such resolution of the issues as I could obtain. Everyone who seriously seeks this goal will have to do it his or her own way. Perhaps a brief account of my own efforts will encourage others to believe that the struggle is worth the effort.

The philosopher SÃ¸ren Kierkegaard observed that "life can only be understood backward, but it has to be lived forward." [^2] In my own search for truth, whether sacred or scientific, I too have had to live forward, not knowing what was yet to come, nor why. Only after reflection, analysis, and much thought have I eventually understood some of the lessons to which I have been exposed. At each stage in my life I have looked back at my past thinking and have found errors, truths, partial truths, and errors mistakenly thought to be truths. There were frequent periods of doubt interspersed with times when I was blessed with insight and understanding.

In order to give the reader a sense of my personal approach to the search and integration of religious and scientific truths, I must resort to a series of flashbacks. It is not so important that I recall exactly what happened and how. What is important is what effect my thoughts and reactions to events had upon my philosophy of life, and upon the actions resulting from that ever-evolving philosophy. My scientific and religious education have usually worked together, mostly in harmony, to bring me to a modest understanding of this universe and its inhabitants.

It is essential to differentiate between the approach to the search for truth in religion and the search for truth in science by distinguishing between the nature of scientific truths and the nature of religious truths. Each sphere of truth has its own validity, its own goals and objectives, and its own means or methods of searching for truth. Although we as Latter-day Saints are taught to accept all truth, in an important sense the two spheres of truth meet only in the human soul. Failure of mankind to understand this dichotomy has been the cause of much unnecessary contention and disputation.

In science we repeat an experiment under controlled conditions until we get what we consider reproducible results, albeit the results may be negative. In life we get results without the opportunity to control the conditions and often without the opportunity to repeat or control the experiment. It is true that there is a lot of repetition in life. As one of my friends often observed, "If you keep doing what you have always done, you will keep getting what you have always gotten." Like all good aphorisms, there is a kernel of truth encapsulated within that husk of simplism.

However, cumulative effects of repetitive behavior sometimes lead to totally unanticipated results. We learn religious truths from both repetitive and unique experiences. From each of life's events it is for us to do the sifting and winnowing to separate the wheat from the chaff and find those precious kernels of truth bound up inextricably with each experience. If we are wise, we will also learn from the experiences of others and avoid undesirable consequences or achieve desirable outcomes.

At various stages in my life I have looked back and realized how naive were my earlier opinions and ideas. I have come to realize that even in my more mature years I am still far from where I need and want to be in my understanding of truth. This essay is an attempt to recount the more significant parts of that backward look, insofar as it relates to the intersection of science and religion.

I would like first to place my own "pilgrim's progress" in the historical context in which it was lived. In 1633 Galileo was placed under house arrest for advancing the Copernican view that the earth revolved around the sun and was not the center of the universe. The events of Galileo's life illustrate the vital point that the most serious clashes between religion and science occur when one appears to threaten the very essence and being of the other.

Charles Darwin's Origin of the Species, published in 1859, seemingly eliminated the need for a Creator in order to explain the existence of life on this planet. The bookprovided the basis for perceived threats to the doctrines of Christian churches. Many philosophers and scientists, particularly biologists, took up the debate, and their legacy is still our intellectual misfortune.

At about the same time, the concept of "Higher Criticism" of the Bible was spreading throughout northern Europe, further threatening Christian beliefs. The rationalism of this movement led the historian Will Durant to comment, "The result of two centuries of discussion seemed to be the annihilation of Christ." [^3] Durant dismissed this extreme view with his own conclusion: "That a few simple men should in one generation have invented so powerful and appealing a personality, so lofty an ethic . . . would be a miracle far more incredible than any recorded in the Gospels. After two centuries of Higher Criticism the outlines of the life, character, and teachings of Christ remain reasonably clear, and constitute the most fascinating feature in the history of Western man."

Defenders of the Christian faith have resorted to various tactics. In 1925 John T. Scopes was tried and convicted in Dayton, Tennessee, for violating a state statute forbidding the teaching of evolution in the schools of the state. The verdict was reversed on an appeal, but the statute stayed on the books until 1967.

Since the discovery of the double helical structure of DNA, the building blocks of the genetic code, our understanding of evolutionary biology has been revolutionized. There is no longer a "missing link" between man and the apes; through comparing DNA base pairs, biologists can calculate the relationship between any two species of organisms. The availability of more powerful telescopes has allowed astronomers to see further into the past and describe the evolution of the universe from the first few seconds of its existence. Many churches now openly embrace such scientific concepts as evolution.

On the other side, many scientists of our day are more conscious of the limitations of science than were scientists of the past, and many scientific establishments go out of their way to avoid denigrating religion. [^4] In the United States the battle between science and religion continues to be carried into the courts over the question of what can be taught in public schools without violating the Constitutional prohibition of favoring one religion over another. Having failed to achieve the right to give equal time to the biblical account of the Creation, some Christian churches have invented a concept they call Creation science, for which they demand equal school time. The Supreme Court has determined that this concept does not qualify as science, even when it is modified to admit a limited evolution. Thus in the forty years since publication of the book Science and Your Faith in God, the context and the debate have changed significantly. The rule of law has placed the debate in its proper venue. Individual believers on all sides must make their cases by force of reason, logic, and faith. It is the realm of faith which I first seek to address.

My Personal Voyage

The first significant religious experience which I can recall is my baptism into The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. It took place in an irrigation reservoir on the outskirts of Fort Collins, Colorado, in June of 1934, four months prior to my ninth birthday. It was the first and only baptism performed by either of two elders serving in a relatively hostile mission. Thus it is understandable that their instructions to me were a bit sketchy. They assumed I was more informed as to what was going to happen than was the case. I had seen pictures of Christ and John the Baptist in the River Jordan, with John's arm raised to the square as he prepared to baptize Christ. Waist deep in the water, their upper bodies appeared dry. Remembered pictures of Jesus after his baptism, showing the Holy Ghost descending in the form of a dove, did not depict the Lord dripping wet. I innocently assumed that as soon as Elder Rose had recited the appropriate incantation, I would have faithfully and fully fulfilled my part of the ordinance.

Suddenly, and entirely without warning, Elder Rose thrust me under water and attempted to drown me. At least that's the way I interpreted it. The fact that he failed to ensure that either of my hands was restrained made my struggle for survival all the more vigorous. This only caused him to redouble his efforts to hold me firmly on the bottom of the lake. At long last, he seemed to have a change of heart and pulled me upright and led me sputtering and bewildered out of the water. He and his companion exhibited a sense of satisfaction which I did not share. My emotions were a combination of surprise and relief. The fact that my mother seemed to sanction the entire process fixed in my mind a less-than-theologically-accurate connection between misbehavior, atonement, and baptism.

We had hardly started for home when the elders' ancient vehicle ran out of gas. After a short deliberation the junior companion agreed he would walk the two miles (and back) to the nearest gas station. Upon his return he confessed that he had brought only enough gas to get back to the station. Lacking funds, he had had to leave his watch with the owner as security. My mother set that matter right, and we proceeded homeward with everyone else appearing rather self-satisfied if not downright joyful, while I tried to make sense out of the afternoon. I must have been confirmed sometime afterwards, but that part of the ordinance has been lost from my memory.

This inauspicious beginning proved to be characteristic of many of my religious experiences. I have learned since that it is not unique to encounter a significant religious experience ill prepared for what is to come. A sense of bewilderment and bemusement is often my initial reaction. I have frequently found myself, as a result of compliant and complacent willingness to go along with the wishes of family, friends, and associates, suddenly thrust into situations where my very future was cast into uncertainty and doubt; and on these occasions I have wondered about the meaning of it all. My immediate concern was more often with how to get out of or survive the situation than how or why I got into it in the first place. However, this mode of encounter has served to fix such events firmly in my memory.

Our family was one of the first LDS families to settle permanently in Ft. Collins, and my religious training in our exceedingly small branch was acquired haphazardly and over strong objections and resistance on my part. I never had LDS classmates in school near my age with whom I could associate. There was no Primary, no Young Men nor Young Women programs, no seminary classes, no Scouting. With great perseverance, my mother managed to get me, my sister, and my brother to what passed for church services—a combination of Sunday School and sacrament meeting held in the leftover Saturday night smoke of the Odd Fellows Hall. [^5] We seemed never to pursue any other course of study than Church history. We undoubtedly had a Book of Mormon in the house, though I don't recall where it was kept.

Whatever our religious training may have lacked, our moral training was another matter. No children ever had two parents with more unflinching senses of integrity and honesty. It was clear from my earliest years that in our family there were certain things (a large number, in fact) we simply didn't do, whatever the standards of the rest of the world. My mother's technique with me, which was incredibly effective, was to explain in a greatly sorrowful tone of voice how mortified she had been by my behavior (behavior deserving of this response was often exhibited during church). I did not know for a long time what mortification meant, but to my young mind it sounded as though mortifying one's own mother was just about the worst thing a child could do. As a parent, I have not changed my feelings on that subject.

After high school I entered engineering training at Stanford University on a "full scholarship," courtesy of the U.S. Army. Prior to my departure from home, the branch president thought it might be a good idea if I were ordained a priest. This was done, and thus it was that as an eighteen-year-old freshman at Stanford, I blessed the sacrament for the first time. At the time I was a temporary member of the Palo Alto Ward.

The four-year college education promised by the army was replaced after a single semester by an assignment to an infantry regiment and later a combat engineer battalion. After being exposed to the subject of physics at the college level, I knew I wanted to be a physicist, whatever it might take to achieve that goal. Only later did I learn that many of my relatives had already entered that field of science.

At the end of hostilities in Europe, my battalion left Germany and embarked from Marseilles, France, for the Philippine Islands, from which we were to participate in the invasion of Japan. War is a sobering and unforgettable experience. It leaves impressions that do not dim with age and which become an integral part of one's own being. Seeing the death and destruction in Germany prepared me, I believe, for my next and my most significant religious experience. My personal copy of the Book of Mormon was still rarely opened, with large parts unread. However, I could never again read scriptural accounts of ancient battles dispassionately. Never again could I take life for granted nor leave its meaning unquestioned.

During the next two months, the only shipboard activity of any interest, other than eating, reading, and watching the flying fish, was the glee club directed by the chaplain's assistant (another shipboard activity, dice games played with large amounts of real money, both amazed and frightened me). The price for participation in the glee club was attendance and performance at the interdenominational Sunday services. During services one Sunday [^6] I idly contemplated the fact that I was really an imposter. Everyone else who belonged to the singing group was a Jew, a Catholic, or a Protestant. My dog tag declared me to be a Protestant, but my religious training had drummed into my head that we Mormons were not Protestants but that we were somehow related to the Jews.

While I mused on such thoughts, a very foreign idea entered my mind. For the first time in my life, the thought occurred to me that I didn't have to be a Mormon, or a Christian, or anything else. I could go home and inform my family that I was no longer a Mormon. It was a liberating thought which opened up endless vistas and opportunities. I knew I wouldn't need to drink alcoholic beverages; most of my friends of other Christian denominations in Ft. Collins didn't. Nor would I need to smoke. While I didn't really care for coffee and beer, I thought I could learn to fake that part of the non-Mormon lifestyle. [^7] As for girls, they were still largely merely a part of my fantasy life, but a whole new dimension of fantasies had been opened up. I cannot explain the sense of freedom I felt at that moment.

As the chaplain's sermon came to a close and we prepared to sing the closing anthem, my joys were dashed as quickly as they had arisen. I thought that my parents would accept my decision, though there was still the possibility that my mother might feel mortified. More important was the overwhelming realization that both the Lord and I knew that I was forever and unquestionably a Mormon. Reason and desire were irrelevant. Some heretofore-unappreciated agent for transmitting knowledge and truth from the Lord had acted upon me. I still didn't know what kind of a physicist or what kind of a Mormon I was destined to be, but my future course seemed foreordained, however mixed my feelings.

My Education Begins

Had I been in doubt about my future vocation, both religious and secular, upon discharge from the army, I would have stayed in Colorado. There a college scholarship was available, and I could have lived at home, enjoying my mother's cooking. Instead, I entered Utah State University, where I could acquire a degree in physics (something which Colorado State did not offer, whereas at Utah State my Uncle Willard Gardner was chair of the Physics Department) and a Mormon wife (which Ft. Collins also did not appear to offer).

Once enrolled at Utah State, I did not take religious classes at first; I had calculated that by taking the maximum number of real courses I could finish my degree in three years. During my senior year, however, I decided to audit (unofficially, since I was already over the course limit) an LDS Institute course in the Old Testament from Heber C. Snell. The main motive was not so much to learn anything about religion but to be able to share a course with Marjorie Cole, a freshman whom I had identified as my future spouse. Snell was, arguably, the best Biblical scholar in the Church at the time. He had been among those promising scholars encouraged by the Church to go east a generation earlier for advanced training at Chicago and other top centers of learning. With his dry wit and gentle manner, Snell opened my eyes to the world of religious scholarship. He dealt honestly with the seeming inconsistencies in the scriptures and helped us to separate the important concepts from troublesome interpretations. He led us to an appreciation of the historical, religious, and philosophical truths of the Old Testament. We learned to appreciate its beauty and poetry as well. I am forever indebted to Professor Snell for ignoring the letter of the university's law and obeying the spirit by allowing my participation in his class. From him I learned the critical difference between reading and studying the scriptures.

Dr. Snell's course helped me to realize that one source of my occasional uneasiness with the knowledge that I was a Mormon was an uncomfortable feeling that there were truths known to the philosophers and the prophets that were missing from my own simplistic and very limited knowledge of Mormon doctrine. It was to be some years before I really managed to redress this situation to any significant extent.

Meanwhile, I entered Iowa State University for graduate work in physics and mathematics. My father, a very wise man (and a soil chemist) had suggested that I could probably make a fair-to-middling physicist. On the other hand, were I to take a degree in physics and enter the field of soil physics, of which his older brother Willard had been a pioneer, I might make a very good future for myself. At that time few soil physicists had more than a year of college physics. At Iowa State the physicist Don Kirkham, son of the distinguished Mormon educator Francis Kirkham and nephew of Oscar Kirkham, a General Authority, held a joint appointment in both the agronomy and the physics departments. Kirkham had become interested in soil physics through a brief association with Willard Gardner while Kirkham was teaching physics at Utah State. Kirkham was an important reason for my choosing Iowa State, and a very sound reason he proved to be. By happy coincidence, Marjorie later was to become Don Kirkham's secretary, an added bonus. One of Don's daughters later became one of my students.

I discovered at Ames that Mormon scientists were represented in most of the agricultural sciences far beyond the proportion of Mormons to the general population of the country. These men were moving into positions of international prominence. [^8] With some exceptions, most were still strongly identified with the religion of their birth. Kirkham was already acknowledged to be the top mathematician among the soil physicists and was eventually to train more soil physicists than any other single individual. Thus, my newfound Mormon friends were largely a subset of my scientific colleagues, and they created a very congenial and tolerant intellectual atmosphere.

Equally tolerant was the science faculty. I recall one lecture on quantum mechanics given by J. F. Carlson (of whom we were all much in awe, inasmuch as he had been a student of Robert Oppenheimer). After Professor Carlson had presented the surprising results of an interesting calculation, one of the students burst out spontaneously, "Why is that?" Carlson replied in a matter-of-fact tone, "I can teach you how it is. Only God can tell you why it is." It was said in such a manner that it left open the possibility that, to Carlson's way of thinking, God did indeed exist and did bear responsibility for why things are as they are.

At about that time I read a comment attributed to the distinguished Princeton physicist John Wheeler. [^9] Wheeler suggested that the size of the universe was dictated by the requirements for the existence of mankind. Very large and complex molecules are required for the existence of life on earth. Very large molecules require a very long time to evolve and to be organized into life forms. Long times, in an ever expanding universe, require very large distances. In a very real physical sense, therefore, the existence of mankind requires a universe billions of years old and of immense size. In the words of the physicist Freeman Dyson, "The universe knew we were coming." [^10] I found very intriguing the theological implications of this concept.

I initially eschewed attendance at priesthood meetings in the Ames Branch. My excuse was that the course of study was Church history and that the class was taking longer to get across the plains than the 1847 journey. I was taught an important lesson in the ways of the Church when I responded to the question "What would you rather study?" My mistake (at least I thought so at the time) was to suggest that I would rather study something much different, such as the priesthood and Church government. Two weeks later I was the teacher of such a class. The experience forced me to begin the process of filling the gaping voids in my religious background.

Upon graduation I received several job offers in my primary field of training, solid state physics. However, I elected to take a position in soil physics that would allow me to work for a year (which ended up to be thirteen years) under the tutelage of L. A. Richards with the USDA in Riverside, California. Richards was a direct descendent of Willard Richards, who was a cousin of Brigham Young and was also President Young's personal physician, and who is perhaps best remembered for having been one of the four men incarcerated in the Carthage Jail at the time of the martyrdom of the Prophet Joseph Smith. L. A. Richards was recognized as the foremost experimental soil physicist in the world. He had taken his M.S. with my Uncle Willard at Logan and his Ph.D. in physics from Cornell University and had preceded Dr. Kirkham at Ames in the same faculty position. Once again, my scientific and my religious worlds were intimately interwoven. Kirkham represented the best in theory and Richards the best in experiment, and both possessed, one might say, distinguished Mormon pedigrees. My daunting scientific challenge was to find a niche somewhere in between the two men.

With so many relatives and friends sharing both my scientific and religious heritage, I also faced the challenge of determining where I fit into the ecclesiastical spectrum of Mormon scientists. My personal acquaintances among LDS scientists by now ranged from ultra-orthodox to those who claimed limited belief in the doctrines of the Church but still acknowledged their Mormon heritage, at least conditionally.

The main point of this overlong personal history is to illustrate how I arrived at adulthood with a mind largely devoid of knowledge of Church doctrine or other religious knowledge. Until college my Book of Mormon was essentially unstudied, though much earlier I had concluded that "I Nephi, having been born of goodly parents," was one of the best first lines in all of literature. I had known that there were thirteen articles of faith but could have identified only about five of them. However, both my scientific and personal destiny seemed ineluctably bound up with that of other Mormons. This represented a dramatic shift from my youthful isolation from the Saints. Other than my father's mission to the eastern states without purse or scrip, neither of my parents had held a position in a Church quorum or auxiliary. Therefore, it still had not occurred to me that I might at some point be called to such service. Because of the war, the question of a mission never arose. Accepting Church callings was still outside the boundaries of my personal belief system.

Science and Religion

When a scientist sets out to record and describe his or her contributions to truth, the process is made to sound very orderly and precise. A hypothesis to be tested is postulated, methodology is explained, results are obtained and interpreted, and only then is it affirmed that the hypothesis is indeed true, as was anticipated (negative results generally are consigned to a bottom drawer, unless they dramatically debunk some highly regarded consensus).

In actuality, the process of finding truth is never that orderly and neat. There is a current movement among some sociologists which asserts that scientific truth exists only in the minds of scientists and is whatever a consensus of scientists says it is. Steven Weinberg answers that fallacy thus: "A party of mountain climbers may argue over the best path to the peak, and those arguments may be conditioned by the history and social structure of the expedition, but in the end either they find a good path to the peak or they do not, and when they do, they know it."

Just as the nonscientist may be confused by the apparent inability of science to agree on what is the truth of a given issue at any given time, the agnostic and atheist may take the same view of religion: i.e., that religious truth seems to be whatever a group of theologians say it is. In the Church we are taught that we learn "line upon line and precept upon precept." [^11] However, when we assemble all the lines and all the precepts together in our minds, we often seem to observe a sort of jigsaw puzzle of pieces that don't quite fit. In some regions, gaps loom large, and in others the pieces overlap in mutual conflict. Only here and there do we see regions of order, some quite clear, many more fuzzy and "impressionistic." The human mind does not like disjunctions and will go to great lengths to avoid or eliminate them.

The scientific method provides the means by which scientific truth can be found, and in that method the consensus follows the process rather than leading it. When it comes to religious truth, we are either condemned to the sterile conclusions of endless religious debates about many parts of the religious puzzle which do not appear to fit or we must find a viable religious pathway to truth. Various religious communities resort to differing methods. Some rely upon tradition, others trust in reason, many have holy books, while still others place their hope in charismatic individuals. As Latter-day Saints we believe that a God-given process exists and has always existed and will continue to exist. Joseph Smith found that procedure in the Epistle of James 1:5. [^12] It is explained further in the Book of Mormon (see Moro. 10:3-5). [^13] As I prepared for various Church assignments, the realization that I could find out the truth for myself and did not have to rely upon the word or authority of another was of critical importance to me. In God's mind confusion does not exist, for he is the author of all truth. If he wants us to know truth, then surely he must provide a pathway by which that truth can be obtained. To understand eternal truths that transcend the bounds of this universe, we must eventually go to the author of that truth, our Creator.

My religious education continued to be very much a matter of chance. In Riverside I accepted a call to teach a Sunday School class of sixteen- and seventeen-year-olds. Since I was scarcely a decade older than the students, it was a much less daunting prospect than it would be today. I accepted, not so much out of a sense of duty, but because the Sunday School president was a friend and colleague. Thus while I was learning to be a scientist I was also forced to undergo a crash course in Mormon doctrine, if only to minimize embarrassment due to my ignorance. This call was followed by a series of Church administrative positions, ranging from Sunday School superintendent to counselor in a bishopric to member of a stake high council and then back to teaching (the Gospel Doctrine class) all within the space of a decade. When given a choice, I adopted a conscious and deliberate use of speaking assignments to select and speak on those religious or philosophical concepts of most immediate concern to me or least understood by me. Interestingly, each new Church assignment seemed to contain elements in common with my baptism. Initially, each call came unexpectedly and left me figuratively "gasping for breath" and wondering why otherwise friendly souls were trying to bring me to grief. Later, as I became wiser in the ways of Churchmanship, I could see some of the calls coming, but this prevision did not alter the sense of lack of preparation nor lessen the feeling of engulfment.

I frequently met Mormon scientific colleagues at professional meetings, in an ever-expanding network. I do not recall that we normally indulged in any significant discussions of the problems of accommodating religious doctrine and scientific "facts," with two exceptions. I had long discussions with two friends who were already on the brink of leaving the Church, and for whom the Pearl of Great Price was a most troublesome document. For them, I think, conflicts between science and religion provided a convenient and "principled" excuse to do what they already wanted to do on other grounds. However, they still accepted many truths of the gospel. From discussions with such disaffected individuals I have learned an important theological principle, since reinforced many times. We are often presented with the choice between two seemingly correct but mutually exclusive principles and must decide which is the higher and the more important. Thus it was with Adam and Eve. I feel that my friends replaced what they considered an error by a more serious error, in that they rejected major truths due to what they perceived to be minor "errors." Such dilemmas are not at all uncommon in science, and they often guide our choice of research subjects.

The Philosophies of Men

An opportunity to remedy my ignorance of philosophy occurred early during one of my Riverside years. An evening course on the philosophy of religion was offered at the University of California, where my wife was taking her turn to obtain a higher education. In a class of about twelve other students, we covered subjects ranging from the existence of God, to good and evil, God and human freedom, and immortality. As my wife and I studied for the class, in which we were both enrolled, we read from many of the important philosophers to whom my intense scientific training had given short shrift. On our reading list were names such as Santayana, Alfred North Whitehead, Albert Einstein, SÃ¸ren Kierkegaard, Blaise Pascal, Thomas Aquinas, St. Augustine, Benedict Spinoza, and many others. By unspoken agreement, none of the participants identified their religious affiliation, if any. Discussions were free-ranging and spirited, with the instructor serving only to keep the discussion moving forward.

The important point which delighted me and surprised me was to learn that every one of the most basic religious questions posed by the distinguished philosophers through the ages was dealt with in the doctrines of the Church. One might or might not accept the answers provided by Joseph Smith, either through modern revelation or through his translations of ancient scriptures, but the issues were addressed, and Joseph Smith (with the essential support of the Book of Mormon) had neither avoided nor sidestepped a single fundamental issue. It would be false to assert that I fully comprehended or accepted all that I read. The important consequence was an affirmation that the Church had a theological basis worthy of investigation and study, deserving a place on the library shelves of all the noted philosophers and theologians. One unexpected point of dissatisfaction I found with the writings of many of the philosophers was the minimal attention paid to the concept of eternal progression, a concept which my Church callings had led me to accept and which my science led me to embrace. Our class had problems with the concept of God's grace as the only means of salvation. In the class members' view, if you followed the arguments of one of the saints of old, you might conclude that you could add greatly to God's grace and glory by sinning as much as possible. Obviously absurd. I had already learned to question scientists who preceded me, but questioning philosophers of world renown was a bold step for me. It was a growing confidence in modern day revelation that emboldened me to reason and ponder things for myself. Looking back, I now realize that I was continuously asking the Lord for confirmation of my reasoning to a much greater extent than I appreciated at the time. Sometimes this confirmation came, sometimes not. It was obvious that much study lay ahead, but this learning experience permanently influenced my approach to religious truth and my approach to correlation of sacred truth with scientific and philosophical truth. I did learn an important concept from the words of St. Augustine: "If you don't believe it, you won't understand it." [^14] The scientific analog is the reverse: "If you don't understand it, you can't believe it." I began to appreciate that belief and understanding go hand in hand, both in the religious and the secular spheres of knowledge. Sometimes one comes first, sometimes the other, but they cannot remain very far apart.

Science and the Church

In an attempt to understand LDS doctrine relative to some of the more controversial scientific concepts of the day, I frequently sought help from among those Mormon scientists who have gone before. I have found a particular kinship with Elder John A. Widtsoe, a member of the Quorum of the Twelve from 1921 until his death in 1952. Although I was too young to know him, he was a close colleague of my Uncle Willard Gardner, with whom he published a number of important scientific papers. His early experiments on the water requirements of plants anticipated researches that were to consume three decades of my own career.

Widtsoe wrote at length on science and Mormonism. One helpful passage comes from the volume In Search of Truth. [^15] In commenting on what he terms "this troublesome squabble about evolution," Widtsoe wrote, "The gospel of Jesus Christ accepts all truth. There is no limitation placed upon that truth that may be accepted by members of the Church. A vast literature sets forth in detail the facts around which the evolution controversy has raged. No one, least of all the Church, objects to those facts if they are properly verified. They are to be accepted,acceptable, and welcome." Widtsoe goes on to refer to "man-like" forms found in various countries and acknowledges them as "undoubtedly genuine." [^16] To me, it is not enough that the scientific community validate the facts and truths of science. I know how difficult that can be, and I have lived long enough to find myself arguing vigorously with colleagues defending interpretations of facts that I myself had promulgated years earlier but now no longer accept. Prayerful study can be an aid to understanding in science as well as in religion.

A significant truth came to me rather suddenly at a time when it was much needed. I had often listened in testimony meetings to those who could assert with obvious sincerity and honesty that they knew the gospel was true, "beyond a shadow of a doubt." I wondered how they could be so certain when my own doubts about certain matters cast dark shadows in the corners of my mind. I had often read D&C 46:10-26, about the gifts given by the Spirit of God. But during all prior readings I had missed an important point. Verse 13 gives the answer very clearly: "To some it is given by the Holy Ghost to know that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and that he was crucified for the sins of the world." At that time I did not possess that gift. There was no doubt, however, in my mind that my paternal grandmother, who blessed our home by living with us for three of her 100 years, did have it.

As I became wiser in the ways of God and the gospel, I understood that just as many scientific colleagues knew and understood truths that were yet beyond my comprehension, so it is with the gospel. It is not for me to question what someone else knows nor how they can know it. I must learn for myself as well as hope for the gift described in verse 14, i.e., to believe on the words of those with the gift of knowledge.

From Riverside I went to Madison, Wisconsin, largely to expand my contacts with scientists in other disciplines but also to work with C. B. Tanner, one of the first agricultural scientists to be elected to the National Academy of Sciences and again a very close LDS scientific colleague. This period of fourteen years provided the opportunity to be challenged in my thinking by LDS scholars who had progressed well beyond my own level of understanding. It was an exciting and profitable time, both scientifically and ecclesiastically.

My wife and I also added to our knowledge of the children of Israel through an excellent seminar given by a local rabbi. His insights were extremely illuminating. It also helped us to understand the reasoning of a rabbi who was making a stir in Jewish circles by his book and lectures (one of which we attended) asserting that God was dead. He based his conclusion on the Holocaust and all the other misfortunes visited upon God's supposedly "chosen people." Soon after his lecture in Madison, two items of graffiti appeared on a wall across from the lecture hall: "My God is alive and well, sorry about yours"; and "Nietzsche: 'God is dead.' God: 'Nietzsche is dead.'" As Lord Keynes observed, "In the long run, we're all dead." All humor aside, what happens in the long run may be of eternal importance to us.

Science and Religion Harmonize

Next in my life came seven years as an administrator at the University of Arizona ( my previous administrative experience had been derived entirely from Church service). My dean and immediate superior was a Mormon. These were years in which I tried to put into practice both my religious and scientific theory. I also was forced to come to grips with my painful shyness and become more people-oriented. My Church service had taught me that on any given day, many staff and faculty members are probably undergoing serious trauma in their lives and should be dealt with accordingly.

Then came an irresistible opportunity to move to an administrative position with the University of California, the president of which happened to be a Latter-day Saint. My wife and I found a home which turned out to be within the boundaries of the Richmond Ward, just north of Berkeley. After the first visit to our new ward, I was asked to meet with the stake presidency, who were visiting the ward. I interpreted this as a routine interview and courtesy visit designed to let the stake presidency become better acquainted with ward members, and our visit was consistent with this interpretation. I conveyed to the stake presidency the nature of my travel schedule and the time demands and emotional stresses of my new university position. Two or three weeks later, as we were moving into our new home, my wife and I were asked to meet with the stake president in his office in Walnut Creek. I had now been in the Church long enough to know that this was not to be a social visit. One or both of us were about to receive a Church calling. During the forty-five minute drive we succeeded in thinking of many good and sufficient reasons for dissuading the president from issuing any and every conceivable call which might be in his mind. My university assignment was nothing less that the complete restructuring of an entire college. Change is a concept almost foreign to Berkeley, and my abilities and energies were being taxed to the utmost. An appropriate calling might be, say, usher at stake conference or secretary to the high priests group. I was indulging in the self-justification that it is not where you serve but how you serve that is important and that all calls are equal in the eyes of the Lord.

We had overlooked the one calling for which we had no adequate response. When the stake president called me to be bishop of the Richmond Ward, I think my wife was even more shocked than I was. I felt almost as I had when Elder Rose suddenly thrust me under the waters of baptism, except that drowning now appeared almost the better of the two fates. The first thing I discovered was how nearly impossible it is to say no to such a call. I made a feeble pro forma attempt to put forth the excuses designed for the anticipated callings, but stake presidents would never find bishops if they accepted protestations of that kind. Thus the week we moved into our new ward I found myself trying to influence a faculty of 150 highly individualistic and independent scholars and at the same time to lead a ward of 740 Mormons, none of whom I knew. No more severe and definitive test of whether I had crossed the chasm from a philosophical belief in God to a sacred theological belief in God and in his organized church could have been devised. When everyone on the ward priesthood executive committee looks at you, the bishop, expectantly awaiting, if not inspiration or a revelation, at least some modicum of wisdom, you know you are dependent on faith and faith alone. No amount of theory or academic training can save you, nor can you fake it. It was at this point that my separate and partially independent searches for truth, religious and scientific, had finally and fully merged into one.

As I look back on my career, I feel that were it not for my interest in science and scientific truth, I would have found it very easy to neglect the search for religious truth. Science is not the only way to God, nor will science lead anyone all of the way to God. Without realizing it, I had been following the admonitions of Bacon and Moroni, quoted above. Science is epitomized by a compelling need to know the truth. This same motivation led me to try to become proficient in both science and religion. In order to do so, I have had to believe in order to understand and to understand in order to believe. I find that my studies of the scriptures are much enriched and more meaningful in the context of my understanding of science, and my understanding and appreciation of science are enlightened by my religious experiences. No longer are they compartmentalized. They are complementary. Together they regulate my conduct. To achieve this state I believe it took a nurturing and understanding environment of family and tolerant church and scientific friends, combined with many hours of study and pondering, driven by a hunger for knowledge and truth.

The promise of a physical resurrection tells me that God views both the physical and the spiritual components of the human soul as essential, worthy of careful study, coexistent and harmonized in his sphere of truth. As a physicist I cannot yet begin to imagine how the physical and the spiritual do come together, but as one who has finally overcome the reluctant and feeble faith of my youth and replaced it with stronger, firmer, more willing faith, I have now accepted and try to honor as best I can the baptismal covenant entered into as a bewildered and confused boy so many years ago.

Notes

Wilford R. Gardner studied at Utah State University and Iowa State University and received degrees in physics, mathematics, and soil physics. He worked as a physicist for the U.S. Department of Agriculture in Riverside, California, following graduate school and then served as professor of soil physics at the University of Wisconsin, as head of the Department of Soil and Water Science at the University of Arizona, and as dean of the College of Natural Resources and director of the agriculture and natural resources programs at the University of California, Berkeley. He retired in 1994.

Dr. Gardner was elected to the National Academy of Sciences in 1983. He published more than 150 papers on different areas of soil physics and served as president of the Soil Science Society of America in 1990. He was a Senior Fulbright Fellow in Belgium, and in 1972 he was awarded the Medal of Honor by the University of Ghent. He continues to work with a number of international committees concerned with water resources and soil physics in western Europe, Russia, Australia, and Asia.

Dr. Gardner married Marjorie Cole and has three children. He has served as Sunday School president in six different wards, served on three stake high councils, served as bishop of a California ward, and taught a number of classes.

16.Ibid., pp. 33, 67-88.

---
Notas:
[^1] James Ussher, The Annals of the World (London: E. Tyler, 1658), p. 54.
[^2] James Hutton, Theory of the Earth with Proofs and Illustrations (London: Caldwell & Davies, 1795).
[^3] Will Durant, The Story of Civilization: Part III, Caesar and Christ (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1944), p. 554.
[^4] The National Academy of Sciences has recently published a report entitled How to Teach About Evolution (Washington, D.C.: NAS Press, 1998). I was asked to review this report prior to publication because of my known affiliation with the LDS Church. My charge was to ensure that, insofar as possible, the report would not inadvertently appear to denigrate any religion or anyone's religious beliefs.
[^5] Until early adulthood I knew little of my father's positive feelings about the Church. Having finally, at age forty, found permanent employment in his field of scientific training, he worked seven days a week to ensure his continued employment.
[^6] This event occurred roughly a week after we had learned of the nuclear bombing of Hirsohima, but prior to our realization that there would be no invasion of Japan. That particular religious service was well attended by troops who were doing their best to try not to think about what might lie ahead for us, and who had taken an uncharacteristic interest in religion.
[^7] It did not occur to me that I might aspire to be other than a Christian. Ft. Collins appeared to me to be divided into Christians, Mormons, and heathens. I was certain I was not a heathen and my friends seemed unsure that I was a Christian. This misunderstanding still dogs our Church. I have repented of my early opinion of heathens.
[^8] See Leonard J. Arrington and Davis Bitton, The Mormon Experience (New York: Knopf, 1979), chapter 16.
[^9] I believe it appeared in Physics Today, published by the American Institute of Physics, but, regrettably, I did not anticipate a future need for such a citation.
[^10] Freeman Dyson, Infinite in all Directions, The Gifford Lectures, Aberdeen Scotland, April-Nov., 1985 (New York: Harper and Row, 1988).
[^11] See Isa. 28:10,13 2 Ne. 28:30; D&C 98:12.
[^12] "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him."
[^13] "And when ye shall receive these things, I would exhort you that ye would ask God . . . if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost" (v. 4).
[^14] De Libero Arbitrio 354-430.
[^15] In Search of Truth: Comments on the Gospel and Modern Thought (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1930).
[^16] Moses 1:35.
