David Clark, Of Heaven and Earth: Reconciling Scientific Thought with LDS Theology ( 1998)

Chapter 5

"Oh Say, What Is Truth?"

Raymond L. Ethington

An estimated date for Earth's origin, based on events reported in the Old Testament, was published in 1658 in the name of James Ussher (1581-1656), Archbishop of Armagh and Primate of Ireland. He summarized as follows: "In the Beginning, God created Heaven and Earth, Gen. I.V.I., Which beginning of time, according to our chronology, fell upon the entrance of the night preceding the twenty third day of October in the year of the Julian calendar, 710." [^1] Transposing that date to the Gregorian calendar, which has been used to record time since 1752, provides 4004 b.c. as the year when Earth was said to have joined the other planets in the solar system.

William Lloyd, then Bishop of Winchester, entered this chronology prominently in the English Bible in 1701. Since that time, the year 4004 b.c. has been cited frequently, although the method by which it was determined is probably unknown to many who quote it. This figure for the age of Earth is in marked contrast to the estimate that has been assembled by persons who based their conclusions on careful examination of Earth itself.

In the last half of the eighteenth century, a Scottish intellectual named James Hutton (1726-1797) made numerous observations about the spatial relations of the rocks of Scotland and thought deeply about how they had come to be. He noted that the kinds of raw materials needed to form the rocks could still be found along the coasts and in the mountains and valleys of Scotland, and he believed that similar raw materials of the past had been transformed into the present-day rocks through the action of natural processes that still operate. Hutton summarized his ideas in 1795 as a small book entitled Theory of the Earth. [^2] The substance of this volume was that Earth had undergone constant change during its history, and the author remarked that he saw no indication recorded in the rocks as to how or when these changes began and no suggestion of when they might end.

Baron Georges Cuvier (1769-1832), a man best known for his contributions to the development of the biological sciences, and his colleagues studied the layers of rocks in the region surrounding Paris. They noted that these rocks occurred in a specific vertical succession of layers and that the fossil animals they contained changed through the sequence. Some of these fossils represented marine animals, and others were of typical land dwellers. None of the fossils had living counterparts, and the farther down in the succession they were found, the more they differed from anything known to be living at that time.

Cuvier's group reported discovery of evidence at some levels within the succession of rapid elevation of the sea floor to a subaerial position and at other levels of quick submergence of a land area. They noted that such events were marked by the disappearance of the animals whose fossils characterized older rocks and that new populations of fossils were present in rocks formed after the events. Cuvier concluded that these relationships indicate a series of episodic cataclysmic events during Earth's history that caused near instantaneous extinction of the entire population of living things, after which a new creation led to repopulation with a different set of organisms. It is not surprising that his published discussions of his ideas in 1811 and 1812 referred to these events as "Revolutions of the Surface of the Globe," a comparison no doubt to the political and sociological turmoil that dominated his native France while he was a young man. Cuvier's paradigm was widely accepted in the Western world during the first half of the nineteenth century and is generally identified by the word catastrophism.

William Smith (1769-1839), a contemporary of Cuvier, worked as what we would call a civil engineer, making surveys, planning construction projects, and especially building canals, an important activity in England at the start of the industrial revolution. His observations of the spatial distributions of rocks and fossils in Britain largely duplicated those made by Cuvier in France. Whereas Cuvier was an analytical intellectual, Smith was a pragmatic person who did not draw upon his experience to provide insight into the deep meaning of things. He learned to use the orderly distribution of rocks and fossils to anticipate what he would encounter in the course of his construction projects and thereby enhance their planning and execution. Smith adopted the practice of recording his data graphically on maps, and in 1815 he published a map showing the rocks immediately beneath the soil cover of England, Wales, and part of Scotland, thereby pioneering a fundamental format for reporting data that is used by all geologists. His other major contribution was to note the order of succession of fossils in the rocks and then use this succession as a key for the identification of individual layers found in isolation and out of the context of a continuous succession of strata.

Science Today

These pioneering efforts, together with those of less well-known persons of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, laid the theoretical as well as the practical bases for geology and paleontology. They also are situated centrally in a debate that has waxed and waned in intensity over the past century and a half. On one side of this debate are those who recognize the history of Earth as a dynamic succession of events expressed over an extremely long period of time measured in billions of years, with a population of organisms that has displayed near constant change. The opposing view, commonly supported by citations of scripture, envisions Earth's history as brief, measured in thousands of years and essentially static, with no significant changes in its physical or biological configurations. A dramatization of some twenty years ago represented the issues in this debate in the format of a famous trial in the first half of this century. One of the protagonists, a witness under oath, advocates an age for Earth consistent with the ideas of Bishop Ussher. The other, in the role of a cross-examining attorney, responds by asking him if the calculated age was according to eastern or central standard time. Unfortunately, public discussion often has been in this vein, with each side seeking to trivialize the arguments of the other and to demonize those who advanced them, thus discrediting the opposition without coming to grips with either position.

Most of us can take a passive position with regard to this long-standing concern about the history of Earth, for we can accept it as an accomplished fact and devote our time to the everyday problems that are our lot and whose outcomes are not directly influenced by the specifics of history. My experience and day-to-day activities deny me this comfortable option. I am a geologist, and more specifically a paleontologist, which means that I have devoted my adult life to seeking knowledge and understanding of Earth, its materials, its population in the broadest sense, and its history. Space does not permit me to summarize what I have observed in forty years of examination of rocks and fossils from many parts of this country, and readers likely would find it tedious were I able to review it. My experience demonstrates to me that two things are inescapable. First, Earth is much older than six thousand years (the current estimate is that Earth, like the moon and the rest of the solar system, is of the order of 4.5 billion years old). Second, Earth had no population at the time it was created, the things that lived on it have changed continuously since it was populated, and the present population is the most recent phase of a dynamic history of the living things that have inhabited this planet.

Religion

In modern scriptures we find the account of Moses, who went into a high mountain and there experienced a vision whereby he saw many earths and their populations. He implored God, saying, "Tell me, I pray thee, why these things are so, and by what thou madest them?" (Moses 1:30). After giving Moses an answer that does not contain the requested details but rather emphasizes God's purpose, control, and influence in the process, God provides the ultimate justification for the existence of this and other earths: "For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39). The second chapter of the Book of Moses is an explication of the beginning of Earth as reported in the Bible in the first chapter of the book of Genesis.

Does my professional experience negate the scriptural treatment of Earth history? Do the scriptures render my experience false? That dilemma has persisted for those who deal with Earth history from both religious and secular perspectives for several hundred years at least and perhaps longer. It still is before us today. The words that follow may not reconcile these conflicting perspectives; rather, they are intended to convey my understanding.

Examine a picture printed in a newspaper. What does it represent? A photograph depicting a person or events at some time and some place. But what is actually shown in the newspaper? Not the original event and not the photograph that was made to record the event. Instead it is a collection of dots—big dots, small dots, widely spaced dots, crowded dots. If we get close enough to it we see only a single dot, and what it represents is lost to us. But the newspaper representation also is flawed when we view it from a distance. The rendering is achieved by photographing the original picture through a screen in order to produce the pattern of dots. The finer the screen, the greater the detail that is retained from the original photo, and newspapers use relatively coarse screens in their reproductions. When the pattern of dots is printed, the image is not recorded accurately on the newsprint because the ink tends to blot and flow on the fibrous surface, producing an irregular outline rather than a well-defined circle. As a result, illustrations in newspapers often lack definition, the contrast often presents problems in interpretation, and they not uncommonly display less-than-perfect definition of the objects that are pictured.

I liken the scriptures to the illustration on the newspaper page and the geologic evidence that I have examined over my forty years to the dots. Together they provide me with independent representations of the reality of something that I did not experience personally. We seek to understand what is before us by considering it from both perspectives, although admittedly many of us feel more comfortable and informed about one approach than the other. Perhaps that is where our difficulty in resolving the issue arises.

Truth

We have two ways of establishing what is true. We observe things about us through our physical senses, and we integrate those experiences over our lifetime to produce our view of the physical world. This aspect of our life is easy for us to comprehend and to define, and it allows us to convey this kind of learning and knowledge to others in a way they will comprehend. They in turn can, if they choose, replicate our observations and, if they are consistent with their own experiences, obtain the same insights. We also experience things spiritually, and this brings us personal understanding and conviction about the world around us. Our spiritually obtained insights cannot be shared except by testifying of them to other people. These people then may accept them or reject them, but they cannot reproduce them.

My professional career has been devoted to physical observations of Earth—to increasing the number of dots that make up the picture and to define them ever more rigorously in order to produce the best possible image. Were my life limited to those professional observations, I would have a strongly secular outlook on the world around me. My outlook is tempered by the spiritual experiences that have accompanied my professional experience. I want to share one of these because it exerted a profound influence on my thinking and will remain with me forever.

More than a decade ago, our first grandson was born. My companion and I and his parents eagerly awaited his arrival, anticipating the joy we would experience as we welcomed another generation into our family. Everything was judged to be normal as the projected date of his birth approached. We were delighted to receive a telephone message early one morning that informed us of his birth and that he and our daughter were doing well. Our joy turned to dismay when our son-in-law phoned us some twelve hours later to say that unexpected complications had arisen and our grandson was experiencing seizures whose cause had not been determined. The medical treatment he received over the next several days was to no avail. The seizures increased in frequency, duration, and intensity, and at one point our grandson had to be resuscitated. We began to despair.

Specialists were consulted to review the situation. After a few more days with no progress, the physicians met with the child's parents and grandmother to summarize their findings. They presented a grim prognosis, concluding that his chance of survival was slight and that even if he lived, he would require institutional care throughout his life. Our daughter asked that I give her son a blessing, her only hope for him in the face of this crisis. Our stake president and a close personal friend of our family went with me to the hospital to perform the ordinance. It was heart wrenching to see his tiny body encased in instruments that continuously monitored his bodily functions, an intravenous drip entering through a needle implanted in his scalp, and the baby lying encased in a transparent plastic capsule. We placed our hands on him and offered our prayer in his behalf, then solemnly departed with heavy hearts, leaving him behind in the technological jungle that was all he had known in his brief life and that was projected to be his future.

He was transferred to the medical center at the local university where he could receive continuing attention from the experienced physicians on the staff. The prognosis remained the same. But then, after about a week without any change in treatment, his condition began to improve. The seizures were less frequent, of briefer duration and intensity, and then they just faded away. In another week he was discharged to join his parents in their home for the first time. The physicians who attended him could offer no reason why he had suffered the difficulties that beset him, and they could not account for why he had overcome them. None of the tests and measurements that are part of normal medical procedures gave any insights into these questions. I suppose they assumed that they had been fortunate to recommend a treatment that eventually resolved the undetermined difficulty that afflicted him. I know that he was the beneficiary of a more powerful intervention in his behalf, one not limited by human knowledge. That experience convinces me that we cannot develop a full understanding of Earth merely by measuring, weighing, and analyzing it.

The gospel tells us that all things have a spiritual component, and it emphasizes the physical component as well. We cannot come to a complete knowledge of ourselves or of the universe unless we consider fully both the physical and spiritual nature of things. Unfortunately, as we seek to do so we see through a glass darkly. Some of us are most comfortable with a spiritual perspective; others are preoccupied by the physical nature of the world. Too frequently in our pursuit of reality we have aligned ourselves on opposite sides of a perceived dividing line and shouted past each other rather than engaging in a discussion. We focus our attention on the imperfect picture, or we concentrate on the individual dots. Whatever our perspective, the more we learn, the more the mystery remains and new questions appear.

Summary

Within the last year an announcement was circulated in the press that those who are concerned with the ultimate structure of matter had found the top quark after a long search. Probably a typical reader's reaction was a statement like "I didn't know it was lost." As scientists, including geologists and paleontologists, have probed in search of ever more fundamental attributes of the natural world, the field of investigation has become increasingly abstract and far from what we can see, smell, hear, and feel with our senses. Scientific investigation, a work of the mind, seems to me to often converge with revelation and the world of the spirit. I am impressed by how closely my thinking comes to words written over a century ago by W. W. Phelps:

The works of God continue, and worlds and lives abound; Improvement and progression have one eternal round. There is no end to matter; there is no end to space; There is no end to spirit; there is no end to race. There is no end to virtue; there is no end to might; There is no end to wisdom; there is no end to light. There is no end to union; there is no end to youth; There is no end to priesthood; there is no end to truth. ("If You Could Hie to Kolob," Hymns, 1985, no. 284)

I wish I could complete this essay with a grand conclusion that would unify the spiritual and physical insights about Earth and man that my life has provided me, but to my regret I cannot. Just as Einstein was frustrated in his aspiration to formulate a unified field theory that would provide a set of equations that could account for all of the fundamental forces recognized by physicists, so a complete theory of Earth has eluded me. But I take heart in my conviction that continued efforts to understand our planet and each other as physical and spiritual entities will bring to me and you insights that we now lack. To achieve this end, we cannot concentrate on either the dots or the fuzzy pictures that collectively constitute our experiences, for they force us to define personal limits to ultimate truth, which has no boundary.

Notes

Raymond L. Ethington received his formal education at Iowa State University and the University of Iowa. His first position after graduate school was at Arizona State University. In 1962 he accepted a position at the University of Missouri at Columbia, where he has been professor of geology since that time. At Columbia he has taught paleontology and served as chairman of the Department of Geological Sciences. For a number of years he was editor of the prestigious Journal of Paleontology. He publishes extensively on Paleozoic paleontology.

In 1988 Dr. Ethington was elected president of one of the major paleontological societies, the Society of Economic Paleontologists and Mineralogists (SEPM). He was awarded honorary membership in the Society for Sedimentary Geology and now serves that organization as president of the SEPM Foundation. Recently he was awarded the Hartley Visiting Fellowship at the University of Southampton.

A convert to the LDS Church during his graduate student days, Dr. Ethington married Leslie Nielsen and has two daughters. His many church callings have included serving as a high councilor in the Columbia Missouri Stake and serving as elders quorum president, high priests group leader, and bishop of the Columbia Missouri First Ward.

---
Notas:
[^1] Hydrogen and helium are not the most abundant elements on the earth, however, where atoms of oxygen, silicon, iron, and magnesium are more numerous. How the composition of the earth came to be so different from that of the universe at large is another interesting story, but far outside the scope of this essay. For information on this topic, see C. J. Allegre and S. H. Schneider, "The Evolution of the Earth," Scientific American 271, no. 4 (October 1994): 44-51; R. P. Kirschner, 1994, "The Earth's Elements," Scientific American 271, no. 4 (October 1994): 58-65.
[^2] See E. Anders and N. Grevesse, in Geochim. et Cosmochim. Acta 53 (1994): 191-214; N. Grevesse, A. Noels, and A. J. Sauval, "Standard Abundances," in Stephen S. Holt and George Sonneborn, eds., Cosmic Abundances, Astronomical Society of the Pacific Conference Series, vol. 99 (San Francisco: n.p., 1996), pp. 117-26; N. Prantzos, E. Vangioni-Flam, and M. Casse, Origin and Evolution of the Elements (Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 1993).
