David Clark, Of Heaven and Earth: Reconciling Scientific Thought with LDS Theology ( 1998)

Chapter 6

Atoms, Stars, and Us

Hollis R. Johnson

Gazing at the heavens from our wondrous blue planet, we humans can be excused if we marvel at the beauty and ponder the meaning of our spectacular view. What is our place, we ask, in this grandeur?

As we marvel and ponder, we are aware that we do so, for we are sentient, conscious, intelligent beings. According to both ancient and modern revelation, we humans also are composite beings—spirits clothed in bodies of flesh and bones. Our spirits existed before our bodies were created (see Abr. 3:18-23). Moreover, a distinctive teaching of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is that we are literally spirit children of God, our Heavenly Father. Our perspectives and lives are enormously enriched, we believe, by the knowledge that our spirits are eternal and that, through our divine heritage, we have unlimited potential in the eternal realm.

Like all material objects, our marvelous bodies are subject to senescence and decay. In the end each of us must die. In theological terms, our bodies will be laid in the grave and our spirits will return to the spirit world. However, that is not the end of us; a glorious future awaits each human being in the resurrection, for spirit and body will be reunited, never again to be separated.

Let's consider the heap of atoms so marvelously arranged into our incredibly lovely and useful bodies. Where did the constituent building materials of our bodies—molecules and atoms—originate? Have they always existed? If not, they must have been made. But where? when? how? of what? Behind these questions lies a fascinating story of stars and stardust.

Atoms are the fundamental building blocks of the universe and everything within it. A million atoms strung in a line would barely reach across the period at the end of this sentence. Atoms are composed of protons, neutrons, and electrons; these in turn are composed of quarks, which might even be composed of something more fundamental. Our bodies, like all animals and plants, are composed of atoms of hydrogen, carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, and other trace elements.

If asked where a particular carbon atom in our body came from, we might reply that it came from the hamburger we ate at lunch. So where was it before that? It was part of the cow or steer from where the hamburger came. Before that? It was in the grass the animal ate. Before that? It was a part of the soil. Before that it was a part of Earth, and before that it must have been a part of the cloud of gas and dust from which Earth and the entire solar system were assembled. Where was that carbon atom before the solar system existed? That must be a fascinating story. Can we find out? Where are the clues? Let's discover this remarkable connection between atoms and stars and us.

In searching for clues to the origin of atoms, we are struck by the fact that the two simplest and lightest atoms, hydrogen and helium, represent the two most abundant elements in the universe. [^1] In that vast expanse there are, for every one million atoms of hydrogen, about one hundred thousand atoms of helium; about one thousand atoms of oxygen; a few hundred atoms of carbon and neon and a few less of nitrogen; a few dozen atoms of magnesium, silicon, sulfur, and iron; and even fewer atoms of all other elements. [^2] How did the universe's chemical composition come to be arranged this way? Furthermore, there is a surprising odd-even effect in the elemental abundances of lighter elements: elements with even atom numbers (carbon, oxygen, neon, and magnesium) are relatively more abundant than those with odd atomic numbers (nitrogen, fluorine, and sodium). Why? Finally, we might inquire into the physical conditions necessary to produce atoms. What values of temperature and density are needed? Where are these conditions to be found? These clues will lead us far. [^3]

My Background

A farm is a great place to grow up, for there are so many interesting things to see and do. Of necessity farmers live close to nature. That closeness is very helpful if one is interested in science, the study of nature, and in God, the Governor of nature.

On warm evenings after the day's chores were done, while Arcturus and Vega wheeled slowly overhead, I could be found outdoors at the edge of the hay, grain, or sugar beet fields watching the friendly stars and talking to the God of nature. Where did it all come from? How did it get to be this way? Where does our Heavenly Father live? What are we humans doing here on Earth? Are there other people out there? It seemed crystal clear to me that God must be the ultimate Scientist.

Garland, Utah, where our family lived, is a typical Mormon community with deep pioneer roots. It was settled largely after 1902 when the canals were dug and the sugar factory opened. E. Lewis and Ida Johnson and their seven children, with me in the middle, lived with Lewis's parents, Lewis O. and Celine Johnson, who had originally built the house. Our Mormon pioneer heritage was still close at hand. We worked the land with horses as did our pioneer forefathers. Houses in town had indoor plumbing, but many farms, including ours, did not. The Johnsons were an ordinary, hardworking Mormon farm family who made their way only because they, like their neighbors, worked hard and worked together.

The Johnsons knew that God had raised up a prophet, Joseph Smith, in our day and through him had restored the true gospel and Church of Jesus Christ. Evil-disposed people had driven the Mormons (including some of their Watkins ancestors) from their homes in Missouri and Illinois. Other ancestors from New England, Denmark, and England had worked and sacrificed for the restored church. Now the Johnsons were privileged to help build Zion in the mountain wilderness. From Zion the gospel was being taken to all nations, kindreds, tongues, and peoples. And the Johnson family, on their little farm in Bear River Valley, were part of that divine venture.

As a youth, I enjoyed the outdoors and the satisfaction that comes from hard work. All the time, whether milking cows by hand or thinning beets or pitching hay, I contemplated the mysteries of nature: How do plants (and weeds!) grow? How do they suck nourishment from the dry soil? On a certain day I examined a pear tree on a neighbor's farm. Where did the stem stop and the pear start? How does a cell know whether to become a leaf or a limb or a lemon? What about rocks? My older sisters said that the banks along the Bear River, where their pasture was and where they spent many tiresome hours working and many happy hours exploring, would someday become rock. Now, these banks had been there for thousands of years, I reasoned, yet they were still clay, not rock; it would take eons for them to become rock. But the mountains around were rocky, so Earth had to be old enough for them to have become rocks. Indeed, Earth must be very, very old.

What about weather? Like every other kid, I loved snow, even though it made chores more tedious. Is there a way to make it snow more? What made the wind blow, so refreshing in summer and so bitter cold in winter? What made the spectacular and occasionally frightening thunderstorms that formed over the Great Salt Lake and marched up along the western mountains? So much to learn and understand!

What about the stars? What are they? Freshmen English students at Bear River High School in the winter of 1943-44 were assigned a reading project in which they were to read and write a review of a number of books. Having chosen astronomy as a topic, I quickly devoured the few astronomy books in the high school library. A whole new universe opened to my view! Stars are very far away from us, and they are not eternal. They are formed, they live, they change, and they fade away. We live in the Milky Way galaxy. Galaxies are enormous systems. The universe was much larger and much older and much more complex than I had ever imagined! Because there were not enough astronomy books either to satisfy my reading appetite or to help me earn an A grade on my class project, I also read chemistry books. (Chemistry ran in my family. My father was a chemist at the sugar factory, and so was my mother during several war years. As for me, I had a wonderful chemistry set.)

As a freshman at BYU, I naturally concentrated on chemistry. To say I devoted myself to this study would be to exaggerate, however. Rooming across the street from the men's gym on the lower campus, two high school buddies and I developed our basketball skills at least as fast as our academic skills. Then came a mission for the Church. When my call to Denmark came, my mother was delighted, my father, as usual, said little, I was a bit frightened, and everyone else was pleased. But off I went, of course. A mission is a great opportunity to learn while serving: to learn to teach the gospel, to learn the conversion process firsthand, and to learn to value the brotherhood and sisterhood of the Saints. Principles taught since one's youth become more meaningful for a missionary. By personal experience I learned the reality of spiritual things and began to make these an integral part of my life.

Returning from my mission during the Korean War, I was soon drafted into the army. After basic training, I was sent to Aschaffenburg, Germany. On a furlough I met Grete Margit Leed in Horsens, Denmark, and remembered her from my mission. The two of us began to write, then to visit, and we finally decided to make a team of it. Back from the army, I pursued studies in physics at BYU.

Grete came to the United States the next summer, and we were married in the Salt Lake Temple. Our goal was to serve the Lord and to create a bond of love strong enough to provide a loving home atmosphere for a family. Our hope was that our children would be good friends and happy, devoted servants of the Lord Jesus Christ. Blessed with three sons and three daughters, our marriage has brought much happiness.

At some moment I realized that people were actually paid to study and teach about the stars, and that realization made my career decision easy. After earning a bachelor's and a master's degree in physics at BYU, I went on to earn a Ph.D. in astrogeophysics from the University of Colorado. Then came postdoctoral stints at the Paris Observatory and at Yale. Finally, my family settled in Bloomington, Indiana, where I took a position on the faculty in the astronomy department of Indiana University in 1963.

My wife and I have had the privilege of serving in a variety of Church positions. Such important experiences of serving the Lord through callings should not be lightly skipped over, for they leave a clear mark on one's character and outlook. To be a servant of the living God is not a light load. Having made sacred covenants with God, Latter-day Saints strive to obey His word and serve Him even when doing so might be inconvenient or even dangerous. Yet the compensation is great because, like virtue, obedience and service are their own rewards. Moreover, God pours down on us transcendent blessings such as increased faith, hope, peace of mind, inspiration and guidance, enlightenment, and the refreshing of body and mind, to name a few. As King Benjamin so nicely put it, we can never repay our Heavenly Father for the bounties he shares with us (see Mosiah 2:20-21). Among other blessings, occasional insights into the plans and purposes of God are worthy of mention here because of their relation to the exhilaration of scientific discoveries. Those who have felt the power of the Spirit of God will forever view the world and people and God in a different and more spiritual way.

As members of the Church, we expect much, perhaps too much, of our leaders. It is amazing that we expect a person, an ordinary elder one day and a bishop the next, to know everything about everything. As all bishops, I faced questions ranging from marriage (the roles of men and women and their treatment of each other) to financial affairs (tithing, credit cards), interpretation of obscure biblical passages (there are lots of them), justification for war (the Vietnam War was a hot topic, and members and nonmembers alike wanted clear answers regarding the morality of the U.S. involvement), scientific questions (age of Earth, distances in the universe, evolution), and a wild array of other questions, mundane and esoteric.

This expectation on the part of members is, of course, unrealistic. Church leaders are men and women chosen by the Lord for qualities he sees. It is not necessary that they be knowledgeable in other fields. A Church leader might have beliefs, for example, about the creation or age of Earth, dinosaurs, light, meteorites, UFOs, black holes, relativity, or life itself that are not in accord with the facts of nature. What then? Obviously, we should support that person as a leader chosen by the Lord. A person who believes the world to be flat, for example, might still be a prophet if the Lord chose to call him as such.

Differences of opinion over scientific facts and theories sometimes arise in the Church. Whatever the reasons for controversy (there may be many), our discussions (outside the meetinghouse) ought to be carried on in the spirit of love so they do not distract from the unity our mission as a church requires. Sometimes science is used simply as a vehicle to carry on arguments between members who like to argue. Some members use the latest scientific discoveries to display their superior knowledge. Occasionally members seize upon unusual or outlandish stories from friends or the media that seem to support some tenet of our faith without investigating the evidence behind the story, and sometimes in spite of well-established facts to the contrary. (Everyone should understand that many stories in the media and in books are flatly incorrect in one or more ways and are often exaggerated simply to be sensational.).

To preserve unity, we often do not discuss disagreements over scientific matters. [^4] Worse yet, some Church members appear to take the position that science and religion are intrinsically antagonistic. They may even further emphasize the superiority of revealed religion to the ideas of men. But what does this tactic accomplish? Surely it will not slow scientific progress nor change the facts of nature! Because scientific discoveries may influence the way we perceive Earth and the universe, in the long run such new information must be taken into account in our world view. We members ought to make the effort to differentiate between scientific facts and theories as do scientists themselves.

Believing as we do in a revealed religion, we Latter-day Saints are used to having questions answered in black and white. Unsettled matters make some of us nervous. On the other hand, controversies are common in the world of scholarly research as scientists try to figure out how things (atoms and life and planets and stars and the universe) got to be the way they are. Puzzles and controversy lead to progress. Settled questions (facts and neat explanations) are written in textbooks; unsettled questions attract our research efforts. Furthermore, scientists are willing to suspend judgment when necessary. Controversies over science and Mormonism may mean the answers are not completely understood, and we must await further revelation or further scientific discoveries for clear resolution. Both science and Mormonism are struggling to learn truth—the laws of nature and the laws of God. In addition, Church members are struggling to apply in their lives the laws of God. There are common points, and I believe we might gain by an increased awareness of them.

I have deliberately used the term discoveries to emphasize the task of the scientist to describe nature. Yet one should understand that scientists describe not nature itself, but some picture or model of nature we have in our mind. The phenomena of nature are extremely complex, while our descriptions of them are generally quite simple. It is remarkable that in many cases science has seen amazing success in describing incredibly complex things such as natural objects, phenomena, and processes with such simple ideas and mathematics.

The believer in God must accept that God is the Creator of Earth and the heavens. From this point of view, a scientist studying nature is perforce studying the handiwork of God (see Ps. 19:1). The Scientist God, who lovingly creates worlds for his children, and the Father God, who lovingly reveals commandments to his children, are one and the same being! With this understanding of God, it is very difficult to imagine a contradiction between the discoveries of science and the revelations from God. If disagreements over these arise, it must be because someone does not properly understand scientific discoveries or someone does not properly understand divine revelations, or both.

As we understand better the facts of nature and the revelations of God, we can expect to find less disagreement between science and Mormonism. We should be warned, however, that some characteristics of the universe are very strange (e.g., protons and electrons are waves as well as particles, black holes exist, and we are made of stardust), and some aspects of the gospel are very strange (e.g., Jesus Christ atoned for past and future sins, all spirit is made of ultrafine and ultrapure matter that "can only be discerned by purer eyes" (D&C 131:7), and we must learn to love people we don't like). As with everything else of value, learning is an ongoing process, and increased knowledge will occasionally force us to change some of our ideas, sometimes even our religious ideas.

Stars and Atoms

Who would believe that Earth and the pile of atoms that constitutes our body are made of stardust? As we explore the magnificent universe about us—especially stars, stardust, and atoms—we will surely find some surprises! This short summary will at best whet the appetite. [^5]

Why are there such things as stars? Some people might say stars exist because they are so beautiful. Some might say stars exist because God created them. Some might say a star exists because it has the right mass for a gas so that its internal temperatures and pressures are high enough that the outward force of hot gas and radiation perfectly balances the enormous inward force of gravitation throughout the star. Otherwise, stars simply could not exist. Our sun lies somewhere in the middle of that mass range. It so happens that the high central temperatures of most stars lie in a favorable range for many nuclear reactions, especially among the lighter elements, including the fusion of hydrogen to helium. This fusion and the resultant conversion of mass to energy provide the energy that allows stars to shine so brightly for so long. In that sense a star is similar to a giant hydrogen bomb, except that its powerful gravity holds it together against even this fierce outward push.

Stars change slowly over enormous periods of time. In a sense the life story of a star is the tale of its losing battle against gravity. Gravity never relaxes its grip, but the pressure of gas and radiation depends on temperature, and a high temperature depends on the presence of an energy source. However great the energy store of a star is, it is finite and will eventually be used up. Gravity then gains its final victory. But what a story is that battle!

In trying to deduce the life story of a star, scientists must be detectives. They first find the facts, as far as possible, and then try to construct a plausible scenario (a theory or several theories) to account for these facts. They try to answer this question: What happened to cause the things (facts) we observe? The more facts scientists can discover, the more tightly constrained is the scenario they can construct. Put another way, scientists proceed by constructing theories or making hypotheses (ideas of all kinds) and then trying to test these theories against observations or experiments (facts). A good theory is one that makes testable predictions and stimulates thought and research even if in the end it is disproved. Moreover, theories may be changed several times along the way, or new scenarios may be constructed in light of new facts. Often scientists have grand discussions and arguments over such matters. Laymen sometimes misinterpret what is happening and form the idea the scientists often change their minds. (Actually, it is often very difficult to get scientists to change their minds!) If scientists as a group change their minds, it is likely in response to new facts that cast doubt on their initial theories or hypotheses.

Eventually, if enough facts can be discovered, the main points of some theory may become sufficiently well attested (meaning that enough of its predictions are verified and it is not contradicted by any empirical fact) that scientists will regard it as more or less certain. But one should always be wary of saying science has proven something. Scientists search for facts. In this search they may disprove a theory, but it is extremely difficult to prove a theory. Thus science does not so much prove statements or theories or scenarios as it disproves them. Theories that stand the test of repeated experiments come to be regarded as more or less correct. Scientists are trained to keep facts separate from theories, and others should do so as well. Evidence for and against every theory or point of view should be cited so that each person can make his or her own decision regarding the likelihood that a statement is true or false.

Galaxies and Stars

Like all galaxies, our Milky Way galaxy consists of gas, dust, and stars along with a massive outer halo of more or less unknown stuff. The gas and dust are not spread evenly throughout the galaxy but are often clumped into clouds. Recall that our rotating Milky Way galaxy is about one hundred thousand light-years across and contains about 150 billion stars. Our sun, some twenty-five thousand light-years from the galactic center, drags its planets along with it at a speed of 250 kilometers per second in an orbit so huge that it takes us 200 million years to go around! [^6]

Far out in galactic space, these gigantic clouds are extremely cold, and their atoms are often associated as molecules, sometimes complex ones. [^7] Like clouds in Earth's atmosphere, these interstellar clouds form and dissipate over and over again. Once in a while, however, part or all of a cloud may be compressed so that it begins to contract gravitationally because every particle attracts every other particle. This contraction speeds up as the cloud collapses, and it also fragments into a spray of cloudlets. Cloudlets of the right size will become stars. Do astronomers actually see "starbirth"? In a way. They see young stars in regions of dense gas clouds. These are stars that are just beginning to burn (fuse) hydrogen and have not had time to dissipate the placental gas and dust from which they were formed. [^8]

Because spectra of the oldest stars show extremely small amounts of any elements besides hydrogen and helium but stars formed later show increasing amounts of these elements, we must accept that atoms of heavier elements were not present in the early stages of our galaxy; rather, they gradually appeared during the lifetime of the galaxy and universe. [^9] Where were these atoms formed? Other sites with sufficient energy are excluded for one reason or another, leaving the interior of stars as the likely site. This idea is supported by the fact that scientists have also shown over the years how heavier atoms could in fact be manufactured from hydrogen and helium in stellar interiors. The whole argument has been nicely set forth quantitatively. [^10]

Stars and Atoms

As a cloudlet contracts and its volume decreases, its density, temperature, and energy density increase rapidly. At first this increasing energy is radiated away, but as the density increases so does the opacity, and the radiation becomes trapped in the gas, further heating it. Eventually, the outward force of gas and radiation balances the inward force of gravity, and the cloudlet becomes stable. [^11] However, if this were the entire story, a gas cloud with the mass of the sun would have enough gravitational energy to shine at its present energy output for about 100 million years. Unfortunately, this is far less than the length of time life has existed on Earth, [^12] and we must look for other, larger sources of energy. Fortunately, our sun has enough nuclear energy stores to keep shining for at least 10 billion years!

Our sun is a good, average star. Some stars have less mass (but a star must have about 0.06-0.08 solar masses in order to burn hydrogen and be a real star), some have more mass (up to about 60 solar masses, but these huge stars are very short-lived), and some are older and younger, brighter and dimmer. But the sun, with its long lifetime, is an ideal furnace to warm and light a planetary system. The more massive a star is the shorter is its lifetime. It is also true that high-mass stars are relatively rare, while tiny (low-mass) stars are much more abundant.

What will happen when hydrogen in the core has been burned (fused to helium)? Hydrogen continues to burn in a narrow shell around the now almost inert helium core, but gravity compresses the inert core, and the enormous energy released by this compression increases the luminosity and puffs out the star. As the star becomes larger, its temperature falls and it becomes a cool (red) giant star. Although the star has grown to more than fifty times its original diameter, its mass has not changed and its outer density must be as low as a good vacuum on Earth. As the core contracts, its central temperature increases until it is high enough (about 100 million degrees for the sun) for a new reaction: helium burns (fuses) to carbon with the emission of a great deal of energy.

Our story now gets more complicated, and the outcome depends more and more on the mass of the star. As the concentration of carbon in the core rises, helium can burn only in a shell around the carbon core. In this double-shell phase of a red giant's life, hydrogen burns (to helium) in an outer shell, and helium burns (to carbon) in a slightly smaller shell. The carbon or carbon-oxygen core (some carbon captures helium and becomes oxygen) is now extremely compact. As time passes, the thin helium-burning shell begins to flicker, and some of the burned material is churned into the envelope (the deep gaseous layer overlying the core) and eventually to the surface of the red giant. This burned (nuclearly processed) material, enriched in carbon and often in heavier elements (by neutron-capture), changes the chemical composition of the surface. [^13] Fascinating as it is, the red-giant phase is relatively short, partly because these giants are blowing themselves apart. As a red-giant star grows in size and its temperature falls, gas starts flowing away from the surface with speeds of about ten kilometers per second. The rate of mass loss can be very large, rising to values of 10 [^14] or even 10 [^15] solar masses per year. At this high rate, a star would lose lots of its mass in one hundred thousand years.

"Stardeath"—to use a sensational term for the natural end of a star—occurs in one of three ways, depending sensitively on the star's mass. Ordinary stars like the sun, and all stars with masses up to about eight solar masses, blow away their outer envelope so that only the compact core remains. For a few thousand years, this expelled shell glows in exotic forms and colors before it finally fades away. The hot core cools rapidly at first and then more slowly. Amazingly, this core (a white dwarf star) is only slightly larger than Earth, but it must be about a million times as dense as water. White dwarfs are supported against gravity by the resistive pressure of their electrons, which are so squashed together that their motions are severely restricted. Although there is a maximum limit of 1.4 solar masses in order for a white dwarf to support itself against gravitation, stars up to about eight solar masses may shed enough mass (this is serious weight reduction!) during the red-giant stage to end as white dwarfs. There is no known way by which a white dwarf star can be revitalized.

If a star's mass exceeds about eight solar masses on the main sequence, its evolution is faster and different. It blazes forth as a super-giant star and burns (fuses) elements, one after the other, in sort of an onionlike chemical structure, up to iron. In addition, such a huge star, in its final collapse, forms the heaviest of the elements by neutron capture. [^16] For reasons explained below, its energy supply suddenly ends there, and the outward force of gas and radiation abruptly decreases, initiating a catastrophic collapse of the star. In the stellar core the enormous gravitational force crushes free electrons and protons into neutrons and pushes these neutrons tightly together until they form a hard core and abruptly halt the collapse. The in-falling material then rebounds, and a strong shock blasts most of the envelope into space in a supernova explosion. Only a neutron star remains, a star composed of hard-packed neutrons. Its mass may be as large as that of the sun, but it will be only ten or twenty kilometers across. Its density is stupendous. Neutron stars are actually seen as rapidly rotating objects whose radiation is channeled by extremely strong magnetic fields along the magnetic poles. As the object spins (on an axis different from the magnetic axis), whenever its magnetic pole happens to point in our direction we receive a pulse of radiation, and the objects are called pulsars. Often these remarkable stars pulse hundreds or thousands of times each second.

Perhaps the most incredible part of our story is still ahead. As with white dwarfs, there is also an upper limit of a few solar masses for neutron stars. Imagine now a star with, say, fifty solar masses. Although the star may lose much of its mass along the way, when it finally collapses and rebounds as a supernova, gravity may compress the core beyond the resistive capacity even of hard-packed neutrons. When this occurs, the star becomes a black hole—an object so compressed that the escape velocity at the surface exceeds the velocity of light. [^17]

Why do atoms or ions of some elements combine (burn or fuse) to produce atoms of other elements? Natural processes "run downhill"; that is, they take the easiest path to the easiest destination. As free particles are bound in an atomic nucleus, some energy is given up. For example, a helium nucleus (two protons and two neutrons to give a mass of four) is more tightly bound than two free protons and two neutrons, and a nucleus of carbon is more tightly bound than are three helium nuclei. In fact, atomic nuclei are more tightly bound (and therefore yield energy by fusion) along the periodic chart of the elements up to iron. Iron is the most tightly bound of all elements, and no energy can be extracted from it. In a sense, then, iron is the ultimate ash of the universe.

Stellar evolution, the life story of stars, presents us with an interesting opportunity to combine theory and observation. Of necessity, the calculations are theoretical. How much confidence can we have in the results? Whenever possible, comparison is made with observations. For example, theoretical models have been constructed for the sun, for which the chemical composition is well known. To be acceptable, such a model must predict the correct radius, temperature, and luminosity for the sun at its current age. [^18] The age for the sun is estimated to be 4.6 billion years—a value measured from radioactive dating of Earth [^19] and meteorites. [^20]

Different requirements can be set for models of stars in star clusters, where all stars have the same age and are formed of the same materials but differ in mass. Repeated, exhaustive comparisons of brightness (luminosity) and color (temperature) of the predictions of model calculations to real star clusters assure us that the basic results of stellar evolutionary theory are correct. [^21] However, there is still much to be learned about binary stars, novae, supernovae, variable stars, convection, stellar seismology, solar and stellar activity, stellar dynamos, stellar winds, molecules, grain formation, mass loss, and evolution of the biggest and tiniest stars—just about everything! Although for simplicity we describe the evolution of single stars only, most stars are in binary systems, and these systems, especially interacting binary systems, are important to galactic evolution and the formation of the elements. Describing these systems would fill a whole book.

This is the time to note that fuel reactions often involve nuclei of [^22] He. That is, the addition of [^23] He to [^24] C produces [^25] O, and further addition of [^26] He nuclei produces in order [^27] Ne, [^28] Mg, [^29] Si, and so on up to iron. As the astute reader may have noticed, this series of elements with even atomic numbers are exactly those elements whose abundance in the universe is greatest. Clearly, the stellar atom factories have left their fingerprints in the abundance of the elements (and isotopes), and this fact neatly explains the odd-even effect noted earlier (and much more). Such heavier elements as mercury, gold, and uranium can also be manufactured in stellar cores when iron or other elements capture neutrons, but their production consumes energy rather than yields it. There are two processes: one process operates in red-giant stars (remember, these are the very abundant, low-mass stars like the sun) to fabricate the medium-heavy elements such as carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen; and the other process operates in supernovae (the rare, high-mass stars) to fabricate a different set of heavy elements. Detailed comparisons between the predictions of stellar evolutionary theory and spectra of real stars is a fascinating story that continues today.

Exotic as are stellar lives and evolution, the important point for our purpose here is that most of the material of the star, be it a red giant or a supernova, is blown outward into the galaxy. This material is rich in nuclearly processed material—heavier atoms created from hydrogen and helium deep within the star. As the ejected matter mixes with the gas of the galaxy, it enriches the material from which the next generation of stars and planets will be formed. [^30]

There is, of course, a limit to starbirth. When all the raw material in a galaxy has been used up in stars, no new stars can be produced. Indeed, there are such galaxies. Most of the material in the Milky Way has already been used in stars. Gradually, in the distant future, no new stars will be formed, and the existing stars will gradually age and die.

Reflective Summary

Let's now step back and view the entire sweep of the history of a galaxy of stars. Several lines of evidence point to the origin of most galaxies, including the Milky Way, as a huge cloud of hydrogen and helium some 15 billion years ago. [^31] Spectra of the oldest stars, some of which appear to have been shining for 12 to15 billion years, show only extremely weak traces of any elements except hydrogen and helium. Apparently, when these old stars were formed, the galaxy consisted essentially of these two elements. They are notably the lightest and most abundant elements and the two that are believed to have been formed early in the expansion phase of the universe, [^32] lightheartedly called the "Big Bang."

Soon after the galaxies formed, the first stars formed. Any planets that might have circled these early stars were also composed mainly of hydrogen and helium, and these planets would have been sterile. Life as we know it is based on the chemistry of carbon, and its appearance had to await the formation of heavier elements.

As these early stars, composed of hydrogen and helium, went through the evolutionary stages described above, they formed heavier elements in their interiors, which are literally atom factories. The most massive stars formed quickly, raced through their lives, and exploded as supernovae. In doing so they blew out into space newly created heavy elements—those ranging from carbon through iron and used as fuel, and those heavier elements formed by neutron capture. [^33] Now imagine countless generations of massive stars forming and quickly dying, each contributing a load of heavier elements to the galactic gas. The far more numerous stars of solar mass evolved more slowly, but eventually these became red giants and blew away their newly formed heavier elements into space as well.

As time passed and generation after generation of stars formed and died (see Moses 1:35, 38), the Milky Way and all galaxies gradually became rich in heavier elements. After an enormous amount of time had passed, perhaps as long as 10 billion years after the Big Bang, our solar system formed. By that time—some 4.6 billion years ago—atoms of carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen and other heavier elements were available as described above. The stage was finally set for the appearance of planets like Earth, with the chemical elements necessary for life.

Are there other planets with life? That is an exciting question. On the one hand, it seems that if our solar system, with its life-bearing planet, is an ordinary natural product, there ought to be many other life-bearing planets (and this agrees with Moses 1:33). On the other hand, in spite of thorough searches, astronomers have found no evidence whatever of any other life-bearing planet. It is a puzzle, but even an elementary discussion would require at least another book. However, recent reports of possible fossils in a meteorite from Mars might be evidence for at least fossil life on other planets. [^34] In addition, astronomers have recently discovered a few planets in orbit around other stars, but these are huge planets, bigger than Jupiter. Finding an Earth-sized planet is a daunting challenge, but it is perhaps imaginable in our lifetime. We must wait for more answers from this exciting search.

A voyage over the entire universe, even if limited essentially to facts, would fill many books, and the universe is so remarkable as to be almost beyond our capacity to imagine. The descriptions we humans give, marvelously ingenious and complex as they are, may be poor representations of reality. Were any of us to write a science fiction story about a universe of our own imagining, it is highly doubtful that our imagined universe would be as remarkable as the real one!

One of the greatest accomplishments of mankind has been the discovery of the universe, and that voyage of discovery constitutes a grand adventure of the human mind and spirit. To be even a small part of that adventure is exciting for me. Those magnificent, sparkling stars are the atom factories, where heavier elements are created out of hydrogen and helium. Our bodies are made of these elements. We are literally made of stardust!

And what is the place of mankind—our spirits and bodies—in this vast, cold, dark universe? What are we humans doing here? Are we a chance product of remarkable biochemistry, or are we the result of careful design?

Consider the incredible panorama of our universe, one that is billions of light years in extent and has been billions of years in the making! Giant clouds of hydrogen and helium (proto-galaxies) formed within a billion years after the Big Bang. Stars then formed in these clouds, and as they lit up the heavens, the stars also fabricated heavier atoms from the original hydrogen and helium. When the stars died in mild or titanic explosions, they dispersed these atoms into galactic space. Thus, the Milky Way Galaxy and all galaxies became slowly enriched in heavier elements with time, and this has been our focus in this brief article. Atoms of these heavier elements became associated into molecules, as are seen in abundance in interstellar space. When newer stellar systems, such as the Solar System, were later formed (about 4.6 billion years ago), they contained a load of these heavier elements, which formed complex molecules. From these complex molecules, living cells and then larger plants and animals, including man, could be created.

Where does God fit into this remarkable picture? The nonbeliever might say this spectacular caravan of events happened by chance or by the action of natural processes and laws. Every step is describable by mathematical equations. Some might even say the equations themselves are the Final Answer. The believer might maintain that when one views the whole picture, a pattern clearly emerges. There is a direction and a goal indicative of design and intelligence. The discussion will likely go on for a long time!

We humans are conscious of our own existence. We appreciate beauty and logic. We remember and decide and think. We worship. We know the difference between right and wrong. We could ask many questions here that would be wonderfully difficult to answer completely. It is clear, however, that humans are distinct from other animals intellectually and spiritually. From that point of view, one might say we are most human, in the best sense, when we develop and use to the fullest our great intellectual and spiritual powers.

According to the gospel, we human beings are much more than a pile of atoms, however wonderfully arranged. We are composite beings. We are composed of body and spirit. Our spirits existed before our bodies were created and will exist beyond the grave and beyond the resurrection.

Remarkable as our marvelous world and solar system and galaxy and universe are, and exciting as our search for further knowledge about them is, this kind of knowledge is not of paramount importance. Some knowledge has greater significance than other knowledge. What is of greatest importance to us? Both in our daily lives and in the long term, we are most concerned with our relationship with our Heavenly Father, with one another, and with our environment, and we must be if we and civilization are to survive. Spiritual truths and values take precedence over all else.

How do we learn the ethical and moral values that govern our lives? How do we know what is right or best? How do we know we should serve others? In particular, how do we learn the will of God? From science? Hardly. Powerful as it is in the discovery of facts about the universe and in attempting to put these facts into an understandable picture, science can tell us little about how we ought to live. Science can say little about ethics, morals, ideals, and values, and it can say next to nothing about God. For this knowledge we must look to experience, both of our own and others, and directly to the revelations of God.

Although to the prophet Alma, Earth and all the planets witness of a "Supreme Creator" (Alma 30:44), others may or may not accept the wonders of nature as proving the existence of God, and they will likely continue to argue about it for a long time. Only God, not nature, can tell us of himself and his plans. We Mormons believe God has revealed himself and his plans anew in our day, and we benefit from that knowledge. To me it is of the greatest importance to know and follow that plan. It is the plan of exaltation and happiness.

Truly the universe is remarkable and the gospel is wonderful. Each human being is precious to our Heavenly Father, and we should be to each other. Life is great. Our task is to learn to live a Christlike life, to build a righteous society, to serve one another, and to enjoy the work!

Notes

Hollis R. Johnson received his bachelor's and master's degrees in physics from Brigham Young University and his Ph.D. in astrogeophysics from the University of Colorado. He did postdoctoral work at Yale University and at the Paris Observatory in Meudon, France, before joining the faculty at Indiana University, where he has been professor of astronomy since 1963 and has served as chairman of the Department of Astronomy twice. He has specialized in solar and planetary physics and has published more than eighty papers and coauthored three books related to his specialties. He has held a National Academy of Science-National Research Council Fellowship at the NASA Ames Research Center in California and was the F. C. Donders Visiting Professor at the University of Utrecht, the Netherlands, and a guest professor at the Niels Bohr Institute at the University of Copenhagen. Dr. Johnson has been an active member of a number of commissions of the International Astronomical Union and a member of the board of directors of the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy.

He and his wife, Grete Margit Leed, have six children and seventeen grandchildren. The Johnsons recently returned from service as Church Educational System missionaries in Copenhagen. Hollis served as a missionary for the Church in Denmark (1948-51) and has held many Church callings, including bishop of the Bloomington Indiana Ward, president of the Indianapolis Indiana Stake and of the Bloomington Indiana Stake, stake mission president, and ordinance worker in the Chicago Temple.

---
Notas:
[^1] See David L. Clark, "Early History of the Arctic Ocean," Paleoceanography 3 (1988): 539-50.
[^2] See J. (Hans) R. Weber and Jack F. Sweeney, "Ridges and Basins in the Central Arctic Ocean," in A. Grant, L. Johnson, and J. F. Sweeney, eds., The Arctic Ocean Region, vol. L of The Geology of North America (Boulder, Colo.: Geological Society of America, 1990), pp. 305-36.
[^3] See David L. Clark et al., "Late Neogene Climate Evolution of the Central Arctic Ocean," Marine Geology 93 (1990): 69-94; D. L. Clark, "The Pliocene Record in the Central Arctic Ocean," Marine Micropaleontology 27 (1996): 157-64.
[^4] See David L. Clark, "Arctic Ocean Ice-Cover: Geologic History and Climatic Significance," in Grant, Johnson, and Sweeney, eds., Arctic Ocean Region, pp. 53-62.
[^5] See George G. Simpson, "Fossil Penguins," Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History, no. 87 (1946): 99.
[^6] See Matthew H. Nitecki, ed., Evolutionary Progress (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1988), p. 354.
[^7] See David L. Hull, "Progress in Ideas of Progress," in ibid., pp. 27-48.
[^8] See William B. Provine, "Progress in Evolution and Meaning in Life," in Nitecki, ed., Evolutionary Progress, p. 49.
[^9] See ibid., pp. 51, 62.
[^10] See ibid., p. 69.
[^11] Robert J. Richards, "The Moral Foundations of the Idea of Evolutionary Progress," in Nitecki, ed., Evolutionary Progress, p. 147.
[^12] See ibid., p. 129.
[^13] See Adam Urbanek, "Morpho-Physiological Progress," in Nitecki, ed., Evolutionary Progress, pp. 195-96.
[^14] Michael Ruse, "Molecules to Men: Evolutionary Biology and Thoughts of Progress," in Nitecki, ed., Evolutionary Progress, p. 98.
[^15] See J. Maynard Smith, "Evolutionary Progress and Levels of Selection," in Nitecki, ed., Evolutionary Progress, p. 219.
[^16] See ibid., p. 229.
[^17] Edward O. Wiley, "Evolution, Progress and Entropy," in Nitecki, ed., Evolutionary Progress, p. 290.
[^18] David M. Raup, "Testing the Fossil Record for Evolutionary Progress," in Nitecki, ed., Evolutionary Progress, p. 293.
[^19] See ibid., p. 297.
[^20] See ibid., pp. 298-301.
[^21] Stephen J. Gould, "On Replacing the Idea of Progress with an Operational Notion of Directionality," in Nitecki, ed., Evolutionary Progress, p. 319.
[^22] See ibid.
[^23] See ibid., p. 234.
[^24] See D. S. McKay et al., "Search for Past Life on Mars: Possible Relic Biogenic Activity in Martian Meteorite ALH84001," Science 273 (16 August 1996): 924-30.
[^25] Moses 1:31.
[^26] Moses 1:32.
[^27] Moses 1:36.
[^28] Moses 1:37-39.
[^29] See George Abell, Exploration of the Universe, 2nd ed. (New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1969), p. 608.
[^30] See Tony Rothman, "This Is the Way the World Ends," Discover, July 1987, pp. 82-93.
[^31] Andrei Linde, "Particle Physics and Inflationary Cosmology," Physics Today, September 1987, p. 68.
[^32] Moses 1:28.
[^33] Brigham Young said: "I am not astonished that infidelity prevails to a great extent among the inhabitants of the earth, for the religious teachers of the people advance many ideas and notions for truth which are in opposition to and contradict facts demonstrated by science, and which are generally understood.
[^34] Bruce R. McConkie, Ensign, June 1982, p. 11.
