David Clark, Of Heaven and Earth: Reconciling Scientific Thought with LDS Theology ( 1998)

Chapter 8

If There Be Bounds

William Lee Stokes

Joseph Smith left behind a great prophecy of events that will take place in the Space Age:

If there be bounds set to the heavens or to the seas, or to the dry land, or to the sun, moon, or stars—

All the times of their revolutions, all the appointed days, months, and years, and all the days of their days, months, and years, and all their glories, laws, and set times, shall be revealed in the days of the dispensation of the fulness of times—

According to that which was ordained in the midst of the Council of the Eternal God of all other gods before this world was. (D&C 121:30-32)

The Prophet recorded this while he was a prisoner in Liberty Jail, in Missouri, on March 20, 1839. In this prophecy specific future events are described that will be revealed in a certain time period, namely, "in the days of the dispensation of the fulness of times." This dispensation, which began with the organization of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints by Joseph Smith in 1830, is still in effect and is the last we shall receive or experience. Each of us, individually, is participating in the fulfillment of the events of this great prediction. Some of it has already been fulfilled, some is in process of fulfillment, and some is yet to be fulfilled as the Space Age unfolds. Nowhere else in religious literature can one find a prediction about specific objectives, events, and attainments so inclusive and far-reaching as this. Think of the cost, energy, and technology applied to explorations of our total surroundings in the interval since 1839 when the Prophet made this prediction.

There is something intriguing about the wording of this prophecy. Note that everything listed is to be revealed in the "days of the dispensation of the fulness of time." By not using the word day or the word year, this statement avoids any possible confusion with the so-called God's day of one thousand years or any other identifiable time period. Might it not be that the revelations mentioned are not to come forth all at once, but rather in a step-by-step manner? Truly, as one learns by reading the daily news, great astronomical discoveries are being made and reported on almost a daily basis. We are experiencing the fulfillment of the Prophet's words almost without realizing it.

The Bounds of Lands and Seas

Man has a continuing urge to explore his surroundings. Ancient man wandered aimlessly or made daring voyages over unknown seas. In time, a need to record past travels was recognized. Beginning with crude charts, the making of maps has progressed to the point where any spot on the globe can be located from space-based satellites with an accuracy of within only a few feet.

Early advances in mapmaking include the standardization of units of measurement, the adaptation of the compass, invention of the sextant, and steady improvement of clocks. A major advance was the establishment of the worldwide latitude-longitude system to unify and standardize all mapping.

The application of electronic technology brought further refinements. Radar, an invention of World War II, utilizes radio waves not only to locate stationary features such as coastlines but also to track moving objects such as ships and aircraft. With the drilling for oil in shallow water out of sight of land, the need for establishing and reestablishing specific spots and tracts became very important. This is now done with the aid of satellites far above Earth.

The waters of Earth are found in three-dimensional bodies; in other words, they have depth as well as length and breadth. Although surface configurations were well known at the time of Joseph Smith, it is only within the past few decades that much has been learned about the depths of the world's lakes, seas, and oceans. During World War II, submarine warfare motivated several nations to study the ocean floors. In determining water depths, what had once been a laborious process of lowering weights became immeasurably easier with the invention of sonar, basically a process of bouncing sound waves off the ocean floor. This process enables a ship to make continuous recordings of water depths wherever desired. Now, with multiple records of numerous traverses, the configuration of the major ocean basins is well known.

An unexpected result of underwater surveys was the discovery of a continuous 24,000-mile mountain chain totally unlike anything on dry land. The best-known segment bisects the Atlantic Ocean and is known as the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. A deep trench follows the crest of the ridge, and evidence is clear that this is a zone of separation constantly filled with lava from below as the sides move apart. This process, called seafloor spreading, is known to be operating in all the oceans.

Of course, the ocean floors cannot expand without forcibly colliding with bordering continents. The fact is that they are colliding, with the result that the ocean bottoms slide downward beneath the continents and are remelted at deeper and hotter levels of Earth. Deep trenches called subduction zones mark places where the crust is descending. Thus the deepest spots of the ocean are in trenches near continental borders; the deepest spot known, 36,198 feet (almost seven miles), is in the western Pacific near the island of Guam.

Following World War II, exploration of the ocean bottom was continued as a cooperative international project known as the Deep Sea Drilling Project. Vessels equipped for drilling holes under deep water were built and sent out on separate expeditions to investigate specific patches of sea or ocean bottom. As of 1990, most of the world's oceans have been charted and sampled in a systematic way.

For the first time, the major physical features of Earth are understandable in a comprehensive, unified framework. The great moving plates, bearing both continents and oceans, encase Earth and interact as an interlocking, dynamic system. The geologic expression of this system is called global plate tectonics. All aspects of present structure and past history of Earth seem compatible with tectonic theory in an eminently satisfactory way. As far as Earth is concerned, the "bounds" of its oceans and dry lands seem to have been determined in a comprehensive way.

Heavenly Bounds

Turning to the sun, moon, and stars, we find equally startling discoveries. To refer to individual celestial bodies as having bounds may seem illogical, but they do have invisible force fields of various kinds that are boundaries under permissible meanings of the word. We have landed on the moon and have sent space vehicles past other planets and around the sun. We know their distances and dimensions and have measured the invisible electrical, magnetic, and gravitational fields that accompany them through space.

Before the invention of the telescope, five planets were known and named—Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn. These were known to be different from other stars only because they moved constantly across the heavens. Adding Earth to the above list gives the six planets known to Copernicus, who correctly described the solar system as a flattened disk with multiple bodies circling a central sun. Using telescopes, astronomers eventually discovered three additional planets: Neptune, Uranus, and Pluto. Uranus was discovered more or less accidentally in 1781 by William Herschel, who initially mistook it for a comet. Neptune was located in 1846, mostly because of the gravitational effects of Uranus. Several astronomers aided in the search, but chief credit goes to the Frenchman Leverrier.

Pluto, named for the god of the underworld, was discovered in 1930 by the American astronomer Clyde Tombaugh. The mean distance from the sun to Pluto's orbit is 33,656,000,000 miles. The corresponding figure for Earth is 93,000,000 miles. A popular textbook view is that Pluto's orbit marks the outer limit of the solar system. At the time of its discovery, each of the planets was considered to be the ultimate or outermost member of the solar system. The possibility of a tenth planet is seriously discussed, and surveys have been made in the hope of finding it.

Regardless of whether or not there is a tenth planet beyond Pluto, a large amount of solid matter is in orbit within and beyond the fringes of the planetary system. This is in the form of relatively small icy bodies, technically called inactive comets, that seem to be leftover remnants of the cloud from which the solar system condensed some 4.6 billion years ago.

The inactive comets are calculated to exist in several clouds or swarms, the densest of which is near the orbit of Neptune. The inactive clouds surround the sun in a sort of elliptical cocoon and are not in a flattened disk like the planets. The total number of comets is estimated in the billions, but their average size is measured in feet or yards, and they are widely separated in space. Adding them all together might give a mass equal to only several Earths. If we define the solar system as all matter circling the sun, and there is something out there two light-years away moving under the sun's influence, then that must be the bounds of the system.

A galaxy is defined as an extensive system in space consisting of millions to billions of luminous stars with great quantities of gas, dust, and fine invisible matter. In order of size, galaxies stand next above the stars. There is nothing of intermediate magnitude—nothing between pennies and dollars as it were. For some much-debated and little-understood reason, the galaxies are of roughly the same size and are so widely distributed that only by accident do they come close to or collide with each other.

Photographs of galaxies reveal that the majority have a striking two-armed spiral shape. If their spiral shape tells us anything, it is that galaxies are rotating around their dense central cores. The rotational motion has been verified in a number of ways. Our home, the Milky Way galaxy, is revolving along a path and at a speed that carries the solar system completely around its center in about 250 million years. When astronomers studied entire galaxies as rotating gravitational systems, they discovered an unexpected thing. At their calculated speeds they should be flying apart, and yet they maintain their compact shapes.

It is amazing how long it took us to find out enough about the Milky Way to know that it has boundaries and is one of a numerous company of similar entities that seem to extend outward to infinity. It is a long story that could be told in terms of a steady belittlement of the status of man and his home planet.

For centuries, everyone regarded Earth as flat and the center of the universe. The first big adjustment came when the sun proved to be our master and governor instead of the other way around. We adjusted to this reduced position but maintained a belief that the solar system is the center of the galaxy and possibly of the universe as well. In the early 1900s, astronomers demonstrated that the solar system occupies an obscure corner of one average-looking galaxy, and our sun is a superficially undistinguished member of a group of billions of other shining stars.

The only force able to hold a galaxy together is the gravitational pull of a large mass of invisible matter, most of it out beyond the limits of the luminous stars. The total mass of this invisible matter must be many times that of the visible component. The nature and distribution of dark matter is one of the major unsolved problems of cosmologists.

Considering all galaxies, the average distance between them is about one thousand light-years, far enough to ensure that galaxies are not touching each other—each is distinctly separate and apart. In other words, each has its own distant boundaries. Even the dark matter of one galaxy does not seem to mingle with that of its neighbors. The Andromeda Galaxy and our Milky Way are hurtling toward each other at a rate of three hundred miles per second. We need not be alarmed. So great is the distance between us that we will not actually meet for millions of years.

As with the solar system, we cannot yet say that we have discovered the bounds of our galaxy. We know there are bounds, but where are they? There is something about matter that has caused it to clump together in roughly equal masses that may separate into stars, but these stars do not fly apart to fill surrounding space. Stars are not like an endless field of closely packed daisies; they are most like blossoms on neatly but irregularly spaced celestial rosebushes. Furthermore, they are so far apart that bees from one bush are not likely to visit their neighbors. Why galaxies are distributed the way they are is one of the great unsolved mysteries of astronomy.

This brings us to a final great question: Are there bounds to the great universe itself? We are fairly sure that it is at least ten to fifteen billion light-years across, but everything looks the same in all directions. With no boundaries anywhere, can we safely define the boundary as that nothingness beyond which there are no galaxies?

Would that we could understand the great revelation that reads: "And there are many kingdoms; for there is no space in the which there is no kingdom; and there is no kingdom in which there is no space, either a greater or a lesser kingdom" (D&C 88:37).

A Final Question

Joseph Smith's predictions may be tested by how we answer these questions:

* Have geologists and geographers completely mapped the lands and water bodies of the planet? Almost, but not completely.

* Have astronomers located the bounds of the solar system? Approximately.

* Have astronomers located the limits of the Milky Way or any other galaxy? Again, only approximately.

* Have cosmologists found an edge to the universe? Definitely no, not even a hint of it.

At this point, let it be understood that I accept divine revelation, not science, as the standard of truth. One must indeed confirm the other; truth cannot exist in conflict with itself.

note

William Lee Stokes received undergraduate and graduate degrees at Brigham Young University and earned his Ph.D. from Princeton University. After seven years with the U.S. Geological Survey, he began a career of teaching and research in 1947 at the University of Utah, where he was professor of geology and, for thirteen years, chairman of the Department of Geology. He received many honors, including the Governor's Medal for Science and Technology. He was one of Utah's earliest dinosaur enthusiasts, and as a result of his interest and guidance, more than forty natural history museums throughout the world exhibit Utah dinosaurs, many of which he excavated. He published extensively on the paleontology and geology of Utah. His text for historical geology, published by Prentice Hall, was the leading U.S. book for introductory geology for a number of years. He authored or coauthored thirteen other books and, with colleagues Lehi Hintze and James Madsen, was responsible for the first comprehensive geologic maps of Utah.

Dr. Stokes married Betty Curtis, and five children were born to them. He held a number of positions as teacher and officer in Church auxiliary and priesthood units, including high priest group leader and service as a stake missionary.

Dr. Stokes published six books that address his personal reconciliation of science and LDS theology. The essay included in this volume is reprinted with permission of Betty Stokes. Dr. Stokes was emeritus professor of geology at the University of Utah when he died in 1994. The following essay is adapted from his book Joseph Smith and the Creation.1
