David Clark, Of Heaven and Earth: Reconciling Scientific Thought with LDS Theology ( 1998)

Chapter 9

Truth, the Sum of Existence

B. Kent Harrison

In The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, [^1] members generally understand the word truth to mean an all-encompassing system of knowledge. Truth is defined by the statement found in D&C 93:24: "Truth is knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come"—surely an all-encompassing statement. This view of truth is supported by the general tone of other scriptures, for example, "truth abideth forever and ever" (D&C 1:39), "truth abideth and hath no end" (D&C 88:66), and "the glory of God is intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth" (D&C 93:36). Implicit in these statements is the idea that truth is absolute, unified, and self-consistent.

C. Terry Warner goes further than the above definition [^2] by noting that D&C 93:24 is usually taken out of context and that a broader and more correct LDS view is that the word truth signifies an entire way of life. (He also comments that many current philosophers have abandoned the search for absolute truth and have settled for a relative, or personal, view of truth.) I am entirely in agreement with these remarks, but for purposes of this essay I will regard truth in the narrower sense as an absolute system of knowledge. Whether truth is "increasing"—particularly as regards God's comprehension—is another question, one I will touch on later.

B. H. Roberts makes a distinction between personal truth, as suggested by D&C 93:24, and the broader sense of truth as an impersonal, broad statement of the "way things are" (my terminology)—of which any one individual can comprehend only a tiny part. [^3]

For Latter-day Saints, it is desirable and ultimately necessary to learn all truth. A famous statement is that from D&C 88:78-79: "Teach ye diligently and my grace shall attend you, that you may be instructed more perfectly in theory, in principle, in doctrine, in the law of the gospel, in all things that pertain unto the kingdom of God, that are expedient for you to understand; of things both in heaven and in the earth, and under the earth; things which have been, things which are, things which must shortly come to pass; things which are at home, things which are abroad; the wars and the perplexities of the nations, and the judgments which are on the land; and a knowledge also of countries and of kingdoms."

Brigham Young made many statements supporting the learning of all truth. Two brief examples will suffice: "Every art and science known and studied by the children of men is comprised within the Gospel," and "The more I learn the more I discern an eternity of knowledge to improve upon." [^4] Indeed, implicit in the concept of eternal progression, held dear by Latter-day Saints, is the idea that all truth will become available to those faithful men and women who are able to progress without limit.

Definitions

From such a foundation follows the conclusion that all truth is acceptable, no matter what its source. There is no distinction among types of truth. All things are to come within our purview. There should be no distinction between sacred and secular knowledge. [^5] President Brigham Young taught that all truth will ultimately be self-consistent: "Our religion will not clash with or contradict the facts of science in any particular." [^6] However, sometimes a distinction is made between sacred and secular knowledge. Why is this? The differences lie in the fact that there are various sources of knowledge or methods of obtaining knowledge, and different sources are emphasized in gaining these two types of knowledge. This essay will often speak of these two types of knowledge. However, I believe that ultimately all truth will be unified.

Grant W. Mason and his colleagues identify four sources of knowledge: authority, intuition, reason, and sensation. [^7] (The term experience is quite general and perhaps would include all of these.) Drawing from Mason's work, I offer the following definitions of these terms, including my own comments on their limitations.

Authority. Authoritative knowledge is obtained from recognized authorities in an area (teachers, prophets, etc.) and their teachings presented in books, lectures, scriptures, and so on. Obtaining such knowledge means that one does not have to repeat the investigation; on the other hand, it is recognized that authorities may be wrong and that sometimes one needs to find out for oneself.

Intuition. This includes information obtained from one's own mind. Self-generated ideas or hunches fall into this category. Mason and his colleagues also place inspiration and revelation here, which of course are taken much more seriously by LDS people (and some others) than are such things as hunches. The point is that this is individual knowledge, obtained by oneself. The oft-quoted example that one cannot describe a testimony, just as one cannot describe the taste of salt, illustrates this aspect of individuality.

Reason. Well-established rules for logical, correct reasoning have been known for millennia, beginning with Aristotle. Modern philosophers, logicians, and semanticists have developed and extended these methods. Great reasoning power results from these systems, such as in inductive and deductive procedures in modern science and mathematics. The truth of logical deductions depends, however, on the truth of the premises and on the validity of the reasoning, both of which are always subject to question.

Sensation. A huge amount of information about the world around us has been gathered by the senses. This is more "community" knowledge than the intuitive knowledge discussed above. However, we recognize, first, that such knowledge can be wrong (as in optical illusions), and second, that it is incomplete. For example, our senses do not tell us directly about atoms, although observation of results of various experiments may be interpreted to imply their existence.

What sources or methods of knowledge are used by religion and science? Why, all of them! Sacred knowledge is gained from authoritative pronouncements of inspired Church leaders, by one's own inspiration, through reasoning about gospel truths—"come . . . let us reason together, that ye may understand" (D&C 50:10)—and by sensation and simple observation—"by their fruits ye shall know them" (Matt. 7:20). Scientific knowledge also comes through authorities in the field (published results in scientific journals), self-generated ideas (perhaps from inspiration; Latter-day Saints believe that the scientific and technological progress of our day is inspired by the Lord), [^8] reasoning, and observation. Through experimentation, an essential part of the scientific method, we can make our own observations and compare them with those of others; experimentation is also part of religious understanding, as Alma 32 makes clear (though the counsel therein is to experiment in the development of one's faith, part of intuitive knowledge rather than sensation).

There may be great differences in the importance to us of various types of knowledge. Joseph Smith taught, "It is impossible for a man to be saved in ignorance" (D&C 131:6). This statement is often interpreted to mean that we cannot be saved in ignorance of the saving ordinances of the gospel. [^9] However, some of the Prophet Joseph Smith's original comments may be construed as encouraging the gaining of all types of knowledge. [^10]

Science and Religion

Thus searches for truth in science and in religion use all these methods, but the emphases are very different. Religious truth depends heavily on revelation, which is not subject to criticism but is subject to clarification and refinement as the Lord sees fit. Latter-day Saints rely on their own inspiration as well as instructions from Church leaders at general conferences and in Church publications like the Ensign. Scientific truth, however, relies on sensation, reason, and experimentation. Experiments are controlled and repeated, and results are published in the community literature, a vehicle not available for private knowledge. Scientific knowledge is always regarded as tentative and is subject to criticism by others. Thus interpretations of information by scientists and religionists, even when they purport to describe the same situation, often differ. Disagreements inevitably occur.11

In cases of disagreement it is absolutely essential to remember that the canons of knowledge of both science and religion are incomplete. Science has an enormous amount of information that has been compiled over centuries, yet much of this becomes outdated and is superseded year after year. It is an article of faith in science that there is much more yet to learn. For example, it is not yet known how to combine gravitation—as expressed in Einstein's theory of relativity—with quantum mechanics, a topic discussed later in this essay. There even has been some debate about whether a successful unification of scientific knowledge will ever be achieved, partly because we lack the enormous experimental resources to do that. On the other hand, there has been some talk lately about the possibility of soon achieving unification and completing the basic frontiers in physics. [^11]

It is similarly an article of faith (literally!) in religion that our information is incomplete: " . . . we believe that He [God] will yet reveal many great and important things pertaining to the kingdom of God" (A of F 1:9). Further enlightenment will come. For example, the scriptures speak of great visions, to such people as the brother of Jared (Ether 3:25-26) and Moses (Moses 1:8, 27-38), which contain many things yet unknown to most persons. Mormon said he could not write a hundredth part of the information he had available, and other records are yet to be found and translated. The Lord told Joseph Smith, "As well might man stretch forth his puny arm to stop the Missouri river in its decreed course . . . as to hinder the Almighty from pouring down knowledge from heaven upon the heads of the Latter-day Saints" (D&C 121:33). How this is to be done is, of course, not known.

So disagreements are inevitable because our knowledge is incomplete. But we believe in a unified truth and so we eventually expect agreement. It is tempting to seek agreement now. However, it is inappropriate, and often dangerous, to attempt a premature reconciliation of conflicting ideas where there is a lack of complete knowledge. If a scientist concludes that there is no God—based on inadequate evidence!—and thereby casts doubt on those who believe in God, he does them a disservice. For example, it is inappropriate for a scientist who accepts organic evolution to claim that there is no God. (However, many scientists do indeed take the position that they cannot comment on religious truth because they have little or no information on it.)

Similarly, if an ecclesiastic states that such and such a scientific idea is not true—based on inadequate evidence!—then he does a disservice to the scientist who has carefully explored that idea. As a hypothetical example, it would be inappropriate for a church authority to make a flat statement that special relativity is invalid because it limits information transmission such as prayer to the very slow (!) speed of electromagnetic waves. It may later turn out to be invalid in some sense, but current experimental and other considerations support it strongly.

The proper stance, it seems, is to withhold judgment on such questions until we have more information—but also to take advantage of what knowledge we do have. A closely related point is that one's view of what is "true" depends on one's interpretation of one's (always incomplete) data. The provision of more data may lead one to change one's mind. But one is always expected to gather as much knowledge as can be found currently before making further conclusions. One must do one's homework.

Disagreements sometimes result because of pride. Jacob (2 1 Ne. 9:28-29) criticizes the learned who think they are wise, but goes on to say that learning is good if one hearkens to God; the problem is clearly not learning, but pride.

Are there limits on the scientific search for truth that should be imposed because of our religious beliefs? In some areas of science such a question may never arise, because the perceived overlap, as discussed later, is small. In other areas, where overlap is perceived as considerable, there may be strong feeling against some types or methods of research. It is not hard to think of examples. Research in human sexual response, such as the research carried out by Masters and Johnson and involving mechanical aids for sexual stimulation and measurement of that stimulation, [^12] would almost certainly be proscribed at Brigham Young University. Research attempting to prove that the Book of Mormon is not historical would also be clearly forbidden at that institution, and attempts to create life in a test tube might be discouraged. Yet the general feeling among Latter-day Saints, as noted at the beginning of this discussion, is that all truth is acceptable. Whatever is found must be compatible with other truth, be it religious or scientific. Ultimately it reduces to a matter of faith in truth's universality.

Resolution

Religious and Scientific Truth

In view of our belief that religious and scientific truth will eventually agree as we gain enough information, it is somewhat surprising that there is as little overlap between the two as currently exists. To see this lack of overlap, one needs only, for example, to attend any science course and any religion course at BYU. Despite attempts to achieve some interaction, there is little the two curricula have in common. Of course, we need to put this fact into perspective; there is likely not much in common between any two courses, from different disciplines, taught at BYU or anywhere else. Yet science and religion both claim to search for fundamental, basic truth despite some difference in approach. Why is there not more overlap?

I will attempt to explain some reasons for this lack of common ground. In doing so I make no attempt to be complete in surveying the vast literature dealing with the comparison of science and religion. [^13] Rather, the present discussion is meant to be a treatment of how I view the two areas in my own life and reconcile them where possible.

First, as noted earlier, it seems clear that despite the enormous progress in science of the last few centuries, and despite the considerable spiritual information obtained in this last and final dispensation, there is still a huge amount of knowledge yet to come forth. We are still babes in the woods. Also, each individual knows very little of the knowledge that is already available. This realization is clear enough to anyone who has worked in research and is presumably clear to other people as well. The ultimate statement of this ignorance is exemplified by Moses, who, upon beholding (only!) our world and its inhabitants, said, "Now, for this cause I know that man is nothing, which thing I never had supposed" (Moses 1:10).

It is helpful to note that progress in both areas has served to dispel some previous misconceptions. For Latter-day Saints, the true gospel of Jesus Christ has been restored; misconceptions of spiritual truth have been erased and replaced by the coming forth of the Book of Mormon and by modern revelation, although the primary statement of new doctrine was made by Joseph Smith. In science, many early misunderstandings have been replaced after the rise of modern science around the 1600s. For example, basic ideas in astronomy and in the science of force and motion were totally changed by such developments as Copernicus' realization that Earth went around the sun, not vice versa; Kepler's insistence, in his study of planetary orbits, that theory had to be consistent with observation; and the contributions of Galileo and Newton to our understanding of motion and gravitation. The modernization of biology began later but progressed substantially in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Assumed overlaps between science and religion have been investigated, sometimes paradoxically seeming to further the distance between them. For example, the old idea that angels were needed to push planets in order to keep them moving has been abandoned in view of Newton's first law of motion, which states that no such agent is needed for uniform motion to persist.

This last remark illustrates an important point: if science shows that some particular religious explanation is faulty or unnecessary—such as the planet-pushing angels—that does not necessarily mean that science is antireligion. In this example the lack of need for angels for this purpose simply means that alone; it does not prove or even suggest that angels do not exist. As I am fond of pointing out to students, angels have better things to do. The French astronomer and mathematician Laplace is often quoted as saying, when asked where God was in his description of the solar system, that he had no need for that hypothesis. Laplace may have been exhibiting proud atheism, but it is true that the equations and science describing solar system astronomy can be written down and processed without explicitly invoking God. That does not say that God does not exist. The common view of many scientists, including many LDS scientists, is to say that God set up laws for physical and astronomical operation and then simply let them "work," allowing nature to progress consistently with them.

Latter-day Saints believe that God himself is subject to law. Spiritually, he is bound by his own covenants and integrity: "I, the Lord, am bound when ye do what I say; but when ye do not what I say, ye have no promise" (D&C 82:10). However, which physical laws constrain him we do not know. We also believe that God does intervene in human affairs, particularly in response to prayer; but when or why he allows us to manage and muddle through our own affairs by ourselves (in other words, when his answer to prayer is "wait") is not entirely clear. [^14]

In contrast to Laplace, some other scientists were pleased to invoke God in their science. Isaac Newton is a prominent example. A long section in the Principia speaks of God: "This most beautiful system of the sun, planets, and comets, could only proceed from the counsel and dominion of an intelligent and powerful Being. . . . This Being governs all things, not as the soul of the world, but as Lord over all. . . . He is eternal and infinite, omnipotent and omniscient. . . . He governs all things, and knows all things that are or can be done." [^15]

Another example is Thomas Wright, discoverer of galaxies: "Since as the Creation is, so is the Creator also magnified, we may conclude in consequence of an infinity, and an infinite all-active power, that as the visible creation is supposed to be full of siderial [sic] systems and planetary worlds, so on, in life similar manner, the endless immensity is an unlimited plenum of creations not unlike the known." [^16] Others, more contemporary, suggest or imply the existence of a supreme intelligence but do not say much about it. [^17] Many take an unabashedly agnostic, pessimistic, or atheistic point of view. Freeman Dyson, a well-known physicist and science writer, quotes Nobel Prize winner Steven Weinberg: "The more the universe seems comprehensible, the more it also seems pointless." [^18] Eugene Wigner, another Nobel Prize winner, also waxed somewhat pessimistic about whether we would ever achieve full understanding of nature: "We have no right to expect that our intellect can formulate perfect concepts for the full understanding of inanimate nature's phenomena." [^19]

Second, as a kind of corollary to the first reason why science and religion lack common ground, researchers in the areas of science and religion often investigate disparate areas and may have different aims. As already noted, their methods differ substantially. Religious studies do not investigate equations of motion; astronomers do not study the first principles of the gospel. The purposes of the two types of study are different. As Galileo said (quoting another person and here slightly paraphrased), the one seeks to find out how to go to heaven, the other to find out how the heavens go. [^20] Overlaps may be somewhat accidental. Where these occur, there may be disagreements, but not always. (In the story of the Creation, there is lack of agreement as to the time scale and other great gaps in knowledge, but the order of creation as briefly given in Genesis, Moses, and Abraham is roughly the same as astronomers, physicists, geologists, and biologists suppose. [^21] )

A clear statement that science and religion must be viewed differently is found in a National Academy of Sciences paper on creationism: "Religion and science are separate and mutually exclusive realms of human thought whose presentation in the same context leads to misunderstanding of both scientific theory and religious belief." [^22]

In the following discussion I examine areas in which science and religion both have something to say and compare their tentative conclusions.

Creation of the Universe

Jesus Christ is a Creator; so there must have been a creation. What form did it take, and when did it happen? Gen. 1:1 suggests a moment of creation—but this presumably refers only to Earth. To find religious texts referring to larger assemblies than that, such as the entire universe, we must refer to other scriptures. [^23] D&C 76:24 speaks of creation, by the Only Begotten, of "the worlds" and their inhabitants. Is this the entire universe as we know it from astronomy and theory? No time scale is given in that scripture.

Moses 1:33 speaks of the creation of "worlds without number," and verse 35 says that many worlds have already passed away and that innumerable worlds yet remain. Joseph Smith's King Follett sermon and his sermon of 16 June 1844, both suggest an infinite extension of gods, although there is no agreement on exactly what his statements mean. [^24]

Incidentally, when Joseph suggests in the King Follett sermon that matter can neither be created nor destroyed, [^25] he is essentially stating the law of conservation of mass-energy, a law currently and universally accepted in science but not known in his time. The Creation was an organization of preexisting matter. That this is our LDS belief—contrary to the theory of ex nihilo creation (out of nothing) of traditional Christianity and of creationism—has been clearly pointed out by numerous authors. [^26]

The currently accepted scientific view of the origin of the universe is the "Big Bang" theory. According to this view, the universe—including the space and time in it—is presumed to have begun at some definite moment in the past, expanding from an initially extremely small and extremely dense clump of matter to its present size. How long ago this took place is still very uncertain but is commonly estimated at 12-15 billion years. If there is enough gravitating matter in the universe, then it will eventually recollapse—fall back on itself. Then it may reexpand, perhaps many times (in which case it is said to "oscillate"). If there is not enough matter to make it fall back, the universe will expand forever. Within this theory, which of the two scenarios will take place is not known.

A number of persons, scientists as well as nonscientists, who are uncomfortable with the Big Bang's postulate of sudden initial expansion of matter and other features have sought alternative explanations of the universe's existence. For example, a rival theory called the "Steady State" universe competed for acceptance for a quarter of a century. It was abandoned because it could not explain the observed "microwave background radiation"—a constant radiation coming from all parts of the sky and apparently a result of the Big Bang.

Such observational evidence for the Big Bang indicates that that theory is in fairly good shape. However, many cosmologists currently believe—in order to explain some awkward features of the Big Bang—that after the initial event there was a tiny period of tremendous expansion called "inflation." There is also a new alternative explanation, one based on the idea of a recollapsing universe. [^27] For the interested reader, there are several good popular accounts of the current status of our scientific understanding of the creation of the universe. [^28]

It is clear from the above comments that religion and science have little information in common regarding the Creation, except for the fact that (and this is in itself highly significant) there does seem to have been a specific creation. Whether our religious understanding of the creation of the universe is consistent with the scientific belief in the Big Bang is unclear. Ernan McMullin, speaking from the Roman Catholic point of view, observed, "What one cannot say is, first, that the Christian doctrine of creation 'supports' the Big Bang model, or second, that the Big Bang model 'supports' the doctrine of creation." [^29]

In some versions of the "inflation" model, it is suggested that many additional universes could have come into being during inflation. [^30] Might these be new universes, awaiting the advent of those faithful individuals who inherit exaltation in the celestial kingdom?

The Big Bang's postulation that the universe suddenly comes into being sounds suspiciously like creation ex nihilo. Keith E. Norman raises the question whether modern cosmology in this sense might contradict LDS doctrine on the Creation as stated by Joseph Smith in the King Follett sermon and as noted earlier. [^31] My point of view is simply that, in the absence of information about a prior state, we cannot really say that the universe was indeed created out of nothing. (Incidentally, this "nothing," the vacuum, seems to be remarkably active in modern physics, because particles, maybe even universes, can come into or out of existence from the vacuum.) Our future prospects for gathering further scientific information on the Big Bang—despite the Hubble telescope—are quite limited, and so the problem seems to be unanswerable for the foreseeable future.

A useful idea discussed recently among cosmologists is the "weak anthropic principle" (WAP), which states that only those creations consistent with the existence of human life (ours in particular) can have taken place. [^32] In other words, we exist and so the universe must be consistent with that fact (obviously). However, a number of other possible "principles" have been suggested that are not so obvious; for example, the "strong anthropic principle" (SAP), which states that the universe must have those properties that allow life to develop within it at some stage in its history. This principle is somewhat similar to the older "argument from design," which argues that the design apparent in the universe is evidence for the existence of a designer (just as the existence of a watch argues for the existence of a watchmaker, to use an old metaphor). John Barrow and Frank Tipler state the argument from design as follows: "There exists one possible Universe 'designed' with the goal of generating and sustaining 'observers.'" [^33]

It has been noted that only certain conditions could have existed in order to make life possible (which can be taken as support for either the argument from design or the anthropic principle). For example, the noted British astronomer Fred Hoyle pointed out that a particular nuclear energy level occurs in carbon 12 at a position where a "resonance" (along with other features) makes the production of carbon in stellar interiors possible; a slight change in its placement would make carbon formation impossible, which in turn would mean that carbon-based life would be impossible. [^34] (The source of terrestrial carbon, and indeed of all elements beyond helium, is understood to be the interior of stars, generations earlier than our sun.)

The anthropic principle and the argument from design suggest to the mind a teleology—a purpose in creation—which in turn suggests the existence of God. Thus the existence of the favorable carbon energy level can be seen as an evidence for the existence of God, in particular a God who was interested in forming human life. Hoyle does not say this, but instead attributes the situation to more or less random accidents. True enough, it is not necessary to assume that this energy level was created by a supreme being, because if any of the processes favorable to our existence had failed, we would not be here anyway. Our existence demonstrates only that conditions were right for life formation in our own universe; there could have been billions of other universes that formed, existed, and passed away in which there was no life developed at all.

An interesting form of the anthropic principle is the "participatory universe" suggested by Princeton physicist John Archibald Wheeler, in which, perhaps in a quantum mechanics context of an observer-dependent reality, the creation of the universe is bound up with our ability to observe it. As Barrow and Tipler state this idea, "Observers are necessary to bring the Universe into being." [^35] They note that this idea is closely related to another possibility: "An ensemble of other different universes is necessary for the existence of our Universe." [^36] This is intriguing, although it is not clear how observers formed after the creation of the universe could have affected its initial creation. [^37] Barrow and Tipler suggest that this might be related to Hugh Everett's "many-worlds" interpretation of quantum mechanics, in which an infinitely branching set of possible worlds really exists. [^38] (A short story suggestive of the many-worlds approach was published in 1941—before Everett's work—by the Argentine author Jorge Luis Borges.) [^39]

While the argument from design is not a proof of the existence of God, it suggests to us that God exists. Scriptures support this view: "The heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament sheweth his handywork" (Ps. 19:1) "The earth rolls upon her wings. . . . Behold, all these are kingdoms, and any man who hath seen any or the least of these hath seen God moving in his majesty and power" (D&C 88:45, 47) "All things denote there is a God; yea, even the earth, and all things that are upon the face of it, yea, and its motion, yea, and also all the planets which move in their regular form do witness that there is a Supreme Creator" (Alma 30:44). Such scriptures may be read not as an attempt by the writer to prove the existence of God (although the latter passage was such an attempt), but simply as an expression of worship and awe in the presence of a God already presumed to exist.

It should be noted that the SAP, as currently understood, indicates that the universe was created only to give rise to our own existence. Thus it implies that there are no other human civilizations in the universe, a view certainly contrary to LDS scriptures and thought (see D&C 76:24). [^40]

The Nature of Space and Time

Despite considerable progress in the twentieth century, our understanding of space and time still seems to be rudimentary. Numerous tantalizing scriptures refer to space and time: "All is as one day with God, and time only is measured unto men" (Alma 40:8) "Listen to the voice of the Lord your God, . . . whose course is one eternal round, the same today as yesterday, and forever" (D&C 35:1) "The light which shineth . . . proceedeth forth from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space" (D&C 88:11-12) "There are many kingdoms; for there is no space in the which there is no kingdom; and there is no kingdom in which there is no space" (D&C 88:37) "Kolob was after the manner of the Lord, according to its times and seasons in the revolutions thereof; that one revolution was a day unto the Lord, after his manner of reckoning, it being one thousand years according to the time appointed unto that whereon thou standest" (Abr. 3:4) "We will go down, for there is space there, . . . and we will make an earth" (Abr. 3:24) "One day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day" (2 Pet. 3:8).

It is interesting to consider these statements in the context of Albert Einstein's relativistic view of time and space. [^41] As understood from his theory of special relativity set forth in 1905, measurements of time duration and space extent may range from one frame of reference to another, depending on the exact experiment performed and on the frames' relative motion. In addition, one's speed through space is limited to speeds lower than the speed of light, rapid for Earth life but incredibly slow if one wants to travel in space. Thus, special relativity seems to be inconsistent with the existence of prayer and of travel possible for celestial beings, both of which seem to be extremely rapid.

Special relativity was revolutionary when it was proposed, but it is hardly cosmic in the sense of the scriptural quotes above. (Many people have asked me what special relativity has to say about theology; I usually answer that I don't know.) The apparent numerical correspondence between God's time and man's time indicated by Abr. 3:4 (one day for the Lord equals a thousand years for man) is sometimes taken as a definite ratio of time scales, perhaps arising in special relativity. However, according to relativity, that ratio would require the Lord and man to be traveling at nearly the speed of light—for a long period of time—relative to each other. This sort of thing seems preposterous.

A better interpretation is suggested by 2 Pet. 3:8, which speaks of the ratio of a thousand years to a day operating in both ways. I regard that simply as indicating that time, as perceived or controlled by God, is very different from our perception. This suggests that it would be premature to force the meaning of these scriptures beyond that point and avoids the temptation to try to work out some sort of definite numerical correspondence of the two scales (as has often been tried by LDS people). Relativity may still play a role, but we do not know as yet what that role might be.

In the extension of Einstein's theory called general relativity (1916), space time is viewed as "curved," allowing gravitation to be explained as a natural effect of that curvature. (Imagine the sun creating some sort of depression or funnel in space, around which planets are forced to travel. Thus the planets move in orbits.) This allows a very nice view of the creation and operation of the universe, in that it extends into more than three spatial dimensions, allowing all kinds of interesting phenomena—and, of course, the Creator would be able to comprehend and use all dimensions although we cannot. Travel of celestial beings—as we understand it from events such as Moroni's appearances to Joseph Smith in his bedroom—might easily be explained by postulating extra dimensions.

Such kinds of travel through "hyperspace" have indeed been considered in science fiction. This sort of thing is often based on ideas from general relativity. For example, in the 1950s John Wheeler suggested such routes through curved space with complex topology and called them "wormholes."43 (Imagine folding a rectangular piece of paper in half widthwise and allowing travel from one end to another across the gap between the ends instead of being required to follow the paper lengthwise.) As noted by Kip Thorne, the possibility of such things was first discovered right after the genesis of general relativity in 1916.44 Wormholes could conceivably provide routes alternate to, and possibly shorter than, normal routes. One can also imagine wormholes through time, or "closed timelike curves" (CTCs), that would allow time travel to the future or the past.

A similar development in the 1950s and 1960s led to our modern understanding of "black holes," regions in space from which nothing can escape. One could never get into a nonrotating black hole and back out again; however, exit did appear possible in an electrically charged or rotating black hole, leading to different times and places (although one's exit point was not guaranteed even to be in one's own universe!). [^42]

Kip Thorne, some of his students at Caltech, and other physicists elsewhere have made thorough, serious studies of such models of space or time travel—wormholes or CTCs—asking how consistent with known classical and quantum physics they would be. Although neither space nor time travel has been entirely ruled out, either one would appear to be highly difficult to achieve. For example, an object or individual making such transport would likely be required to be made of exotic matter of a type not available to us on Earth. [^43] The answer is not known, however, and papers continue to appear on this subject. [^44]

Nevertheless, such space travel or time communication appears possible, even required, from spiritual experiences as stated in scripture and elsewhere. How does God know the end from the beginning? (see Abr. 2:8). How did he know, thousands of years in advance, that Joseph Smith would lose the 116 pages of manuscript and that an alternate set of records would be needed? (see W of M 1:6-7). Again, how was it possible for Moroni to travel through space, to appear, in a boy's bedroom, standing in the air, having control over gravity as well as space and time? (see Joseph Smith—History 1:30). In what sense is God above time? (see Alma 40:8).

Scientists associate time duration with causality—the idea that causes precede effects. Surely there is still cause and effect in the eternities; that is simply the law of the harvest. (It has also been commented that time is God's way of preventing everything from happening all at once!) Is time simply a sequence of events, without a quantitative label? And how is God able to answer prayer almost instantaneously? If he is at any distance at all from Earth—a few light-years perhaps—transmission of such information at the speed of light or less would be impossibly slow. And if he is close to us and yet has other worlds he cares about (see D&C 76:24; Moses 1:33, 35), how could he communicate with them? (Perhaps spirit matter or resurrected matter is the exotic matter needed in order to traverse wormholes or CTCs!)

As noted earlier, the usual view among cosmologists, especially general relativists, is that space and time "began" at the Big Bang—in other words, that it makes no sense to speak of their existence "before" the Big Bang. From the standpoint that we have absolutely no information about such a prior existence, that is a reasonable position. On the other hand, as noted earlier, because we have no such information, we cannot conclude that there was no existence then! If we truly believe that our entire universe was created by God, then one naturally assumes that he existed prior to that creation, [^45] outside our perceived universe, implying that his time is different from our time. Alma 40:8—"all is as one day with God, and time only is measured unto men"—makes the dichotomy clear, although it does not help us understand God's time. Presumably, in God's universe cause precedes effect and there is eternal progression, which would suggest some sort of time order—but beyond that we cannot go. We can only ask whether God's understanding applies just to our universe or to the (possibly) more extensive space and time in which he dwells.

Nature of Matter and Spirit

The current scientific explanation of matter is that it is made up of a number of elementary particles occurring in a number of families. These interact by means of four known forces, or interactions: gravitational forces, electromagnetic forces, and strong and weak nuclear forces. The families are "quarks" (out of which protons, neutrons, and other particles are made), "leptons" (electrons, neutrinos, and such), and "interacting bosons" (particles that are interchanged between other particles and that give rise to the forces). These forces work together in the framework of quantum mechanics, the theory that explains the behavior of such elementary particles in terms of waves and probability. These particles come together to build the matter familiar to our eyes.

In recent years the existence of a number of undiscovered elementary particles has been proposed. In addition to theoretical motivations for such proposals, another motivation has been the evidence of so-called missing matter (commonly called "dark matter") in the universe—nonluminous matter that seems to be present because of its gravitational effect on its surroundings. However, we may never be able to detect such particles because of limitations on our experiments.

How is matter described in a religious context? It seems to have constant, real existence, as suggested earlier from the King Follett sermon. But in addition to the solid matter we are accustomed to, there appears to be spirit matter. Along this line Joseph Smith taught: "There is no such thing as immaterial matter. All spirit is matter, but it is more fine or pure, and can only be discerned by purer eyes; we cannot see it; but when our bodies are purified we shall see that it is all matter" (D&C 131:7-8).

It is clear enough that, despite its invisibility, spirit matter can interact with ordinary matter, as witness the violent effect on individuals of evil spirit possession (see, for example, Matt. 8:28-32; Mark 9:25-26). Yet there do not appear to be significant immediate physical changes in the body as a person dies, beyond the cessation of activity. The interaction must be of some rather delicate nature, strong only on occasion. Science has no information about such a thing. It seems to me that that interaction would constitute at least a fifth interaction, beyond the four currently known to physics.

What of mind-to-mind communication? We commonly call this telepathy, one of other such mental abilities termed psychic phenomena. These abilities are viewed with skepticism among most scientists, who are unable to demonstrate their operation with any degree of certainty or consistency. Yet many LDS people believe such things are possible under unusual conditions. Could this phenomena result from the interaction of spirit matter with ordinary matter or other spirit matter?

In D&C 93:23, 29, and 33, and in the King Follett sermon, the Prophet Joseph spoke of intelligence and of its being "co-equal" (corrected by B. H. Roberts to "co-eternal" in the footnote) [^46] with God. Intelligence appears to be even more ethereal than spirit. In what form was it? If intelligence existed as embryo individuals in the infinite past, then one wonders how it is possible to have so much structure(as intelligent individuals). But if intelligence existed only as some amorphous substance and individuals came into being, say, as God created spirits (this seems to be supported by Abr. 3:22), then one is faced with some old philosophical problems. There is the concern with the idea of the "contingent" existence of man (as opposed to "necessary" existence)—that we are created by God and our very existence is contingent upon him—and with the feelings of instability and insecurity that idea engenders. There is also the question of the existence of evil; if God is good, how could he create men who have the possibility of sin? This idea is discussed further later on.

The question of the nature of preexistent matter is a long-standing one in the Church. The question of whether intelligence is really co-eternal with God is not settled. Some Church members seem to prefer a contingent existence for intelligences rather than a necessary existence, despite D&C 93.

Chance, Statistics, and Quantum Theory

The idea that there is an element of chance in the operation of nature occurs in a number of places. First, we recognize that material things are made up of atoms and molecules that are generally all moving very rapidly—the molecular model, or kinetic theory, of matter. It is convenient to treat such assemblies of particles statistically; the number of particles is so large that it is far beyond our abilities to calculate their individual behavior, even with the best computers, actual or contemplated. However, the particles are still presumed to obey classically deterministic laws (such as Newton's laws of motion and the electromagnetic and gravitational force laws). If one knows the particles' situation at one time, then one can in principle determine all future situations.

To complicate matters, modern chaos theory has demonstrated that many systems exhibit extreme sensitivity to initial conditions. This means that one cannot calculate and predict the future in such systems, to any reasonable extent, unless one knows the present conditions to very high accuracy—to many decimal places. (This is one reason that weather predictions cannot be made precise, even for a few days.) Systems need not be very complex in order to show this behavior, and of course our universe is extremely complex.

So we are faced with having the Creator understand many particles and their characteristics to high accuracy. The scriptures do speak of his omniscience, and so we can accept on faith the idea that he can determine, or observe, the behavior of the huge number of particles in the universe, although it is difficult for our finite minds to see how.

Quantum mechanics is the twentieth-century view of matter at the atomic level and smaller. Our present understanding of matter (termed the "Copenhagen interpretation") postulates an uncertainty that translates into a fundamental inability to determine the complete description (in terms of position and velocity) of a system of particles. Exact determination of the future becomes impossible; such matters are seemingly governed by chance, probability, and statistics.

Quantum mechanics is a two-edged sword. On the one hand, the lack of certainty in the behavior of matter seems to allow real freedom of action to individual intelligence. This freedom seemed illusory under the older (Newtonian) determinism, which suggested that all our actions were irrevocably determined by the beginning state of things. On the other hand, because of its dependence on chance, quantum mechanics seems to imply a limit on God's ability to know the future. A number of physicists from Albert Einstein and ErwinSchrodinger onward have been distressed by the probability/chance aspect of the Copenhagen interpretation (which gave rise to Einstein's famous saying that God does not play dice with the universe). Several of these physicists have postulated an underlying structure (referred to as "hidden variables") to try to remedy the theory's perceived incompleteness.

Such efforts have not succeeded to date. In fact, things have become more bizarre than before. Recent experimental results even suggest the possibility of "nonlocality"—the idea that an action at one place can influence results elsewhere, at apparent instantaneous speeds. There are even experiments in which the experimenter can affect the results by changing his mind in the middle of the experiment or even afterward. [^47] Physics at the quantum level is stranger than we can imagine; there is no possibility at present of unifying it with religion.

So we are left with the question of how God deals with, acts in, or controls a world that seems to be highly dependent on chance in several important ways. It may be that he is actually able to exert control—on the spot as needed—to direct the universe and its structure and inhabitants in the way he desires. On the other hand, there appears to be an uncreated, individualistic part to each of us that is beyond God's control, for "man was also in the beginning with God. Intelligence, or the light of truth, was not created or made, neither indeed can be" (D&C 93:29).

That partially solves the problem of the existence of evil in the world, but it leaves open the question of how God is able to perceive the future so well. For instance, how did the Father know in the premortal existence that Jehovah could and would serve as his Only Begotten Son, eventually to become the Redeemer and to be so obedient that—despite the terrible requirements of the Atonement—he would finish the work? (see D&C 19:16-19). How did God foreknow the details of the loss of the 116 manuscript pages?

Despite the seeming success of science and rational thinking in other areas, our present state of scientific knowledge cannot begin to answer such questions about God, the eternal world, and matters of faith and revelation with any degree of confidence.

Holism and Reductionism

Scientists and others have asked for millennia, "What is life?" A basic assumption among many scientists has been, and continues to be, that life is simply an effect resulting from the combination of basic structural elements of matter—atoms and molecules and the physicochemical interactions by which they are held together (reductionism). [^48] Opposed to this view has been the view of holism, or "vitalism," in which some sort of essence or life force is proposed in order to explain life. In the latter view it would presumably be impossible to reduce the explanation of life to mere matter interactions. This would suggest that ultimate scientific explanation of life by scientific methods would be impossible. It would also suggest that creation of life in a test tube is impossible. On the other hand, one could perhaps argue that if one created exactly the right assembly and conditions for life to exist, a spirit from the spirit world might be allowed to enter that assembly. (Clearly LDS people would find this difficult to accept.)

One can also note the rather intriguing view in some current mathematics that total reduction sometimes fails, that sometimes one must consider a complex system as a unit. [^49] Whether this can be viewed as an argument for holism in the biological sense is not clear.

In the last few decades the question about what life is has been sharpened to, or replaced by, the question, "What is consciousness?" This has often been assumed to be related to presumed freedom available through the looser predictions of quantum mechanics, as opposed to rigid determinism; however, this is a greatly simplified view. The topic of consciousness has been explored extensively in the last few decades from many aspects; it even has been the subject of recent conferences. In his recent book, Francis Crick discusses the reductionist view of consciousness and concludes that each of us is really just a vast, complex network of neurons. At the end of the book he suggests that the seat of the will is near the anterior cingulate sulcus (an area in the human brain). [^50] On first inspection it is likely that most Latter-day Saints would oppose such a reduction. On the other hand, it could be that physical operations relating to the will are located there, while there could still be a spirit, made of spirit matter, resident in our brains and controlling those physical operations. (That this is not Crick's view is clear from his opening remarks in chapter one of his book.)

Another recent treatise, opposing simple reductionism, is set forth in a notable book by Frank Tipler, [^51] in which he claims that modern physics—including quantum theory, general relativity, and ultimately quantum cosmology (for which a complete theory does not exist, as noted earlier)—actually demonstrates the existence of God, called in his book the"Omega Point" (a term originally coined by the paleontologist/Jesuit priest Teilhard de Chardin). The Omega Point is to have a pointlike structure in the ultimate future. Needless to say, this view is substantially different from the LDS anthropomorphic God.

The Ability to Create and Entropy

We know from the second law of thermodynamics that the universe has a tendency to "run down"—to approach a state in which energy is unavailable, even though it has not been destroyed. The final such state is sometimes called the "heat death"; it seems to portray an inexorable, even if very far distant, end to organization and intelligence.

The essence of creation would seem to be the ability to circumvent this law (see Isa. 65:17; D&C 29:22-25; 88:18). Indeed, we speak of creation as "organizing." This seems clearly recognized by scientists concerned with the question. [^52]

I remember a remark from my graduate-school days, attributed to Professor Valentine Bargmann, that there is one area in physics that seems not to be subject to that law—general relativity. We can imagine that if the universe recollapsed after the Big Bang, that would wind things up again, providing the needed order. There is no guarantee that the recollapse would yield enough order to really recreate a universe like ours. And what happens to God in this recollapse? Hopefully he stands outside the universe and is not caught in the crunch! Furthermore, what happens if the universe does not recollapse, but continues to expand forever, as would seem to be indicated by current measurements of the density of matter in the universe or by inflationary models? Freeman Dyson notes that life could perhaps go on indefinitely in an open, continuously expanding universe by reducing the rates of processes, [^53] but this seems to be an unsatisfactory, passive, ungodlike way of prolonging existence or progression.

Such matters relate to questions of the direction of time. The second law of thermodynamics is often spoken of as "time's arrow," a law that actually points time's direction (in the sense that things become more disordered as time goes on). There are other time's arrows: the fact that radiation from a source expands outward; the expansion of the universe; the collapse of the wave function in quantum mechanics, in which, for example, an observation suddenly makes the position of an electron definite (in place of its formerly uncertain location). Extensive discussions about the possible relationships of these arrows have taken place, with no certain conclusions forthcoming. [^54]

Scriptural Items with Seemingly No Scientific Counterpart

There are many occurrences mentioned in scripture that we cannot fully understand by either science or religion. I will briefly mention a few here and also note that many such instances have been treated in the excellent earlier work by LDS scholars, Science and Religion: Toward a More Useful Dialogue. [^55] Readers may also wish to consult the writings of Henry Eyring. [^56]

The Noachian flood. We see no evidence of a worldwide flood. In fact, we see overwhelming evidence that there was not such a (recent) event. Geologists know the geologic effects of flooding, as for example in the scablands in the state of Washington that resulted from the emptying of Lake Missoula. No such topography is seen on large scale. A possible explanation is that the Flood was a relatively local event.

The sun standing still. (See Josh. 10:12-13.) It is clear from Hel. 12:15 that the sun does not move; rather, Earth does. This raises the problem that the sudden stopping of Earth's rotation would have produced huge cataclysms on Earth, of which there is neither geological nor scriptural evidence. So was Earth stopped gradually? How much time would it take to stop it so gradually that cataclysms would not happen? How did the Lord do it? We don't know.

The destruction in America at the time of Christ's crucifixion. The events described in 3 Ne. 8 seem extreme. However, they can quite easily be explained by assuming that a very large earthquake or volcanic eruption, with its attendant disasters, took place. [^57] This would then be a fairly local catastrophe; it would not explain geologic changes elsewhere, as is sometimes supposed.

The division of Earth. This division mentioned in Gen. 10:25 is, of course, suggestive of continental drift, but the time scales are all wrong. The division of Earth may simply mean an earthquake. [^58] It has also been suggested that the splitting is only political.

The seven thousand years of Earth's temporal existence. The question of the age of Earth has been a prominent one, both in LDS and in traditional Christian thought. It is probably fairly well understood now that the "days" of creation can be viewed as indefinite, long periods; yet D&C 77:6 sounds quite definite. Presumably the reconciliation is to be found in the definition of "temporal existence." Scientifically, the age of Earth is considered to be 4.5 billion years, a figure borne out by many measurements, using various forms of dating. In particular, these include a number of methods of radioactive or fission-track dating, which give reasonably consistent figures. In addition, this age is consistent with stellar ages and the (rough) age of the universe as determined by astrophysics and cosmology. [^59]

Astronomical significance of Facsimile No. 2 and related comments in Abr. 3. The caption to Facsimile No. 2 in the Pearl of Great Price mentions the thousand-years-to-one-day ratio mentioned earlier. What is meant by the statement that the sun borrows its light from Kolob? The scientific explanation for the sun's light is that it comes from nuclear fusion proceeding in the sun's interior, never from some external source. And where is Kolob? How does it govern fifteen (only fifteen?) other planets or stars? Probably this caption, which contains the wording "called by the Egyptians" and "called in Egyptian," is to be viewed only as relating to the Egyptian world view.

Origin of man. My father, Bertrand F. Harrison, taught botany at BYU for many years. I grew up with the idea that more complex forms of life evolved from simpler forms. I had no problem, religiously or otherwise, with it and was surprised to find there were people who were horrified by the idea. It still seems reasonable to me that organic evolution could occur and, in particular, that man's body could have been formed that way by our Heavenly Father. All life is his creation, and just because we may not identify with lower creatures does not mean that the Creator did not use them in this process. Certainly at some point—no matter what process was used!—God had to make the bodies of Adam and Eve perfect—presumably making them potentially divine by putting into them their spirits.

A good (and unusual) reference on this topic is an article written for the Instructor by my father when he served on the General Sunday School Board. He wrote the article at the invitation of Lorin Wheelwright, who was the managing editor of the magazine at the time. [^60] While this article does not go into detail about the possibility of organic evolution or its being the source of man's body, it makes that idea plausible and points out that a person can believe in evolution and still be a faithful member of the Church.

An example of a strong argument for the possibility of the organization of man's body by development from lower forms of life is the existence of vestigial organs—organs that exist in the human body yet have no clear function and presumably are remnants from some earlier form of life. Some of these organs are evident in the embryo stage, and others exist in the adult form—including the appendix, hair on the body, and the male nipple (see Rev. 1:13).

Conclusion

Through the years it has been my experience that many persons are concerned about the interaction and seeming conflicts between science and religion. [^61] It is natural that there should be this concern, given people's interest in these two areas. It is also natural that people should try to reconcile them whenever possible. However, it seems clear that we are a long way from the possibility of reconciliation and synthesis. Despite the advances of knowledge, both religious and scientific, of our modern age, we still are but children in understanding. Once such a stance of humility is adopted, it is easier to be comfortable with apparent differences between the two areas, especially if one has a faith that all truth will eventually be unified. We can look forward to that unification.

I am comfortable with this stance. I recognize that there are many seeming disagreements between scientific and religious truth, even some so disparate as to cause one to wonder how reconciliation can ever be possible. However, it may be that reconciliation will be easier than supposed; perhaps even simple redefinitions (of what is meant by the "earth's temporal existence," for example) will aid that synthesis. To some observers this attitude may be disdainfully viewed as compartmentalized thinking; however, to me, it appears to be the only safe approach, one that does not do violence to either type of truth by prematurely forcing agreement.

Many people anticipate much knowledge to come forth when the sealed part of the Book of Mormon is unsealed (see 3 Ne. 26:6-11). That will indeed be a glorious revelation; however, I believe it will still contain only a relatively small, albeit important, amount of knowledge (contrast what we know about the size of the sealed part with the millions of volumes of printed information in the libraries of the world). Perhaps the description of the white stone available to each of us (mentioned in D&C 130:10-11) provides some indication of the manner of receiving knowledge in the hereafter, for inhabitants of the celestial kingdom. (Another indication of the later provision of knowledge to us is found in D&C 101:32-34: "in that day when the Lord shall come, he shall reveal all things. . . .")

In any case it seems reasonable to assume that considerable effort is needed to gain such knowledge. Our model for learning is this mortal life, which does require effort. At the same time, however, the acquisition of truth must be associated with not just learning but with living right, as suggested by Terry Warner in his definition referred to at the beginning of this essay. Our complete appreciation of truth will come only in the eternities, when we finally understand and live the full meaning of Jesus' statement to the Twelve Apostles, as recorded in John 14:6: "I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me."

Notes

B. Kent Harrison was valedictorian of his Brigham Young University class when he graduated with a B.S. in physics in 1955. He received his Ph.D. in theoretical physics from Princeton University in 1959 and worked at Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory following postdoctoral work. In 1964 he joined the Department of Physics and Astronomy at BYU and has been a full professor in that department since 1971 as well as its chairman from 1972 to 1979. Dr. Harrison spent two years at the Jet Propulsion Lab in Pasadena, California. He has served as a member of the editorial board for the Journal of Nonlinear Mathematical Physics and the Journal of Mathematical Physics. He has published extensively on physics and is coauthor of a book on gravitational theory and gravitational collapse. In addition, he is coeditor of a book related to social welfare problems.

Dr. Harrison is married to Janyce Maxfield, and they are the parents of three sons and a daughter. He has served in the LDS Church as stake clerk, stake high councilor, counselor in a branch presidency, and bishop of a BYU ward.

---
Notas:
[^1] See my Mineral Exploration Decisions: A Guide to Economic Analysis and Modeling (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1990).
[^2] See my article "Mineral-Resource Assessment—Perspectives on Past and Present and Speculation on Future Directions," Nonrenewable Resources 4, no. 3 (1995):213-32.
[^3] See my Mineral Resources Appraisal: Mineral Endowment, Resources, and Potential Supply—Concepts, Methods, and Case Studies (New York: Oxford University Press, 1984).
[^4] Melchizedek Priesthood Study Guide, 1977-78, p. 95.
[^5] Ensign, May1974, p. 95.
[^6] Joseph Fielding Smith, John R. Winder, and Anthon H. Lund, "The Origin of Man," Improvement Era 12 (1909): 80-81.
[^7] Dallin H. Oaks, April1989 general conference address, quoted in Church News, 27 January 1996, p. 14.
[^8] Ibid.
[^9] Ibid.
[^10] James E. Faust, "Serving the Lord and Resisting the Devil," Ensign, September 1995, pp. 2-7.
[^11] "First Presidency Christmas Address," Deseret News, 17 December 1910, p. 3.
[^12] Stephen E. Kessler, Mineral Resources, Economics, and the Environment (New York: Macmillan, 1994), p. 1.
[^13] Thomas R. Malthus, "An Essay on the Principle of Population as It Affects the Future Improvement of Mankind" (1798), Population. The First Essay (London: Macmillan, 1926); and Principles of Population, 5th ed. (Homewood, Ill.: Irwin, n.d.).
[^14] See Stanley Jevons, The Coal Question: An Inquiry Concerning the Progress of the Nation and the Probable Exhaustion of Our Coal Mines (London: Macmillan, 1865).
[^15] See Donella H. Meadowset al., Limits of Growth (New York: Universe Books, 1972).
[^16] See William N. Peach and JamesA. Constantin, Zimmermann's World Resources and Industries, 3rd ed. (New York: Harper & Row, 1972).
[^17] See HaroldJ. Barnett and ChandlerMorse, Scarcity and Growth: The Economics of Natural Resource Availability (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1963).
[^18] See Julian Simon, The Ultimate Resource (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1981).
[^19] See ibid.
[^20] See Thierno Sow, "Multivariate Forecasting of Mineral Commodities Price: Implications for Natural Resource Scarcity" (Ph.D diss., University of Arizona, 1996).
[^21] Ibid., p. 45.
[^22] Peach and Constantin, Zimmermann's World Resources and Industries, p. 156.
[^23] Ibid., p. 12.
[^24] Ibid.
[^25] Kessler, Mineral Resources, p. 1.
[^26] See HaroldBarnett, "Scarcity and Growth Revisited," in Scarcity and Growth Reconsidered, ed. Kerry Smith (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1979).
[^27] David M. Graber, Book Review, Los Angeles Times, 22 October 1989, p. 9; quoted by Walter Williams in State Journal-Register, 25 June 1992. Williams is quoted by Dixie Lee Ray and Lou Guzzo in Environmental Overkill: Whatever Happened to Common Sense? (Washington, D.C.: Recency Printing, 1993), p. 204.
[^28] Rudolf Bahro, "Building on Unlimited Future,"Imprimis, January 1992; also excerpted in Barry Asmus, "The 'Green Brick' of Socialism," Abundant Wildlife 5 (1992) and quoted by Ray and Guzzo, Environmental Overkill, p. 203.
[^29] See Lynn White Jr., "The Historical Roots of Ecological Crisis," Science 155 (March 1967): 1203-7.
[^30] Tom Tietenberg,Environmental and Natural Resource Economics (Glenview, Illinois: Foresman, 1984), p. 56.
[^31] See ibid.
[^32] James L Malone, "Mineral Resources and the International Environmental Agenda," Mining Voice 1, no. 5 (November/December 1995): 32.
[^33] David Graber, Book Review, Los Angeles Times, 22 Oct. 1989, p. 9.
[^34] James L. Malone, "Mineral Resources . . . ," p. 32.
[^35] Judy Bari, quoted by Walter Williams in State Journal Register, 25 June 1992. Williams is quoted by Ray and Guzzo in Environmental Overkill: Whatever Happened to Common Sense?, p. 203.
[^36] Ray and Guzzo, Environmental Overkill: Whatever Happened to Common Sense?, p. 25.
[^37] Ray and Guzzo in Environmental Overkill: Whatever Happened to Common Sense?, p. 202.
[^38] See Hugh W. Nibley, Approaching Zion, vol. 9 of The Collected Works of Hugh Nibley (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co. and F.A.R.M.S., 1989), p. 480.
[^39] Viewpoint, Church News, 17 February 1996.
[^40] Alexander B. Morrison, "Our Deteriorating Environment," Ensign, August 1971, p. 9.
[^41] Joseph Fielding Smith, quoted in Come unto the Father in the Name of Jesus, Melchizedek Priesthood personal study guide, 1971, p. 7.
[^42] Hymns, 1985, no. 193.
[^43] This concept is discussed extensively in John Archibald Wheeler, Geometrodynamics (New York: Academic Press, 1962), a collection of earlier papers by Wheeler and others.
[^44] See Charles W. Misner, Kip S. Thorne, and John A. Wheeler, Gravitation (New York: Freeman, 1973), p. 921.
[^45] See ibid., p. 921 diagram; see also Stephen W. Hawking and G. F. R. Ellis, The Large Scale Structure of Space-Time (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1974), p. 165, fig. 28; W. Misner et al., Gravitation, p. 490.
[^46] See Kip S. Thorne, Black Holes and Time Warps: Einstein's Outrageous Legacy (New York: Norton, 1994), chapter 14.
[^47] A popular account is given in Paul Halpern, Cosmic Wormholes (New York: Penguin Books, 1992).
[^48] See Joseph Smith's King Follett sermon, in Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 345, 347.
[^49] See Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 353n.
[^50] See John Horgan, "Quantum Philosophy," Scientific American 267 (July 1992): 94-104.
[^51] A good discussion of reductionism is found in Davies, God and the New Physics, pp. 58-71.
[^52] See Ian Stewart, Nature's Numbers (New York: Basic Books, 1995), chap. 9.
[^53] Francis Crick, The Astonishing Hypothesis: The Scientific Search for the Soul (New York: Scribner's, 1994).
[^54] See Frank J. Tipler, The Physics of Immortality (New York: Anchor Books, 1995).
[^55] See, for example, Paul R. Green, comp., Science and Your Faith in God (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1958), with remarks by Henry Eyring on p. 35 and by Harvey Fletcher on p. 51.
[^56] See Freeman J. Dyson, "Time Without End," pp. 447-60; see also Tipler, The Physics of Immortality.
[^57] See, for example, H. D. Zeh, The Physical Basis of the Direction of Time, 2nd ed. (Berlin: Springer, 1992).
[^58] Wilford M. Hess and Raymond T. Matheny (and Donlu D. Thayer for vol. 2), Science and Religion: Toward a More Useful Dialogue (Geneva, Illinois: Paladin House, 1979), vols. 1 and 2.
[^59] Henry Eyring, The Faith of a Scientist (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1967); and Reflections of a Scientist (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1983).
[^60] See Hugh W. Nibley, Since Cumorah, 2nd ed. (Salt Lake City and Provo, Utah: Deseret Book Co. and FARMS, 1988), 231-38; James L. Baer, "The Third Nephi Disaster: A Geological View," Dialogue 19 (spring 1986): 129-32.
[^61] The word Peleg may mean "earthquake" (personal communication to author from William E. Dibble).
