David Clark, Of Heaven and Earth: Reconciling Scientific Thought with LDS Theology ( 1998)

Chapter 11

Expansion of Knowledge of Human Genetics: A Mormon Perspective

J. Edwin Seegmiller

In this essay I will share highlights of new insights into hereditary diseases and human genetics that I have learned in the course of nearly half a century of a professional life of medical research. By design, my discussion will freely reflect my own Mormon cultural perspective.

This period of time has been a most enlightening epoch in which to live, for our understanding of the field of genetics and, in particular, human biochemical genetics has seen remarkable progress. Such advances bring to my mind the ultimate purpose of our life here on Earth, concisely stated in a couplet by LDS Church president Lorenzo Snow: "As man is, God once was; as God is, man may become." I feel we are well along on our way, and I can think of no greater destiny for each of us to aspire to.

Acquiring the greatest intelligence possible and the fullest knowledge of the natural laws governing our lives here on Earth becomes a major objective for Latter-day Saints. It should not matter if we now catch a glimpse of the creative, godlike powers we may start to control even here in this mortal existence. This goes well with the scripture "the glory of God is intelligence" (D&C 93:36) and the admonition "ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free" (John 8:32), which is the essence of science. Thus a life dedicated to the study of science comes easily to Mormons. Perhaps this philosophy is one reason for the fact that in 1943 the state of Utah had a per capita figure of 45 percent more men listed in American Men of Science than any other state in the Union.1 This lead has persisted with more highly educated Mormons also being more religious than less highly educated Mormons. A summary by Mark W. Cannon2 of nine studies over a seventy-year period found that Utah (in relation to its population) has led the nation in production of scientists and continues to do so despite substantial recent migration of non-Mormons into Utah. The fact that scientists and engineers have been among the Church's leaders from its inception and continue to do so is also worth noting. Over a near half century, the state of Utah has led the nation in the portion of its college graduates who go on to receive the Ph.D. degree. In the same period, Utah has consistently shown a higher proportion of its population honored by listing in American Men [and Women] of Science than any other state in the Union. It is therefore not surprising that a higher proportion of graduates of Utah universities received this recognition of contributions to science than even the graduates of MIT, Harvard, or Stanford, according to a 1944 study. The importance of learning and education has been long recognized as an integral part of the philosophy of the Church. The well-known challenge given by every missionary to each prospective convert to "prove for yourselves the truth of this doctrine" becomes, in effect, an application of the scientific method to religion.

Personal Background and Early Major Decisions

In retrospect a rather unusual set of events catalyzed the early steps in my transition from a rural agricultural environment to an interest in scientific pursuits. I was born in St. George, Utah, a member of the second generation of descendants of the settling pioneers who were hand-picked by Brigham Young to raise cotton in this region of more temperate climate in the southwest corner of Utah. I am aware of at least three university presidents who trace their origins to this same small farming community of around twenty-five hundred people whom I knew in my early years. My decision to prepare myself for a research career, initially in chemistry, was the result of a memorable contact of only a few hours with another descendant of the original settlers who was one of the most inspiring men I have known, Dr. Henry Eyring, then a professor at Princeton University. He had a brilliant mind, a warm personality, and a strong belief in the truths of our religion. I had just turned seventeen. I remember well his words "You can't make a mistake going into chemistry," followed by advice to pay attention to grades so I could qualify for a fellowship to cover the expenses of graduate school. This occurred before I had been exposed even to high school chemistry. Eyring's own parents were part of the first generation growing up in St. George and had been close friends of my own parents. The families of both of his parents had been included in a group selected by the Church to immigrate to Mexico to found a Mormon colony in the 1890s. Henry Eyring came with his wife and two sons to St. George to bring his parents back to visit their old friends there during his own summer vacation.

I took Dr. Eyring's advice, and during my senior year at the University of Utah I was accepted at several graduate schools, including Princeton, when World War II intervened. However, a war research project to which I was assigned brought me in contact with physicians at the National Institutes of Health (NIH) in Bethesda, Maryland. I found some were working on human diseases caused by chemical abnormalities of the body. I found that these disorders presented problems even more fascinating to solve regarding the chemical mechanisms producing human diseases than anything I had found in the chemistry laboratory. After my discharge from the army, I promptly enrolled in medical school at the University of Chicago. While interning in medicine at Johns Hopkins Hospital, I learned that a clinical research center was under construction on the grounds of NIH. In addition, a new basic biochemical research group was being assembled, including some of the research doctors I had met during my work there. Feeling the need for more intensive training in biochemistry to be most effective in the field of clinical research that had captured my interest, I applied and was accepted. It was an excellent choice since the leader of the group, Dr. Arthur Kornberg, won a Nobel Prize for his elucidation of the biochemical mechanisms for the replication of DNA after he moved to Stanford less than a decade later.

Early Phases of Clinical Research

In preparation for more clinically oriented research, I then worked for a year as a research associate at Harvard Medical School's Thorndike Memorial Laboratory identifying chemical abnormalities of the blood in patients with hepatic coma. During my medical training I had been intrigued by the fact that we were still lacking a full explanation of the basic abnormalities causing gouty arthritis. I was, therefore, most gratified when the newly appointed clinical director of the Institute of Arthritis and Metabolic Diseases of NIH, Dr. Joseph J. Bunim, suggested that I start working on gouty arthritis with Dr. Dewitt Stetten at the Public Health Research Institute of the City of New York. Stetten's pioneering earlier work while he was still on the faculty at Harvard involving use of heavy isotopes for studies of a chemical abnormality of gout had already attracted my attention.

Distinctive Features and History of Gout

Gouty arthritis has a fascinating history. [^1] It is one of the most anciently recognized forms of arthritis first described by Hippocrates in the fourth century b.c. He noted that gouty arthritis is a disease primarily of mature young men after the age of "venality" and that it is much less frequently seen in women, and then only after menopause. Far earlier evidence of gout has been found in ancient Egyptian mummies, and it may very well have afflicted a portion of the human race from the beginning. The remarkable number of social and political leaders in past ages who have been afflicted with the gout ties the disease closely with this aspect of mankind's history as well. I have therefore undertaken to open new vistas of self-worth and potential accomplishment to numerous young patients who have come to me with their first attack of gout by informing them that they are suffering the initiation rites to the world's most illustrious and exclusive fraternity.

Through the more recent centuries, the chemical abnormality in gouty patients had provided a meeting ground for the interests of both early chemists and physicians. The classic description of the clinical features of gout was published in 1683 by a British physician, Thomas Sydenham, based on his thirty-four years of personal affliction with this disease. The Swedish chemist Scheele was the first to isolate uric acid from a urinary stone in 1776. In 1797 a British chemist, Wollaston, was the first to isolate uric acid from a gouty tophus that he is purported to have removed from his own ear. In 1848 another British physician, Alfred Baring Garrod, was the first to demonstrate the elevation above normal of uric acid in the serum of gouty patients by collecting uric acid crystals formed on strands of huckaback or other unwashed linen fibers added to acidified serum in a shallow glass dish exposed on a mantelpiece for thirty-six to sixty hours.

But neither the cause of this elevation nor the mechanism causing the recurring, debilitating acute attacks of gouty arthritis had yet been clearly defined. These episodes usually involve a single peripheral joint that rapidly becomes swollen, red, warm, and exquisitely painful and tender. Even if untreated, symptoms gradually disappear over a period of days or even weeks but with time recur at progressively shorter intervals with development of firm nodules called tophi over tendons, joints, and, not infrequently, the outer edges of the ears. Advanced cases show a progressive destruction of joint cartilage and subchondral bone and virtually constant pain and disability. Development of kidney stones composed of uric acid or calcium oxalate are not infrequent, and a progressive kidney damage accelerates progression of the disease and can lead to death from kidney failure.4

In 1890 Garrod, in his "Propositions on Gout," proposed that deposits of crystals of sodium urate found in tophi (nodules) in and about the affected joints of gouty patients was the cause of the exquisitely painful attacks of acute gouty arthritis. However, this view had been discounted when other investigators failed to find any ill effects from injecting similar urate crystals into rabbits. I could find no report of the effect of injecting urate crystals into a human volunteer, which I kept in mind as a project I must do when I returned to the clinical center of NIH.

Beginning of Research on Gout

I found that my new research project with Dr. Dewitt Stetten Jr. at the Public Health Research Institute of the City of New York was a great joy. He had both an M.D. and a Ph.D. in biochemistry and was a most inspiring mentor with a contagious enthusiasm for research. He had a brilliant mind and was a most effective teacher and a man of great integrity and compassion. [^2] My first assignment was to synthesize a chemical precursor of purines, 4-amino-5-imidazolecarboxamide (AIC) incorporating a heavy isotope of carbon (C-13). I found there was a chemist, Dr. D. Wayne Woolley at the Rockefeller Institute, who had synthesized this compound. I promptly made an appointment to visit him.

I had been told that he was completely blind. In talking with him, I found he had grown up a member of a Mormon community in western Canada and had received his Ph.D. in biochemistry from the University of Wisconsin even though he had problems with diabetes at that time. While in his postdoctoral fellowship at Rockefeller Institute, he had become completely blind as a complication of his diabetes. I was most impressed with his remarkable ability to continue his productive life as a biochemist despite his handicap. With our Mormon heritage in common, he had me visit his home and meet his wife, who was also scientifically trained and could therefore be of special value to him by reading the current scientific literature to him. We became good friends although he never seemed interested in talking about religion. Whenever I saw him at annual biomedical meetings, I always spoke to him and he always recognized me from my voice.

My organic synthesis was successful, and I became the first normal control for our study by eating a portion of my newly synthesized product with my breakfast one morning. I decided that this would be a good ethical principal to follow in my research career. I could not go far wrong if I ask a patient to undergo only procedures that I, myself, would be willing to undergo. As a result I have been one of the normal controls for virtually all of my human investigative studies. Our studies showed that AIC is a ready precursor of uric acid and that it substantially inhibits the new synthesis of uric acid from glycine-N15 given simultaneously. [^3] This was our first evidence for the presence of a regulatory system for the control of the rate of synthesis of purines. We eventually showed that the elevated serum urate of gout patients resulted from an increased rate of urate synthesis in some patients, a decreased efficiency of elimination of uric acid by the kidney in most patients and occasional patients show evidence of both processes. [^4] In some families we have even found the enzyme defect that has in most cases been an absence or diminished activity of an enzyme, but in one family an overactive rate-limiting enzyme was found as the genetic basis of their gout.

After a year and a half in New York, I returned to NIH in 1954 as clinical investigator in the Arthritis and Rheumatism Branch of the National Institute of Arthritis and Metabolic Diseases located in the newly completed clinical center. Since Dr. Stetten soon joined the same institute as research director, we continued our research on gouty arthritis. I recall preparing the needle-shaped crystals of monosodium urate of size comparable to those found in gouty tophi and injecting a sterilized suspension of these crystals into the skin of my forearm. The next morning I was most pleased to see an intense red and slightly swollen area at the injection site. When I showed this to Dr. Stetten, he was delighted to see it but soon asked me if I had received permission from the Human Investigations Committee for doing this procedure on myself. I told him I had not thought that was necessary and pointed out that I was in reality merely following the ethical standard that I had set up for myself. However, I did agree to obtain that important committee's approval before I administered the crystals to any of my volunteers. [^5]

Crystals as the Cause of Acute Attacks of Gouty Arthritis

I recall having several volunteer gouty patients in the clinical center with typical attacks of acute gout in the single joint, which they had consented to have me inject with a small dose of sterile crystals. It happened to be at the time of the annual meeting in the Washington, D.C., area of the American Rheumatism Association. When some of the association's members visited our institute, I showed them my patients. Even when they were permitted to examine the patients' joints themselves, none of them even spoke to me. It was only then that I realized I had just shown them a phenomenon that completely violated the dogma they had been taught about gout. This common reaction to new ideas that are not yet accepted by the establishment can be a deterrent to progress if the investigator becomes discouraged too soon. It was obviously difficult for them to face this truth about the origin of these attacks even though they had seen the results themselves. I find that this skepticism, although difficult to take, is probably a healthy part of the scientific establishment. Demonstrating the truth usually requires the presentation of supporting evidence from several different sources.

Our group and other investigators did furnish supporting evidence of the ability of the urate crystals to induce an inflammatory response as part of the acute gouty attack by showing an additional aspect of the inflammatory reaction. During either the spontaneous or the urate crystal-induced acute attacks of gout, more than 90 percent of the crystals readily visible in the synovial fluid obtained from the affected joint were found engulfed in white blood cells (phagocytes). [^6]

These were the same type of cells that are normally attracted to areas of bacterial invasion in the body and were obviously treating the crystals as the equivalent of invading bacteria by engulfing them with a burst of increased oxygen consumption and in effect placing them into the cellular counterpart of our kitchen garbage disposal known as a lysosome. These organelles in the cytoplasm of the cell are capable of generating an abundance of "free radicals," molecules with a single unshared electron generated from the burst of oxygen consumption via the direct oxidative pathway of glucose, thus delivering single electrons to oxygen molecules to generate the highly active oxygen radicals. The resulting strongly oxidizing environment serves to kill the bacteria taken up by the phagocytes and is an important factor in our defense against infection. The lysosomes can even generate the same active oxidizing ingredient that is found in our laundry bleach to kill bacteria and bleach out stains: sodium hypochlorite. We found that even urate crystals engulfed by these phagocytes could be destroyed, [^7] which might very well contribute to the gradual recovery of the patients from each acute gouty attack even if they have not received treatment with anti-inflammatory drugs. In addition, the destruction of urate crystals by phagocytosis was demonstrated and was diminished by addition of colchicine, [^8] a drug with a long medical history of being an effective and specific treatment of the acute attack of gouty arthritis.

A Beneficial Role for Uric Acid in the Human Species

I have mentioned the remarkable number of political and social leaders of past ages who have had gouty arthritis. This may have prompted Dr. Stetten to do a study of army inductees at an army base that showed a low but nevertheless statistically significant positive correlation of their serum urate concentration with their score on the Army General Classification Test, which was regarded as a measure of intelligence.

Among all mammals, the human species and possibly closely related primates are the only ones in whom gouty arthritis develops. Early biochemical investigators showed that all mammals but man and the higher apes and some Western monkeys excrete allantoin instead of uric acid as their end-product of purine metabolism. The reason for this biochemical difference was traced to the absence of the enzyme uricase, which in all other mammals converts the sparingly soluble uric acid to the more soluble substance allantoin before excretion. If uric acid is merely a waste product, this leaves two unanswered questions. Why does the human kidney excrete uric acid so inefficiently? Kidney physiologists have shown that the normal human kidney is very inefficient at eliminating uric acid from the body. It actually excretes into the urine only around 5 percent of the uric acid that passes into the kidney from the bloodstream.

The second question is closely related: If uric acid is merely a waste product, why is the mean concentration of serum urate of normal human males of 6.4 mg per deciliter so very close to the limit of solubility of urate we have found in human serum of 7.0 mg per deciliter? All gouty patients have more than this upper limit so their serum is supersaturated with urate as was noted by A. B. Garrod in the middle of the last century. The fact that the mean value for serum urate of women is 5.4 mg per deciliter until after the menopause explains very well Hippocrates' observation of their being protected from the gout until after the menopause. It should also have pointed the way for successful treatment of gout in the preventive mode.

Actually, the answer to the two questions above was a completely new function for urate in serum and other body fluids shown by a former colleague of mine at NIH, Dr. Bruce Ames, now on the faculty of the University of California, Berkeley. In 1982 he proposed a new role for uric acid as a very effective natural scavenger of free radicals. [^9] He has since shown that although ascorbic acid (vitamin C) is the first line of defense the body has against free radicals in the water-soluble compartments of the human body, in some systems uric acid is actually as effective as vitamin C in its free-radical scavenging ability. Furthermore, it does this without having a hazard shown by vitamin C. In laboratory studies of free radicals, a convenient source is found by the simple addition of trace metals, iron or copper, to a solution of vitamin C. Iron, of course, is an essential component of hemoglobin of red blood cells and of the cytochromes involved in transmitting electrons from the mitochondria inside cells where food is oxidized by the oxygen delivered by the hemoglobin to form water. It makes good reason for storage forms of iron in the body to be found encased in a protein sheath.

These considerations are of even further interest when we remember that humans are incapable of making vitamin C. That is why it is called a vitamin. We find that the same human progenitors who lost the enzyme uricase also lost the activity of the last enzyme that in other mammals is involved in their synthesis of vitamin C. Other investigators have proposed that this high level of uric acid in serum from the loss of the enzyme uricase and loss of the ability to synthesize ascorbic acid may account for the fact that the human species has the longest average life span of all mammals. [^10] In the overall plan, gouty arthritis in a small segment of the population was thus the price the human species pays for having a longer and perhaps a more intelligent life than any other mammal.

Control of Gouty Arthritis in a Preventive Mode

In the last four to five decades, research into the basis of the disease by numerous investigators and the development and application of new drugs have made gouty arthritis readily controlled in a preventive mode by primary care physicians throughout the world. Once the primary role of crystals of monosodium urate was demonstrated as the cause of the acute attacks of gouty arthritis, the rational solution was to remove the cause by lowering the serum urate from the supersaturated range generating the crystals to the normal unsaturated range that would allow the crystals to be dissolved by body fluids. The first really effective drug was probenecid (Benemid), which increases uric acid excretion by diminishing the reabsorption of urate in the distal tubule of the kidney and eventually mobilizing gouty tophi and preventing recurrence of attacks. [^11] Another drug, allopurinol (Xyloprim), is an inhibitor of the enzyme xanthine oxidase (responsible for making uric acid) and was first synthesized by an LDS chemist, Roland K. Robins [^12] for enhancing the clinical effectiveness of an anticancer drug, 6-mercaptopurine. It was later shown to be very effective for lowering the serum urate for the long-term treatment of gout by Wayne Rundles and associates [^13] and later by James Klinenberg and colleagues in my group. [^14] If either of these drugs that lower serum urate to the normal (unsaturated) level is initiated during an acute attack of gout, it usually makes the acute attack worse. Since we still found urate crystals engulfed by phagocytes during these attacks, we presume they are dispersed from a disaggregation of clumps of crystals so that it is the equivalent of injecting additional urate crystals into the joint. An herbal drug extracted from the autumn crocus, colchicine, is so specific in suppressing the acute attacks of gout that response to colchicine was used for many years as the diagnostic test for gout and is still of value in suppressing this tendency to develop gout if it is given daily during the first few months treatment with probenecid or allopurinol. More modern anti-inflammatory drugs are also effective in terminating acute attacks of gout. [^15]

Origin of Free Radicals

Detailed studies by Dr. Irwin Fridovich at Duke University showed that xanthine oxidase, the enzyme generating uric acid, also generates free radicals and that these agents are formed by all enzyme systems that deliver single electrons to oxygen. [^16] Free radicals are very reactive and are strong oxidizing agents that damage virtually all organic molecules in their vicinity. All life forms that consume oxygen for energy generation have developed free-radical scavenging enzymes and reducing agents such as ascorbic acid (vitamin C) in aqueous compartments and vitamin E in lipid and lipid membrane compartments to destroy free radicals and thereby minimize their damage. [^17] In the human species uric acid is another important free-radical scavenger quite comparable in many systems to ascorbic acid. Investigators are now finding that many degenerative diseases of later life may well be caused in part by free radicals.

Insight from Study of Inherited Diseases

I soon came to realize that each inherited metabolic disease was in reality an experiment of nature caused by a single mutation, usually in a gene directing the synthesis of a single protein. If that protein happens to be an enzyme, the mutation results in the impairment in carrying out a specific chemical reaction, which results in the accumulation of the precursor.

The gene enzyme relationship was first proposed by British physician Archibald E. Garrod (the son of Alfred Baring Garrod) in 1908 in the Croonian Lecture, [^18] a full thirty years before microbiologists at Cal Tech developed the same gene-enzyme concept from their studies of bacterial systems. Garrod's theory was first developed to explain the clinical features of a rare human hereditary metabolic disease called alcaptonuria. The excessive accumulation of an intermediate compound of metabolism announces its presence by turning into a dark pigment in the diapers and urine while standing exposed to oxidation by air. The chemical from which the pigment is formed was identified by an early organic chemist as homogentisic acid, a close structural relative of one of the amino acids called tyrosine. This suggested to Garrod that its accumulation in the body fluids and the urine of affected patients was from a lack of the chemical machinery (enzyme) for its normal further processing, which resulted in its accumulation in the bodies of affected patients. Although this chemical disorder is benign during early decades of life, it leads to a severe crippling arthritis in mature adult life. At autopsy these patients show the deposition of a dark pigment in and about the cartilage of the joints and tendons associated with severe degenerative changes in virtually all of the joints. Under the microscope this pigment has an ochre color, so the pathologists named the clinical disease "ochronotic arthritis." In his 1931 book The Inborn Factors in Disease, Garrod listed this disorder, gout, and only four or five other such disorders. [^19]

Concurrent with the rapid development of our understanding of metabolic pathways in the field of biochemistry has come a substantial expansion in the recognition of human diseases with biochemical abnormalities. Nearly six thousand aberrations of genetic disorders are now listed in McKusick's most recent listing. [^20] In 1957, just a few years after I had begun working as a clinical investigator in the Institute of Arthritis and Metabolic Diseases in the newly opened clinical center of the National Institutes of Health, I received a referral of a patient with alcaptonuria and well-advanced ochronotic arthritis. I was surprised to find no report in the literature of the actual documentation of Garrod's proposal of a missing enzyme as the actual cause of this disease. On his second admission the patient required surgery for stopping a severe gastrointestinal hemorrhage and had consented in advance of the surgery for the surgeon to remove a small piece of his liver for this determination. Quite by chance, Bert LaDu, a physician with a recent Ph.D. thesis from Berkeley on tyrosine metabolism, had just joined our institute with a laboratory near mine. We worked together in determining the activity of each of the enzymes of tyrosine metabolism in the liver sample and were able to show the virtually complete absence of the single enzyme homogentisic acid oxidase as had been postulated by Garrod nearly half a century earlier. [^21]

In subsequent studies Dr. LaDu's group demonstrated the stepwise oxidation of homogentisic acid to benzoquinone acetic acid was required for homogentisic acid to bond with cartilage with formation of fairly stable intermediates that were carrying an unpaired electron and so were free radicals. In subsequent work in my laboratory, a medical student showed that a large dose of vitamin C would reduce the deposition of isotopically labeled homogentisic acid into rat-tail tendon and chest (xyphoid) cartilage in rats on a high tyrosine diet. [^22] We have, therefore, shown subsequently an inhibition of growth of cultured cartilage cells induced by homogentisic acid at the concentrations we have found in serum of affected patients that is partially prevented by vitamin C. [^23] Vitamin C given to infants with alcaptonuria was effective in significantly reducing the amount of benzoquinone acetic acid found in the urine, [^24] which was taken as evidence of a beneficial effect and is now being recommended for treatment of affected children and adults. [^25]

It has been fascinating to have had the opportunity of actually having a hand in proving the truth of Garrod's hypothesis for this disease, to participate in the identification of additional such diseases, and to gain a better interpretation of others that are well known. In the case of gout, for example, this progress in our understanding of human genetics has also introduced new prospects for the treatment of at least some of these genetic diseases by the new technologies of medical genetics. The possible introduction into the patient's cells of a normal gene to provide the missing enzyme produced by a mutant or damaged gene becomes a rational therapy for the treatment of a number of genetic diseases in the near future. At one point the religious leader Jerry Falwell had a group of his followers assemble in Washington, D.C., to persuade elected representatives on Capitol Hill to make a law outlawing the introduction of any gene into humans and thereby "spoil God's handiwork." When notified of this pending action, the director of NIH, Dr. James Wyngaarden, told me how he had to drop everything he was doing to rush down to Capitol Hill to prevent such a bill from being introduced.

This incident provided to me a current example of the contrast of the doctrines of conventional Christian religions with the LDS view of the potential of mankind. The LDS view that man is a God in embryo carries the expectation that we must each eventually learn how to put genes together and even to create new life forms as part of our preparation to be creators. The inhospitable environment of adjacent planets might well yield to remodeling with the help of specific life forms yet to be developed by modern technology.

Insight from Study of Lesch-Nyhan Disease

In 1964 I was in London for a year's sabbatical to learn more about human genetics from Dr. Charles Dent at University College Hospital and to learn the technology of tissue culture from another laboratory nearby. Dr. Dent was aware of my interest in abnormalities of uric acid metabolism and one morning asked me to go with him to see a patient at Hammersmith Hospital who had an elevated level of uric acid in his blood. Upon arrival we were escorted to a crib where a six-year-old boy with a severe form of cerebral palsy was lying down with his hands tied to the side of his crib. As I started to untie one hand, the child started crying and his mother said, "He is afraid you will not hold his hands, and if his fingers get into his mouth, he will bite them, and it hurts." I then saw scars on the ends of his fingers from previous biting. He was violating some of my assumptions about life: that we all have instincts that protect us from injuring ourselves, that we all can control our actions and are responsible for them, and that we all have free agency to make all choices. I then told Dr. Dent and the other doctors of a similar case of which I had been told a few weeks before I had left the NIH for London. It was a young boy of similar age and similar neurological problems at Johns Hopkins Hospital who had been first seen in the emergency room because of blood in the urine. Under the microscope his urine had shown many crystals, so his doctors collected all of the urine the child passed in a twenty-four-hour period and analyzed it and could not believe the presence of three to four times the normal amount of uric acid for a child of that age. They were concerned that the test being used for determining the uric acid was nonspecific and was reacting with some other chemical, so my laboratory at NIH was given a small sample of the urine to analyze using a highly specific enzymatic method that we had developed for our studies of patients with gout. The test confirmed that it was indeed uric acid. An older brother of the child at Johns Hopkins Hospital had suffered from the same neurological disease and had died from it, suggesting to the doctors that both cases may have been caused by a genetic defect. [^26] To the doctors at Hammersmith Hospital I predicted they would find a similarly excessive amount of uric acid in this child's twenty-four-hour collection of urine, which proved to be true. I knew immediately that eventually I must study this disease in detail and find the enzyme defect responsible.

Enzyme Defect in Lesch-Nyhan Disease

Upon my return to NIH, I soon had my tissue-culture system working well, but it was nine months before I had a patient with this same disease under my care in the clinical center. We began cultures of his fibroblast cells from a small skin biopsy. It took another nine months for us to find the enzyme defect that was responsible—a gross lack of activity of an important enzyme of purine metabolism that I think of as a thrifty Scottish enzyme that reutilizes the purine bases hypoxanthine and guanine. [^27] It is named hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase, generally abbreviated to HPRT.

The disease was eventually named Lesch-Nyhan disease after the authors Michael Lesch, a medical student, and Dr. William Nyhan, pediatricians who published a detailed study of the clinical description of the original patient under their care at Johns Hopkins Hospital. [^28] We soon found a less-severe deficiency of this same HPRT enzyme in a family of three gouty brothers who all produced an excessive amount of uric acid in their daily urine but had no neurological disease and had been participating in our clinical studies for several years. [^29] Evidently even a small amount of residual enzyme activity from a slightly different mutation in the same gene was enough to prevent the neurological problems. In still other patients we found even less residual enzyme correlated with relatively mild neurological symptoms. Eventually this gene was shown to be located on the X chromosome, which meant that it affected only males and was transmitted only through the mother's side of the family.

By incubating the cultured skin fibroblasts with hypoxanthine labeled with radioactive tritium, we had a simple way of demonstrating the presence or absence of normal or mutant HPRT-deficient cells by exposing the cells to photographic film and developing it. The normal cells took up substantial radioactivity, and the mutant ones did not. We used this same procedure to demonstrate the presence of both normal and mutant cells in fibroblasts cultured from mothers of Lesch-Nyhan patients. This showed the correctness of genetic work done by a British investigator, Dr. Mary Lyon, in studies of coat color in cats some years before demonstrating the random inactivation of one of the two X chromosomes carried in female cats to account for the spotted fur markings of certain strains of female cats.

Dr. Ted Friedmann used the above radioautographic procedure in 1967 while working with me at NIH to see if the simple addition of DNA isolated from normal human cells to cultures of the HPRT deficient human cells would show any evidence of restoration of the HPRT activity. DNA isolated from the HPRT deficient cells showed no restored cells, while DNA isolated from normal cells showed correction in one in five thousand cells to one in one hundred thousand cells. However, the corrected cells failed to increase in number with additional replication in fresh media. In fact, they were lost. We took this to mean that the extracted normal DNA carried the HPRT gene into the cell but failed to insert it into the replicating DNA of the chromosomes of the mutant cells. Dr. Friedmann then left my laboratory to go to work at the Salk Institute in La Jolla to find out just how RNA viruses could be used to insert genes into host cell DNA. This was the first human condition found where an identifiable gene defect was correlated with a stereotyped compulsive behavior.

The first Lesch-Nyhan patient under my care at the NIH Clinical Center was a bright-eyed seven-year-old boy who was very alert and intelligent. In response to my question as to why he bit his fingers, lips, and tongue, he said with a glint in his eye, "My uric acid is too high." I think he was telling me that it was not his fault and that he had no desire to do it. The answer I obtained from another patient, a fourteen-year-old black boy, was informative. He said he felt an urge to bite whenever he was worried and upset. I immediately faced the fact that when concentrating on a problem I often find I am biting at my own lips, but rather gently and not hard enough to cause bleeding. I also thought of several friends of mine who have the compulsion to bite at their fingernails when under pressure. Could children with Lesch-Nyhan disease have a fairly common compulsion but with the volume turned up? Other investigators have reported substantial decreases in the brain concentration of serotonin and L dopamine involved in transmission of nerve signals found in a Lesch-Nyhan patient at autopsy. Affected children seem quite willing to wear Velcro-fabric splints around their elbows that are sufficiently tight to prevent their hands reaching their mouth but also sufficiently loose so they can reach their mouth with a spoon to feed themselves. They then still have freedom of choice as long as their fingers do not reach their mouth. Thus the moment of free decision is shifted to an earlier action.

Treatment of some aspects of Lesch-Nyhan disease has been found, but the major problems remain. The large amount of uric acid produced leads to deposition of uric acid stones in the kidneys and urinary tract with resulting development of progressive kidney damage. This can be largely avoided by using allopurinol and by increasing the fluid intake to give a larger volume of urine with which to carry the load of uric acid out of the body. Allopurinol also prevents childhood gout seen in some of these patients.

In 1969 I left NIH and joined the new medical school that had just opened at the University of California, San Diego, in La Jolla. William Nyhan was the chairman of the Department of Pediatrics and I was director of the Division of Arthritis in the Department of Medicine. Upon completing his fellowship at the Salk Institute, Dr. Ted Friedmann joined the Department of Pediatrics and eventually cloned the normal HPRT gene and inserted it into a defective retro virus that could not replicate and cause disease. I soon had funding with William Nyhan for a project grant from NIH to support our program on human biochemical genetics that allowed us to continue our research activities on Lesch-Nyhan disease and other enzyme defects of human purine metabolism for a total of fifteen years. We collaborated with Ted Friedmann in testing the effectiveness of his retro viral vector for carrying the normal HPRT gene into a permanent line of lymphoblasts cultured from peripheral blood of a Lesch-Nyhan patient. We found from 3 to 23 percent of normal HPRT activity restored in different cloned colonies of lymphoblasts. [^30] We felt we had demonstrated that this gene transplant could be done, but the variability of response in the different clones might very well be a result of the great variability in the location of this newly transplanted gene in the chromosomes of the genetically corrected cells. This variability would then have a substantial effect from the genes adjacent to the transplant site. It would be much better if the gene could be inserted in a uniform site surrounded by its own normal regulator systems. We think that we may need to deal with the development of a system that will carry the gene into cells of the brain. The prospects now in view for genetic modalities for treatment of human ailments is rapidly expanding and presents a most fascinating range of diseases to be treated and additional modalities for introducing these genes.

Further studies of the detailed biochemical mechanism responsible for the marked overproduction of purines in HPRT-deficient patients revealed an elevated concentration of the nonpurine substrate for the missing enzyme called phosphoribosylpyrophosphate (PRPP), which is also a substrate for the rate-limiting enzyme for the first step of purine synthesis. [^31] This in turn led to the identification in 1972 of an increased activity of this first enzyme, PRPP synthetase, as another hereditary cause of an excessive rate of purine synthesis and gouty arthritis by Dr. Sperling's group in Israel. [^32] The detection of additional families was made by Dr. Becker in our group soon after. [^33] The PRPP synthetase gene was mapped to the X chromosome quite close to the HPRT gene. [^34]

Conclusion

I have a strong conviction that we have a Father in Heaven who created our universe and developed the life forms we see about us using natural laws that we are still discovering. I have never had a direct conversation with or vision of the Lord. He is probably too busy. I do feel that I have been given during my life unusual opportunities to help bring knowledge of these creative endeavors to our brothers and sisters now occupying Earth. A special pleasure has been the opportunities to obtain glimpses of mutations the Lord must have created in the generation of some of the characteristics of modern man to give this species a longer life than any other mammal so we will have time to learn and absorb the new information that is developing. In my studies I feel very strongly that I have been repeatedly presented with most unusual opportunities to make incremental increases in human knowledge, and I thank my Creator for this privilege to work with him.

If we make the search for truth an objective for our personal everyday life as well as our religious life and views as advocated by Henry Eyring, [^35] I feel confident we can each add a greater meaning to life's experiences and an enrichment of our appreciation of our own potential for interaction with our Creator. In my own lifetime we have all seen modern science verify the validity of a revelation known as the Word of Wisdom, given to the Prophet Joseph Smith in 1833 "in consequence of evils and designs which do and will exist in the hearts of conspiring men in the last days" (D&C 89:4). In effect it can be viewed as the counterpart of the manufacturer's brochure enclosed with this new machine you have just purchased, giving advice on how to obtain the best performance and how to avoid damaging it.

A recent study of the health of Mormons of southern California by Dr. James E. Enstrom, a non-Mormon epidemiologist on the faculty of University of California, Los Angeles, has shown the lowest death rate yet found for cancer and for cardiovascular disease. From an eight-year follow-up study (1980-1987) of 5,231 Mormon high priests and 4,613 wives twenty-five to ninety-nine years of age, the Mormon men showed one-half the expected number of deaths from cancer and from cardiovascular diseases. The wives showed 72 percent of the expected death rate from all cancers and 64 percent of the expected death rate from cardiovascular diseases. The take-home message given by Dr. Enstrom in an interview with a writer for the Wall Street Journal was his finding that active Mormon males have a life expectancy of eleven years longer than the average for the American males, and Mormon females have a life span six years longer than the average for American females. [^36] If I had seen his publication a bit earlier when I was facing mandatory retirement from the university at age seventy, I might very well have challenged this ruling. I could have argued that because of my cultural heritage I should not face mandatory retirement until at least eighty-one years of age!

Notes

J. Edwin Seegmiller studied at Dixie Junior College and the University of Utah and received his M.D. from the University of Chicago. He did postdoctoral work at the National Institute of Health and at the Thorndike Memorial Laboratory in Boston and focused his career on medical research. He has held positions at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Maryland; the University College Hospital in London; and the School of Medicine of the University of California, San Diego, in La Jolla, California. He was the founding director of the Institute for Research on Aging at the University of California, San Diego, and the associate director of the university's Sam and Rose Stein Institute for Research on Aging. He was a visiting scholar at the Basel Institute for Immunology and at the Sir William Dunn School of Pathology and the Department of Biochemistry at Oxford. He was also a Guggenheim Fellow at the Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research.

A recipient of the U.S. Public Health Distinguished Service Award in 1969, Dr. Seegmiller was elected a member of the National Academy of Sciences in 1973 and of the Institute of Medicine of the National Academy in 1978. The recipient of many honors and awards, he is the author of more than 300 articles and books.

He has served in many Church callings, including two bishoprics. He married Roberta Eads, and they had four children and seven grandchildren. Following the death of his first wife, he married Barbara Davies Ellerston. He is now professor emeritus at the University of California, San Diego, in La Jolla, California.

---
Notas:
[^1] See Edward L. Thorndike, "The Production, Retention, and Attraction of American Men of Science," Science 92 (August 1940): 137-41; EdwardL. Thorndike, "The Origin of Superior Men," Scientific Monthly (May 1943): 424-33; and Kenneth R. Hardy, "Social Origins of American Scientists," Science 185 (August 1974): 497-506.
[^2] See David John Buerger, "Highly Educated Mormons Are More Religious, Study Shows," Sunstone 10 (March 1985): 51; Brent Harker, "Academic Minds, Religious Hearts," BYU Today, April 1985, p. 16; and, most recently, Mark W. Cannon in Virginia McClairo, "Mormons and Science" (14 May 1998), a still-unpublished, concise summary.
[^3] See my paper "Conquest of Gouty Arthritis," in Landmark Advances in Rheumatology, ed. Daniel J. McCarty (Atlanta: American Rheumatism Association, 1985), pp. 89-101.
[^4] See my study "Genetic Diseases: II. Gout and Lesch-Nyhan Disease," in NIH: An Account of Research in Its Laboratories and Clinics, ed. DeWitt Stetten Jr. and WilliamT. Carigan (New York: Academic Press, 1984), pp. 314-23.
[^5] See my work Biographical Memoirs of DeWitt Stetten, Jr. (Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 1996).
[^6] See J. Edwin Seegmiller, L. Laster and D. Stetten Jr., "Incorporation of 4-amino-5-imidazolecarboxamide-4-C13 into Uric Acid in the Normal Human," Journal of Biological Chemistry 216 (1995): 653-62.
[^7] See the letter to the editor by DeWitt Stetten Jr. et al., "The Pathogenesis of Gout," Metabolism 6 (1957): 88-91.
[^8] See J. Edwin Seegmiller, RodneyR. Howell, and StephenE. Malawista, "The Inflammatory Reaction to Sodium Urate: Its Possible relationship to the Genesis of Acute Gouty Arthritis," Journal of the American Medical Association 180 (1962): 469-75.
[^9] See StephenE. Malawista and J. Edwin Seegmiller, "The Effect of Pretreatment with Colchicine on the Inflammatory Response to Microcrystalline Urate," Annals of Internal Medicine62 (1965): 648-57; RodneyR. Howell and J. Edwin Seegmiller, "Inflammatory Response to Injected Sodium Urate," Eighth Interim Scientific Session of the American Rheumatism Association, December 1961 (abstract); J. S. Faires and DanielJ. McCarty Jr., "Acute Arthritis in Man and Dog Produced by Intra Synovial Injection of Sodium Urate Crystals," Clinical Research 9 (1961): 329.
[^10] See Daniel J. McCarty Jr., "Phagocytosis of Urate Crystals in Gouty Synovial Fluid," American Journal of Medical Science243 (1962): 288-95.
[^11] See Rodney R. Howell and J. Edwin Seegmiller, "Uricolysis in Human Leucocytes," Nature 196 (1962): 482-83.
[^12] See Stephen E. Goldfinger, RodneyR. Howell and J. Edwin Seegmiller, "Suppression of Metabolic Accompaniments of Phagocytosis by Colchicine," Arthritis and Rheumatism8 (1965): 1112-22.
[^13] See Bruce N. Ames et al., "Uric Acid: An Antioxidant Defense in Humans against Oxidant- and Radical-Caused Aging and Cancer: A Hypothesis," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, United States of America78 (1981): 6858-62.
[^14] See RichardCutler, "Urate and Ascorbate: Their Possible Roles as Antioxidants in Determining Longevity of Mammalian Species," Archives of Gerontology and Geriatrics 3, no.4 (1984): 321-48.
[^15] See TsyF. Yu and Alexander B. Gutman, "Mobilization of Gouty Tophi by Protracted Use of Uricosuric Agents," American Journal of Medicine 11 (1951): 765; A. B. Gutman and T. F. Yu, "Benemid (p-di-n-Propylsulfamyl-Benzoic Acid) as Uricosuric Agent in Chronic Gouty Arthritis," Transactions of the Association of American Physicians 64 (1951): 279-88; and J. H. Talbott et al., "The Clinical and Metabolic Effects of Benemid in Patients with Gout," Transactions of the Association of American Physicians64 (1951): 372.
[^16] See RolandK. Robins, "Potential Purine Antagonists. 1: Synthesis of Some 4,6-Substituted Pyrazolo-3,4-pyrimidines," Journal of the American Chemical Society 78 (1956): 784-90.
[^17] R. Wayne Rundels et al., "Effect of a Xanthine Oxidase Inhibitor on Thiopurine Metabolism, Hyperuricemia, and Gout," Transactions of the Association of American Physicians 76 (1963): 126-40.
[^18] See James R. Klinenberg, Stephen E. Goldfinger and J. Edwin Seegmiller, "The Effectiveness of the Xanthine Oxidase Inhibitor, Allopurinol, in the Treatment of Gout," Annals of Internal Medicine62 (1965): 639-47.
[^19] See J. Edwin Seegmiller, "Goals in Gout," Postgraduate Medicine 45 (1969): 99-103.
[^20] Irwin Fridovitch, "Quantitative Aspects of the Production of Superoxide Anion Radical by Milk Xanthine Oxidase," Journal of Biological Chemistry 245, no.16 (1970): 4053-57.
[^21] See J. Edwin Seegmiller, "Future Directions in Aging Research," in Molecular Biology of Aging, ed. Avril D. Woodhead, Anthony D. Blackett, and Alexander Hollander (New York: Raven Press, 1985), 29:461-63.
[^22] See ArchibaldE. Garrod, "The Croonian Lectures on Inborn Errors of Metabolism. Lecture II: Alkaptonuria," Lancet 2 (1908): 73-79.
[^23] See ArchibaldE. Garrod, The Inborn Factors in Disease: An Essay (London: Oxford University Press, 1931).
[^24] Victor McKusick, personal communication.
[^25] See BertN. LaDu et al., "The Nature of the Defect in Tyrosine Metabolism in Alcaptonuria," Journal of Biological Chemistry 230 (1958): 251-60.
[^26] See ThomasJ. Lustberg, Joseph D. Schulman, and J. Edwin Seegmiller, "Decreased Binding of C-Homogentisic Acid Induced by Ascorbic Acid in Connective Tissue of Rats with Experimental Alcaptonuria," Nature 228 (1970): 770-71.
[^27] See Adam P. Angeles et al., "Chondrocyte Growth Inhibition Induced by Homogentisic Acid and Its Partial Prevention with Ascorbic Acid," Journal of Rheumatology16 (1989): 512-17.
[^28] See JonA. Wolff et al., "Effects of Ascorbic Acid in Alkaptonuria: Alterations in Benzoquinone Acetic Acid and an Ontogenic Effect in Infancy," Pediatric Research 26 (1989): 140-44.
[^29] See J. Edwin Seegmiller, "Ochronosis and Alkaptonuria," in Internal Medicine, ed. Jay H. Stein (Boston: Little, Brown and Co., 1994), pp. 2508-11.
[^30] See Michael Lesch and William L. Nyhan, "A Familial Disorder of Uric Acid Metabolism and Central Nervous System Function," American Journal of Medicine 36 (1964): 561-70.
[^31] See J. Edwin Seegmiller, FrederickM. Rosenbloom, and William N. Kelley, "Enzyme Defect Associated with a Sex-Linked Human Neurological Disorder and Excessive Purine Synthesis," Science 155 (1967): 1682-84.
[^32] See Lesch and Nyhan, "A Familial Disorder of Uric Acid Metabolism and Central Nervous System Function," pp. 561-70.
[^33] See William N. Kelley et al., "A Specific Enzyme Defect in Gout Associated with Overproduction of Uric Acid," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, United States of America57 (1967): 1735-39.
[^34] See RandallC. Willis et al., "Partial Phenotype Correction of Human Lesch-Nyhan (Hypoxanthine-Guanine Phosphoribosyltransferase-Deficient) Lymphoblasts with a Transmissible Retroviral Vector," Journal of Biological Chemistry 259 (1984): 7842-49.
[^35] See FrederickM. Rosenbloom et al., "Biochemical Bases of Accelerated Purine Biosynthesis de Novo in Human Fibroblasts Lacking Hypoxanthine-Guanine Phosphoribosyltransferase," Journal of Biological Chemistry 243 (1968): 1166-73.
[^36] See OdedSperling et al., "Altered Kinetic Property of Erythrocyte Phosphhoribosylpyrophosphate Synthetase in Excessive Purine Production," Revue Europeenne d'etudes Cliniques et Biolofiques17 (1972): 703-6.
