Brigham Young University–Hawaii’s Concert Choir shared its love for music and demonstrated music’s power as the choir took the stage at one of the world’s most musically elite venues—Carnegie Hall—in New York City in June. The mixed voice ensemble brought a packed New York audience to its feet at the conclusion of the performance of Mozart’s Requiem.

The group traveled about 5,000 miles (8,046 km; 10 hours by plane) from the North Shore of Hawaii to perform in the prestigious hall with five other choral groups.

“The experience was a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity for the members of the choir,” explained the group’s director, Dr. Michael Belnap. Choir members represent more than 15 countries, including Hong Kong, New Zealand, South Korea, French Polynesia, Japan, Malaysia, Tonga, and Samoa. According to U.S. News, BYU–Hawaii is the most internationally diverse campus in the nation per capita with more than 74 countries represented.

While in New York City, the choir performed a musical fireside in the newly dedicated Latter-day Saint meetinghouse in Harlem.

“Performing at Carnegie is such an accomplishment and a great feather to put in the hat of our music department,” said Justin Smith, the coordinator for the university’s performance tours. “But when we did the Harlem fireside with the newly formed BYU–Hawaii Alumni Chapter of New York, that became my tour highlight.”

Brother Smith continued: “Before the tour, the fireside seemed like just another ‘appointment’ on the itinerary—it kind of flew under the radar. That’s probably why it was so incredible, because it was an unexpected moment on the tour that really struck a chord. Carnegie was commendable. Harlem was the highlight.”

Isrin O’Connor, a sophomore from Thailand studying vocal performance, thought the Harlem fireside was one of the greatest musical performances she had ever been a part of.

“I felt so strongly that the Spirit was there around us, everywhere!” she said. “I could feel the Lord’s love for us, His children. It was truly uplifting.”

The choir also had the rare opportunity to perform at Old Slip Park in lower Manhattan, the site where a statue of Joseph Smith Jr. has stood since December 2005, commemorating the Prophet’s 200th birthday.

In addition to performing, the choir visited several famous sites, such as Grand Central Station, the Empire State Building, Times Square, and Ground Zero.

Nearly half of the 60-member choir is bilingual. English is a second language for nearly one-third of the choir members, who study a wide variety of majors, including international business management, mathematics, vocal studies, history, and political science.

Its reputation and international flavor have opened many doors for the choir, both locally and internationally, resulting in performances in New Zealand, Fiji, Tonga, Taiwan, and Singapore.

The members of the choir are now preparing for their June 2007 tour to China and Mongolia, where they plan to perform in Beijing, Xi’an, Ürümqi, Tianjin, and Ulaanbaatar.
