P Chapter 21 ontius Pilate

The Enforcer

What happens when a person is given unlimited au-was a man of excess but at least had the presence of thority in a task related to the common good, then mind and sleight of hand to keep a lid on things that acts with only his own interests in mind? If the as-would cause Caesar undue concern. His son Arche-signment is small the potential damage done may laus, who inherited Judea, Idumea and Samaria in 4 not be too great, but woe to everyone in reach if the b.C., was beneficiary of Herod’s iron-fisted will but misfit wields a behemoth’s club. So it was with Pon-at eighteen appeared too young to know how to tius Pilate, who held the office of prefect of Judea add the necessary political and diplomatic finesse from a.d. 26–36. By most reasonable estimates here to make it all work. Within ten years Archelaus was someone who was part butcher, part beholden, had offended virtually every element of the local part anti-Semite, part man of expediency and part population and so in a.d. 6 Caesar Augustus ban-self-made man who worshipped his maker. Pilate ished him to the northern reaches of Gaul where burst onto the scene in Judea with a host of vet-he could thrash around without hurting anyone eran actors already following multiple scripts, none (Ant. xvii.8.4–9.6, 13.1–4).

of which included lines he was fit to read. It was all When Herod had died ten years earlier, a del-a toxic mix. Before the curtain fell he was yanked off egation of influential Jewish leaders, rightly fear-stage having made it messier by virtue of his being ing that Archelaus might prove to be even more there and banished to a place of anonymity reserved tyrannical than his father, begged Caesar Augustus for actors who fail miserably in their parts. It was not to replace him with a member of the Herodian not a pretty sight. Justifiably, most modern critics royal line. In a moment of extreme pragmatism they One of the rights Caesar sweep Pilate into a bin labeled “Bad Boys of the asked instead that Augustus annex Judea to Syria, granted the prefects and Bible,” occasionally snatching his mangled reputa-the largest and most powerful of Rome’s provinces procurators of the Roman tion to serve as proxy for others throughout history in the east, hoping the governors there would show Empire was that of minting who also have crushed voices of innocence, reason more grace toward local sensibilities than did Herod coins. Each of the governors and faith. Attempts to redeem him as a fellow who (Ant. xvii.11.2; War ii.6.2). Augustus deferred at the time, of Judea (with the exception of was well meaning but misunderstood, genuine but but after Archelaus had indeed proven to be a great-Pontius Pilate) struck only coins somehow misguided, or an honest seeker of truth er despot than his father and sensing an opportunity depicting objects that would who just didn’t push his curiosity quite far enough to capitalize on the desire of the Jewish delegation not offend Jewish religious largely fall on deaf ears. Let them lie. When ancient to place Judea under tighter Roman control (it was sensibilities: sheaves of barley, sources as diverse in opinion as Philo, Josephus and a minority though vocal opinion), the emperor be-palm trees and palm branches, the Gospels all point in the same direction, it’s prop-latedly heeded the call. In doing so, however, Au-bunches of fruit, vines, figs and

cornucopia. The coins of Felix

er to call a spade a spade.

gustus bypassed the delegation’s specific suggestion showed anchors (a symbol

Rome’s decision to appoint Pontius Pilate as pre-and chose instead to create a new province out of that appeared on Hasmonean

fect of Judea was part of a sequence of events that the region (Ant. xviii.1.1). coins) and crossed spears.

slowly ratcheted the region from the periphery to- He had several options. Provinces within the em-None depicted human faces. ward the center of Rome’s orbit of control. After pire that were stable and generally free from threat Pilate was the only governor of Pompey entered Jerusalem in 63 b.C. and brought were placed under the control of the Roman Sen-Judea to depict symbols used in

the Jewish Hasmonean kingdom to an inglorious ate. Others—and these were the majority in the Roman pagan worship on his lituus (augur staff; end, Rome initially tried to maintain control of empire—faced the possibility of ongoing unrest coins: the above, bottom) and simpulum Judea by backing cooperative members of the dis-from either external or internal threats and so re-(ladle; above, top). Pilate’s posed Hasmonean royal family, principally Hyrcanus mained under the direct control of the emperor. Of choice of symbolism was an II who as high priest had been a legitimate claimant these “imperial provinces” the more critical, such as unnecessary affront to the to the Jewish throne. Hyrcanus proved to be inef-Syria, were governed by men of senatorial rank (leg-people he was assigned to rule, fective (most of his subjects despised collaborators) atus Augusti pro praetore) and supplied with crack but given his overall patterns of and so in the summer of 40 b.C. the Senate instead legionary troops. Others, including Egypt, Cappa-behavior, it was probably to be appointed a local strongman, Herod the Great, docia, Sardinia and Judea, were placed under the expected. as king. The region placed under Herod’s control authority of equestrians (equites; “knights”), men of included Judea, Idumea, Perea, Samaria, Galilee, proven military ability who were still climbing the Gaulanitis, Trachonitis, Auranitis and much of ladder of success within the imperial system. Impe-the coast, and remained a client kingdom of Rome rial provinces of the equestrian order typically were throughout the reign of Herod and his sons. Herod provided with auxiliary troops (auxilia) recruited

211

This free eChart is taken from the book Rose Then and Now Bible Map Atlas with Biblical © 2013 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies, Backgrounds and Culture by Paul H. Wright. ISBN 9781596365346. The atlas gives you but not post on the internet or send via email. Your

Pontius Pilate

Provinces of the Roman from within each province. When Archelaus was ences to Pilate as “procurator of Judea” appear to Empire, a.d. 117. Slowly, dismissed in a.d. 6, Judea became a province of this be anachronistic (cf. Ant. xviii.3.1; War ii.9.2); the writ-methodically but surely the type but with the apparent understanding that the ers of the Gospels preferred the more generic title Roman Empire burst from the governor of Syria held veto power over internal “governor” (hegemon) for all higher Roman officials, mountainous spine of central matters. It was a hook that would come in handy including the prefect, who served in the region Italy to swallow the world of later. With Augustus’ decision, then, the people of (Mt. 27:2; Mk 13:9; Lk 2:2, 3:1, 20:20). the Mediterranean. At its height Judea (including Idumea and Samaria), together The prefects of Judea typically were appointed Rome governed lands from with their resources and hopes and dreams for the and dismissed by Caesar himself. Until the reign of the Atlantic to the Euphrates, future, came under the heavy fist of direct Roman Claudius, all were natives of Italy, a pattern which from what is now the British rule (Ant. xvii.13.5; War ii.8.1). For the members of the probably helped to ensure that the province would Isles to Khartoum. An empire prior Jewish delegation and their desperate constit-be governed by men known by, and particularly loy-as large as the world had ever

known needed to be divided uency who had asked for relief from the Herods, it al to, the emperor. Their duties were directly related into provinces to be governed proved to be an ominous choice. to enforcing Rome’s will. High on each prefect’s effectively. Some, termed Until the reign of Emperor Claudius (a.d. 41–54), job description was control of the auxiliary troops, “Imperial Provinces,” were the governors of imperial equestrian provinces were which for Judea were drawn from the local Hellenis-placed under the direct control called prefects (praefectus), a term that was proper tic populations of Caesarea and Sebaste (Ant. xx.8.7). of Caesar. Of these, the ones for seasoned military officers who commanded five If the prefect of Judea needed additional military that were the most troublesome hundred to one thousand troops. (Judah’s garrison help he had to appeal to the governor of Syria for or faced an open frontier (such in the decade leading up to the Great Revolt of access to its legions. (From the time of Tiberius, as Syria) were governed by men a.d. 66–70 was significantly larger, with up to five four of Rome’s 25 legions were based in Syria; of Senatorial rank with the help infantry cohorts of five hundred men each in addi-Tacitus, Annals iv.5.) The prefect was also the highest ju-of legionary troops. Egypt was tion to a squadron of cavalry, and it may have been dicial authority in the province, holding the exclu-an Imperial Province of a lesser this large under the early prefects as well; sive right to enforce capital punishment (War ii.8.1). order governed by equestrians,

cf. Ant. xvi-

although because of its extreme ii.3.1; xx.6.1; War ii.12.5; 111.4.2; Mt 27:54; Acts 10:1, 21:31–36; Additionally, he was responsible for the province’s wealth Roman legions were also cf. Lk 7:2.) Only after the reign of Claudius was the financial affairs, which included levying taxes, im-stationed there. Little Judea was title “prefect” replaced by the more familiar term plementing the corvée and minting coins. Rome sandwiched between. “pro-curator,” designating the chief financial of-also allowed the prefect to appoint and dispose of

ficer of a province. Evidence for the use of “pre-high priests, a right necessary for maintaining a firm fect” as the proper title for the early governors of line of control in the province but something that Judea comes chiefly in a broken inscription found was a constant show of humiliation for the Jews; in archaeological excavations in Caesarea mention-over time it further politicized a temple hierarchy ing Pilate as [praef]ectus Iuda[ea]e. Josephus’ refer-already given to power plays and expediency. (The

212

This free eChart is taken from the book Rose Then and Now Bible Map Atlas with Biblical © 2013 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies, Backgrounds and Culture by Paul H. Wright. ISBN 9781596365346. The atlas gives you but not post on the internet or send via email. Your

Pontius Pilate

Herodian kings had been given the same right, but people of Judea—their blood just kept get-at least they were a local Jewish dynasty.) As a cor-ting sucked out.

ollary, until the end of the governorship of Pilate the This being said, Judea’s first three prefects prefect also administered the use of the high-priest-apparently strove for a relatively favorable ly vestments, an act that had practical ramifications relationship with their Jewish subjects. These as large as its symbolism (Ant. xviii.2.2, 4.3). Any one of were Coponius (a.d. 6–9?) for whom the gate these several duties brought the prefect into direct on the western side of the temple precinct conflict with the powers and people of Judea, and to (the Kiponus Gate of Mishnah Middoth 1.3) be effective he had to be a man with refined skills of may have been named, Marcus Ambivulus diplomacy and coercion.

(a.d. 9?–12) and Annius Rufus (a.d. 12–15).

Tiberius (a.d. 14–37) appointed only two pre-The fourth, Valerius Gratus (a.d. 15–26),

fects over Judea, Valerius Gratus and Pontius Pi-had a mixed record. During his long term in late. Each served about ten years. Later procurators office Gratus dismissed and/or appointed no typically remained in office for only two years, just less than five high priests, including Annas, long enough for each to gain some experience in the who was fired not long after Gratus took office, and In 1962 an Italian job and enrich themselves for their journey up the Annas’ son-in-law Caiaphas, whom Gratus appoint-archaeological team uncovered power echelon of Rome in the process. Or, engorge ed toward the end of his tenure (cf. Jn 18:13). Caiaphas this stone in the theater complex themselves on the public good. Emil Schuerer’s remained in power throughout the term of Pilate, at Caesarea Maritima. The comments on the matter are sufficient: leading some to suggest, certainly correctly, that at stone was found in secondary

For the good of the provinces concerned, [Tiberius] the very least he had gained the trust of the Roman use as a common building stone

left [the prefects] as long as possible in their posts authorities. Likely Rome found Caiaphas a conveni-for a stairway built to renovate Kolymbethra , because he thought governors behaved like flies on ent tool to foster Jewish loyalties to the empire, or the theater as a a “pool for water games.” The a wounded body; once sated, they then temper their at least someone who wouldn’t rock the boat in the inscription reads: extortions, whereas new men would start with a keen matter. It was a tough spot for a high priest to try to […] S TIBERIEUM appetite. (History of the Jewish People 1:383) survive, and in a world of politics and strange bed-[…PO]NTIUS PILATUS

Tiberius was mistaken with Pilate. And as for the fellows, Caiaphas snuggled up to the prefect. [PRAEF]ECTUS IUDA[EA]A

[FECIT]

“…This Tiberium, Pontius Pilate,

Governor of Date of Name of Rul-Reference in Josephus Reference in the New prefect of Judea, erected.” Judea Office ing Caesar

Testament Originally the stone bore a

(a.d.)

dedicatory inscription for a

Coponius 6–9? Augustus Ant. xviii.2.2 —

Tiberium, or temple, that

Pilate built in the city in honor

Marcus Ambivulus 9?–12 Augustus Ant. xviii.2.2 —

of Tiberius. Pilate is the only

known Roman governor

Annius Rufus 12–15 Augustus; Ant. xviii.2.2 —

Tiberius

who built a temple to a living

Valerius Gratus 15–26 Tiberius Ant. xviii.2.2

— emperor. Unlike Augustus,

Tiberius downplayed efforts to

Pontius Pilate 26–36 Tiberius Ant. xviii.3.1–3, 4.1–2; Mt 27:2–66; Mk 15:1–15; Lk develop a cult to his person, and

War ii.9.2–4

3:1, 13:1, 23:1–7, 23:13–25; he likely was not particularly

Jn 18:28–19:15; Acts 3:13, pleased with Pilate’s efforts to

4:27, 13:28; 1 Tim 6:13 ingratiate himself in this way.

Marcellus 36–? Gaius/Caligula Ant. xviii.4.2

— (photo: Garo Nalbandian)

Interregnum of 41–44 Claudius Ant. xviii.3–10; xix.4–8 Acts 12:1, 12:18–23

King Agrippa I

Cuspius Fadus 44–46 Claudius Ant. xv.11.4; xix.4.2; xx.1.1; —

War ii.11.6

Tiberius Alexander 46–48 Claudius Ant. xx.5.2 —

Ventidius Cuma- 48–52 Claudius Ant. xx.5.2; War ii.12.1 —

nus

Antonius Felix 52–60 Claudius; Nero Ant. xiv.11.7; xx.7.1, 8.5, 8.7, Acts 23:24–24:27, 25:14

8.9; War ii.12.8, 13.7

Porcius Festus 60–62 Nero Ant. xx.8.9, 9.1 Acts 24:27–26:32

Albinus 62–64 Nero Ant. xx.9.1

— The Governors of Judea

(Prefects from a.d. 6–41;

Gessius Florus 64–66 Nero Ant. xviii.1.6; xx.9.5, 11.1; War —

Procurators from a.d.

ii.14.3, 14.6, 14.9, 15.1, 16.1

44–64)

213

This free eChart is taken from the book Rose Then and Now Bible Map Atlas with Biblical © 2013 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies, Backgrounds and Culture by Paul H. Wright. ISBN 9781596365346. The atlas gives you but not post on the internet or send via email. Your

Pontius Pilate

Next after Gratus was Pontius Pilate. Like his im-ing people, cruelty, continual murders of people

mediate predecessors, Pilate appears to have been untried and uncondemned, and his never ending, a native of central Italy. The family name Pontius gratuitous and most grievous inhumanity”—a list of has been traced, with some likelihood, to the hilly seven deadly sins if there ever was one (De legatione region of Samnium in south-central Italy, 130 miles ad Gaium, 301–303). If Pilate came to Judea under the east of Rome. The specific name Pilate is much more sponsorship of Sejanus with anti-Semitic tendencies rare; none of its supposed meanings (“armed with already in hand, what else could his subjects expect a javelin,” “bald” and “shaggy”) are of any help in during ten years of free-reign in the province? shedding light on the origin or character of the man. Having taken up residency in Caesarea, Pilate After what must have been a fairly noticeable career wasted no time in offending the Jews under his in the equestrian orders of the Roman military, Pi-charge. It almost seems as though he did so delib-late was appointed prefect of Judea in a.d. 26. erately. Josephus cut to the chase in his very first

Some scholars (e.g. Menahem Stern) have sug-mention of the man:

The second Roman emperor, gested that Pilate’s appointment, which should Now Pilate, the procurator [sic] of Judea, moved Tiberius, was born to one have been made by Tiberius alone, was influenced the army from Caesarea to Jerusalem to take their of Julius Caesar’s military by Sejanus, the powerful chief of Caesar’s Praeto- winter quarters there in order to abolish Jewish laws. officers and rose through rian Guard. (According to Tacitus, Annals iv.5, Rome

(Ant. xviii.3.1)

the ranks of the army by was guarded by three city and nine praetorian co-Transferring the army from wintertime Caesarea, waging successful campaigns horts.) The suggestion is not without merit—a.d. where the weather is mild, to cold and wet Jerusa-in Pannonia, Dalmatia, 26 was the year that Tiberius retired from the daily lem for the sake of quarters makes no sense, and Jo-Armenia and Gaul. Tiberius’ grind of his job and withdrew to the picturesque sephus quickly—and correctly—smelled an ulterior mother divorced his father Campanian isle of Capreae (Capri) off the coast of motive. Indeed, Pilate brazenly showed his hand. and became Augustus’ third Neapolis (Naples), where he owned twelve magnifi-The army arrived in Jerusalem with royal ensigns wife; Tiberius himself married cent villas. He never returned to Rome. It can be bearing the image of Tiberius, a clear affront to Jew-one of Augustus’ daughters, expected that in Tiberius’ absence someone as well-ish law and religious sensibilities. All ensigns that Julia. Family life in Caesar’s placed and ambitious as Sejanus would try to buck had been brought to Jerusalem previously flew with-household wasn’t smooth, and

personal and political rivalries the Senate and lend a direct hand in helping run out such ornamentation, following Herod’s prece-kept Augustus and Tiberius the empire (“Who, me? I’m just a loyal servant of dent not to depict images in places and palaces that at arm’s length. The Emperor Caesar…”). But perhaps more importantly, Sejanus Jews might visit. Pilate’s move cannot be excused as eventually adopted Tiberius, was a known proponent of anti-Semitic policies in a rookie mistake, for the whole operation proceeded helping pave the way for the Rome (Philo, De legatione ad Gaium [On the Embassy to Gaius] under the cover of darkness. The next morning the Senate to appoint him Caesar 159–161) , and it is likely that he was attracted to Pi-city was in an uproar. Masses of people marched after Augustus died in a.d. 14. late—and vice versa—because the latter fostered on Caesarea and for five days demanded that Pi-Tiberius’ 23-year reign was the same tendencies. Philo, an Alexandrian Jew, late remove the ensigns that were polluting the largely conservative in polity, wrote freely and bluntly of the excesses of Pilate, Holy City. The protest clearly caught him off-guard and unlike his predecessor he his contemporary, and while it is certain that Philo’s and he responded by digging in his heels and pass-played down attempts to be own interests as a defender of the faith shaped his ing the blame upward, insisting that Caesar himself portrayed as divine. Tiberius opinion of Judea’s prefect, his comments do provide would be affronted otherwise (Are we not friends of ruled during the time of the

ministry of Jesus (Lk 3:1) and a helpful grid to understand Pilate’s heavy-handed Caesar?). On the sixth day Pilate had had enough the fledgling years of the early actions once he assumed control of the province. and instructed his army to surround the protesters Church. He died on 16 March, Pilate was, said Philo, a man “with a very inflex-with orders to draw their swords at his command. a.d. 37, having spent the last ible disposition, merciless and most obstinate,” pos-But when confronted with death, the Jews “laid eleven years of his life on his sessed by “most ferocious passions” and someone their necks bare and said they would rather take several royal estates on the who was widely feared because of his “corruption, their deaths willingly than transgress the wisdom of island of Capreae (Capri). acts of insolence, rapine behavior, habit of insult-their laws” (Josephus’ retelling of the event comes

Most of what we know about the life and times of the people of Judea during the time of the New Testament has been preserved for us by the Jewish historian Josephus (c. a.d. 37–100). Josephus was trained as a rabbi and a priest and dabbled in various interpretative schools of Torah before eventually joining the Pharisees at age nineteen. During the Great Revolt he commanded the Jewish forces in Galilee. He was a better scholar than soldier, surrendering the fortress of Jotapata (above Cana) to Vespasian in a.d. 67. After becoming Caesar, Vespasian favored Josephus, released him from his status as prisoner-of-war and granted him the emperor’s family name, Flavius. Josephus eventually traveled to Rome with Vespasian’s son, Titus, the victorious general of the battle for Jerusalem (a.d. 70). There he lived out his years as an author and favorite of the court. Josephus’ primary works, Antiquities of the Jews and The Jewish War, are an invaluable, though understandably opinioned, account of the decades of Jewish history that witnessed the destruction of the Temple and the birth of Christianity. This bust is thought to preserve his likeness.

214

This free eChart is taken from the book Rose Then and Now Bible Map Atlas with Biblical © 2013 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies, Backgrounds and Culture by Paul H. Wright. ISBN 9781596365346. The atlas gives you but not post on the internet or send via email. Your

Pontius Pilate

with all his usual flare for the dramatic; Ant. xviii.3.1;

War ii.9.1–2). In any case the point was made: Pilate

caved, and the ensigns were removed. It is not clear

if the Jews of Jerusalem were emboldened or just

relieved at the outcome; certainly their suspicions

that Pilate would not shy from confrontation again

were justifiably aroused.

A similar incident is related by Philo of Alexan-

dria (De legatione ad Gaium, 299–305). When Pilate came

to Jerusalem he typically stayed in Herod’s palace

in the western part of the city, and at one point he

decorated the palace with golden shields. Although

the shields bore only an inscription mentioning the

name of the donor (certainly Pilate himself) and the

honored recipient (Tiberius), their very presence

represented an imperial affront to the Jews of the

Holy City. It is often suggested that the incident

janus in Rome in may have been prompted by the execution of Se-then at a signal attacked, killing many and suppress-Pilate’s Judean headquarters

a.d. 31, and Pilate’s subsequent ing the throng by brute force. While Josephus notes were in Caesarea, within the

desire to show a sign of loyalty to Tiberius. In any that the severity of the soldiers’ reaction against the confines of the sumptuous case the Jews protested again, and again Pilate re-crowd exceeded their orders (it was mob against palace there, the palace Herod sisted, but this time they went above his head and mob), the Jews of Jerusalem clearly held Pilate re-the Great had built on a sent a delegation to carry the matter all the way to sponsible for the affair and its bloody aftermath. spit of land jutting into the

Mediterranean. Only scattered

Rome. The circumstances fit a time frame subse- Things didn’t improve.

quent to the incident of the offending ensigns; Pi- Now there were some…who reported to [Jesus] building stones remain together late seemed to have learned a lesson about graven about the Galileans whose blood Pilate had mixed with the outline of the palace’s images in the meantime, but for the people of Jeru- with their sacrifices. Jesus replied, “Do you think that foundation—rooms centered on salem that wasn’t enough. Tiberius intervened on these Galileans were greater sinners than all other a large rectangular freshwater

pool. Pilate was holed up here

their behalf and forced him to remove the shields;

when crowds from Jerusalem

Pilate installed them instead in the Temple of Au-

swarmed Caesarea to protest

gustus in Caesarea. Religious sensibilities and the

his pretense in bringing offensive

common good prevailed; Pilate was called on the

royal ensigns to their city.

carpet and humiliated in Rome and in Judea. He

didn’t wear it well.

Sometime later—Josephus doesn’t mention

when—Pilate got into trouble for what probably ap-

peared to him as a simple and necessary improve-

ment in Jerusalem’s infrastructure: tapping into a

distant spring and channeling its waters into the city

(Ant. xviii.3.2; War ii.9.4). Although Pilate’s aqueduct has

The Aqueduct to Jerusalem,

not been positively identified archaeologically, it

1st Century a.d. It was

was certainly related to the earlier Hasmonean and

a massive undertaking:

Herodian aqueduct system that brought water from

bringing water from several

the hills of Hebron into Jerusalem. Pilate probably

springs in the hills of Hebron

increased the length of that system by extending its

to Jerusalem, a twisting

upper end to reach additional springs near Hebron.

channel, pipe and tunnel route

His offense was that he paid for the project out of

following hillside contours for

(extorted) temple funds, money that had been des-

over 40 miles. The aqueduct

ignated “Corban” (“devoted”; cf. Mt 7:11) and so was

was probably begun by the

Hasmoneans, although Herod

restricted for sacred use only. The next time Pilate

the Great properly gets credit

showed his face in Jerusalem he was beset by anoth-

for overseeing the construction

er angry mob, this time bold enough “to hurl insults

of most of its length. Pilate’s

and abuse the man as crowds of such people usu-

addition was likely somewhere

ally do” (Ant. xviii.3.2). It had become personal. Pull-

in the aqueduct’s upper,

ing a practiced trump card from his pocket, Pilate

southern extremities, although

again brought armed soldiers onto the scene, this

it is impossible to identify any

time dressed as cloaked commoners with armor and

specific section as his from the

weapons concealed. They mingled with the crowd,

extant remains.

215

This free eChart is taken from the book Rose Then and Now Bible Map Atlas with Biblical © 2013 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies, Backgrounds and Culture by Paul H. Wright. ISBN 9781596365346. The atlas gives you but not post on the internet or send via email. Your

Pontius Pilate

sistently avoided entanglements of that kind) and

simply noted that the wrath of God toward unre-

pentant sinners far exceeded anything that Pilate

could muster. God and people were the focus; Pilate

was just a detail of time and place. Few others could

dismiss the prefect that easily.

But in the end could Jesus? Somewhere in the

middle of Pilate’s lengthy term of office Jesus of

Nazareth, Son of David and Son of God by birth

but a resident of insurrection-prone Galilee by up-

bringing, made his final pilgrimage to Jerusalem.

His entrance down the Mount of Olives the Sun-

day morning before Passover was dramatic—tri-

umphant, even—as crowds of people waved palm

branches, giving fervent expression to their longing

for redemption and freedom from political overlords.

Shouts of “Hosanna (Save, now!)” and “Blessed is

the king who comes in the name of the LORD!”

echoed into the city (Mt 21:9; Lk 19:38). Jerusalem was

already crowded with pilgrims getting ready for the

Passover, the Jewish freedom festival par excellence,

when it was easy for thoughts of redemption from

bondage in long-ago Egypt to blur with hopes for

freedom from Rome. Modern estimates suggest

that the population of the city may have doubled in

size whenever the Jewish pilgrimage festivals rolled

around; the city not only pulsed with the excite-

ment of the moment but with the anticipation that

each new year might be the year of the Messiah at

Pontius Pilate, Prefect of Galileans because they suffered this fate? I tell you last. Rome had a long history of dealing with such Judea, a.d. 26–36. Pilate held no—but unless you repent, you will all likewise per- matters, and Pilate probably sent extra troops to Je-the office of prefect of Judea ish.” (Lk 13:1–3) rusalem to offset any populist tendencies that might longer than any other man Some scholars have suggested that this massacre give rise to expressions of freedom that threatened except for Valerius Gratus. mentioned in the Gospel of Luke was a spillover of Rome (cf. War i.4.3, ii.1.3, ii.12.1, v.5.8). He himself would The record of his activities is the “crowd-control” following the riot over the aq-also typically come to the city for the festival to keep also lengthier than that of his ueduct, but the details are sufficiently different— a personal watch on things. But this year the week colleagues, due in no small and Pilate’s character sufficiently obstinate—to see before Passover started badly for Pilate—a report measure to his antagonistic them as two separate events. Pilate had no authori-no doubt reached his desk that the crowds couldn’t attitude toward the Jews and ty in Galilee (that province was part of the tetrarchy even wait for the holiday to begin before clamoring that his term in office coincided

with the adult ministry of Jesus. of Herod Antipas), but when a number of Galileans for some rabbi from Galilee to overthrow the gov-Most of Pilate’s offenses were ran afoul of his will while on a holy pilgrimage to ernment. Extra care had to be taken. Pilate didn’t inflicted in Jerusalem, home Jerusalem, his response was true to form. The par-need another incident, but he also couldn’t hope to a Jewish way of life worth ticulars are unstated but easily imagined—if asked, that the crowds that had so welcomed Jesus to Je-fighting for. Pilate never learned Pilate probably would have called it insurrection. rusalem would just go away. He couldn’t afford any the ideological language of the Luke’s comments on the matter may be taken to unnecessary confrontations that would rouse Tibe-people under his charge, and his mean that the pious travelers were killed in the very rius’ ire again. With Sejanus dead Pilate no longer reign imploded in the end. act of offering sacrifices in the Temple—an outrage had a buffer to help absorb Caesar’s blows should

of unprecedented proportions that Josephus surely trouble arise out in the provinces. would have mentioned if they had—or, more likely, Certain members of the temple hierarchy also that they were involved in some sort of violent dem-wanted Jesus gone. The Gospels say “from envy” onstration (or caught in its backlash) during their (Mt 27:18; Mk 15:10)—apparently that Jesus was at-pilgrimage to the city. Whatever the circumstances, tracting too large a following—but many members it was likely part of the cause of the antagonism be-of Jerusalem’s priesthood, especially Sadducees tween Antipas and Pilate—this, and the fact that comfortable with the status quo, had no patience Pilate, a rank foreigner, had taken over the inherit-for movements clamoring for revolutionary change. ance of Antipas’ half-brother Archelaus (cf. Lk 23:12). Thanks to Judas Iscariot’s “inside job” Jesus was When the subject of the massacre was brought up taken off the streets quickly and quietly. His disci-to Jesus, he refused to get into politics (Jesus con-ples scattered under cover of darkness; only Peter

216

This free eChart is taken from the book Rose Then and Now Bible Map Atlas with Biblical © 2013 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies, Backgrounds and Culture by Paul H. Wright. ISBN 9781596365346. The atlas gives you but not post on the internet or send via email. Your

Pontius Pilate

and John followed, furtively hugging the shadows, a Messiah was the threat of carving up the empire. hardly daring to draw close (Mt 26:47–56; Mk 14:43–52; Pilate had to take the case seriously and so he asked Lk 22:47–62; Jn 18:1–16).

the Messianic question in a way that mocked the

As high priest, Caiaphas was responsible for a validity of its claims.

complex weave of political and religious interests Jesus’ reply was also direct, but provocative: “You in Judea and Galilee and throughout the Diaspora, have said so” (Ellis Rivkin has called it “Delphic”; with multiple constituencies clamoring for leader-What Crucified Jesus, 104)—as if Pilate’s pronouncement ship and attention. His feet were firmly planted on had any objective relevance in the matter of God’s both sides of the fence that divided Jerusalem from Messiah. Then Jesus fell silent (Mt 27:11–14; Mk 15:2–5; Rome; it was a rather delicate place to stand, and Lk 23:2–5).

Josephus’ description of

above all he needed no one to kick one of his feet Only the Gospel of John records further conver-Jerusalem’s Royal Stoa includes out from under him or to give the barbed wire a sation between the two. Interrogation was standard the following line: “The “twang.” Get rid of Jesus, and things would quiet procedure in an investigation by a Roman magis-number of columns was 162, down. Representing the temple hierarchy, Caiaphas trate when the accused refused to plead his case each of which had a capital accused Jesus of blasphemy, then, after consultation, (Pliny the Younger, Epistulae x.96.2–3; Eusebius, ornamented in the Corinthian delivered him to Pilate for the sentence of death v.1.20–22). Here it started with Pilate distancing him-Historia ecclesiastica style of carving, which caused

(Mt 26:57–27:2; Mk 14:53–15:1; Lk 22:63–23:1; Jn 18:12–27). self from the maddening people under his control. amazement by the magnificence ( Ant. xv.11.5) .

Jerusalem Talmud, Rome alone held the authority to execute (Jn 18:31; “I am not a Jew,” he hissed. “How should I know of its whole effect” This Corinthian capital, Sanhedrin 1.18a).

Pilate had no interest in internal Jewish religious what you have done?” (Jn 18:35). Jesus’ response was carved of hard limestone (of

reasoned and calm:

matters unless they touched on issues of security My kingdom is not of this world. If it were, my ser- the local mizzi hilu variety) and control—he probably resented being drawn vants would be fighting by now for my release. and still nearly perfect after being buried in the rubble of

into what he considered the quirky controversies of

(Jn 18:36) Second Temple Jerusalem for

the Jews—and so the charge against Jesus was given (Your kingdom is not what?!) nineteen centuries, attests to

with the appropriate nuance:

Pilate had to regain the edge: “So you admit that the grandeur of Herod’s city.

We found this man misleading our nation, forbid- you are a king?” To the matter-of-fact prefect, Jesus’ The acanthus leaves across

the bottom are not quite as

ding us to give tribute to Caesar and saying that he reply was incomprehensible:

himself is the Messiah, a king. (Lk 23:2) You have said [correctly] that I am a king. For this elaborate as those of classic Corinthian capitals; the center

Pilate preferred the direct approach and imme- I have been born, and for this I have come into this panel contains lilies, a common

diately set the tone for the direction of the inquiry: world, to testify to the truth. Everyone who is of the Jewish symbol of the time. “Are you the king of the Jews?” Absent an ideology truth hears my voice. In all, the capital is witness of the Messiah, the question was quite impossible (Your voice? Mine is the one that counts!”) Then (Jn 18:37) to the persuasive power of for any normal person living in Judea or Galilee to the snarl: “What is truth?!” (Jn 18:38) Rome in the face of persistent answer. At most someone could have dared to re-world of political expediency, truth is whatever it . In the cold Jewish forms in the Holy City.

(NEAEHL)

ply “I am the rightful king of Judea,” of a bounded has to be.

territorial unit currently under the control of Pilate Pilate had had enough. If he passed sentence of himself. But to respond “Yes, I am king of the Jews” execution, he risked another riot by the crowds who would have meant either that Judea should be di-last he heard were still looking for the Messiah. But vided into Jewish and Gentile sub-provinces, or if he turned Jesus loose, he risked further alienating worse, it would have made the accused king over the local religious authorities who wanted him dead. a minority population scattered throughout the And Caiaphas, who was supposed to be sensitive to many districts of the empire, clearly a conceptual Rome’s interests, was pressing the affair! Hearing and practical impossibility for Rome. The threat of that Jesus was a Galilean, Pilate shipped him across

town to Herod Antipas, who had also come

to Jerusalem for the Passover. This time

Antipas could deal with his own mess!

The tetrarch of Galilee was not opposed to

The tomb of the high priestly Caiaphas family was found in archaeological

excavations directed by Zvi Greenhut in 1990 within the grounds of the Jerusalem

Peace Forest, just over a mile southeast of the Old City of Jerusalem. Although the

tomb had been robbed in antiquity, the bones of over 60 persons remained, together

with an ossuary inscribed “Joseph son of Caiaphas” (above). According to Josephus

(Ant. xviii.2.2; 4.3) this was the full name of the high priest who presided at the trial

of Jesus. The ossuary’s rich and detailed ornamentation (left), the most exquisite of

any ossuary found in Jerusalem, attests to the importance of the man whose bones

were laid within. The ossuary actually contained the bones of six people, including

a 60-year-old man who was probably Caiaphas himself. (NEAEHL)

217

This free eChart is taken from the book Rose Then and Now Bible Map Atlas with Biblical © 2013 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies, Backgrounds and Culture by Paul H. Wright. ISBN 9781596365346. The atlas gives you but not post on the internet or send via email. Your

Pontius Pilate

I’ll-never-forget-you-humiliated-me-before-Caesar

prefect. Pilate was setting the crowds up against

their own leaders, relishing the thought of creating

an opportunity to crush once and for all their seeth-

ing and arrogant hope for an independent Jewish

state. (Although he had been in the province for

half a decade, Pilate still had no real clue who the

Jews were, either.) Let the crowds force the hand of

their own leaders this time!

A convenient tool lay at hand. According to

recent custom, Pilate could offer to release one

prisoner from custody at Passover time. He gave

the crowds a choice: Barabbas or Jesus (Mt 27:15–20;

Mk 15:6–9; Jn 18:39–40). Barabbas was a local insur-

rectionist and murderer, but as far as we know not

someone who claimed to be the Messiah. There was

no particular reason why anyone (except for his own

family) would want him back on the street, and we

can assume that many wanted him to remain locked

up. Jesus was the crowd’s hero and savior. Pilate fig-

ured that the choice would be obvious, and that

a mass call to release Jesus would force the Jewish

authorities to cave before popular will. They could

be humiliated this time. And if it gave him justifi-

able reason to turn his troops loose again, so much

the better.

But once again, Pilate had misunderstood his

foes. By now the Jewish authorities had swayed the

emotional crowds to their side—Jesus was a messi-

anic fraud who would only lead them all astray. Bet-

ter to get rid of him now than to incur the wrath of

Rome one more time (Mt 27:20; Mk 15:11). Everyone

quickly closed ranks and demanded Jesus’ execu-

tion. Pilate was obstinate—he knew how to dig in

The Arrest, Trials and seeing Jesus; he had already executed John the Baptist his heels, too, and tried again and again to swing the Crucifixion of Jesus—A (Mt 14:1–12) and now wanted a good look at the momentum back (Mt 27:21–23; Mk 15:12–14; Lk 23:18–23). Possible Sequence. The prophet’s cousin, the miracle worker from Nazareth. But in the end the growing mob pulled the ultimate Gospel accounts agree that Jesus Antipas grilled Jesus well, but the prisoner main-trump card: “If you release Jesus, you’re no friend was arrested, brought before tained his silence. Without extradition to Galilee of Caesar” (Jn 19:12). That was the one thing Pilate Jewish and Roman authorities there was little Antipas could do other than taunt couldn’t have. So he caved, but not before literally for interrogation and sentencing, Jesus and send him back to Pilate (Lk 23:6–12). washing his hands of the matter (Mt 27:24): “You’ll and led outside the walls of Thanks for nothing. It was time to finish the case. get what you deserve someday. And don’t blame me Jerusalem to be crucified. What But perhaps Pilate could have a little fun in the pro-when you do.” Then he nailed down a final warn-is not clear is the sequence of cess, undercutting the claim of Jesus’ accusers and ing, a sign of mock tribute fastened to Jesus’ cross, the events of Jesus’ trial(s) or

their location within Jerusalem. picking away at the absurdity of the perpetual po-pointing in shame to The King of the Jews—“this is About all that is sure is that the litical-religious mix of Judaism that had given him what happens to messiahs. Don’t even think about Via Dolorosa, a modern series such trouble in the past. And so Pilate announced being one.” of narrow, arched and stepped his decision, wholly unexpected by everyone: “I find In the end, as the trials and tribulations of a pre-streets leading from the Sisters no fault in him” (Lk 23:13–16; Jn 18:38). fect go, Pilate’s day could have been worse. His own of Zion Convent (the location No fault? Who was Pilate trying to kid? He had agenda had been thwarted, it is true, but he had of the Antonia Fortress) to the just heard Jesus as much as admitting to be the King avoided a riot, solved a difficult case to the satisfac-Church of the Holy Sepulcher of the Jews! Pilate was ready to throw Jesus back to tion of the accusers (much to his own chagrin, but (Golgotha), is a route more of the multitudes from which he came, a near-martyr he would have to live with that), kept Rome out of faith than fact. The uncertainty returned to his partisan following to live and lead a the matter, saved his own neck in the process (that of the known route aside, revolt another day. (He had no clue who Jesus re-was more important), and been able to throw some the events surrounding Jesus’ ally was.) The religious authorities were incensed— barbs at the people who had dared buck his author-crucifixion and Resurrection

remain the founding fact of they knew that another attempt at insurrection ity in the past. And only one person had to be sacri-Christianity. would prompt an even harsher response from their ficed—and he wasn’t even a Judean.

218

This free eChart is taken from the book Rose Then and Now Bible Map Atlas with Biblical © 2013 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies, Backgrounds and Culture by Paul H. Wright. ISBN 9781596365346. The atlas gives you but not post on the internet or send via email. Your

Pontius Pilate

From the ground it looked as though Jesus had Pilgrims from Italy pray and sing their way through the

been caught in a riptide of competing egos and streets of Jerusalem following the Stations of the Cross.

pulled under by cross-currents of conflicting agen-Centuries of tradition have etched in stone holy moments : where he das, paying the highest price in the process. In re-of Jesus’ final journey along the Via Dolorosa ality, the Creator of the World had orchestrated fell, where he met his mother, where Simon of Cyrene took events so that the Savior of the World could pay the cross, where Veronica wiped his face, where he fell the highest price for human sin. But Pilate cared again, and again. By now Pilate had gotten on with his

day, the matter put aside, more important things to attend

nothing for that. By such mixed doses of in-your-face and dodge-to. He did order soldiers to guard Jesus’ tomb lest anything and-feint, Pilate rode herd over the Jews under his unexpected should happen. A martyr’s body could be as watch and care. But things couldn’t go on indefi-dangerous to a crazed following as the martyr himself.… nitely. Ironically, the sequence of events that led couldn’t let Pilate’s attack on their community go to Pilate’s downfall didn’t happen in Judea but in unanswered. A delegation reported the matter to Samaria, the portion of his territory that had a size-Vitellius, governor of the province Syria, claiming able Gentile base (centered in the cities of Caesarea that Pilate had murdered members of a harmless and Sebaste). Samaria was also home to the Sa-crowd. Vitellius, tired of Pilate’s excesses, pulled maritans, a schismatic people group once close to rank and sent him to Rome to finally answer to Judaism who clung to the tradition that Moses had the emperor directly for his heavy-handed ways intended Mount Gerizim to be the holy mountain (Ant. xviii.4.2). A friend of Vitellius named Marcellus, of Israel. An unnamed Samaritan mystic (Josephus, who had been given the privilege of delivering the who had no reason to protect Samaritan sensibili-news to Pilate, stayed on as temporary prefect of ties, called him “one who thought lying was a thing Judea. At the next Passover festival Vitellius, who of little consequence and who contrived things to understood that pro-Jewish policies were in Rome’s please the multitudes”; Ant. xviii.4.1) inspired a crowd best interest, went up to Jerusalem to a hero’s wel-to converge on Mount Gerizim and look for sacred come. Knowing change was in order, he ordered tax vessels that Moses had buried somewhere on the relief, removed cozy Caiaphas from the high priest-mountain. But they came armed; this was no effort hood and returned the control of the priestly vest-at objective archaeology. Sensing a messianic-type ments to the temple authorities (Ant. xviii.4.3). Judea revolt, Pilate sent the army to meet them on the breathed a collective sigh of relief. road near the village of Tirathaba (an unknown lo- In the meantime, while Pilate was en route to cation but likely in one of the valleys touching Mt. Rome, Tiberius died—and with this, the contempo-Gerizim on the north or east) to prevent their as-rary sources for the prefect’s life fall silent. Pilate’s cent up the mountain; some were killed, others fled; involvement in the trial and execution of Jesus, many were taken prisoner. Their recondite leader however, guaranteed that he would not be forgot-was executed straightaway. It was quick, easy and ten. In the early fourth century a.d. Eusebius, bishop decisive—ignore public opinion, and life can go on of Caesarea, wrote that during the reign of Tiberius’ as it should (Ant. xviii.4.1).

successor Gaius (Caligula; a.d. 37–44), “calamities

But this time Pilate couldn’t outrun the crowds. forced [Pilate] to an unavoidable suicide, for the

Even though the official Samaritan leadership likely penalty of God, it seems, followed hard after him” saw their unfortunate mystic as a bit of a kook, they (Historica ecclesiastica ii.7). A likely scenario is that Pilate

This ancient pavement, made of large, smooth flagstones, is located in

the basement of the Sisters of Zion Convent on today’s Via Dolorosa

in the Muslim Quarter of Jerusalem’s Old City. The pavement is

inscribed with markings thought to be a “gameboard” of the type used

by Roman soldiers to idle away their time while on duty far from

home (close-up photo, above). Perhaps they played “the Game of the

King,” in which an unfortunate prisoner was taunted and abused

while being forced to pretend to be king for the day. The Antonia

Fortress almost certainly stood here in the first century a.d., with a

Praetorium housing Jerusalem’s contingent of Roman soldiers assigned

to enforce the Empire’s will in this independent-minded city. All of

this prompted the suggestion long ago that these very stones are part of

the Pavement (lithostrothon) mentioned in John 19:13 where Pilate

condemned Jesus to death. It’s a popular stopping point for pilgrims

tracing Jesus’ final journey to the Cross, even though archaeologists

have now shown the pavement to be dated to the 2nd century a.d.

A reasoned historical supposition locates Pilate’s activities in Herod’s

royal palace in the western part of the city instead.

219

This free eChart is taken from the book Rose Then and Now Bible Map Atlas with Biblical © 2013 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies, Backgrounds and Culture by Paul H. Wright. ISBN 9781596365346. The atlas gives you but not post on the internet or send via email. Your

Pontius Pilate

Pontius Pilate in History

and Tradition. It is natural

that a man as closely tied to the

death of Christ as was Pilate

would become easy prey for

weavers of tradition and legend.

The details of Pilate’s life that

are supplied by Josephus are

largely limited to events that

took place in Judea. Early

Church traditions differ on

what happened to the man after

Jesus’ crucifixion; for some he

was a saint, for others a demon.

In the two millennia since,

Pilate’s character and career

have become a favorite template

for works of art, literature and

song, most casting him in a

justifiably negative light.

was found guilty of crimes against Rome’s inter-benevolent miracle-worker, on “the wickedness of ests and chose to die honorably rather than at the the Jews”). Anti-Semitism never rests, but fortu-hand of his employer. The spurious but influential nately the earliest Church creed proclaimed a more Mors Pilati (“Death of Pilate”), a Latin document accurate understanding: dated no earlier than the fifth century a.d., relates I believe in God, the Father Almighty, that Pilate’s corpse was sunk in Rome’s Tiber River the Creator of heaven and earth, but that “malignant and filthy spirits” clinging to and in Jesus Christ, His only Son, our Lord: his body so agitated the waters that he was drawn Who was conceived of the Holy Spirit, out and sunk again in the Rhone near Vienne (in born of the Virgin Mary, southeastern Gaul). But those waters also churned suffered under Pontius Pilate, and so his body was moved again, to the territory of was crucified, died and was buried. Lausanne where the evil spirits plagued that land. He descended into hell.

Pilate’s unfortunate remains were finally buried in a The third day He arose again from the dead. pit surrounded by mountains somewhere high in the He ascended into heaven

western Alps “where to this day,” reports Mors Pila- and sits at the right hand of God the Father ti, “certain diabolical machinations are said to bub- Almighty,

ble up.” Tradition accomplished what history didn’t. whence He shall come to judge the living and

Certain early Church traditions sought to exon- the dead.

erate Pilate for his role in the death of Jesus, prefer- I believe in the Holy Spirit, the holy catholic church, ring instead to place full blame for the act on the the communion of saints, Jews (e.g. Tertullian, Apologia 21.24, and The Acts of Peter the forgiveness of sins,

and Paul in which Pilate sends a letter to the Em- the resurrection of the body, peror Claudius blaming the crucifixion of Jesus, a and life everlasting.

The XIIth Station of the Cross, where Jesus died, was first identified by Constantine in the Amen. (The Apostle’s Creed) early 4th century. Here Constantine erected a wooden cross in memory of his Savior and And here Pilate’s legacy should lie. God needed built a massive church surrounding both it and the tomb in which Jesus was thought to have a human instrument so that His grace could flow been laid. In a.d. 417 the Emperor Theodosius II replaced Constantine’s cross with a cross through Jesus into all the world. Like Pharaoh, of gold and precious stones, more fitting with a Rome that was becoming Byzantium, and Nebuchadnezzar and Cyrus before, Pilate was called the push to beautify and beatify the site was on. Today the Church of the Holy Sepulcher into the divine plan. His unfortunate personality bears little resemblance to the Roman killing fields that lay outside the walls of first-century served God’s purposes even though it seemed like Jerusalem. The church pulsates with the prayers of the faithful, mixed with equal doses of nothing but grief and chaos at the time. The Empty tourists’ gawks and power politics. These pious nuns genuflect daily at the altar that stands Tomb demanded first a crucifixion. In this instance over the very spot that tradition has fixed as the place of the cross, a constant reminder that at least, the will that Pilate enforced was God’s. while Pontius Pilate is dead and gone, the faith of the Jesus whom he tried to exterminate lives on.

220

This free eChart is taken from the book Rose Then and Now Bible Map Atlas with Biblical © 2013 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies, Backgrounds and Culture by Paul H. Wright. ISBN 9781596365346. The atlas gives you but not post on the internet or send via email. Your

Deluxe Then and Now Bible Map Book with

Clear Plastic Overlays + CD

Deluxe Then and Now® Bible Map Book includes

full-color Bible maps with clear-plastic overlays that

show modern cities and countries. Now you can see

where Bible places are today. This best-selling book

brings new relevance to your studies and teaching,

and compares Bible locations with modern-day sites. .

Book ................... 9781596361638 ...........$29.99

Also available as a PDF and eBook.

Then & Now® Bible Maps

The bestselling pamphlet Then & Now® Bible Maps!

This full-color, fold-out reference tool contains 17 Bible

maps that show ancient cities and countries in black

with modern-day boundaries marked in red. Then &

Now® Bible Maps is fantastic for comparing places in

the news with places in the Bible.

Pamphlet............9781596361300............$3.99

Also available as PDF, in Book, Wall Chart, eBook,

PowerPoint®.

Rose Then and Now Bible Map Atlas

Then and Now® Bible Map Insert - Ultra-thin

atlas fits in the back of your Bible

The Best “Then and Now” Bible Atlas Ever — It has Features No Other

Then and Now® Bible Maps Insert includes 44 pages

Has! 120 stunning detailed Bible maps, clear plastic overlays of modern

with 8 clear plastic overlays; 22 full color maps; larger

cities and countries so you know where Bible places are today, incredible

print; every major city in the Bible; separate maps for

insights into the lives of 30 important Bible characters, and much more!.

each of Paul’s journeys; a Bible time line; and an index.

This atlas focuses on people – not regions -- and how the geography

5.5 x 8.5 inches (ultra-thin).

affected their lives and decisions.

Insert ................... 9781596362932 ...........$16.99

Book ................................................. 9781596365346 ................. $39.99

Also available as an eBook.

Sign up now to receive FREE Rose Bible eCharts at www.rose-publishing.com/echarts

ROSE PUBLISHING/ASPIRE PRESS

www.rose-publishing.com

info@rose-publishing.com

or call (310) 353-2100

Rose Publishing, Inc., publishes full-color, easy-to-use Bible reference materials, including charts, maps, time lines, and biblical reference pamphlets for pastors, Bible study leaders, new member classes & small groups.
