Byron R. Merrill, Heavens Are Open: The 1992 Sperry Symposium on the Doctrine and Covenants and Church History ( 1993)

Preface

President Ezra Taft Benson has borne testimony of the Doctrine and Covenants in these words:

"The Book of Mormon brings men to Christ. The Doctrine and Covenants brings men to Christ's kingdom, even The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 'the only true and living church upon the face of the whole earth.' (D&C 1:30.) I know that.

"The Book of Mormon is the keystone of our religion, and the Doctrine and Covenants is the capstone, with continuing latter day revelation" (A Witness and a Warning: A Modern-day Prophet Testifies of the Book of Mormon [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1988], pp. 30-31).

He also stated: "The Author of the Doctrine and Covenants is the Lord Jesus Christ. . . . [It] is unique among the standard works of the Church . . . in that it is a modern book of scripture" (Ensign, Jan. 1993, p. 2).

That "unique" volume is compiled from revelations of the Lord to the Prophet Joseph Smith, Jr., and to his successors in the presidency of the Church. It records the words of "the only living and true God" (D&C 20:19), given through living prophets to a living Church. The Lord has declared that in conjunction with the Book of Mormon and continuing revelation, the Doctrine and Covenants "shall bring to light the true points of my doctrine" (D&C 10:62), upon which his Church and kingdom is founded in the latter days. He has further declared that his promises contained in this sacred volume "shall all be fulfilled, whether by mine own voice or by the voice of my servants, it is the same" (D&C 1:38).

Brigham Young University and the LDS Church Educational System were pleased to sponsor the twenty first annual Sidney B. Sperry Symposium on 26 September 1992. The theme of the symposium was "The Heavens Are Open." This present volume contains presentations selected from those given at the symposium. Though the authors have sought to be in harmony with Church doctrine, their remarks represent their own ideas and are not necessarily those of the Church Educational System, Brigham Young University, or The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

These presentations focus on the Doctrine and Covenants and the continuing stream of revelation that directs the Lord's work on the earth. They discuss topics ranging from historical insights on Zion's Camp and the early mission of the Twelve Apostles to prophecies of the last days. Subjects are as panoramic as the restoration of all things or as specific as Joseph Smith's poetic rendition of Section 76. Each bears witness to the fulfillment of the Lord's promise to reveal his will "by mine own voice out of the heavens" (D&C 84:42). Truly, the heavens are open.

BYU Religious Education Special Lectures Committee

Byron R. Merrill

Brent L. Top

David R. Seely

Vern D. Sommerfeldt
