Byron R. Merrill, Heavens Are Open: The 1992 Sperry Symposium on the Doctrine and Covenants and Church History ( 1993)

1

The Authentic Theology

Bruce C. Hafen Brigham Young University

A friend of mine is a successful physician and a stake president who lives with his family in the southeastern part of the country. He and his wife enrolled several of their children in an academically strong Christian school, where their children were among the school's best and most popular students. Not long ago, because of the fears of other parents who were convinced that Mormons are not Christians, the school required these parents to withdraw their children permanently. Another friend, who is a community-oriented priesthood leader in a West Coast city, recently applied for membership in an interdenominational organization of local Christian religious leaders. He was told that a Mormon would fit more appropriately with the city's association for non-Christian religions.

A substantial part of these puzzling attitudes can be attributed to widespread and erroneous perceptions about Latter-day Saint doctrines concerning the atonement and the grace of Christ. Newsweek magazine put it this way a few years ago in an article entitled "What Mormons Believe": "Unlike orthodox Christians, Mormons believe that men are born free of sin and earn their way to godhood by the proper exercise of free will, rather than through the grace of Jesus Christ. Thus Jesus' suffering and death in the Mormon view were brotherly acts of compassion, but they do not atone for the sins of others. For this reason, Mormons do not include the cross in their iconography nor do they place much emphasis on Easter." [^1]

I find massive irony in these profoundly mistaken impressions, for it is my thesis that the Restoration through Joseph Smith actually made the atonement and the grace of Jesus Christ relevant and accessible to individuals in a way that traditional Protestant and Catholic doctrines have simply been unable to do. And this has occurred at a time when the contemporary society is literally starving with spiritual hunger.

I wish to introduce this thesis by telling you about a recent book from Yale University Press, called Heaven: A History, in which two historians, Colleen McDannell and Bernhard Lang, trace both popular and religious beliefs about the concept of heaven throughout the centuries of Western history. McDannell and Lang say they chose to study this subject because "it reflects a deep and profound longing in Christianity to move beyond this life and to experience more fully the divine. The ways in which people imagine heaven tell us how they understand themselves, their families, their society, and their God." Indeed, these authors regard their subject as "a key to [understanding] our Western culture." [^2]

Their study concludes with an assessment of heaven in twentieth-century Christianity, which is characterized by two major findings: first, 71 percent of modern Americans believe "there is a heaven where people who have led good lives are eternally rewarded." Significantly, the proportion of the population who hold this belief is about the same today as it was in 1952. [^3] Thus, in attitudes toward topics ranging from cemeteries to love songs, people from all Christian denominations still express their instinctive belief in "the eternal nature of love and the hope for heavenly reunion," especially with their family members. [^4] These popular sentiments echo Emily Dickinson's from a century ago that the "'Life that is to be' will be 'a Residence too plain / Unless in my Redeemer's Face / I recognize your own.'" [^5]

This yearning for eternal forms of belonging reflects attitudes not only about human relationships but also about relationships with God. For example, a 1983 survey reported in a prominent Catholic publication revealed that many American Catholics "want to 'hug God' when they arrive in heaven." McDannell and Lang note that this response echoes "the hopes of earlier generations: God will be a personal character willing to be hugged, individuals will retain their personalities, families will reunite, and earthly activities will continue." [^6]

When I first read about this widespread hunger to "hug God," my knowledge of gospel teachings on that sacred subject made me feel like Alma of old: "O that I were an angel, and could have the wish of mine heart" (Alma 29:1), to let these thousands of hopeful people know the glad tidings of the Restoration, to tell them the Lord's words to Joseph and Oliver, "Be faithful and diligent in keeping the commandments of God, and I will encircle thee in the arms of my love" (D&C 6:20). Or as Mormon wrote, "that this people . . . might have been clasped in the arms of Jesus" (Mormon 5:11).

With that tender perspective in mind, let us consider now the second and more sobering finding about the idea of heaven in twentieth century America. After first describing the surprising strength of today's personal beliefs in a real heaven, McDannell and Lang observe that the mainline Christian churches offer no serious theological response to the natural intuition of their members. Rather, individuals' "ideas about what happens after death are only popular sentiments and are not integrated in Protestant and Catholic theological systems." [^7] Modern Christian theology seems to assume that its earlier ideas about immortality are no longer socially relevant and, besides, are too speculative to be acceptable to contemporary scholarship. "For some of the most prominent Protestant and Catholic theologians of this century, heavenly life—if heaven exists at all—cannot be described by reason, revelation, or poetic imagination." [^8]

But then these two historians make a further observation. They note one "major exception" to their generalization regarding today's theological vacuum among Christians about heaven, namely, "the theology of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter day Saints." [^9] They then summarize in respectful and knowledgeable terms a range of LDS teachings from eternal marriage and genealogy to ordinances for the dead. They conclude that "the understanding of life after death in the LDS church is the clearest [known] example of the continuation of the modern heaven into the twentieth century." [^10] I note here that I first became aware of this book in a conversation with the religion editor of Newsweek magazine when he said to me, "I see where the Mormons got some nice play in the new book on heaven out of Yale."

I find it poignant that so many people would instinctively yearn for a sense of genuine belonging in everlasting relationships of loving, intimate meaning not only with other people but also with God. How sad and ironic, then, that today's Christian theology offers no serious response to these deeply felt needs. If McDannell and Lang are correct that this "deep and profound longing in Christianity" is a key to understanding Western culture, then Western culture is a theological wasteland scorched with loneliness and alienation. Perhaps these are the days of which Amos spoke, days of "a famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of the Lord: and they shall wander from sea to sea, . . . they shall run to and fro to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not find it" (Amos 8:11-12).

Despite this virtual absence of theological support, many Americans dream of a heaven where families are reunited and where God himself might welcome them in a divine embrace. The Restoration offers these people not only the hope of such an embrace but a full understanding of its meaning, which offers the promise of "peace in this world, and eternal life in the world to come" (D&C 59:23). For being clasped in the arms of Jesus symbolizes the fulfillment of his atonement in our individual lives, here as well as in heaven, becoming literally "at one" with him, belonging to him, as he will to us.

The theological foundation for this fulfillment touches upon several major doctrines, including the Fall, the Atonement, salvation, the nature of man, grace, and repentance. Without probing all of these doctrines, I want to suggest that just as the Restoration offers the most complete and satisfying available theology about heaven, so does the Restoration also fill a similar—and more substantial—theological void about the atonement of Jesus Christ. Moreover, the Restoration teaches of Christ's mission in a way that lets his life and his death speak to our most profound human needs in everyday life, just as an understanding of heaven fulfills our hopes for the life after death. There is an answer to the doubt and fear that plague the modern wasteland. To borrow a phrase from Robert Browning, there is an answer to the passionate longing of the heart for fullness. That answer is in the teachings of the Restoration about our relationship with the Savior.

This bold assertion of the Restoration's revolutionary implications for Christianity's most central doctrine finds strong support in the work of a noted scholar on the Protestant Reformation, John Dillenberger. In a 1978 essay comparing Martin Luther with Joseph Smith on the question of grace and works, Dillenberger commented on Mormonism's doctrinal uniqueness: "Mormonism brought understanding to what had become an untenable problem within evangelicalism: how to reconcile the new power of humanity with the negative inherited views of humanity, without abandoning the necessity of grace." In this way, "perhaps Mormonism . . . is the authentic American theology, for the self-reliance of revivalist fundamentalist groups stood in marked contrast to their inherited conception of the misery of humanity." [^11]

To explore the meaning of Professor Dillenberger's provocative observation, we must take a brief journey through the history of certain ideas in Western civilization. Any sketch of this kind runs the risk of being simplistic, but sometimes even a few headlines from history can provide needed perspective. Ever since the fourth century A.D., the teachings of traditional Christianity regarding man's nature and the role of Christ's grace have begun with the assumption that each person born since the fall of Adam and Eve has an inherently evil nature. According to Catholic teachings, this effect of original sin can be overcome only by the grace of Christ as that is dispensed through the official sacraments of the church. Standard Protestant theology on this subject is even more pessimistic about the uncontrollable nature of humankind's inherent evil, yet its primary departure from Catholic doctrine is its claim that the source of grace is not in church sacraments but only in the unearned gift that God may choose to bestow, at his option alone, directly upon an elect few. Let us consider the historical origin of these major premises for so much Christian reasoning.

Leading Christian scholars commonly acknowledge, as BYU's Stephen Robinson has pointed out, that by the fourth century, Christianity's basic doctrines had undergone a "radical change from the theology of the New Testament Church." [^12] The extent of this change is illustrated by the Harvard Theological Review's recent publication of an excellent article by BYU's David Paulsen, which documents that "ordinary Christians for at least the first three centuries" after Christ believed that God had a body. [^13] Brother Paulsen shows that beginning in the fourth century, Christianity gradually abandoned its belief in God's physical body, because that idea was unacceptable to the Greek philosophy that pervaded the Roman empire. This change erected one of the first conceptual barriers against human identification with a personal God. That the Harvard Theological Review considers this evidence of the Great Apostasy to be worthy of serious treatment by a BYU scholar is, like Heaven: A History, an encouraging sign that as we thoughtfully remove whatever bushels conceal the Restoration's light, Latter-day Saint perspectives can and will play a legitimate part in "restoring" the Restoration to its rightful place in the otherwise impoverished conversations of today's thoughtful people.

Another significant doctrinal change during and after the fourth century was the widespread acceptance of Saint Augustine's views about man's fallen and evil nature, which has had a profound effect on Christianity's understanding of both the need for and the meaning of the atonement and the grace of Christ. In another candid acknowledgment of the Great Apostasy, Princeton religious scholar Elaine Pagels's recent book, Adam, Eve, and the Serpent, describes in some detail how Augustine's highly original "teaching on 'original sin' became the center of [the] western Christian tradition, displacing, or at least wholly recasting, all previous views of creation and free will." [^14] Augustine's reasoning began with his despair over his perceived inability to control the way his body responded to sexual stimuli. He finally concluded that all human seed is infected with the contaminated seed of Adam, thereby transmitting to each human person Adam's fallen nature. And in his view "no human power" could remedy this inborn human failure, but only the power of Christ, who was fathered without mortal seed. As a result, only the Church and its clergy could bestow God's grace by administering "to sick and suffering humanity the lifegiving medication of the sacraments." [^15] I infer from this logic that the Catholic doctrine of transubstantiation, whereby sacramental bread and wine are believed to be literally transformed into the flesh and blood of Christ, is the only way, under materialistic Augustinian thinking, to achieve a gradual, physical conversion of a fallen part of the body of Adam into a redeemed member of the body of Christ.

Professor Pagels's research shows that Augustine's ideas were a radical departure from both the moral freedom taught by the Old Testament and the ideas of free will and personal responsibility that had prevailed among Christians since the time of Christ. Given Augustine's heretical "decision to abandon his predecessors' emphasis on free will," [^16] she asks, why were his views embraced rather than condemned by the Christian leadership? One answer must be that Augustine's writings demonstrated great intellectual power. But Pagels found a further explanation in historical and political reality. The Roman emperor Constantine had accepted Christianity and declared it the official religion of the vast Roman empire not long before Augustine began writing. Augustine's views offered a perfect justification for the assertion of both governmental and religious power over a pluralistic and unruly population: because people by their fallen nature could not govern themselves, they required the help of a powerful state as well as a forceful church structure. Thus Augustine's theology of the Fall made "the uneasy alliance between the Catholic churches and [the] imperial power [of the Roman state] not only justifiable but necessary." [^17] This political imperative moved Augustinian doctrine "into the center of Western history," surpassing the influence "of any other church father." From then on, it was heresy to teach the earlier Christian view of human freedom, which had once been "so widely regarded as the heart of the Christian gospel." [^18]

In the centuries that followed, the church of the Middle Ages erected an elaborate structure of both doctrine and practice on the foundation of Augustine's assumptions about man's evil nature. This structure included the monastic orders. By the time of Martin Luther in fifteenth- and sixteenth-century Germany, the Church's influence was waning and the former Roman empire had fragmented into many nationalistic states that looked to their own interests rather than to Rome for leadership. New political, economic, and intellectual forces had emerged that would make the Renaissance into one of Western history's greatest watersheds. Nevertheless, Augustine's notion of Natural human depravity was about to be reinforced in the life of Martin Luther as the linchpin of Christian theology.

Himself an Augustinian monk, Luther struggled with his personal weaknesses in an ordeal very similar to Augustine's. He tried in vain to satisfy his desperate need for grace through the church's sacraments.

Eleven hundred years earlier, Augustine had found guidance in Paul's New Testament letters, which Augustine interpreted as denying human will. Luther looked to those same sources and accepted Augustine's major premise about man's evil nature and utter incapacity. [^19] He then launched the Reformation era by concluding (along with his other criticisms of the Catholic church) that God bestows undeserved grace not through church sacraments but directly on chosen individuals, removing any need for the church as an intermediary. Luther thus, perhaps unintentionally, broke the Catholic church's control over the sources of grace, thereby permanently undermining the church's social and political authority. In another echo of Augustine's experience, Luther's theology provided a rationale for the claims of potent new political forces throughout Europe that sought to overthrow rather than to sustain centralized authoritarian structures. Luther was courageous and articulate, but, as had happened with Augustine, a historic need gave wings to his thought that its religious merit alone might not have warranted.

John Calvin, Luther's contemporary, soon developed a complete doctrine of predestination based on Luther's idea that God alone chooses the individuals on whom he bestows the gift of grace, regardless of what they deserve or even what they prefer. The American Puritans later drew heavily on Calvinism, emphasizing the belief that when one is chosen by God to receive his grace, one's life will spontaneously reflect such fruits of the Spirit as goodness and material success. Because being "elected" by God to receive grace was a totally private experience, the urge to show that one had been chosen paradoxically provided considerable incentive for people to display the energetic self-reliance and productivity we associate with the Puritan ethic in United States history.

This historical sketch illustrates John Dillenberger's comment about the "negative inherited views" of "the misery of humanity" that have characterized western Christianity. After the Reformation, despite some variations among Christian denominations, the Augustinian and Lutheran doctrines of the Fall, the nature of man, and the atonement and grace of Christ continued as a permanent inheritance in both the Catholic and the Protestant traditions. By 1820, these ideas had painted Christianity into an impossible corner, because neither the intellectual developments of recent centuries nor popular common sense in the United States took seriously the notion of man's uncontrollable evil nature. As Dillenberger put it, Protestantism had thus developed "an untenable problem," namely, how to reconcile the "new power of humanity" and the "self-reliance" of Christian religious groups with the Augustinian heritage, without nullifying the meaning of grace.

For example, a leading authority on Puritanism writes that within a century after the Puritans came to America in 1620, "the theory of the utter dependence of man on . . . God ceased to have any relevance to the facts of the Puritan experience. . . . [Still,] the preachers continued to preach [the doctrine of man's inherited evil nature] and the laymen continued to hear it; not because either of them believed it, but because they cherished it. . . . Thus the sense of sin became a genteel tradition, cherished in the imagination long after it had been surrendered in practice. The Puritan insistence on human depravity became the . . . justification of Yankee moral complacency." [^20] In other words, one might say with a wink, we might as well be sinful—that's just human nature.

One reason people stopped believing in man's fallen nature was that European and American history between Luther's time and Joseph Smith's time demonstrated such irresistible evidence for the wonder of humankind's abilities. Drawing on classic Greek optimism about man's rational powers, the Renaissance and the Enlightenment fueled true revolutions in the sciences, the arts, the commercial industrial world, and in the political sphere—as witnessed by the French and American revolutions. The turmoil of the French Revolution and its aftermath tempered many Europeans' enthusiasm for some of these ideas, but the independent and robust America of Joseph Smith's time was fairly bursting with confidence in the ability of men and women to subdue the earth and take charge of their lives through their own creative energy.

From the hundreds of possible examples of this optimistic spirit in Western history, consider only one—Goethe's Faust, which was published, during Joseph Smith's lifetime, in two parts, in 1808 and 1832. Faust is a literary masterpiece in which the central character has a consuming desire to comprehend life's meaning. He agrees to yield his eternal soul to the devil, if the devil can give him such complete access to the depths of human experience and understanding that Faust feels content enough to cease his quest for further knowledge. Mephistopheles thus leads Faust through a lifetime of complicated experiences with love, sin, disappointment, guilt, beauty, intellectual comprehension, economic power, and finally a taste of service to others. After years of ceaseless striving, it is only when Faust finally contemplates the joy of offering his knowledge and power to benefit other people that he would utter the phrase of ultimate satisfaction, "Linger awhile, thou art so fair." Faust then collapses into death, and Mephistopheles comes for his soul. But in that moment, to the devil's tormented astonishment, angels sweep down to bear off Faust's soul to heaven. The angels later explain that "whoever strives in ceaseless toil, him we may grant redemption. And when on high, transfigured love has added intercession, the blest will throng to him above with welcoming compassion."

Both Faust and his author, Goethe, embody the indomitable human confidence of the pre-Restoration era. The Enlightenment's "light" regarding human possibilities was in utter contrast to the "dark" of Augustine's Dark Ages. One intellectual historian described this optimistic spirit with words Augustine and Luther could never have accepted: "We are agents as well as observers; we are not just objects in the world, but we can change it." [^21] Thus, writes a noted Faust scholar, Faust "assumes symbolic significance as the extreme exemplar of the deepest drives of western civilization. Self-realization . . . is a program without inner or outer limits." [^22]

Faust also carries religious overtones. For one thing, Faust's stirring quest for knowledge in an imperfect world suggests a positive view of Adam's fall that was articulated by Goethe's friend, Schiller: He [Schiller] conceded the tragedy of the Fall, but he argued that "the fall was also an absolutely necessary first step in the higher development of mankind. . . . Without [the Fall], man would forever have remained a child of Nature, innocent but ignorant, unable to develop the faculties of distinguishing between good and evil." [^23] This positive understanding of the Fall is far closer to the truth as taught by the Restoration than it is to the traditional Christian heritage.

Moreover, I read the speech by the angels to mean that heaven's mercy allowed Faust to rob Satan's claim to justice only because Faust had demonstrated honest repentance and growth in the relentless and self-initiated striving of his whole life. At the same time, neither his effort nor God's mercy alone would have sufficed by itself: he was finally rescued by mercy but only because he worked hard enough to prove worthy of it. Goethe intuitively recognized each person's innate capacity to improve himself by learning from experience, but he also saw a need for higher powers. And although he still needed to know the place of Christ's atonement and its attendant commandments and ordinances, Goethe did sense generally the relationship among justice, mercy, and repentance as taught by the Restoration. But, significantly, traditional Christian theology offered him virtually no support for that understanding, because its Augustinian premises were so limiting and so inconsistent with obvious human experience.

In that sense, Goethe and the Western thought he represented at Joseph Smith's time illustrate what Dillenberger meant in describing Christian theology's "untenable problem": "how to reconcile the new power of humanity with the negative inherited views of humanity, without abandoning the necessity of grace." In other words, the great danger of the optimistic view of human nature and mankind's striving was that, taken to its logical extreme, that optimism finally had no need for the grace of Christ. Because "self-realization" was thought to be "without inner or outer limits," the limitless Faustian journey by itself—wherever it led, with or without grace—could serve life's limitless purpose. And that is exactly what happened, as humanistic self-confidence gained the upper hand over self-deprecating theology in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.

Actually, Goethe had not yet fallen into that natural trap. By showing that Faust still needed angelic forces, he acknowledged human dependency on a higher power—but only after Faust did all he could. Like the large proportion of the American people whose instincts tell them more than does their theology about the reality of a meaningful heaven, Goethe's instincts told him more than did his theology about the relationship between God's grace and mankind's striving. But all of that simply underscores the theological bankruptcy of traditional Christianity on the foundation subject of Christ's atonement.

The Protestant Christianity that dominated nineteenth-century America was increasingly unable to reconcile its pessimistic heritage with the nation's new frontier optimism. The widely recognized power of human accomplishment contradicted traditional beliefs in humankind's evil nature to the point that many people not only saw little practical need for God's grace but adopted the humanistic assumption that mankind is good by nature. Having believed for centuries that people need grace primarily to overcome their evil nature, once they assumed that man is inherently good, they eliminated the need for Christ's grace altogether. Individuals still occasionally violated divine laws, but poverty and other collective failures within society's urban environment were more persuasive explanations for these failings than was any idea of inborn depravity. Thus the abstractions of Christian theology seemed ever less relevant to actual daily experience.

This gradual reduction of theological influence continued through the twentieth century until traditional Christianity was pronounced totally irrelevant to modern society in 1964 by Harvey Cox, a prominent Protestant theologian, in a book called The Secular City. This title was a deliberate and symbolic rejection of Augustine's preoccupation with the other world in his famous book from the fourth century, The City of God. Cox urged that unless the Christian churches gave up their dreaming of heavenly cities and focused on the social problems of earthly cities, Christianity would play no meaningful role in American life. Despite the continuing belief in Augustinian assumptions among a few theologically conservative Protestant groups today, experience demonstrates that most theologians among the nation's churches have clearly taken Cox's advice.

For instance, in a talk to new divinity school students earlier this year, Dean Philip Turner of the Yale Divinity School acknowledged that Augustine's thought "now appears unsatisfactory and in certain ways rather destructive." One of Augustine's errors, he said, was to place so much emphasis on the first commandment, to love God, that he ignored the second commandment, to love one's neighbor. Yet "many theologians in the modern period, partly in reaction [against this Augustinian heritage], have executed a reverse maneuver," and they emphasize love of neighbor so much that they now exclude the love and worship of God. [^24] Dean Turner urged his students to put the study of divinity—God—back into divinity school. His concern is of course consistent with the absence of modern theological interest in heaven that we noted earlier.

As we survey the modern wreckage of a once elaborate Christian theological structure, Dillenberger's observation about Mormon doctrine seems even more compelling. "In stressing human possibilities," he wrote, "Mormonism brought things into line, not by abandoning the centrality of grace but by insisting that the powers humanity were real and that they reflected the actual state of humanity as such." "Perhaps Mormonism . . . is the authentic American theology." [^25]

What is this authentic American theology? This is not the place for an extended treatise on the Restoration's unique and powerful theology of grace and atonement, but, because the weakness and impracticality of traditional Christian teaching is now clearly unmasked, it is appropriate at least to introduce the general relationship among human nature, the Atonement, and the way in which belonging to Christ can sustain us in times of personal need. I am drawn toward this personal dimension because I am saddened by the thought that so many decent people outside (and inside) the Church can see no theological support for embracing and belonging to the authentic Christ— not only in heaven but on earth. For the Restoration, like the Atonement, is not only a historical and abstract message but also an intensely present and personal one.

We deal here with a restoration of truths previously taught. Because the need for a restoration depends on the existence of an apostasy, I am grateful for the recent scholarship we noted earlier that further documents the reality of the Great Apostasy during the early Christian era, especially in explaining the origins of Augustine's thought. We Latter-day Saints have not focused as much as we could on the way the apostasy changed the underlying premises of the Atonement.

According to the Savior's original doctrines, as restored through Joseph Smith, the fall of Adam made Christ's redemption necessary but not because the Fall by itself rendered all humankind inherently evil. Neither, however, is human nature inherently good. Because of transgression, Adam and Eve were expelled from Eden into a world that was subject to death and evil influences, but the Lord soon taught Adam that "the Son of God hath atoned for original guilt"; therefore, Adam's children were not evil but were "whole from the foundation of the world" (Moses 6:54; emphasis added). Thus, "every spirit of man was innocent in the beginning; and God having redeemed man from the fall, men became again, in their infant state, innocent before God" (D&C 93:38; emphasis added).

As the descendants of Adam and Eve then become accountable for their own sins at the age of eight, all of them taste sin to one degree or another as the result of their own curiosity and experiences in a free environment. Those whose cumulative experience leads them to love "Satan more than God" (Moses 5:28) will to that degree become "carnal, sensual, and devilish" (Moses 5:13; 6:49) by nature—"natural men." On the other hand, one who consciously accepts Christ's grace through the Atonement by faith, repentance, and baptism will yield to the "enticings of the Holy Spirit," and put off "the natural man" and become "a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord" (Mosiah 3:19). Thus, after taking the initiative to accept the grace made available by the Atonement, one may then nourish this desire by obedience that interacts with grace until one "becomes a saint" by nature, thereby enjoying eternal, or godlike, life.

In LDS theology, therefore, grace is the absolutely indispensable source of three categories of blessings. First are the unconditional blessings—free and unmerited gifts requiring no individual action on our part. God's grace in this sense includes the very Creation as well as making gospel teachings and the plan of salvation available to us. It also includes redemption from physical death and forgiveness for Adam's and Eve's original sin.

Second, the Savior has atoned for individual sins on the condition of our repentance. Personal repentance is thus a necessary condition of salvation but is not by itself sufficient to assure salvation. Without the Atonement, our repentance availeth nothing. We must also accept the ordinances of baptism and the receipt of the Holy Ghost, by which we are born again as spirit children of Christ.

Third is the bestowal of grace after baptism along the path toward a Christlike nature. Once we have repented and are baptized unto forgiveness of sin, we have only "entered in by the gate" to the "strait and narrow path which leads to eternal life" (2 Nephi 31:18). This postbaptism stage of spiritual development does not expect perfection, but it does require our good faith effort to "endure to the end" (2 Ne. 31:20). This effort includes receiving the higher ordinances of the temple and an ongoing repentance process as needed "for the sake of retaining a remission of your sins from day to day" (Mosiah 4:26).

In Martin Luther's teachings, a Christian who performs righteous acts after receiving Christ's grace is not acting from personal initiative but is only reflecting the spontaneous fruit of internal grace. For Luther, man's fallen nature made self-generated righteousness impossible. In LDS doctrine, by contrast, "men should . . . do many things of their own free will, and bring to pass much righteousness: for the power is in them, wherein they are agents unto themselves" (D&C 58:27-28). At the same time, we lack the capacity to develop a fully Christlike nature by our own effort alone. Thus the perfecting attributes, which include hope, charity, and finally eternal life itself, are—as Mormon put it so eloquently—ultimately "bestowed upon all who are true followers of . . . Jesus Christ" (Moroni 7:48) by grace made possible by the Atonement. This interactive relationship between human and divine powers in LDS theology derives both from the significance that theology attaches to free will and from its optimism about the "fruit of the spirit" (Galatians 5:22) among "those who love me and keep all my commandments, and him that seeketh so to do" (D&C 46:9; emphasis added).

God bestows these additional, perfecting expressions of grace conditionally, as he does the grace that allows forgiveness of sin. They are given "after all we can do" (2 Nephi 25:23)—that is, as a supplement to our best efforts. In general this condition is related less to obeying particular commandments than it is to one's fundamental spiritual character, such as "meekness and lowliness of heart" (Moroni 8:26) and developing "a broken heart and a contrite spirit" (3 Nephi 9:20).

In addition, those who enter into the covenants of the Atonement with Christ through their faith, repentance, and baptism are blessed with a precious and ongoing relationship of personal and spiritual sustenance. That is the relationship of belonging to—or being children of—Christ. We celebrate and renew this relationship each time we partake of the sacrament. Through this covenant relationship, the Savior grants not only a continuing remission of our sins but he will also help compensate for our inadequacies, heal the bruises caused by our unintentional errors, and strengthen us far beyond our natural capacity in times of acute need. Both we and our friends outside the Church need this Atonement-based relationship more than we need any other form of therapy or support: "O Israel, Fear not: for I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy name; thou art mine. When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee; and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee: when thou walkest through the fire, thou shalt not be burned; neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. For I am the Lord thy God, the Holy One of Israel, thy Savior" (Isaiah 43:1-3).

Brothers and sisters, sometimes I think we have no idea of the strength of the Church's position. Our strength derives not just from family values and healthy living, as important as those are; it derives from the "authentic theology" of the restored gospel, which is the last, best, and only hope of Christianity, and of all mankind. The Restoration not only resolves Christianity's doctrinal dilemmas but it also offers the most complete solution to our greatest problems, whether social or personal.

Yet the gospel's insights remain relatively hidden from a society that has been consciously and cleverly persuaded by Mephistopheles himself that the Church of the Restoration knows least—when in fact it knows most—about making Jesus Christ our personal Savior. Satan has known exactly what he is doing. What frightens him and his allies is not that the Restoration teaches so little about the atonement and grace of Christ but that it teaches so much. To conceal that reality, he has been engaged in one of history's greatest cover-ups. But as recent scholarship shows, not only the LDS life-style but now the far more fundamental contribution of LDS doctrine is beginning to come forth from obscurity. The new Encyclopedia of Mormonism is also a wonderful step in that direction. How I hope that our LDS scholars will continue this process. After all, the Lord told Joseph Smith that "every man shall hear the fulness of the gospel in his own tongue" (D&C 90:11), and that should include the language of scholarship, that fertile seedbed of ideas and opinion from which so much future fruit can come.

Today many, many people feel a longing for heaven, where, they want to believe, they will be welcomed into the arms of their families and into the arms of God. The Restoration offers a complete fulfillment of that longing, not just as momentary emotion but as the fully developed doctrine of the gospel of Jesus Christ. I can hear him saying to all those, inside and outside the Church, who hunger and thirst to find him in these times of trauma and famine: "Behold, . . . ye must grow in grace and in the knowledge of the truth. Fear not, little children, for you are mine, and I have overcome the world, and you are of them that my Father hath given me; and none of them that my Father hath given me shall be lost. . . . And inasmuch as ye have received me, ye are in me and I in you" (D&C 50:40-43). "Be faithful and diligent in keeping the commandments of God, and I will encircle thee in the arms of my love" (D&C 6:20).

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Do I put first in my life the things of God's kingdom? Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1974), p. 366; emphasis added.
[^2] Do I accept Church assignments to which I am called, despite my feelings that I would be better suited elsewhere? George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth, ed. Jerreld L. Newquist (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1987), pp. 322-23.
[^3] Am I more concerned with the visibility of my Church labors than with the sincerity and diligence of my discipleship? See Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 180-81.
[^4] Do I find myself becoming more and more concerned with income, social status, possessions, than is befitting a follower of the meek Nazarene? Ibid., pp. 59-60.
[^5] Do I take of my surplus to support missionaries, care for the poor, and otherwise perform acts of Christian service? Ibid., p. 264; emphasis added; see also pp. 168, 308.
[^6] Am I prone to place bounds and limitations upon the Lord's spokesmen—to accept their counsel on some matters and reject it on others? Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrines of the Restoration: Sermons and Writings of Bruce R. McConkie, ed. Mark L. McConkie (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1989), pp. 292-93.
[^7] Do I ever take positions or espouse causes that are at variance with the united voice of the Lord's Anointed? Messages of the First Presidency, ed. James R. Clark (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1971), 5:6.
[^8] Is my involvement with this latter-day work more than an intellectual experience? Am I grounded in simple faith and rooted in a witness of the Spirit? Joseph Smith Diary, 10 Mar. 1844, Archives, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah, as quoted in Andrew F. Ehat, "It Seems Like Heaven Began on Earth," in Brigham Young University Studies, vol. 20, no. 3 (Spring 1980): 259.
[^9] If there are unanswered doctrinal difficulties or events from our Church history that puzzle me, am I willing to withhold judgment for the time being? Am I willing to trust Joseph Smith and his successors, who shall one day help to fill in the gaps and thereby complete the beautiful mosaic of the Restoration? Am I willing to deal with my doubts with dignity and humility? Ehat, "It Seems Like Heaven Began on Earth," p. 259.
[^10] Is all I say or write or do of such a nature that it builds testimony, strengthens faith, and thus contributes to the growth and spread of the gospel and Church of Jesus Christ in all the earth? Joseph F. Smith Minutes of the Council of Fifty, 21 Apr. 1880, as quoted in Ehat, "It Seems Like Heaven Began on Earth," p. 259.
[^11] Fred C. Collier, Unpublished Revelations of the Prophets and Presidents of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (Salt Lake City: Collier's Publishing Co., 1979), pp. 132, 134; emphasis added.
[^12] Collier, Unpublished Revelations, p. 140; emphasis added.
[^13] Spencer W. Kimball, The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, ed. Edward L. Kimball (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982), p. 433.
[^14] 14. Elaine Pagels, Adam, Eve, and the Serpent (New York: Vintage Books, 1988), pp. 99-100.
[^15] 15. Ibid., p. 117.
[^16] 16. Ibid., p. 99.
[^17] 17. Ibid., p. 126.
[^18] 18. Ibid., pp. 125-26.
[^19] 19. Ibid., p. 106. See also Heinrich Boehmer, Martin Luther: Road to Reformation (New York: Meridian Books, 1957), p. 139.
[^20] 20. Herbert W. Schneider, The Puritan Mind (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1958), p. 98.
[^21] 21. Robert C. Solomon, Continental Philosophy since 1750: The Rise and Fall of the Self, vol. 7 of A History of Western Philosophy (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1988), pp. 36-37.
[^22] 22. Hermann Weigand, "Goethe's Faust: An Introduction for Students and Teachers of General Literature," in Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Faust, trans. Walter Arndt, ed. Cyrus Hamlin (New York: W. W. Norton and Co., 1976), p. 448.
[^23] 23. Ibid., p. 447.
[^24] 24. Philip Turner, "To Students of Divinity: A Convocation Address," First Things, no. 26 (October 1992): 26.
[^25] 25. Dillenberger, "Grace and Works in Martin Luther and Joseph Smith," p. 179.
