Byron R. Merrill, Heavens Are Open: The 1992 Sperry Symposium on the Doctrine and Covenants and Church History ( 1993)

3

Being Valiant by Following the Lord's Anointed

A. Gary Anderson Brigham Young University

The Lord declared in Doctrine and Covenants 76:79 that those who were not valiant in the testimony of Jesus were those who would inherit the terrestrial kingdom rather than the celestial kingdom. Our living prophet, Ezra Taft Benson, has said on this matter:

"Not to be valiant in one's testimony is a tragedy of eternal consequence. . . .

"One who rationalizes that he or she has a testimony of Jesus Christ but cannot accept direction and counsel from the leadership of His church is in a fundamentally unsound position and is in jeopardy of losing exaltation.

"There are some who want to expose the weaknesses of Church leaders in an effort to show that they, too, are subject to human frailties and error like unto themselves." [^1]

This seems to be a very popular pursuit, one followed not only by individuals who are not members of the Church but also by Church members who hold temple recommends. That is why President Harold B. Lee declared, "That person is not truly converted until he sees the power of God resting upon the leaders of this church, and until it goes down into his heart like fire." [^2]

One of the individuals living on this earth who has been as close to the prophets and presidents of the Church as any other man is Gordon B. Hinckley. You may recall his words from the October 1992 general conference of the Church: "I have worked with seven Presidents of this Church. I have recognized that all have been human. But I have never been concerned over this. They may have had some weaknesses. But this has never troubled me. I know that the God of heaven has used mortal men throughout history to accomplish His divine purposes. They were the very best available to Him, and they were wonderful." [^3]

President Spencer W. Kimball counseled us in these matters when he said: "I would not say that those leaders whom the Lord chooses are necessarily the most brilliant, nor the most highly trained, but they are the chosen, and when chosen of the Lord they are his recognized authority, and the people who stay close to them have safety." [^4]

If we want to be among the faithful and stay close to the Lord and be counted among those who are valiant, it will be because we have a testimony these things, as these great brethren have testified.

President George Q. Cannon said: "I have noticed . . . that where the people of God pay attention to the written word, and cherish and observe the written word, they are always better prepared to hear the oral instructions of the servants of God; . . . they have greater interest in seeking to obtain instructions, than they have when they are careless about the written word God." [^5]

Now, knowing that understanding and obeying this principle are crucial to our exaltation, let's look at the instructions of the Lord to us in the Doctrine and Covenants with the hope that understanding the doctrine may help us to be more loyal and faithful to his servants and be more concerned about hearing and following their instructions. The Doctrine and Covenants is an unusual book in that it has a preface that was dictated by the Lord to his prophet, Joseph Smith.

Notice how powerfully this preface teaches the importance of the Lord's servants: "the day cometh that they who will not hear the voice of the Lord, neither the voice of his servants, neither give heed to the words of the prophets and apostles, shall be cut off from among the people" (D&C 1:14). Members of the Church can be on the rolls of the Church and be spiritually dead to the words of the Lord to them through his servants. We need not be formally disfellowshipped or excommunicated to be cut off from among his people, although that is sometimes necessary to protect the Church from perverse actions and false doctrines taught by its members. Certainly our complacency and indifference to the Lord's servants separate us spiritually from the Lord and his leaders, and such separation is our own doing.

In that same revelation, the preface, the Lord says, "My word shall not pass away, but shall all be fulfilled, whether by mine own voice or by the voice of my servants, it is the same" (D&C 1:38). Thus the Lord clearly outlines the importance of his servants.

The Lord also dictated the concluding revelation to the Doctrine and Covenants, which was called the appendix (now Section 133). This great revelation deals with the second coming of the Lord and the Millennium and charges the Saints to prepare for that day. One of the final verses in that revelation says, "Behold, and lo, there are none to deliver you; for ye obeyed not my voice when I called to you out of the heavens; ye believed not my servants, and when they were sent unto you ye received them not" (D&C 133:71).

It seems obvious to me that we cannot expect to be prepared for the coming of the Lord while refusing to pay heed and abide the counsel of the Lord's prophets. Harold B. Lee, while president of the Church, quoted extensively from Matthew 24 as Joseph Smith revised it, emphasizing that "safety can't be won by tanks and guns and the airplanes and atomic bombs. There is only one place of safety and that is within the realm of the power of Almighty God that he gives to those who keep his commandments and listen to his voice, as he speaks through the channels that he has ordained for that purpose." [^6]

Then President Lee, after quoting the Lord on the signs of the times, said: "Brothers and sisters, this is the day the Lord is speaking of. You see the signs are here. Be ye therefore ready. The Brethren have told you in this conference how to prepare to be ready. We have never had a conference where there has been so much direct instruction, so much admonition; when the problems have been defined and also the solution to the problem has been suggested.

"Let us not turn a deaf ear now, but listen to these as the words that have come from the Lord, inspired of him, and we will be safe on Zion's hill, until all that the Lord has for his children shall have been accomplished." [^7]

Brothers and sisters, can you see how critical it is in these troubled times to do as the Lord has instructed us in the scriptures?

Another revelation given at the same time as the Lord's Preface and the Appendix is Doctrine and Covenants 68, in which the Lord defines scripture for the Latter-day Saints more clearly and powerfully than in the Bible. He says, speaking to those ordained to the priesthood: "And this is the ensample unto them, that they shall speak as they are moved upon by the Holy Ghost. And whatsoever they shall speak when moved upon by the Holy Ghost shall be scripture, shall be the will of the Lord, shall be the mind of the Lord, shall be the word of the Lord, shall be the voice of the Lord, and the power of God unto salvation" (D&C 68:3-4).

Notice that the Lord's anointed leaders when moved upon by the Spirit speak the will, mind, word, and voice of the Lord, and this is the key to salvation and exaltation with our Father in Heaven. President Spencer W. Kimball made these remarks at the conclusion of a general conference: "Let us hearken to those we sustain as prophets and seers, as well as the other brethren, as if our eternal life depended upon it, because it does!" [^8]

Latter-day Saint theology teaches that the living prophet is more important to us than a dead prophet. We believe in living scripture and an open canon of scripture. President Ezra Taft Benson said it this way:

"God's revelations to Adam did not instruct Noah how to build the ark. Noah needed his own revelation. Therefore the most important prophet, so far as you and I are concerned, is the one living in our day and age to whom the Lord is currently revealing His will for us. Therefore, the most important reading we can do is any of the words of the prophet contained each week in the Church Section of the Deseret News and any words of the prophet contained each month in our Church magazines. Our marching orders for each six months are found in the general conference addresses which are printed in the Ensign magazine. . . . Beware of those who would pit the dead prophets against the living prophets, for the living prophets always take precedence." [^9]

Another important revelation was given to Joseph Smith on the very day the Church was organized, 6 April 1830:

"Wherefore, meaning the church, thou shalt give heed unto all his words and commandments which he shall give unto you as he receiveth them, walking in all holiness before me; for his word ye shall receive, as if from mine own mouth, in all patience and faith. For by doing these things the gates of hell shall not prevail against you; yea, and the Lord God will disperse the powers of darkness from before you, and cause the heavens to shake for your good, and his name's glory" (D&C 21:4-6).

This revelation seems to point out very clearly the special role of the prophet and the responsibility of Church members to look to that prophet; this, however, was a difficult lesson for Church members to learn and a test of their faith. The Lord warned in a later revelation that enemies would prevail against the Church as long as the members did not give heed unto his commandments through his prophet (D&C 103:4-8). The power that Satan can have within the Church and in our individual lives will be in direct proportion to our obedience to the counsel of the Lord's prophets, especially the living prophet.

In even more modern times President Harold B. Lee brought this matter to the attention of the Church:

"We have some tight places to go before the Lord is through with this church and the world in this dispensation, which is the last dispensation, which shall usher in the coming of the Lord. . . .

"Now the only safety we have as members of this church is to do exactly what the Lord said to the Church in that day when the Church was organized. We must learn to give heed to the words and commandments that the Lord shall give through his prophet, 'as he receiveth them, walking in all holiness before me; . . . as if from mine own mouth, in all patience and faith.' (D&C 21:4-5.) . . . You may not like what comes from the authority of the Church. It may contradict your political views. It may contradict your social views. It may interfere with some of your social life. But if you listen to these things, as if from the mouth of the Lord himself, with patience and faith, the promise is that 'the gates of hell shall not prevail against you; yea, and the Lord God will disperse the powers of darkness from before you, and cause the heavens to shake for your good, and his name's glory.' (D&C 21:6.) . . .

"Your safety and ours depends upon whether or not we follow the ones whom the Lord has placed to preside over his church. He knows whom he wants to preside over this church, and he will make no mistake. . . .

"Let's keep our eye on the President of the Church." [^10]

One message of our prophet Ezra Taft Benson, "To the Mothers in Zion," was received in some circles of the Church with murmuring, some even saying that it was not relevant to our day, that it was outmoded, and that President Benson did not know what he was talking about. In that message President Benson said: "Our beloved prophet Spencer W. Kimball had much to say about the role of mothers in the home and their callings and responsibilities. I am impressed tonight to share with you some of his inspired pronouncements. I fear that much of his counsel has gone unheeded, and families have suffered because of it. But I stand this evening as a second witness to the truthfulness of what President Spencer W. Kimball said. He spoke as a true prophet of God." [^11]

President Benson said very little in that address that had not already been said by earlier presidents of the Church from Brigham Young to Spencer W. Kimball. President Lee was right when he said we might not like what comes from the authority of the Church. President Kimball said that "even in the Church many are prone to garnish the sepulchres of yesterday's prophets and mentally stone the living ones." [^12] The reaction to President Benson's address seems to be an excellent modern-day example of mentally stoning the prophets.

Two examples in the history of the Church demonstrate the difficulty early members had in understanding the role of the prophet in receiving revelation for the Church. Even though Oliver Cowdery was present at the organization of the Church in April 1830 and was aware of what the Lord had said in naming Joseph Smith the prophet, seer, and revelator the Church, Oliver Cowdery wrote Joseph Smith a letter that gave him both "sorrow and uneasiness." The contents of the letter are recorded in the History of the Church, as follows:

"He wrote to inform me that he had discovered an error in one of the commandments—Book of Doctrine and Covenants [D&C 20:37]: 'And truly manifest by their works that they have received of the Spirit of Christ unto a remission of their sins.'

"The above quotation, he said, was erroneous, and added: 'I command you in the name of God to erase those words, that no priestcraft be amongst us!'

"I immediately wrote to him in reply, in which I asked him by what authority he took upon him to command me to alter or erase, to add to or diminish from, a revelation or commandment from Almighty God.

"A few days afterwards I visited him and Mr. Whitmer's family, when I found the family in general of his opinion concerning the words above quoted, and it was not without both labor and perseverance that I could prevail with any of them to reason calmly on the subject. However, Christian Whitmer at length became convinced that the sentence was reasonable, and according to Scripture; and finally, with his assistance, I succeeded in bringing, not only the Whitmer family, but also Oliver Cowdery to acknowledge that they had been in error, and that the sentence in dispute was in accordance with the rest of the commandment." [^13]

This dispute was finally resolved in July 1830, but when Joseph returned to Fayette the last of August after having spent some time in Harmony, Pennsylvania, Oliver Cowdery and the Whitmers were again deceived. Newel Knight described the events connected with this matter in his personal journal:

"[Hiram Page] had managed to get up some discussions of feeling among the brethren by giving revelations concerning the government of the Church and other matters, which he claimed to have received through the medium of a stone he possessed. . . . Even Oliver Cowdery and the Whitmer family had given heed to them. . . . Joseph was perplexed and scarcely knew how to meet this new exigency. That night I occupied the same room that he did and the greater part of the night was spent in prayer and supplication. After much labor with these brethren they were convinced of their error, and confessed the same, renouncing [Page's] revelations as not being of God." [^14]

Section 28 of the Doctrine and Covenants was then given to the Church to remind the members that "no one shall be appointed to receive commandments and revelations in this church excepting my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., for he receiveth them even as Moses" (v. 2). Joseph Smith was then recognized as the man like unto Moses, which is affirmed in later revelations (D&C 103:15-16; 107:92). The Lord pointed out that Satan had been at work to deceive the Church. The conference of the Church in September 1830 sustained this revelation as coming from the Lord to his prophet.

David Whitmer was subsequently cautioned: "You have not given heed unto my Spirit, and to those who were set over you, but have been persuaded by those whom I have not commanded" (D&C 30:2). And to the missionaries who were sent out to preach the gospel to the Lamanites, the Lord said: "And they shall give heed to that which is written, and pretend to no other revelation; and they shall pray always that I may unfold the same to their understanding" (D&C 32:4).

These were all reminders to look to the Lord and his prophet for guidance and direction in order to avoid confusion and deception. Later missionaries were cautioned to preach "none other things than that which the prophets and apostles have written" (D&C 52:9, 36). Can you imagine how the Lord could bless this Church and the lives of its members if we could follow that counsel?

The Church was slow to learn this lesson concerning revelation for the Church coming only to the Prophet. Less than six months after Hiram Page and his seer stone revelation, the following events occurred in Kirtland, as recorded by Ezra Booth: "A female [Mrs. Hubble], professing to be a prophetess, made her appearance in Kirtland, and so ingratiated herself into the esteem and favor of some of the Elders that they received her as a person commissioned to act a conspicuous part in Mormonizing the world. Rigdon, and some others, gave her the right hand of fellowship, and literally saluted her with what they called the 'kiss' of charity. But [Joseph] Smith . . . declared her an imposter, and she returned to the place from whence she came. Her visit, however, made a deep impression on the minds of many, and the barbed arrow which she left in the hearts of some, is not as yet eradicated." [^15]

Joseph Smith received Section 43 of the Doctrine and Covenants in response to that incident: "There is none other appointed unto you to receive commandments and revelations. . . . And this shall be a law unto you, that ye receive not the teachings of any that shall come before you as revelations or commandments; and this I give unto you that you may not be deceived, that you may know that they are not of me" (D&C 43:3, 5-6).

Oliver Cowdery, who was close to the Prophet during this period, was the associate president of the Church, holding jointly, as it were, the keys with Joseph Smith. He was warned in an early revelation: "Beware of pride, lest thou shouldst enter into temptation" (D&C 23:1). George A. Smith recorded that "Oliver Cowdery, previous to his apostasy, said to President Joseph Smith: 'If I should leave the Church, it would break up.' Joseph said to Oliver—'What, who are you? The Lord is not dependent upon you, the work will roll forth do what you will.'" [^16] As you know, when Oliver Cowdery left the Church, one of the charges leveled against him was denying the faith by declaring that he would not be governed by the Church in his temporal affairs. He said: "'I will not be influenced, governed, or controlled, in my temporal interests by any ecclesiastical authority or pretended revelation whatever, contrary to my own judgment.' . . . This attempt to control me in my temporal interests, I conceive to be a disposition to take from me a portion of my Constitutional privileges and inherent right." [^17]

President Benson said in his great talk on pride: "The proud cannot accept the authority of God giving direction to their lives (see Helaman 12:6). They pit their perceptions of truth against God's great knowledge, their abilities versus God's priesthood power, their accomplishments against His mighty works. . . .

"The proud wish God would agree with them. They aren't interested in changing their opinions to agree with God's." [^18]

He also declared that the prophet can receive revelation on any matter—temporal or spiritual—and quoted Brigham Young, who had said: "'I defy any man on earth to point out the path a Prophet of God should walk in, or point out his duty, and just how far he must go, in dictating temporal or spiritual things. Temporal and spiritual things are inseparably connected, and ever will be.'" [^19]

Oliver Cowdery resumed to the Church after ten years, but only after humbling himself and realizing that he had made a mistake.

Another early member of the Church who also learned the hard way about the path of apostasy was Thomas B. Marsh, the first president of the Quorum of the Twelve. Church members are generally conversant with the story of the conflict between the Marshes and the Harrises over the cream shared from the common cow. That may have been the incident that led Marsh to leave the Church, but there were other underlying reasons. President Marsh apparently disregarded counsel given to him in two revelations. Heber C. Kimball related:

"About the time he [Thomas B. Marsh] was preparing to leave this Church, he received a revelation in the Printing Office. He retired to himself, and prayed, and was humble, and God gave him a revelation, and he wrote it. There were from three to five pages of it; and when he came out, he read it to brother Brigham and me. In it God told him what to do, and that was to sustain brother Joseph and to believe that what brother Joseph had said was true. But no; he took a course to sustain his wife and oppose the Prophet of God, and she led him away." [^20]

Orson Hyde, who was with Brother Marsh at the time of his apostasy and who also signed the affidavit that led to the Extermination Order in Missouri, described this second incident:

"During our temptation, David W. Patten was shot by the enemy, and several days afterward while Thos. B. and myself were sitting in a log cabin together in silent meditation, some being smote him on the shoulder, and said, with a countenance full of the deepest anxiety and solicitude, "Thomas! Thomas! why have you so soon forgotten?" Thomas told me it was David W. Patten, with whom, he not long before, had made a covenant to remain true and faithful until the end." [^21]

This incident was related by Orson Hyde in a letter written after he had been reconciled to the Prophet and the Church in 1844. So, it appears that Marsh persisted in his apostasy even though he had been warned and the Lord had attempted to deter him on these two occasions. Marsh was subsequently excommunicated from the Church at a conference at Quincy, Illinois, 17 March 1839. An interesting statement with regard to the seriousness of Marsh's apostasy is the following given by the Prophet Joseph on 2 June 1839. The Prophet's statement is especially interesting when we remember that the Prophet spent five months in jail as a result of the betrayal of Marsh and others:

"O ye Twelve, and all Saints, profit by this important key, that in all your trials, troubles, and temptations, afflictions, bonds, imprisonment and death, see to it that you do not betray heaven, that you do not betray Jesus Christ, that you do not betray your brethren, and that you do not betray the revelations of God. . . . Yes, in all your kicking and floundering, see to it that you do not this thing, lest innocent blood be found on your skirts, and you go down to hell. We may ever know by this sign that there is danger of our being led to a fall and apostasy, when we give way to the devil so as to neglect the first known duty. But, whatever you do, do not betray your friends." [^22]

Thomas B. Marsh returned to the Church in 1857, after eighteen years. He recognized his folly and warned some apostates in these words: "You don't know what you are about; if you want to see the fruits of apostasy, look on me." [^23]

In a letter to Heber C. Kimball, he said further: "I have sined against Heaven and in thy sight. . . . I deserve no place . . . in the church even as the lowest member; but I cannot live long . . . without a reconciliation with the 12 and the Church whom I have injured O Bretheren once Bretheren!! How can I leave this world without your forgiveness Can I have it Can I have it?" [^24]

At the time he was pleading for membership in the Church, Marsh was ill with a paralytic stroke: "I want you to get some elders to help you and take me to the river and baptize me, if you have to baptize me in a sheet. For I want to die in the Church. Oh, if I could see Joseph, and talk with him and acknowledge my faults to him, and get his forgiveness from him as I have to Brother Harris, then I would die happy." [^25]

After he came to Utah, he admitted his mistake to the Church there in these words:

"If you will take my advice, you will stand by the authorities; but if you go away and the Lord loves you as much as he did me, he will whip you back again. . . .

" . . . I have frequently wanted to know how my apostasy began, and I have come to the conclusion that I must have lost the Spirit of the Lord out of my heart.

"The next question is, 'How and when did you lose the Spirit?' I became jealous of the Prophet, and then I saw double, and overlooked everything that was right, and spent all my time in looking for the evil; and then, when the Devil began to lead me, it was easy for the carnal mind to rise up, which is anger, jealousy, and wrath. I could feel it within me; I felt angry and wrathful; and the Spirit of the Lord being gone, as the Scriptures say, I was blinded, and I thought I saw a beam in brother Joseph's eye, but it was nothing but a mote, and my own eye was filled with the beam; but I thought I saw a beam in his, and I wanted to get it out; and as brother Heber says, I got mad, and I wanted everybody else to be mad." [^26]

Certainly the words of the Lord in the Doctrine and Covenants are relevant to remember in our discussion of apostasy:

"Cursed are all those that shall lift up the heel against mine anointed, saith the Lord. . . .

"And those who swear falsely against my servants, that they might bring them into bondage and death—

"Wo unto them; because they have offended my little ones they shall be severed from the ordinances of mine house.

"Their basket shall not be full, their houses and their barns shall perish, and they themselves shall be despised by those that flattered them.

"They shall not have right to the priesthood, nor their posterity after them from generation to generation" (D&C 121:16, 18-21).

What a hard lesson to learn. Brother Marsh had six children, and many of his posterity are on the earth today but without the gospel. We hope that they will be reclaimed and find the truth, but we need to pay attention to the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants, for the Lord declared: "The prophecies and promises which are in them shall all be fulfilled" (D&C 1:37).

I will share one other example of failure to support and follow the Brethren. The teachings of the Lord on this matter were given in Doctrine and Covenants 90:5 when Frederick G. Williams was sustained as a counselor in the First Presidency: "And all they who receive the oracles of God, let them beware how they hold them lest they are accounted as a light thing, and are brought under condemnation thereby, and stumble and fall when the storms descend, and the winds blow, and the rains descend, and beat upon their house."

Are the storms here? I expect they are, and there will be more. How can we believe in this book and take statements of the prophet lightly? Elder Marvin J. Ashton warned: "Any Church member not obedient to the leaders of this Church will not have the opportunity to be obedient to the promptings of the Lord." [^27] We cannot afford to try to live our lives without the help and influence of the Lord if we expect to survive the temptations that surely will come.

Again, in Doctrine and Covenants 112:20—which, incidentally, was given to Thomas B. Marsh—we read: "Whosoever receiveth my word receiveth me, and whosoever receiveth me, receiveth those, the First Presidency, whom I have sent, whom I have made counselors for my name's sake unto you." Marion G. Romney said this about the importance of the First Presidency, "What they say as a presidency is what the Lord would say if he were here in person." [^28]

An important admonition was given to Almon Babbitt in a revelation dated 19 January 1841:

"And with my servant Almon Babbitt, there are many things with which I am not pleased; behold, he aspireth to establish his counsel instead of the counsel which I have ordained, even that of the Presidency of my Church; and he setteth up a golden calf for the worship of my people" (D&C 124:84).

This sounds like serious business, that we in our day could be accused by the Lord of setting up a golden calf to worship instead of the true and living God. Most of us probably think that was possible in Moses' day, but certainly not in ours. Let me share some information that may help us to see what Almon Babbit did that was so displeasing to the Lord.

Almon Babbitt joined the Church in 1833, served a mission to Canada, participated as a member of Zion's Camp, and was given leadership responsibilities in Kirtland and Nauvoo. He apparently had some training in the law. In examining the history of the Church, I found that Brother Babbitt had come into conflict with Church leaders on five different occasions from 1833 to 1841, when this revelation was given. Each time a reconciliation was made, and each time he was given another chance. I wondered what effect, if any, this revelation might have had on Brother Babbitt. I found that he continued to go against the counsel of the Brethren. He opposed John Smith when Brother Smith was sent to Ramus, Illinois, to solicit help for the Nauvoo Legion when Joseph Smith was being harrassed. Babbitt later opposed Orson Hyde in Kanesville, Iowa, after the death of the Prophet. After Babbitt was appointed secretary of the Territory of Utah by Brigham Young and was sent to Washington, D.C., to seek for statehood for Utah, Brigham's friend Thomas L. Kane wrote on several occasions to warn him of Babbitt's behavior in Washington.

When Babbitt was returning to Utah from the East in 1856, he stopped at Council Bluffs, Iowa. There he was warned by Church leaders that he should wait for a large wagon train before proceeding west because of Indian hostilities. A couple of his wagons left the next day and were attacked by Indians, the drivers killed and goods destroyed. Babbitt and Frank Rowland followed and were encouraged to wait for a military escort at Fort Kearney, but they rejected that counsel and were attacked by Cheyenne Indians near Ash Hollow and were killed. There were very few remains, and the twelve attacking Indians said that Colonel Babbitt had fought like a grizzly bear to his death. [^29] How much wiser to have learned to listen to counsel.

From the day of the organization of the Church in 1830, the Lord has taught and emphasized the importance of his servants; he has carefully defined the special role of the prophet and the president of the Church in receiving guidance and revelation for the entire Church. That theme has been echoed and reechoed throughout the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants. The Lord even said that all that his Father promised to him could be shared by the Saints if they were true to the covenant of the priesthood. Notice, however, that this promise is predicated upon these words: "And also all they who receive this priesthood receive me, saith the Lord; for he that receiveth my servants receiveth me; and he that receiveth me receiveth my Father" (D&C 84:35-37). Certainly our happiness and exaltation depend on following the Lord by following his prophets.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Following is the text of the questions asked of the 250 returned missionaries surveyed 30 August 1992 about Doctrine and Covenants 4: Are you familiar with the contents of Section 4 of the Doctrine and Covenants?
[^2] Can you recite any passage(s) from Section 4? Other write-in answers given were Hyrum Smith (17), Oliver Cowdery (15), Samuel Smith (9), Martin Harris (4), Sidney Rigdon (4), and David Whitmer (4). The names of the following individuals were written in fewer than four times: Thomas B. Marsh, Joseph Knight, Parley P. Pratt, Peter Whitmer, Newel K. Whitney, and Hiram Page.
[^3] Section 4 of the Doctrine and Covenants was given by the Lord through the Prophet Joseph Smith to whom? Other occupations listed were missionary (15), schoolteacher (8), and store owner (4). Answers received fewer than four times each were newspaper reporter, bishop, plumber, carpenter, lawyer, printer, and blacksmith.
[^4] What was the occupation of the individual to whom Section 4 was directed? The survey results indicate that the person addressed in the revelation is of secondary importance to the respondents. Rationale in support of the respondents is found in Doctrine and Covenants 4: "Therefore, O ye that embark . . . " The pronoun ye in the King James Bible is consistently plural, meaning "You all." In the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants, it varies from a singular, regional colloquial usage to the plural usage.
[^5] Orson Pratt, a noted scientist and mathematician, put these sections in their present numerical order in 1876.
[^6] Daniel Sanborn Miles, son of Josiah Miles and Sarah Sanborn, was born on 23 July 1772 at Sanbornton, Belknap, New Hampshire. He was married to Electa Chamberlin on 30 September 1813. He was baptized into the Church in April 1832 at Bath, New Hampshire, and was ordained a seventy on 20 December 1836 by Hazen Aldrich.
[^7] Andrew Jenson, Latter-day Saint Biographical Encyclopedia (Salt Lake City: Western Epics, 1971), 1:192.
[^8] Heman A. Basset was born in 1814 at Guildhall, Essex, Vermont. He was baptized a member of the Church in the spring of 1831. After withdrawing from the Church in Ohio, he moved to California, where he managed a hotel in Petaluma for many years. He then migrated across the country to Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, where he died in 1876.
[^9] Because of this proselyting journey, biographers have written that they served missions together in four different states. This phraseology is often misinterpreted by modern missionaries to mean that they served an eight-year mission together in the Midwest.
[^10] Son of Gideon Carter and Johannah Sims, Jared was born on 14 January 1801 at Benson, Rutland, Vermont. He married Lydia Ames and became the father of nine children.
[^11] Son of Ira Babbitt and Nancy Crosier, Almon Whiting Babbitt was born on 9 October 1812 at Cheshire, Massachusetts. He married Julia Ann Johnson on 23 November 1833 at Kirtland, Geauga, Ohio, and they became the parents of six children. He died on 24 October 1855 in Nebraska.
[^12] To date information about the enduring faithfulness of the following eleven individuals is unknown: Major Noble Ashley, Stephen Burnett, Philip Burroughs, Jared Carter, Asa Dodds, Ruggles Eames, Selah J. Griffin, Jacob Scott, Micah Welton, Calves Wilson, and Dunbar Wilson. Three were not members of the Church: Lilburn Boggs, James Covill, and Alvin Smith.
[^13] Seventy-two died in full fellowship with the Saints: Jesse Baker, Ezra Taft Benson, Samuel Bent, Titus Billings, Seymour Brunson, Reynolds Cahoon, Gideon Carter, John Sims Carter, Simeon Doget Carter, William Carter, Zebedee Coltrin, Oliver Cowdery, David Dort, James Foster, David Fullmer, Algernon Sidney Gilbert, John Gould, Oliver Granger, Thomas Grover, Levi Hancock, Solomon Hancock, Emer Harris, Martin Harris, Henry Herriman, Elias Higbee, Solomon Humphrey, William Huntington, Orson Hyde, Vienna Jacques, Aaron Johnson, Luke Johnson, Heber C. Kimball, Joseph Knight, Newel Knight, Vinson Knight, Thomas B. Marsh, Daniel Miles, Isaac Morley, John Murdock, Noah Packard, Edward Partridge, David Patten, William W. Phelps, Orson Pratt, Parley P. Pratt, Zera Pulsipher, Charles C. Rich, Willard Richards, Samuel J. Rolfe, Shadrach Roundy, Lyman Sherman, Henry Sherwood, Don Carlos Smith, Eden Smith, George A. Smith, Hyrum Smith, John Smith, Joseph Smith, Jr., Joseph Smith, Sr., Samuel H. Smith, John Snider, Erastus Snow, Daniel Stanton, John Taylor, Robert Thompson, Peter Whitmer, Jr., Newel K. Whitney, Frederick G. Williams, Samuel Williams, Wilford Woodruff, Brigham Young, and Joseph Young.
[^14] Algernon Sidney Gilbert, son of Eli Gilbert and Lydia Hemingway, was born on 28 December 1789 at New Haven, New Haven, Connecticut. He married Elizabeth Van Benthusen on 30 September 1823, and they became the parents of one son. Algernon died on 29 June 1834 and was buried in a common grave with thirteen other Saints near Fishing River, Missouri.
[^15] "Mary Elizabeth Rollins Lightner," The Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine 17 (July 1926): 194.
[^16] Autobiography of James Henry Rollins, n.p., n.d., p. 2.
[^17] "Store at Core of Area, Church Histories," special edition: Kirtland Heritage Days—1984, The Kirtland Enterprise, 22 Aug. 1984, p. 1.
[^18] Dedicatory prayer given by President Ezra Taft Benson at the Newel K. Whitney and Company Store on 25 Aug. 1984.
[^19] "Whitney Store Given Prestigious Award," Church News, 19 Nov. 1988, p. 3.
[^20] For the complete document, see Geraldine Hamblin Bangerter and Susan Easton Black, My Servant Algernon Sidney Gilbert: Provide for My Saints (D&C 57:10) (Salt Lake City: Rollins, Hamblin and Bangerter Families, 1989), pp. 88-90.
[^21] The thirty-six who died outside of Church fellowship were Almon W. Babbitt, Wheeler Baldwin, Heman Basset, Josiah Butterfield, Joseph Coe, Leman Copley, Warren Cowdery, Alpheus Cutler, Amos Davies, Edson Fuller, Isaac Galland, Jesse Gause, George Washington Harris, Peter Haws, George Fitch James, John Johnson, Lyman Johnson, Amasa Lyman, William Marks, George Miller, Hiram Page, John E. Page, Ziba Peterson, Sidney Rigdon, Burr Riggs, Emma Hale Smith, Sylvester Smith, William Smith, Northrup Sweet, Ezra Thayre, Joseph Wakefield, Harvey G. Whitlock, David Whitmer, John Whitmer, Peter Whitmer, Sr., and Lyman Wight.
[^22] Wheeler Baldwin was born on 7 March 1793 at Albany County, New York. He was a known resident of Strongsville, Cuyahoga, Ohio, in 1830. He was baptized into the Church on 8 January 1831 at Cuyahoga County, Ohio, by Solomon Hancock. He was ordained an elder in 1831 in Ohio and a high priest on 3 June 1831 at Kirtland, Ohio, by Lyman Wight. He died on 11 May 1887 near Stewartsville, DeKalb, Missouri.
[^23] Donald Q. Cannon and Lyndon W. Cook, eds., Far West Record: Minutes of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1830-1844 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1983), p. 22.
[^24] Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 2d ed. rev., edited by B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 4:94.
[^25] The True Latter Day Saints' Herald, vol. 3, no. 6 (December 1862): 132.
[^26] The eight apostates were John C. Bennett, Ezra Booth, John Corrill, John A. Hicks, William Law, William McLellin, Robert D. Foster, and Symonds Ryder.
[^27] Symonds was baptized in June 1831 and was ordained an elder on 6 June 1831 by Joseph Smith, Sr.
[^28] Another historian claimed that when Joseph Smith "misspelled" Ryder's first name S-i-m-o-n instead of Symonds, Ryder lost faith in him, feeling that if the Lord really did speak to Smith, he would spell his name "correctly." James B. Holm, ed., Portage Heritage (Portage, Ohio: The Portage County Historical Society, 1957), p. 171; see also Smith, History of the Church, 1:261.
[^29] Holm, Portage Heritage, p. 171; see also History of Portage County, Ohio (Chicago: Warner, Beers, and Co., 1885), p. 474.
