Byron R. Merrill, Heavens Are Open: The 1992 Sperry Symposium on the Doctrine and Covenants and Church History ( 1993)

4

The Importance of the Individual in the Lord's Revelations

Susan Easton Black Brigham Young University

On 30 August 1992 a survey was conducted in which 250 returned missionaries were asked to respond to questions regarding Doctrine and Covenants 4. [^1] It was decided to survey returned missionaries because many mission presidents and teachers at the Missionary Training Center encourage elders and sisters to memorize Section 4 because of its missionary emphasis. Of the 219 respondents, 210 claimed a content recognition, 192 claimed a memorized familiarity with the section, 69 knew that the revelation was given through the Prophet Joseph to his father, [^2] and 80 correctly identified the main occupation of Joseph Smith, Sr. [^3] The compiled results of this survey suggest an impressive familiarity of the respondents with the contents of Section 4 but also a relative lack of awareness of the individual in the Lord's revelation. [^4] If the Lord had set aside or had forgotten the individual, as had most of the respondents, would there have been a revelation? I believe not.

The returned missionaries are perhaps typical, in this case, of other Latter-day Saints. All of us can benefit from knowing that Joseph Smith, Sr., was fifty-eight years old at the time of the revelation and was a wheat farmer. He had labored for decades with his hands, using a sickle to lay up in store a harvest that had physically sustained his family. He was now being asked by the Lord to work in a different field, to lay up in store with all his heart, might, mind, and strength the truths of the gospel. Because his eye was single to the glory of God, he was qualified for the urgency of the work that lay before him. For the next eleven years he would labor as a father, a missionary, and as a patriarch to the Church, exhorting all to faith, hope, and charity.

This additional information places Section 4 in a larger spiritual context, and its personal nature gives us insight into the life of our first patriarch. I have wondered why the surveyed missionaries had forgotten the recipient, Joseph Smith, Sr., and why many other Latter-day Saints might fail to recall other specific names mentioned by the Lord in the Doctrine and Covenants. One reason for our forgetfulness may be in the titles given to each section. The numerical titles in the Doctrine and Covenants differ from names given to segments of scripture in our other standard works. [^5] For example, the Book of Mormon is named after its compiler, and each book within the text is named for an individual. Similarly, the Old Testament, much of the New Testament, and the Pearl of Great Price contain named sections. This approach helps the reader recall the individuals, whereas it appears from the respondents' answers that the numerical system does not. And yet the Doctrine and Covenants is the only book of scripture that has contemporary headings to the chapters that identify the individuals and circumstances involved. It could thus be concluded that the individuals are better identified in the Doctrine and Covenants than in other scriptural texts.

Another reason for the lack of attention we give to individuals mentioned in the Doctrine and Covenants might be our remembrance of 1 Nephi 19:23: "I did liken all scriptures unto us, that it might be for our profit and learning." This teaching is important, for all scriptures can be used for our benefit and we can liken them to our own circumstances, but it should not limit us from gaining further insights by knowing more about the individuals mentioned and their contributions to the new and everlasting gospel. Even greater truths, analogies, and "likenings" can be gained by knowing details of the people identified in the revelations of the Lord.

I believe the Lord had a purpose in including the names of individuals who made solemn covenants and associated with the Prophet Joseph Smith. One purpose might have been to provide us with additional insights as we search individual lives to determine why one was called on a mission to the south and another to the north, to discover why one would be assigned to be a recorder while another was designated a printer, and why some men were worthy to receive the Melchizedek priesthood in the early 1830s while others needed to wait.

Searching for these details begins with a careful perusal of the Doctrine and Covenants. This canonized scripture consists of the Lord's revelations received by his prophets from 1823 to 1978. Most of the revelations identified an individual. For example, of the fourteen revelations received by the Prophet Joseph Smith in 1829 and canonized in the Doctrine and Covenants, all fourteen were directed to or mentioned a contemporary of the Prophet. That correspondence may at first suggest that all of the revelations are directed to specific individuals. Closer examination shows that assumption to be incorrect, because much of the content of the revelations is revealed doctrine that applies universally. One hundred and one revelations named at least one individual other than Joseph Smith either in the text, the heading, or the italicized captions. Altogether, in the revelations recorded from 1823 to 1844, the Lord identified by name a total of 130 contemporaries of the Prophet: 128 males and 2 females, Emma Smith and Vienna Jacques.

Biographical research has given us information on all 130 individuals. Some of the information is sketchy and does not exceed one page in length, but a substantial article could be written on the lives and contributions of 80 of these early Saints. Fifty portrait photographs reveal physical characteristics of the identified individuals. Vital statistics, including birth and birthplace, are available for 126 people. Birth statistics calculated with the revelatory year reveal that the average age of the individual named by the Lord was 37.92 years.

We can also identify the oldest and the youngest men mentioned by name in the Doctrine and Covenants. The oldest was Daniel Sanborn Miles, age sixty-nine. [^6] He was called on 6 April 1837 to be a president in the First Quorum of Seventy. President Joseph Young, who was also called to preside over the Seventy, later wrote that Daniel was "a man of good faith, constant in his attendance at the meetings of the council, until the time of his death, which occurred at quite an advanced stage of his life." [^7] He died on 12 October 1845 at Hancock County, Illinois.

The youngest men named in the Doctrine and Covenants were Joseph Smith and Heman Basset, both seventeen years old when first mentioned. The Prophet's name appeared in connection with the visitation of the angel Moroni, and Heman's name appeared with his missionary call (D&C 2; 52:37). [^8] Heman did not serve that mission, however, despite his being ordained an elder in the spring of 1831. Unfortunately, by June of that year he had become an active participant in the abnormal spiritual activities in Kirtland, Ohio. His failure to discern false spirits and to recognize his transgression led him to be one of the first to withdraw from the Church in Ohio and to reject a directive of the Lord. Heman Basset's rejection is not typical of those individuals mentioned in the Doctrine and Covenants; however, his call to missionary service is typical of the divine purpose of the Lord in naming an individual. By focusing on the individuals mentioned, we discover that the messages of the Lord primarily emphasize priesthood callings. In fact, it is possible to say that the Doctrine and Covenants was the first priesthood manual given in this dispensation.

The priesthood calling most often announced by the Lord was an invitation to serve a mission, with the phraseology being "take a journey." For example, in Doctrine and Covenants 52:23,Ezra Booth and Isaac Morley were called to "take their journey, also preaching the word by the way." In obedience they journeyed through Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, and Missouri, preaching the gospel. [^9]

The second emphasis of the revelations was an invitation to preside in the Melchizedek Priesthood quorums of the Church. For example, in Doctrine and Covenants 124:137,John A. Hicks was called on 19 January 1841 to preside with Samuel Williams and Jesse Baker in the quorum of the elders. This call came just nine months after he was charged, on 19 April 1840, with slandering John P. Greene and lying. After promising to make restitution, he was extended the hand of fellowship by the Nauvoo High Council. Four months later he failed to receive a sustaining vote by a general conference of the various priesthood quorums. He was tried by the elders quorum in Nauvoo in 1841 for falsehood, engaging in schismatical conversation, and breaching the Nauvoo City ordinances. He appealed his case but was excommunicated on 5 October 1841.

The third emphasis was to identify individuals who were worthy to be ordained to the priesthood. Jared Carter was one of them. [^10] He was baptized on 20 February 1831 by Hyrum Smith. Invited in Doctrine and Covenants 52:38 to be ordained a priest, Jared Carter accepted this ordination and a subsequent ordination to the Melchizedek Priesthood.

The fourth emphasis in the Doctrine and Covenants was to reprimand priesthood leaders who failed to magnify their calling, whether in the home or in the Church. For example, Almon W. Babbitt was rebuked for aspiring "to establish his counsel instead of the counsel which I have ordained . . . ; and he setteth up a golden calf for the worship of my people" (D&C 124:84). [^11]

As I have searched for information on the lives of the contemporaries of Joseph Smith mentioned in the Doctrine and Covenants, I have discovered that the Lord chose to identify individuals who varied in their eventual faithfulness. That is typical of other scriptural text. For example, the Lord addressed Nephi, Laman, Lemuel, Cain, Abel, Moses, Pharaoh, and others. By their good or bad examples we can learn many lessons regarding the Lord's love for each of his children as well as their devotion or lack of it. [^12] Of the 130 individuals mentioned, the information we have at present shows that 72 died as faithful members of the Church, or 55.38 percent. [^13] Names of the faithful that quickly come to mind include Joseph Smith, who declared, "I knew it, and I knew that God knew it, and I could not deny it, neither dared I do it; at least I knew that by so doing I would offend God, and come under condemnation" (JS-H 1:25). Other names are Brigham Young, John Taylor, Heber C. Kimball, Edward Partridge, and Joseph Smith, Sr.

The Almost Forgotten Faithful

Almost forgotten by the modern Saint are the names of David Fullmer, Oliver Granger, William Huntington, and Algernon Sidney Gilbert. I will illustrate this forgetfulness by focusing on the faithfulness of Algernon Sidney Gilbert and by taking one verse out of the eight sections in which his name appears in the Doctrine and Covenants. [^14]

From the night in 1830 that his niece, Mary Elizabeth Rollins, brought home a copy of the Book of Mormon, Algernon showed interest in the book. [^15] After staying up most of the night reading this sacred scripture, he was prepared for the missionaries, who baptized him in November 1830. He was privileged to have Joseph Smith in his home on the day of the Prophet's arrival in Kirtland, Ohio. [^16]

Soon Algernon was blessed by the Prophet with added responsibilities because of his faithfulness. Those responsibilities included purchasing land, acting as a scribe for revelations, and working closely with his partner, Newel K. Whitney, in providing materially for the Saints. He accepted gratefully the opportunity to live the law of Zion and to be one of the first to live in Jackson County, Missouri. There he continued to bless the lives of the Saints temporally and spiritually.

The Lord remembered his servant Algernon and helped him and Newel resolve their concerns regarding their store in Kirtland, Ohio:

"And it is not meet that my servants, Newel K. Whitney and Sidney Gilbert, should sell their store and their possessions here; for this is not wisdom until the residue of the church, which remaineth in this place, shall go up unto the land of Zion" (D&C 64:26).

This verse provides an opportunity to illustrate the lack of remembrance of Algernon by the modern Latter-day Saint. The store mentioned by the Lord in this revelation passed through many owners until it was purchased by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in 1979. [^17] The Church authorized the beginning of research and restoration on the building in 1983. Historical documents and diaries were used to provide authentic detail for the reconstruction. Upon completion of the construction, the store was dedicated on 25 August 1984 by President Ezra Taft Benson. [^18] The purchase, restoration, dedication, and United States Presidential citation presented to the Church for its historic preservation of the store are commendable. [^19] Nonetheless, an omission exists. No mention was made of Algernon Sidney Gilbert as the co-owner with Whitney in the store's reconstruction, dedication, or citation. The title of their store was N. K. Whitney and Company. The "and Company" was Gilbert.

Historic land purchase agreements clearly identify the partnership. [^20] This brief illustration of Gilbert's obscurity helps us recognize an early Saint who was faithful but is now almost forgotten.

Lost Their Direction

Of the 36 individuals (27.7 percent) who died outside Church fellowship, very few left significant biographical information. [^21] After searching journals, family group sheets, and writing to their descendants, I discovered it was almost as if they were mentioned by the Lord and then wandered off into comparative obscurity. Only a few maintained a visible presence. This they did by continuing to adhere to partial truth. One such man was Wheeler Baldwin. [^22]

On 7 June 1831 the Lord, through his prophet, Joseph Smith, stated, "Let my servants Wheeler Baldwin and William Carter also take their journey" (D&C 52:31). Wheeler accepted this mission call, and at the 25 October 1831 general conference at Orange, Cuyahoga, Ohio, he bore testimony that he "felt to do the will of the Lord in all things." [^23] His actions seemed to match his desires from the 1830s through the early 1840s. In March 1840 he served on a committee "to obtain affidavits and other documents to be forwarded to the city of Washington" regarding the grievances and needs of the Saints. [^24] His faithfulness was short-lived, however. By the late 1840s he had joined Alpheus Cutler's congregation in Mills County, Iowa. According to his speech at the October 1862 general conference of the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, he stated that Cutler "was ordained President of the High Priesthood." He had sustained him in that position and had been a missionary for the Cutlerites, baptizing more than forty individuals. He claimed that the foundation upon which they had built their church was the "Bible, Book of Mormon, and Doctrine, and Covenants." [^25] Despite his initial adherence to the teachings of Cutler, when Wheeler learned of Joseph Smith III becoming president of the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, he left the Cutlerites and was baptized into the Reorganization in 1863. He presided over the RLDS branches at Mills, Fremont, and Page, Iowa. He died outside the fellowship of the Saints, a leader among those who accepted only partial truth.

The Belligerent Apostates

Eight of the individuals mentioned in the Doctrine and Covenants, 6.15 percent, actively sought to destroy the teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith and to take his life. [^26] John C. Bennett, William Law, Symonds Ryder, and William McLellin were such vengeful apostates. Because of new discoveries about Symonds Ryder's apostasy, I will speak of him. [^27]

Symonds was mentioned only once in the Doctrine and Covenants: "In consequence of transgression, let that which was bestowed upon Heman Basset be taken from him, and placed upon the head of Simonds Ryder" (D&C 52:37). He was thirty-nine years old when he was called to serve a mission and had been a member of the Church for only two days. Instead of experiencing joy at this opportunity, it has been theorized, he found in this call the seeds of his apostasy:

"When he received communication of his ministerial call signed by the Prophet Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon, both in the letter he received and in the official commission to preach, however, his name was spelled R-i-d-e-r, instead of R-y-d-e-r. . . . He thought if the 'Spirit' through which he had been called to preach could err in the matter of spelling his name, it might have erred in calling him to the ministry as well." [^28] The spelling of his name varies on land deeds in Hiram, Ohio. And, as illustrated by his signature on his portrait, his name may still be misspelled in the Doctrine and Covenants.

This theory of Symond's apostasy may be correct, but further research extends the hypothesis to his belief that Joseph advocated communism of goods. One historian claimed: "After a time something leaked out in regard to the Saints having an eye on their neighbor's property, that it was their design to get into their possession all the lands of those whom they converted." [^29] Symonds himself wrote in his memoirs: "When they went to Missouri to lay the foundation of the splendid city of Zion, and also of the temple, they left their papers behind. This gave their new converts an opportunity to become acquainted with the internal arrangement of their church, which revealed to them the horrid fact that a plot was laid to take their property from them and place it under the control of Joseph Smith the prophet." [^30]

Another theory regarding Symond's apostasy was his concern over the adjacent Hinckley property becoming the site of a planned Latter-day Saint temple. [^31]

Whatever the reason, whether it was one of these theories or a combination of all, Symonds did leave the Church and took it upon himself to eradicate from all residents in the Hiram community what he saw as the seducing error of Mormonism. He joined with fellow apostate Ezra Booth in the summer of 1831, planting the seeds of hatred toward Joseph and Mormonism in Hiram. The climax of his actions was the tar-and-feathering of the Prophet on 24 March 1832. His involvement in the event was made apparent that very night to Joseph, who heard, "Simonds, Simonds, where's the tar bucket?" [^32] Despite his obvious connection with the mob, Symonds was never prosecuted. An alibi was provided by his son, Hartwell Ryder, who stated that his father was "ill in bed at the time." [^33]

Conclusion

Attempting to find information on the individuals mentioned in the Doctrine and Covenants has been like searching for the pieces of a lost puzzle whose importance is clear but whose detailed description is destroyed. The frustration of reaching an impasse on the life of one person has been compensated for by the joy of discovering new insights on another. The realization of the faithfulness of one and the disappointment of the faltering steps of another has brought to my awareness the centrality of endurance. This research has heightened my appreciation for the early Saints and the Lord's concern for each individual.

The Doctrine and Covenants teaches us that the Lord knows his children—both the faithful and the unfaithful—by name. He knows of their talents and gifts as well as their weaknesses and imperfections. He extended an invitation to greater service to the faithful, but not all chose to listen and accept his directions. Some served with great joy, and others disregarded counsel and lost direction.

The analogies and "likenings" to be gleaned from knowing more about the individuals in the Doctrine and Covenants are almost boundless. It is my hope that the readers of this book of scripture will take note of the names and begin to wonder more about who they were, where they came from, and whether they fulfilled their divine commission. Such research will lead to a greater understanding of why the Lord has preserved their names in scripture from generation to generation. It will also reveal with profound assurance a knowledge of the important role of the individual in the Lord's revelations.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] The camp was made up of a group of Latter-day Saints who were individually committed to creating Zion by establishing the kingdom of God on earth. Furthermore, they willingly consecrated all that they had, including their lives if necessary, to see the Lord's ideal realized. Lead the Saints from Kirtland, Ohio, to Missouri in a group known as Kirtland Camp. Sidney B. Sperry, Doctrine and Covenants Compendium (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1960), pp. 521-22.
[^2] Participants were obedient in agreeing to go to the revealed center place of Zion to fulfill the will of the Master as revealed by his servant, the Prophet Joseph Smith. Lead the Saints from Nauvoo, Illinois, to settlements in Iowa and Nebraska called the Camp of Israel. Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 2d ed. rev., edited by B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 2:39.
[^3] Camp members were taught and tested on such principles as unity, obedience to counsel, consecration, brotherly love, sacredness of life, and so forth. These characteristics were necessary prerequisites to living together in peace, whether or not the ultimate objectives were realized at that time. These principles are likewise necessary wherever the Lord's people live. Lead the Saints from Winter Quarters, Nebraska, to the Great Basin. Parley P. Pratt, Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, ed. Parley P. Pratt, Jr. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1985), p. 94.
[^4] The participants in Zion's Camp were being tried, stretched, refined, tutored, and tested like Abraham of old to determine their obedience to the Lord in all things. Abraham was obedient to the Lord's command, and likewise, the participants in Zion's Camp were generally obedient. Provide a pattern for leadership for many thousands of emigrant Saints to follow in subsequent years as they came from all parts of the earth. Smith, History of the Church, 2:123 n.
[^5] Typescript of Tamma Durfee Miner Autobiography, Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah, p. 2; hereafter cited as BYU Library.
[^6] Typescript of Nathan B. Baldwin Journal, Special Collections, BYU Library, p. 9.
[^7] Levi Hancock Journal, Special Collections, BYU Library, p. 53.
[^8] Ibid., pp. 53, 57.
[^9] "George Albert Smith's History of Zion's Camp," 4 May 1834, p. 1.
[^10] Ibid., 19 June 1834, p. 21.
[^11] Ibid., p. 22.
[^12] Nathan B. Baldwin Journal, p. 12.
[^13] "George Albert Smith's History of Zion's Camp," 19 June 1834, p. 22.
[^14] Nathan B. Baldwin Journal, p. 12.
[^15] "George Albert Smith's History of Zion's Camp," 19 June 1834, p. 22.
[^16] Smith, History of the Church, 2:104 n.
[^17] Ibid., p. 105.
[^18] Ibid., p. 106.
[^19] "George Albert Smith's History of Zion's Camp," p. 1.
[^20] Raymond P. Draper, "The Early Life of Luke S. Johnson: From the Absolute Beginning to Oct. 11, 1836," entry for 1 May 1834, p. 3. Typescript in possession of the author.
[^21] "George Albert Smith's History of Zion's Camp," 14 May 1834, p. 3.
[^22] Ibid., p. 5.
[^23] Ibid.
[^24] Ibid., 18 May 1834, pp. 5-6.
[^25] Smith, History of the Church, 2:114.
[^26] As quoted in Michael Jay Noble, "Joseph Bates Noble," p. 4.
[^27] "George Albert Smith's History of Zion's Camp," 25 June 1834, p. 23.
[^28] As quoted in Noble, "Joseph Bates Noble," p. 4.
[^29] Heber C. Kimball, in Times and Seasons, vol. 6, no. 5 (15 March 1845): 839.
[^30] Smith, History of the Church, 2:80.
[^31] Ibid., p. 107.
[^32] Kimball, in Times and Seasons, vol. 6, no. 5 (15 March 1845): 839.
[^33] Smith, History of the Church, 2:181 n.
