Byron R. Merrill, Heavens Are Open: The 1992 Sperry Symposium on the Doctrine and Covenants and Church History ( 1993)

7

"I Will Go before Your Face": Evidence of Divine Guidance during the Twentieth Century

Richard O. Cowan Brigham Young University

Some Latter-day Saints wonder why there are not as many examples of miraculous spiritual manifestations now as in the days of Joseph Smith or the pioneers. Are there really fewer instances of divine power or guidance today, or is the supposed difference merely one of perception? After years of researching the Church in the twentieth century, I am convinced that the Lord is blessing and leading his Church as much today as in any previous time.

The Doctrine and Covenants promised that the Lord would strengthen and direct those in his service. To Thomas B. Marsh he promised: "It shall be given you by the Comforter what you shall do and whither you shall go" (D&C 31:11). While Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon were on a short mission in western New York, they were assured: "I, the Lord, have suffered you to come unto this place; for thus it was expedient in me for the salvation of souls. . . . Speak the thoughts that I shall put into your hearts, and you shall not be confounded before men; for it shall be given you in the very hour, yea, in the very moment, what ye shall say. . . . And I give unto you this promise, that inasmuch as ye do this the Holy Ghost shall be shed forth in bearing record unto all things whatsoever ye shall say" (D&C 100:4-6, 8; compare 84:85). The Lord promised a particularly close working relationship with those in his service: "And whoso receiveth you, there I will be also, for I will go before your face. I will be on your right hand and on your left, and my Spirit shall be in your hearts, and mine angels round about you, to bear you up" (D&C 84:88). Speaking again to Thomas B. Marsh, who by this time had become president of the Twelve, Jesus Christ counseled: "Be thou humble; and the Lord thy God shall lead thee by the hand, and give thee answer to thy prayers" (D&C 112:10).

Concerning the reality of continuing revelation, Elder Spencer W. Kimball testified: "Since that momentous day in 1820, additional scripture has continued to come, and numerous pertinent and vital revelations have been flowing in a never-failing stream from God to his prophets on the earth. These scriptures are called the Doctrine and Covenants. We declare them to be divine and official and authentic communications from the Lord to men through divinely appointed prophets and that there never has been and never shall be an end to the prophets so long as men have faith and believe and live righteously.

"There are those who would assume that with the printing and binding of these sacred scripture records, that would be 'the end of the prophets.' But again, we testify to the world that revelation continues and that the vaults and files of the Church are full.

"Revelations come from month to month and from day to day, and since 1830, they have continued. As long as time shall last, a prophet, recognized of God, will continue to interpret the mind and will of God. . . .

"Revelation does not always mean 'walking with God,' nor 'face-to-face,' nor 'lips-to-ear.' There are many kinds of revelation—some more and some less spectacular. . . .

"Most recorded revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants and in the Bible were from deep feelings and an impressive consciousness of direction from above. But some were more direct . . .

"Brigham Young received a vision before building this beautiful [Salt Lake] temple. . . . Here are his own words:

"' . . . five years ago last July, I was here and saw in the Spirit the Temple not ten feet from where we have laid the Chief Corner Stone. I have not inquired what kind of a Temple we should build. Why? Because it was represented before me.' . . .

"If all the spectacular manifestations and visions and pertinent dreams and healings and other miracles were written in books, it would take a great library to hold them.

"Comparable to the numerous revelations of the past would be the one of Wilford Woodruff, President of the Church in the last century:

"'I had some remarks last Sunday upon . . . revelation. Read the life of Brigham Young and you can hardly find a revelation that he had wherein he said, "Thus saith the Lord." But the Holy Ghost was with him; he taught by inspiration and revelation. . . . Joseph said, "Thus saith the Lord" almost every day of his life, in laying the foundation of this work. But those who followed him have not deemed it always necessary to say, "Thus saith the Lord." Yet they have led the people by the power of the Holy Ghost. . . .

"' . . . He is giving us revelation, and will give us revelation until the scene is wound up.

"'I have had some revelations of late and very important ones to me and I will tell you what the Lord has said to me. . . .

"' . . . The Lord . . . has told me exactly what to do . . . I went before the Lord, and I wrote what the Lord told me to write [referring to the "Manifesto," or Official Declaration 1]. . . .'

"Revelations have continued: Brother Merrill, president of the Logan Temple, received a comforting manifestation; Elder Melvin J. Ballard's call, as told by President Grant, was remarkable. President Joseph F. Smith's vision in 1918 on the redemption of the dead [D&C 138] was most comprehensive; the temple work for the signers of the Declaration of Independence is illuminating; President Grant's Arizona experience is remarkable; Heber C. Kimball's experience of unusual discernment in the Endowment House—these and numerous experiences of latter-day authorities all are testimony that, as George Q. Cannon said, there has never been a single minute since 1830 when the people were left without the revealed guidance of the Lord. . . .

"The Almighty is with this people. We shall have all the revelations that we shall need if we will do our duty and keep the commandments of God." [^1]

One must be cautious in compiling and sharing accounts of divine manifestations. Because events tend to be embellished when recounted in second- or third-hand sources, it is important to seek witnesses as close to the actual event as possible. The credibility and reliability of those who report them is especially important. Particularly fantastic stories often cannot be substantiated. Finally, good taste suggests that particularly sensitive or sacred events, especially those of a very personal nature, should not be discussed too publicly.

An abundance of material exists that meets these criteria. Almost all the examples Elder Kimball cited came from the nineteenth century, but what about the twentieth? Some of the most impressive twentieth-century manifestations have been linked to calls into Church service and to the selection of temple sites.

Inspired Calls to Church Service

The fifth article of faith declares: "We believe that a man must be called of God, by prophecy." Here, the word prophecy means that inspired calls come by revelation. The following examples illustrate how revelation may anticipate calls to be given later, may come at the moment the call is made, or may confirm the inspiration of the call after it has been received.

In 1899, David O. McKay was a young elder serving as a missionary in Scotland. At a special priesthood conference, James L. McMurrin, a counselor in the European mission presidency, turned to Elder McKay and promised, "If you will keep the faith, you will yet sit in the leading councils of the Church." [^2] David O. McKay was called to the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles in 1906, became a counselor in the First Presidency in 1934, and served as president of the Church from 1951 to 1970.

President Heber J. Grant was guided by inspiration as he appointed General Authorities. In 1919, one of his first duties as president of the Church was to fill the vacancy created in the Twelve by his own call. "As he reviewed in his mind the men he considered to be worthy and able to fill that position, he returned again and again to his lifelong friend, Richard W. Young." In a meeting of the Twelve, he fully intended "to present him to the council for approval. But for a reason he could never fully explain, he was unable to do so; instead, he presented the name of Melvin J. Ballard, president of the Northwestern States Mission, a man with whom he had had very little personal contact." [^3] Elder Ballard served as a highly respected member of the Twelve for the next two decades.

Elder Harold B. Lee was sustained as a member of the Twelve at the April conference in 1941. Elder Lee later recalled: "It was on the day or so following conference that President Stephen L Richards, who was then chairman of the Church radio and publicity committee, approached me and said, 'Brother Lee, next Sunday is Easter, and we have decided to ask you to give the Sunday night radio talk, the Easter talk, on the resurrection of the Lord.' And then he added, 'You understand now, of course, that as a member of the Council of the Twelve, you are to be one of the special witness[es] of the life and mission of the Savior and of that great event.' The most overwhelming of all the things that have happened to me was to begin to realize what a call into the Council of the Twelve meant.

"During the days which followed, I locked myself in one of the rooms over in the Church Office building, and there I read the story of the life of the Savior. As I read the events of his life, and particularly the events leading up to and of the crucifixion, and then of the resurrection, I discovered that something was happening to me. I was not just reading a story; it seemed actually as though I was living the events; and I was reading them with a reality the like of which I had never before experienced. And when, on the Sunday night following, after I had delivered my brief talk and then declared, simply, 'As one of the humblest among you, I, too, know that these things are true, that Jesus died and was resurrected for the sins of the world,' I was speaking from a full heart, because I had come to know that week, with a certainty which I never before had known." [^4]

Inspiration has not been limited only to calling General Authorities. Several Church leaders have borne testimony that mission calls are inspired. Elder Robert E. Wells tells of a young man from Sweden who was called to serve his mission in Chile and was assigned to work with a native companion. The Swedish elder was surprised to discover that his companion's parents were then living in his own hometown in Sweden. The Chilean elder's parents, not members of the Church, were political exiles who had gone to Sweden to work. The Swedish elder's parents made contact with them and taught them the gospel. Imagine the inspiration it required for the prophet to send a Swedish elder to Chile and the mission president's inspiration to assign those particular companions to work together. [^5]

Inspired Selection of Temple Sites

The Lord has also guided the Church in the selection of sites for Latter-day Saint temples. Once again, revelation has anticipated future site selections, been part of the actual site selection process, or has confirmed the correctness of selections already made.

In the summer of 1924, Elder George Albert Smith was in San Francisco attending regional Boy Scout meetings. On that occasion he met with the presidents of the small branches in San Francisco and Oakland, the only Church units in the area at that time. They met at the Fairmont Hotel high atop San Francisco's Nob Hill. From the hotel terrace, they had a panoramic view of the San Francisco Bay. W. Aird Macdonald, president of the Oakland Branch, later recalled: "As we admired the beauty and majesty of the scene, President Smith suddenly grew silent, ceased talking, and for several minutes gazed intently toward the East Bay hills.

"'Brother Macdonald, I can almost see in vision a white temple of the Lord high upon those hills,' he exclaimed rapturously, 'an ensign to all the world travelers as they sail through the Golden Gate into this wonderful harbor.' Then he studied the vista for a few moments as if to make sure of the scene before him. 'Yes, sir, a great white temple of the Lord,' he confided with calm assurance, 'will grace those hills, a glorious ensign to the nations, to welcome our Father's children as they visit this great city.'" [^6] Reports of Elder Smith's comments led the northern California Saints to anticipate the time when the Oakland Temple would be built. The site was purchased in 1943 and the temple dedicated in 1964.

In 1954 President McKay appointed Wendell B. Mendenhall, who was then directing the Church's building program in the Pacific, to confidentially investigate possible temple sites. Brother Mendenhall looked over various properties in New Zealand but felt that he had not yet seen the temple site. One day he felt impressed to go to Hamilton, where the Church college was then under construction. "While in the car on the way, the whole thing came to me in an instant," he recalled. "The temple should be there by the college. The Church facilities for construction were already there, and that was the center of the population of the mission. Then, in my mind, I could see the area even before I arrived, and I could envision the hill where the temple should stand. As soon as I arrived at the college and drove over the top of the hill, my whole vision was confirmed." This hill commanded a spectacular view not only of the Church college but also of the fertile Waikato River valley.

About ten days later President McKay arrived in Hamilton. Brother Mendenhall first met him in the presence of others, so nothing could be said about a temple site. Brother Mendenhall described their first visit to the hill: "After we stepped from the car and were looking around, President McKay called me to one side. By the way he was looking at the hill, I could tell immediately what was on his mind. I had not said a word to him. He asked, 'What do you think?' I knew what his question implied, and I simply asked in return, 'What do you think, President McKay?' And then in an almost prophetic tone he pronounced, 'This is the place to build the temple.' [^7] Brother Mendenhall was convinced that he had divine help in overcoming obstacles and purchasing the site.

In the light of such examples of revelation guiding the selection of temple sites, some people wondered what went wrong when the Church experienced opposition in obtaining a site for the Denver Temple. Nevertheless, those involved in the difficult process of finding the site were convinced that they had witnessed the hand of the Lord guiding them. When the preferred location proved not to be available, they turned to two other sites. In each case, citizens concerned that an increase in traffic would alter the character of their neighborhood blocked approval. By this time the originally preferred site had become available. Church officials, having benefited from experience in dealing with opposition, were able to gain the support of the temple's neighbors. [^8] The beautiful Denver Temple was completed in 1985.

Revelation Guides Members in Church Service

On assignment from President Heber J. Grant, Elder David O. McKay spent the year 1921 visiting the Church's missions around the world. At several points he was convinced that divine guidance spared his life or helped him fulfill his assignments. While touring the Hawaiian Mission, Elder McKay's party visited the Kilauea volcano. Elder McKay and others climbed down onto a ledge to get a better view of the smoldering and ever-shifting lava. After some time on the volcanic platform, Elder McKay suddenly exclaimed, "Brethren, I feel impressed that we should get out of here." No sooner had they moved to safety than the "balcony crumbled and fell with a roar into the molten lava a hundred feet or so below." Everyone was silent as they pondered what could have happened. "Some might say it was merely inspiration," a sister missionary in the group reflected, "but to us, it was a direct revelation given to a worthy man." [^9]

While visiting Palestine, Elder David O. McKay received instructions from the First Presidency to meet J. Wilford Booth and with him tour the Armenian Mission. The problem was that Elder McKay had no idea where to find Brother Booth, and without his knowledge of the language the mission tour would be almost impossible. Before leaving Jerusalem, Elder McKay ascended the Mount of Olives and, kneeling in a secluded spot, prayed earnestly "that we should be led by inspiration on our trip to the Armenian Mission." Afterwards he felt impressed to take the train to Haifa rather than touring other parts of the Holy Land by automobile as they had previously planned. "If you feel that way," responded Hugh J. Cannon, Elder McKay's traveling companion, "we had better take the train." After they had boarded the train, they both realized that neither had remembered to get the name of a good hotel at Haifa. "The delay caused by seeking information about hotels brought us to the station office door just at the same moment that another traveler reached it. He touched me on the shoulder saying, 'Isn't this Brother McKay?'

"Astonished beyond expression to be thus addressed in so strange a town, I turned, and recognized Elder Wilford Booth, the one man above all others whom we were most desirous of meeting. " Elder McKay was convinced that he could not have met Brother Booth at a better time or place. "As we recounted to each other our experiences, we had no doubt that our coming together was the result of divine interposition. . . .

"Indeed, had it not been for our having met at Haifa, our trip to the Armenian Mission would have been, so far as human wisdom can tell, a total failure." [^10]

President Heber J. Grant described the process by which the principles of the Church's Welfare Plan were hammered out during the 1930s: "We have been meeting morning after morning for months. . . .

After we had evolved a plan I went especially in prayer to the Lord and prayed with all earnestness to know whether or not this plan met with his approval. In response there came over me, from the crown of my head to the soles of my feet such a sweet spirit and a burning within, that I knew God approved." [^11] In 1935, Harold B. Lee, then a stake president, received the assignment to put the plan into operation. "I prayed most earnestly," President Lee recalled. "I had started out with the thought that there would have to be some new kind of organization set up to carry forward the Welfare Program. . . . My spiritual understanding was opened, and I was given a comprehension of the grandeur of the organization of the Church and the Kingdom of God, the likes of which I had never contemplated before. The significant truth which was impressed upon me was that there was no need for any new organization to do what the Presidency had counseled us to do. It was as though the Lord was saying: 'All in the world that you have to do is to put to work the organization which I have already given.'" [^12]

With the approach of World War II, missionaries needed to be evacuated from Germany with some urgency. Mission president M. Douglas Wood assigned Norman G. Seibold, a missionary, to locate thirty-one missionaries who might need funds to buy railway tickets to Denmark. President Wood didn't know exactly where they might be found, so instructed Elder Seibold "to follow his impressions entirely." Elder Seibold commenced his search by train. In some towns he remained on board, but at others he was impressed to get off. In one small town, he felt inspired to walk out in the community. "It seemed silly to me at the time," Elder Seibold recalled, "but we had a short wait and so I went." He found two elders in a restaurant who were very glad to see him. "As surely as if someone had taken me by the hand, I was guided there." [^13]

Several years later, at the conclusion of the war, Elder Ezra Taft Benson of the Quorum of the Twelve received the assignment to go to Europe, supervise the distribution of welfare supplies and arrange for the resumption of missionary work. During his ten months there in 1946, he experienced one miracle after another. When President Benson's companion, Frederick W. Babbel, was unable to obtain visas for their visit to Poland, Elder Benson said, "Let me pray about it." Brother Babbel recalled: "Some two or three hours after President Benson had retired to his room to pray, he stood in my doorway and said with a smile on his face, 'Pack your bags. We are leaving for Poland in the morning!' . . .

" . . . He stood there enveloped in a beautiful glow of radiant light. His countenance shone as I imagine the Prophet Joseph's countenance shone when he was filled with the Spirit of the Lord." [^14] Providentially, the needed doors were opened, and within a few days Elder Benson had completed his visit to the destitute Polish Saints.

Stories of how Matthew Cowley, as mission president in New Zealand, was guided by the Spirit are legendary. "The Maori people used to pray for President Cowley to come to them. One day he drove up to the front of a post office in a rather distant city in New Zealand. There were two sisters standing by the post office waiting. When he got out of the car, one said to the other, 'See, I told you he would be here soon.' President Cowley said, 'Hey, what's going on here?' One of the sisters said, 'We needed you and we've been praying. We knew you would be coming, and you always go directly to the post office, so we decided to wait here until you arrived.' It was just that simple. People would tell the Lord what they wanted, and somehow or other President Cowley was led by the Spirit to go where they were." [^15]

Missionaries who served under President Cowley were undoubtedly influenced by his spirituality. Two examples will illustrate. After being in New Zealand for several weeks, Robert L. Simpson had a vivid dream that impressed him with the need to put forth an effort to learn the Maori language. He was left with the impression that "you are going to need this language when you get through with your mission. You are going to need it." Elder Simpson heeded the warning, learned the language, and served a successful mission. Shortly afterwards, World War II broke out and Robert joined the Air Force. While awaiting orders he thought, "Here I go right back to New Zealand." Much to his surprise, just before his group of hundreds of men were to sail out into the Pacific, he and four others were reassigned to a small American air base near Cairo, Egypt. "I don't know what the Lord has in mind," Brother Simpson reflected, "but I'll just do the best I can, and I am sure that everything will work out all right." Within forty-eight hours he discovered that an entire Maori battalion was stationed "within the very shadows" of the American air base. "For nearly two years I had the privilege of being there and meeting each Sunday with these Maori boys, bearing testimony with them in their own tongue, organizing them into small groups as they went up into the front lines in order that they might have their sacrament meetings and do the things that they needed to do. . . . I want to tell you," Elder Simpson concluded, "that the Lord had a hand in writing military orders because of all of the places in this world that Air Force men were being sent, very few were sent to Cairo, Egypt." [^16]Robert L. Simpson's need for the language did not end there. In later years he became president of the New Zealand mission and, as a General Authority, supervisor of the Pacific Area with headquarters at Auckland, New Zealand.

Glen L. Rudd, another of Matthew Cowley's missionaries, later became president of the Florida Mission. In this capacity, he was responsible for Church members throughout the Caribbean. He received a request from Flavia Salazar Gomez, a convert from Mexico then living in the Dominican Republic, to give her a blessing because she was critically ill with cancer. A few weeks later as President Rudd and a local Church member drove towards the city where Flavia lived, they suddenly realized that they did not have her address. As they entered the large, congested city, President Rudd was blessed to know which streets to take. When they found a parking place, they asked a man standing nearby if he knew Flavia Salazar Gomez. The man with surprise responded, "Yes, she's my wife. She's just inside that door." They had parked right in front of her home. The desired blessing was given and, a few months later, President Rudd was grateful to learn that Flavia had been healed of her cancer.

In 1946 Elder Spencer W. Kimball of the Twelve received the assignment to give leadership to the Church's Lamanite program. While touring the Mexican Mission the following year, he received a vision or dream in which he saw the future destiny of the Lamanites:

"Maybe the Lord was showing to me what great things this people would accomplish. . . .

" . . . I no longer saw you [as] the servant of other people, but I saw you as the employer, the owner of banks and businesses. . . .

"I saw you in legislative positions where as good legislators and good Latter-day Saints you were able to make the best laws for your brothers and sisters.

"I saw many of your sons become attorneys. I saw doctors, as well as lawyers, looking after the health of the people. . . .

"I saw the Church growing in rapid strides and I saw wards and stakes organized. I saw stakes by the hundreds.

"I saw a temple." [^17] This vision sustained and motivated Elder Kimball as he directed the Church's efforts among these people.

Expansion of the Church during the second half of the twentieth century brought into contact an increasing number of ethnic groups and cultures worldwide. This became the setting for one of the most remarkable revelations of all. Church leaders pondered the policy by which blacks were not permitted to receive the priesthood. President Kimball recalled, "I went to the temple alone, and especially on Sundays and Saturdays when there were not organizations in the temple, when I could have it alone. It went on for some time as I was searching for this, because I wanted to be sure. We held a meeting of the Council of the Twelve in the temple on the regular day [1 June 1978]. We considered this very seriously and thoughtfully and prayerfully.

"I asked the Twelve not to go home when the time came. I said, 'Now would you be willing to remain in the temple with us?' And they were. I offered the final prayer and I told the Lord if it wasn't right, if He didn't want this change to come in the Church that I would be true to it all the rest of my life and I'd fight the world against it if that's what He wanted.

"We had this special prayer circle, then I knew that the time had come. I had a great deal to fight, of course, myself largely, because I had grown up with this thought that Negroes should not have the priesthood and I was prepared to go all the rest of my life till my death and fight for it and defend it as it was. But this revelation and assurance came to me so clearly that there was no question about it." [^18]

Of this sacred occasion, Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote: "It was during this prayer that the revelation came. The Spirit of the Lord rested mightily upon us all; we felt something akin to what happened on the day of Pentecost and at the dedication of the Kirtland Temple. From the midst of eternity, the voice of God, conveyed by the power of the Spirit, spoke to his prophet. The message was that the time had now come to offer the fulness of the everlasting gospel, including celestial marriage, and the priesthood, and the blessings of the temple, to all men, without reference to race or color, solely on the basis of personal worthiness. And we all heard the same voice, received the same message, and became personal witnesses that the word received was the mind and will and voice of the Lord. . . .

"In the days that followed the receipt of the new revelation, President Kimball and President Ezra Taft Benson—the senior and most spiritually experienced ones among us—both said, expressing the feelings of us all, that neither of them had ever experienced anything of such spiritual magnitude and power as was poured out upon the Presidency and the Twelve that day in the upper room in the house of the Lord." [^19]

What conclusions can be drawn from the evidence presented here? Numerous revelations given to the Lord's servants in the modern era can be documented. Although most of the examples cited in this study have involved General Authorities, there have been instances of divine guidance to individuals in other callings as well. These revelations have blessed a variety of Church activities—calls to office, temple service, missionary work, the Welfare and Lamanite programs, and many more. Most of these revelations came by inspiration rather than through such spectacular means as personal visitations or visions. Interestingly and significantly, is likewise the source of most revelations recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants. Some might argue that the examples of divine guidance cited in this paper are not that unique—that many other similar manifestations have been experienced by any number of Church members. Such a contention simply confirms that the Lord guides and strengthens his Church today as much as in any former time.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Brigham Young and Thomas B. Marsh, in Journal of Discourses (London: Latter-day Saints' Book Depot, 1854-86), 5:206-10.
[^2] Thomas B. Marsh to Heber C. Kimball, 5 May 1857, Heber C. Kimball Papers, Archives, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah; hereafter cited as LDS Church Archives.
[^3] Minutes, 28 Mar. 1835, Kirtland Record Book, p. 198, LDS Church Archives.
[^4] See Ronald K. Esplin, "The Emergence of Brigham Young and the Twelve to Mormon Leadership, 1830-1841," Ph.D. diss., Brigham Young University, 1981, pp. 166ff.
[^5] For details, see Esplin, "Emergence of Brigham Young," chap. 4.
[^6] Joseph Smith Diary, 3 Nov. 1835, in Dean C. Jessee, ed., The Papers of Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1992), 2:63-64.
[^7] Joseph Smith Diary, 5 Nov. 1835, in Jessee, Papers of Joseph Smith, 2:65-66.
[^8] Historian's Office Journal, 16 Feb. 1859, LDS Church Archives.
[^9] Minutes, 12 Feb. 1849, LDS Church Archives.
[^10] Minutes, 30 Nov. 1847, Brigham Young Papers, LDS Church Archives.
[^11] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 8: 197.
[^12] For details of the Kirtland crisis, see Esplin, "Emergence of Brigham Young," chaps. 5-7, and Milton V. Backman, Jr., The Heavens Resound: A History of the Latter day Saints in Ohio, 1830-1838 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1983), chaps. 17-18; details not otherwise documented are from Esplin, "Emergence of Brigham Young."
[^13] Thomas B. Marsh and David Patten to Parley P. Pratt, 10 May 1837, Joseph Smith letterbook, Joseph Smith Papers, LDS Church Archives.
[^14] Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 2d ed. rev., edited by B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 2:489.
[^15] The story of Kimball's call and of the Kimball-Hyde mission is told in James B. Allen, Ronald K. Esplin, and David J. Whittaker, Men with a Mission: The Quorum of the Twelve Apostles in the British Isles, 1837-1841 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1992), pp. 23-53.
[^16] Wilford Woodruff Diary, 25 June 1857, LDS Church Archives.
[^17] Marsh autobiography published in Deseret News, 24 Mar. 1858.
[^18] If this is the allusion, it would not necessarily be an anachronism. Discussion of and prophecies about a destiny in the Rocky Mountains can now be demonstrated long before Nauvoo.
[^19] Esplin, "Emergence of Brigham Young," p. 313, n. 44.
