Byron R. Merrill, Heavens Are Open: The 1992 Sperry Symposium on the Doctrine and Covenants and Church History ( 1993)

9

Missionary Work: A View from the Doctrine & Covenants

H. Dean Garrett Brigham Young University

The Lord declared that the message of the Restoration must be preached to every nation, kindred, tongue and people (see D&C 133:31). Every person shall hear "the fulness of the gospel in his own tongue, and in his own language, through those who are ordained unto this power" (D&C 90:11). Early Church members inquired of the Lord how they were to fulfill this commandment. Through the Prophet Joseph Smith the Lord revealed how that was to be accomplished: the Lord issued a call to preach, defined the qualifications necessary for those who preach, revealed the message to be delivered, and declared the blessings promised to those who go forth. An understanding and application of these revelations relating to missionary work can greatly aid all Church members in personally fulfilling this great responsibility.

The Call to Preach

A primary obligation of Church members is to spread the gospel message throughout the world. In one of the first revelations given in this dispensation, the Lord declared, "The field is white already to harvest" (D&C 4:4). This important declaration was repeated several times (see D&C 6; 11-12; 14-16; 33) with the decree that it is "the eleventh hour, and the last time that I shall call laborers into my vineyard" (D&C 33:3). The laborers are to "gather mine elect from the four quarters of the earth, even as many as will believe in me, and hearken unto my voice" (D&C 33:6). Thus, the laborers are called by the Lord to thrust in their sickles and "reap with all [their] might, mind, and strength" (D&C 33:7).

Although opportunities for missionary work are available to all members of the Church, Melchizedek Priesthood holders in particular are called to serve as missionaries. The Lord declared: "As many as shall come before my servants . . . shall be ordained and sent forth to preach the everlasting gospel among the nations. . . . And this commandment shall be given unto the elders of my church that every man which will embrace it with singleness of heart may be ordained and sent forth even as I have spoken" (D&C 36:5, 7). To others he commanded: "Take upon you mine ordination, even that of an elder, to preach faith and repentance and remission of sins, according to my word, and the reception of the Holy Spirit by the laying on of hands" (D&C 53:3; see also 55:2). It is evident from these scriptures that when a man receives the Melchizedek Priesthood, he accepts the responsibility to preach the restored gospel to the children of God.

The servants of God will declare the message of the Restoration "unto the Gentiles first, and then, behold, and lo, they shall turn unto the Jews" (D&C 90:9). Then eventually the gospel will be preached unto "the heathen nations" (D&C 90:10). It is under these circumstances that "every man shall hear the fulness of the gospel in his own tongue, and in his own language, through those who are ordained unto this power" (D&C 90:11).

When the first missionaries were sent forth, the means of transportation and communication were the same as in Moses' time when he dealt with Pharaoh. Transportation was on foot or by animal, and communication was by word of mouth or mail delivered on foot or by animal. At the time these revelations were received, it probably seemed almost impossible that all individuals could be taught in their own tongue or language. Now, however, we live in a day when modern transportation, satellite and television communication, and computer translation and printing capabilities make it possible for every individual in the world to hear the gospel in his own tongue. Today missionaries are trained in languages and sent to every part of the world in fulfillment of this command to spread the gospel "unto every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people" (D&C 133:37).

One cannot be self-appointed to preach in God's kingdom. In the early stages of the Restoration, while the Book of Mormon was still being translated, Hyrum Smith wanted to go forth immediately and issue the warning voice. He was told by the Lord: "You need not suppose that you are called to preach until you are called" (D&C 11:15). In giving his law to the Church, the Lord declared: "It shall not be given to anyone to go forth to preach my gospel, or to build up my church, except he be ordained by some one who has authority" (D&C 42:11).

Qualifications to Preach

The response given by the Lord when Joseph Smith, Sr., asked how He wanted him to serve in the kingdom is commonly called "the qualification for the ministry." He was told that to serve in the kingdom, the Lord's servants must have the commitment to serve God "with all [their] heart, might, mind and strength" (D&C 4:2). The Lord requires total commitment. That is the basic building block for service in the kingdom. Our allegiance to whom we serve will greatly determine how we serve. The Lord does not allow for divided allegiance. We cannot "serve two masters: for . . . [we] will hate the one, and love the other" (Matthew 6:24).

The Lord does not require total commitment because of arrogance but because he knows what is necessary to build his kingdom and to save souls. Therefore, he requires total commitment of the heart (emotional), might (spiritual), mind (intellectual), and strength (physical) of the individual. The whole soul of the individual is required if success is to be obtained.

With a commitment to serve the Lord, the objective is to "seek to bring forth and establish the cause of Zion" (D&C 11:6). We are to "seek not for riches" (D&C 6:7) but rather to build God's kingdom. Elder John A. Widtsoe observed: "From one point of view it is selfish enough, perhaps, to keep the commandments that I may be blessed, but it is something even greater to keep the commandments that Zion may be established. . . . Unless we give of ourselves we cannot build Zion, or anything else worthy of the great cause that the Lord has given us." [^1]

The Lord revealed other qualifications that he desires in those who would preach his gospel to the nations of the earth. To be effective, missionaries should strive to obtain these qualities:

"True discipleship is for volunteers only." [^2] This sense of volunteerism is the heart of the kingdom of God—to serve in his kingdom, one must have the desire. God will never force. That is especially evident in missionary work.

When accepting a call to preach, we need to analyze the reason we desire to serve. Our motivation for serving is very critical. Elder Dallin H. Oaks observed six reasons that motivate service: earthly reward, good companionship, fear of punishment, duty or loyalty, hope of reward, and charity. He suggested that charity, the pure love of Christ (Moroni 7:47), should be the true reason for serving: "It must be unconcerned with self and heedless of personal advantage. It must be accomplished for the love of God and the love of his children." [^3] This type of service does not come automatically. Even though we may serve for various reasons at different times, as we continue to grow spiritually and develop Christlike qualities, the time will come when we will serve not for self but for God and his sons and daughters. It is then that we will serve God with "all [our] heart, might, mind and strength" (D&C 4:2).

When we have the desire to serve, we should not postpone that service. Hyrum Smith was told to thrust in his sickle "while the day lasts" (D&C 11:3). We, too, must thrust in our sickle and serve while the day lasts. Opportunities to serve come, but they also pass. The key is to serve when God wants us to serve. That ability does not come easily. Circumstances or demands on time or talents can dampen our desire. Desire can be lost. The decision to wait until it is more convenient or comfortable might not be wise. We should serve when the desire is strong.

Become Godlike

A desire to serve comes by knowing God and emulating him (see D&C 93). A love for God and the desire to be like him motivate an individual to develop a godlike character, and developing a godlike character is essential to qualify to serve in the kingdom. The Lord instructed Joseph Smith, Sr., that "faith, hope, charity and love, with an eye single to the glory of God, qualify him for the work" (D&C 4:5). The Lord further advised him to "remember faith, virtue, knowledge, temperance, patience, brotherly kindness, godliness, charity, humility, diligence" (D&C 4:6). In our mortal condition, these godlike characteristics do not manifest themselves automatically in a person; they must be developed and cultivated. The Lord counseled: "Ask, and ye shall receive; knock, and it shall be opened unto you" (D&C 4:7). This counsel applies directly to the qualifications to be missionaries in his kingdom. If we earnestly seek these qualities and ask God for them, they will be given to us. In other words, each member of the Church can be qualified to serve in the kingdom. We must have the desire to serve and then do whatever is necessary to develop the qualities essential for service. To an early believer, Joseph Knight, the Lord summarized the godlike qualities necessary: "No one can assist in this work except he shall be humble and full of love, having faith, hope, and charity, being temperate in all things, whatsoever shall be entrusted to his care" (D&C 12:8).

Obtain His Word

To be effective missionaries, we must have a strong spiritual base on which to build. As we study the scriptures, our spirituality increases and our love of God and of his children intensifies. Hyrum Smith was instructed: "Seek not to declare my word, but first seek to obtain my word, and then shall your tongue be loosed; then, if you desire, you shall have my Spirit and my word, yea, the power of God unto the convincing of men" (D&C 11:21). If we are to teach, we must know the subject to be taught. Hyrum was told to "study my word" (D&C 11:22). The members of the Church are also instructed to "search these commandments [the Doctrine and Covenants] for they are true and faithful and the prophecies and promises which are in them shall all be fulfilled" (D&C 1:37). Shortly after the Church was organized, Joseph Smith and his companions were commanded: "Let your time be devoted to the studying of the scriptures, and to preaching" (D&C 26:1). The Lord was emphatic when he declared to a group of early missionaries: "Ye are not sent forth to be taught, but to teach the children of men the things which I have put into your hands by the power of my Spirit" (D&C 43:15). That statement has explicit reference to the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants.

Obtaining God's word through scripture study not only produces knowledge but also develops spirituality. Elder Bruce R. McConkie said: "I think that people who study the scriptures get a dimension to their life that nobody else gets and that can't be gained in any way except by studying the scriptures.

"There's an increase in faith and a desire to do what's right and a feeling of inspiration and understanding that come to people who study the gospel—meaning particularly the Standard Works—and who ponder the principles, that can't come in any other way." [^4]

A special relationship can develop between the Lord and his sons and daughters when they study his revealed word. President Spencer W. Kimball declared: "I find that when I get casual in my relationships with divinity and when it seems that no divine ear is listening and no divine voice is speaking, that I am far, far away. If I immerse myself in the scriptures the distance narrows and the spirituality returns. I kind myself loving more intensely those whom I must love with all my heart and mind and strength, and loving them more, I find it easier to abide their counsel." [^5]

Obtain His Spirit

The key to successful missionary work is obtaining the companionship of the Holy Ghost. Once we have obtained godlike characteristics, we are prepared to receive the companionship of the Holy Ghost. It is through the Holy Ghost that teaching takes place. The Lord taught the elders in the law of the Church that they were to teach the principles of the gospel as found in the scriptures "as they shall be directed by the Spirit. And the Spirit shall be given unto you by the prayer of faith; and if ye receive not the Spirit ye shall not teach" (D&C 42:13-14). It is the Holy Ghost that converts an individual to the truth. The Lord warned the elders that if they did not have the Spirit attendant with their teaching, they would only go through the motions of teaching because true conversion and understanding will not take place without the Holy Ghost. Having the Spirit is so critical to the teaching process that, said the Lord, "He that is ordained of me and sent forth to preach the word of truth by the Comforter, in the Spirit of truth, doth he preach it by the Spirit of truth or some other way? And if it be by some other way it is not of God" (D&C 50:17-18). Even if truth is taught, it is not of God unless it is taught by the Spirit of truth.

The Lord revealed that the learner of truth must also learn by the Spirit of truth. "And again, he that receiveth the word of truth, doth he receive it by the Spirit of truth or some other way? If it be some other way it is not of God" (D&C 50:19-20). The process of learning by the Spirit is important because it is the only way that the change called rebirth can take place. "Whosoever believeth on my words, them will I visit with the manifestation of my Spirit; and they shall be born of me, even of water and of the Spirit" (D&C 5:16).

On the other hand, the Spirit does not attend the works of unrighteous servants. In responding to the sinful behavior of a group of early elders, the Lord declared that because of the evil in their hearts, "I, the Lord, withheld my Spirit" (D&C 64:16). Sidney Rigdon "exalted himself in his heart, and received not counsel, but grieved the Spirit" (D&C 63:55). At another time the Lord warned that when "the Spirit of the Lord is grieved" (D&C 121:37), it withdraws.

So important is the Spirit in the building of the kingdom of God that very early in the Restoration, the Lord instructed Oliver Cowdery on the workings of the Spirit. When Oliver traveled to Harmony, Pennsylvania, to determine the truthfulness of the claims of Joseph Smith, the Lord said to him: "As often as thou hast inquired thou hast received instruction of my Spirit. If it had not been so, thou wouldst not have come to the place where thou art at this time. Behold, thou knowest that thou hast inquired of me and I did enlighten thy mind; and now I tell thee these things that thou mayest know that thou hast been enlightened by the Spirit of truth" (D&C 6:14-15).

As further evidence of the influence of the Holy Ghost in the decisions of Oliver Cowdery, the Lord reminded him of a further witness when he prayed in his heart to know the truths that he had heard. "Did I not speak peace to your mind concerning the matter? What greater witness can you have than from God?" (D&C 6:23). Later, when Oliver wanted to translate the Book of Mormon, the Lord taught him that the translation was done by the Spirit of revelation: "I will tell you in your mind and in your heart, by the Holy Ghost, which shall come upon you and which shall dwell in your heart. Now, behold, this is the spirit of revelation; behold, this is the spirit by which Moses brought the children of Israel through the Red Sea on dry ground" (D&C 8:2-3).

It is evident from these instructions to Oliver Cowdery that the Lord speaks to our mind and heart via his Spirit. Thus, it is critical that a preacher of the gospel have a pure mind and heart. God will bestow his Spirit "on those who love him and purify themselves before him" (D&C 76:116). That is why the Lord has said that the basic qualification to serve in the kingdom is to "love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy might, mind, and strength" (D&C 59:5) and "to keep my commandments, yea, with all your might, mind and strength" (D&C 11:20). That prepares us to be in tune with the Holy Ghost.

The Spirit is given to us "by the prayer of faith" (D&C 42:14). Martin Harris, for example, was commanded to "pray always, and I will pour out my Spirit upon you" (D&C 19:38). The members of the Church are also promised that if they partake of the sacrament with the proper attitude, they will "always have his Spirit to be with them" (D&C 20:77). Therefore we who engage in the preaching of the gospel can, if we desire, have the Holy Ghost as our companion. We can "go forth in the power of my Spirit, preaching my gospel, two by two, in my name, lifting up your voices as with the sound of a trump, declaring my word like unto angels of God" (D&C 42:6).

The Message

The Lord revealed what should be taught to the world by those qualified to preach. When the early brethren who had already accepted the gospel inquired of the Lord what would be the most important thing for them to do, the answer was "Declare repentance unto this people, that you may bring souls unto me" (D&C 15:6; see also 16:6). The Lord commanded Ezra Thayre and Northrop Sweet: "Open your mouths and they shall be filled, saying: Repent, repent, and prepare ye the way of the Lord, and make his paths straight; for the kingdom of heaven is at hand" (D&C 33:10). To cry nothing but repentance is more than merely standing on a soapbox and decrying sin. "When the Lord calls upon his servants to cry nothing but repentance, he does not mean that they may not cry baptism, and call upon the people to obey the commandments of the Lord, but he wishes that all that they say and do be in the spirit of bringing the people to repentance. Any missionary who fails to do this in his ministry is derelict in his duty." [^6]

The message of the Restoration must be sent to the world. The Lord has assessed the world as being "corrupted every whit; and there is none which doeth good save it be a few; and they err in many instances because of priestcrafts, all having corrupt minds" (D&C 33:4). Thus priestcraft has distracted many from the truth. So corrupt has the world become that for many the truth is hard to recognize or find. "For there are many yet on the earth among all sects, parties, and denominations, who are blinded by the subtle craftiness of men, whereby they lie in wait to deceive, and who are only kept from the truth because they know not where to find it" (D&C 123:12). It was for this reason that the Lord called Joseph Smith and "spake unto him from heaven, and gave him commandments" (D&C 1:17). The Lord gave Joseph Smith power to translate the Book of Mormon, which contains "the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles and to the Jews also" (D&C 20:9). One purpose of the Book of Mormon is to prove "to the world that the holy scriptures [Bible] are true, and that God does inspire men and call them to his holy work in this age and generation, as well as in generations of old; thereby showing that he is the same God yesterday, today, and forever" (D&C 20:11-12). The messengers of the Restoration are to teach of Joseph Smith and the restored gospel, especially from the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants. It is important that we understand that the Book of Mormon and Doctrine and Covenants were brought forth "for the salvation of a ruined world" (D&C 135:6). The gospel was not restored to benefit only the present members of the Church. The Lord declared that the gospel covenant has been confirmed upon us "not for [our] sakes only, but for the sake of the whole world. And the whole world lieth in sin and groaneth under darkness and under the bondage of sin" (D&C 84:48-49).

Thus, a main focus of the members of the Church must be on the preaching of the gospel, both as a warning voice and as an invitation to accept the truths of the revealed gospel and follow the living God. The messengers of the Restoration carry a warning voice of repentance to the world: "And the rebellious shall be pierced with much sorrow; for their iniquities shall be spoken upon the housetops, and their secret acts shall be revealed. And the voice of warning shall be unto all people, by the mouths of my disciples, whom I have chosen in these last days" (D&C 1:3-4).

The Lord's disciples are sent forth with much power and authority. The mission of the Church and the missionary effort is not just to baptize; it is to declare "repentance unto this generation" (D&C 11:9). The Lord's servants are given power to "seal both on earth and in heaven, the unbelieving and rebellious; yea, verily, to seal them up unto the day when the wrath of God shall be poured out upon the wicked without measure—unto the day when the Lord shall come to recompense unto every man according to his work, and measure to every man according to the measure which he has measured to his fellow man" (D&C 1:8-10). The invitation will be given to all to repent and come to Christ. "Wherefore the voice of the Lord is unto the ends of the earth, that all that will hear may hear" (D&C 1:11). Those who repent will be accepted into his kingdom (D&C 20:37), and those who refuse to heed the warning voice will be sealed up to the judgment of God.

Promised Blessings

As missionaries go forth under the influence of the Holy Ghost, the Lord has given great promises to them. He told the early missionaries to "speak the thoughts that I shall put into your hearts, and you shall not be confounded before men; for it shall be given you in the very hour, yea, in the very moment, what ye shall say" (D&C 100:5-6). If the missionaries will "declare whatsoever thing ye declare in my name, in solemnity of heart, in the spirit of meekness, in all things," the Lord promised, "the Holy Ghost shall be shed forth in bearing record unto all things whatsoever ye shall say" (D&C 100:7-8). Therefore, the warning message and the call to repentance can successfully be given even if individuals do not accept them or respond positively to them.

Perhaps the greatest promise to faithful missionaries is a personal one. To a group of early missionaries who had just returned from Missouri, the Lord said: "There are those among you who have sinned; but verily I say, for this once, for mine own glory, and for the salvation of souls, I have forgiven you your sins" (D&C 64:3). To another group of missionaries traveling to Jackson County, the Lord declared this great promise: "Nevertheless, ye are blessed, for the testimony which ye have borne is recorded in heaven for the angels to look upon; and they rejoice over you, and your sins are forgiven you" (D&C 62:3). He commanded the missionaries to "lift up their voice and declare my word with loud voices, without wrath or doubting, lifting up holy hands upon them. For I am able to make you holy, and your sins are forgiven you" (D&C 60:7). A relationship appears to exist between forgiveness of sin and the bearing of testimony in missionary work.

Summary

The prophets have declared that we do not need just missionaries but better prepared missionaries. With the tremendous responsibilities placed upon the members of the Church to warn and cry repentance to a world full of sin, we must strive to develop the qualities necessary to meet these responsibilities. We must desire to serve and be prepared to deliver the message God has revealed for the world. Elder John A. Widtsoe summarized God's expectations as follows:

"So we need, in this Church and Kingdom, for our own and the world's welfare a group of men and women in their individual lives who shall be as a light to the nations, and really standards for the world to follow [D&C 45:9; 115:4-5]. Such a people must be different from the world as it now is. There is no opportunity for Latter-day Saints to say we shall be as the world is, unless the world has the same aim that we have. We are here to build Zion to Almighty God, for the blessing of all the world. In that aim we are unique and different from all other people. We must respect that obligation, and not be afraid of it. We cannot walk as other men, or talk as other men, or do as other men, for we have a different destiny, obligation, and responsibility placed upon us, and we must fit ourselves for that great destiny and obligation." [^7]

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] See Wilford Woodruff Journal, 1 Feb. 1843, Archives, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah; hereafter cited as LDS Church Archives.
[^2] On 10 February 1843 Joseph reviewed the mobbing of 24 March 1832; see Joseph Smith Diary, 10 Feb. 1843, LDS Church Archives.
[^3] Joseph Smith Diary, 7 Jan. 1843; Wilson Law's poem, "All hail to our Chief! Who has come back to us in honor" was published in Times and Seasons, 4 (15 February 1843): 112.
[^4] Woodruff Journal, 17 Jan. 1843.
[^5] In Times and Seasons, 4 (1 February 1843): 96.
[^6] Woodruff Journal, 18 Jan. 1843.
[^7] See Joseph Smith Diary, 20 Jan. 1843. Following Joseph's death in 1844, Phelps changed the title and added several new stanzas; see Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 2d ed. rev., edited by B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 193251), 5:253-54.
