Byron R. Merrill, Heavens Are Open: The 1992 Sperry Symposium on the Doctrine and Covenants and Church History ( 1993)

10

"Eternity Sketch'd in a Vision": The Poetic Version of Doctrine & Covenants 76

Richard Neitzel Holzapfel CES Coordinator, Irvine, California

Early 1843 was a busy season for the Prophet as he, along with his clerks William Wines Phelps and Wilford Woodruff, began reading proofs of a second edition of the Doctrine and Covenants. [^1] Joseph was also involved in preparing his personal history for publication, portions of which were already appearing serially in the Times and Seasons. In particular he was reviewing the period of February and March 1832 for Richards and Phelps as they began to compose this portion of his history. [^2] That period was, of course, the time when the Vision (D&C 76) was received in Hiram, Ohio.

The Prophet and his people also had cause at this time for great celebration. An Illinois court had advised Governor Thomas Ford that a writ issued for Joseph Smith's extradition to Missouri was illegal, and a federal district judge discharged the Prophet on 7 January 1843. While accompanying the Prophet home from Springfield, Wilson Law and Willard Richards sang A Jubilee Song in honor of Joseph's newfound freedom. [^3] A day of fasting, prayer, and thanksgiving was held in Nauvoo on 17 January to express gratitude for the Prophet's "release and delivery." [^4] Next day a group assembled at Joseph's home for "a day of conviviality and rejoicing, and [that] might properly be called a day of jubilee or release." [^5] A printed handbill with several songs, including one composed by Eliza R. Snow, was distributed, and the songs were sung to the Prophet. At the end of the festivities, Wilford Woodruff noted, "We returned to our homes rejoicing that [we] could again have the privilege of enjoying the society of our prophet seer." [^6] Two days later, W. W. Phelps presented Joseph a poem entitled Vade-Mecum, or Go with Me, as part of the jubilee celebration. [^7]

It was in this setting in February 1843 that a poetic version of the Vision entitled The Answer was first published, under Joseph's name, in the Times and Seasons as a rejoinder to Phelps's jubilee poem, Vade Mecum. [^8]The History of the Church states: "In reply to W. W. Phelps's Vade Mecum, or "Go with me," of 20th of January last [1843], I [Joseph] dictated an answer: [It consisted of the "Revelation known as the Vision of the Three Glories," Doctrine and Covenants, section lxxvi, made into verse]." [^9]

Naturally, the question of authorship of this poem arises. [^10] Did Joseph write it himself, or did someone else write it? Can we be sure the ideas communicated represent the Prophet's own expression?

It is certain that Joseph often depended upon others to produce material under his direction. At one time, he may have simply asked someone to compose an item for him; at another time he may have given someone the main ideas; in other instances, he was involved heavily in the final literary creation. Although Joseph's ideas are present in these documents, the particular literary structure (grammar, punctuation, spelling, and other aspects of style) often depended upon who was writing for him at the time.

Many of the editorials in the Times and Seasons were not Joseph's own words, although he took over as editor of the newspaper in March 1842. The Prophet indicated that only those editorials "having my signature" were those for which he was personally responsible. [^11] It is therefore highly significant that the 1843 poem ends, "Joseph Smith, Nauvoo, Feb. 1843." The first-person singular "I, Joseph, the prophet" in stanza 11 of the poem itself also seems to confirm his acceptance of the material, even if it had been drafted by someone else.

John Taylor, a close associate with Joseph at the time and the new editor of the Times and Seasons, indicated that in his most recent legal contest Joseph's defense attorney had made some comments about biblical poetry. For Taylor, the poetic rendition of the Vision was ample proof that "modern Prophets can prophecy in poetry, as well as the ancient prophets and that no difference, even of that kind any longer exists." He believed Joseph was responsible for the poem, and he emphasized "the ideas" as the most significant aspect when he stated in the published introduction to the poem: "The following very curious poetic composition, is at once both novel and interesting; for while the common landmarks of modern poetry are entirely disregarded; there is something so dignified and exalted conveyed in the ideas of this production, that it cannot fail to strike the attention of every superficial observer." [^12]

Whether W. W. Phelps, Parley P. Pratt or someone else helped Joseph compose the poetic rendition may be difficult to prove. On the other hand, that Joseph accepted it as representing his own ideas seems a reasonable proposition. It therefore can be argued that the poetic rendition can give us insight into how Joseph understood the implications of the Vision, or alternatively, as he was willing to reveal it to the Saints in 1843.

THE ANSWER to W. W. Phelps, Esq. A VISION 1. I will go, I will go, to the home of the Saints, Where the virtue's the value, and life the reward; But before I return to my former estate I must fulfil the mission I had from the Lord. 2. Wherefore, hear, O ye heavens, and give ear O ye earth; And rejoice ye inhabitants truly again; For the Lord he is God, and his life never ends, And besides him there ne'er was a Saviour of men. 3. His ways are a wonder; his wisdom is great; The extent of his doings, there's none can unveil; His purposes fail not; from age unto age He still is the same, and his years never fail. 4. His throne is the heavens, his life time is all Of eternity now, and eternity then; His union is power, and none stays his hand,— The Alpha, Omega, for ever: Amen. 5. For thus saith the Lord, in the spirit of truth, I am merciful, gracious, and good unto those That fear me, and live for the life that's to come; My delight is to honor the saints with repose; 6. That serve me in righteousness true to the end; Eternal's their glory, and great their reward; I'll surely reveal all my myst'ries to them,— The great hidden myst'ries in my kingdom stor'd— 7. From the council in Kolob, to time on the earth. And for ages to come unto them I will show My pleasure & will, what my kingdom will do: Eternity's wonders they truly shall know. 8. Great things of the future I'll show unto them, Yea, things of the vast generations to rise; For their wisdom and glory shall be very great, And their pure understanding extend to the skies:

A careful study of the poetic rendition of the Vision demonstrates that it is more than a reworking of the message of the 1832 revelation; indeed, it is a one-of-a-kind commentary. Surprisingly, few gospel scholars have explicitly used this poetic writing to help interpret the Vision itself. That the poem did not receive much attention during the last half of the nineteenth century and the first part of the twentieth century may be because the early printed sources of the poem were not easily accessible. When the History of the Church was published in 1909, the text of poem was not included, a significant lapse in making the document available to a wider audience in the beginning of this century. It was not until N. B. Lundwall reprinted it in 1951 that the poem generally became available. [^14] Several important twentieth century studies neglect the poem altogether. [^15] A few more recent works make slight reference to it. [^16] A final group reproduce the poem in its entirety as an addendum but do not specifically cite it in their commentary. [^17]

The poetic version of Doctrine and Covenants 76 emphasizes several helpful points relating to the premortal experience; the Savior's mission and power; Satan and his kingdom; the telestial, terrestrial, and celestial kingdoms; and Joseph Smith's life and mission.

The Premortal Experience

That individuals existed as premortal spirits either was not known or not understood during the first years after the Church's founding in 1830. Possibly the first hint of such a knowledge came in 1833, when Joseph received a revelation now recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 93. Privately, as early as 1839, Joseph began teaching that there was a mother in heaven—the mother of our premortal spirits. By 1841, Joseph publicly declared, "Spirits are eternal." [^18] When the Book of Abraham was published in March 1842, the doctrine was further clarified (see Abraham 3:18).

The connection between a foreordained mission and the premortal life is stated positively in the poetic rendition:

I will go, I will go, to the home of the Saints, Where the virtue's the value, and life the reward; But before I return to my former estate I must fulfil the mission I had from the Lord. (Stanza 1; emphasis added)

Joseph emphasized the doctrine of the premortal existence when he stated on 12 May 1844, "Every man who has a calling to minister to the inhabitants of the world, was ordained to that very purpose in the Grand Council of Heaven before this world was—I suppose that I was ordained to this very office in that Grand Council." [^19]

The Prophet expanded the Saints' understanding of the importance of Kolob (already known to the Saints as a great governing star—see Abraham 3:1-3) and the connection it had with the premortal council. A great "council in Kolob" was held before the earth was created. He wrote, "From the council in Kolob, to time on the earth" (stanza 7). The implication is, of course, that at least part of the premortal experience occurred in Kolob.

The Savior's Mission and Power

Joseph revealed to the Saints the power of Christ's atonement. In the poetic rendition of Doctrine and Covenants 76, he proclaimed:

Wherefore, hear, O ye heavens, and give ear O ye earth; And rejoice ye inhabitants truly again; For the Lord he is God, and his life never ends, And besides him there ne'er was a Saviour of men. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Jesus the Maker and Savior of all; The only begotten, (Messiah) his son. Of whom I bear record, as all prophets have, And the record I bear is the fulness,—yea even The truth of the gospel of Jesus—the Christ. . . . . . . . . . . . . . He's the Saviour, and only begotten of God— By him, of him, and through him, the worlds were all made, Even all that career in the heavens so broad, Whose inhabitants, too, from the first to the last, Are sav'd by the very same Saviour of ours; And, of course, are begotten God's daughters and sons, By the very same truths, and the very same pow'rs. (Stanzas 2, 12-13, 19-20; emphasis added) [^20]

Joseph Smith taught that the redemption of Christ was not limited to this world nor to a specific period of time. It reached backward in time and forward into the future, and just as it had crossed the oceans and continents during the first century to bless the lives not only of those at Jerusalem but also of the Nephites and Lamanites in America, the Atonement spread across the vastness of space. It was a final act that did not necessitate another sacrifice in the future.

Satan and His Kingdom

One of the most startling passages from the poetic rendition of Doctrine and Covenants 76 is the knowledge revealed concerning Lucifer's position in the premortal life. Joseph wrote:

And I saw and bear record of warfare in heav'n; For an angel of light, in authority great, Rebell'd against Jesus, and sought for his pow'r, But was thrust down to woe from his Godified state. And the heavens all wept, and the tears drop'd like dew, That Lucifer, son of the morning had fell! Yea, is fallen! is fall'n, and become, Oh, alas! The son of Perdition; the devil of hell! (Stanza 21-22; emphasis added)

The 1842 publication of the Book of Abraham apparently taught that many of the premortal "intelligences" reached a spiritual stature of "godhood" (see Abraham 3-4). That these premortal spirits would eventually take a body was stated by the Prophet just a few months after the publication of the poem. In August 1843 Joseph stated, "But the Holy Ghost is yet a spiritual body and [is] waiting to take to himself a body, as the Savior did or as God did, or the gods before them took bodies." [^21]

That Lucifer held a position of prominence in the premortal life is certain, but here and only here does Joseph identify Lucifer's "godified state" before he fell to the earth to become the devil. [^22] Shortly after the publication of the poem, Joseph said: "In the other world [spirit world] there is a variety of spirits—some who seek to excel—and this was the case with the devil when he fell, he sought for things which were unlawful, hence he was cast down and it is said he drew away many with him" (some punctuation added). [^23]

The Kingdoms of Glory

The central facet of both the poem and the original revelation is the series of visions of the eternal kingdoms of glory. The poem compares the kingdoms in an interesting fashion:

The glory celestial is one like the sun; The glory terrestrial is one like the moon; The glory telestial is one like the stars, And all harmonize like the parts of a tune. As the stars are all different in lustre and size, So the telestial region, is mingled in bliss; From least unto greatest, and greatest to least, The reward is exactly as promis'd in this. (Stanzas 68-69; emphasis added)

The Telestial Kingdom

To emphasize the final results of accepting and believing in creeds of postbiblical Christianity, Joseph noted that the telestial kingdom will include:

These are they that came out for Apollos and Paul; For Cephas and Jesus, in all kinds of hope; For Enoch and Moses, and Peter, and John; For Luther and Calvin, and even the Pope. (Stanza 70; emphasis added)

The 1843 poem underscores that the acceptance of creeds instead of covenants is the real issue. Joseph added to the original revelation a significant phrase:

They never received the gospel of Christ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Nor the covenant neither, which Jacob once had; They went their own way, and they have their reward. (Stanza 71; emphasis added)

In addition to those already cited as being those who will inherit telestial glory, the Prophet added "hypocrites" to the list (stanza 60). That seems to refer to those pretending to be religious or believing in a false creed but whose hearts are far away from God. While it is a "lesser, or starry world, next in its place," the telestial kingdom is a place where the Lord sends "the Comforter [Holy Spirit]. . . / And minist'ring angels, to happify there"; it is a kingdom of "glory, dominion and bliss" (stanzas 58, 62).

An often repeated story associated with the telestial kingdom deals with something Joseph Smith was purported to have said: "The telestial kingdom is so great, if we knew what it was like we would kill ourselves to get there." Wilford Woodruff recounted a comment by the Prophet that may be the basis of that apocryphal story. According to Charles Lowell Walker, Wilford Woodruff "refered to a saying of Joseph Smith, which he heard him utter (like this) That if the People knew what was behind the vail, they would try by every means to commit suicide that they might get there, but the Lord in his wisdom had implanted the fear of death in every person that they might cling to life and thus accomplish the designs of their creator." [^24] What he may have meant by this statement may never be known, but we do know that the happy state of those who inherit the telestial kingdom is emphasized in the poem.

The Terrestrial Kingdom

Those who receive a terrestrial glory seem to fit into four categories. The first are those "that have died without law"—the gospel law— and did not receive it in the spirit world. The Prophet further noted they are

The heathen of ages that never had hope, And those of the region and shadow of death, The spirits in prison, that light has brought up. (Stanza 54)

Another group is represented by those

. . . spirits in prison the Savior once preach'd, And taught them the gospel, with powers afresh; And then were the living baptiz'd for their dead, That they might be judg'd as if men in the flesh. (Stanza 55)

A third group

. . . are they that are hon'rable men of the earth; Who were blinded and dup'd by the cunning of men: They receiv'd not the truth of the Savior at first; But did, when they heard it in prison, again. (Stanza 56)

The fourth and final category are those

Not valiant for truth, they obtain'd not the crown, But are of that glory that's typ'd by the moon: They are they, that come into the presence of Christ, But not to the fulness of God, on his throne. (Stanza 57)

The Celestial Kingdom

By capitalizing the word Gods in stanza 45 of the poetic rendition of Doctrine and Covenants 76, Joseph may have attempted to be more precise regarding the stature of those who obtain the highest degree of the celestial kingdom: "As written: They're Gods; even sons of the Lord." [^25] In the original publication of the Vision in 1832, the word gods was not capitalized. Reorganized Latter-Day Saint apologists used the 1832 version, which uses the lowercase gods, during the nineteenth century and first half of the twentieth century as a means of countering the full implications of the doctrine of eternal glory. [^26] Thus, in this poem, which uses the uppercase Gods, Joseph may have attempted to reveal in a plainer fashion his intention.

In 1844 William Law, formerly a counselor in the First Presidency, formed a new church, which accepted the Book of Mormon and the 1835 Doctrine and Covenants as standard works but rejected Joseph Smith, claiming that he was a "fallen Prophet." In their newspaper on 7 June 1844, Law and his associates accused Joseph of teaching "false and damnable doctrines . . . such as plurality of Gods above the God of this universe." [^27]

Nine days later, the Prophet responded to their charges: "Oh Apostates did ye never think of this bef[ore] these are the quotations that the apostates take to the scrip[tures]—they swear that they bel[ieve] the Bible [and] the Book of Mormon [and etc.]." Joseph continued, "Go [and] read the vision [Section 76]—there is glory [and] glory— Sun, moon & Stars—& so do they differ in glory & every man who reigns is a God—[and] the text of the Do[trine] & Cov[enan]t damns themselves." [^28] For Joseph, the doctrine had always been present since the 1832 revelation was first printed and if the apostates had only just discovered it, then they never truly understood the implications of the Vision.

Although the 1832 revelation used the phrase "kings and priests" to describe celestial beings, the full implications of such titles certainly were not understood by the Saints until Joseph began to reveal the ordinances of the holy endowment to the "Quorum of the Anointed" in 1842. [^29] The 1832 revelation indicated that these righteous Saints "are they who are the church of the first-born: They are they into whose hands the Father has given all things: they are they who are priests and kings." [^30]

The 1843 poetic rendition clarifies and expands upon several aspects of this description. Joseph indicated that the "church of the firstborn" is "of God." He also indicated what is meant to have the Father place into one's hand "all things" when he said: "For they hold the keys of the kingdom of heav'n" (stanza 44; emphasis added).

As early as April 1842, Joseph began introducing a theme regarding the "keys of the kingdom" in his public and private discourses. During an early Relief Society meeting he "exhorted the sisters always to concentrate their faith and prayers for, and place confidence in, those who God has appointed to honor, who God has placed at the head to lead [Church leaders]—that we should arm them with our prayers— that the keys of the kingdom are about to be given them." [^31] The "keys" referred to were given in the endowment, when the term took on greater meaning than before.

The poetic rendition emphasizes the stature of the celestial Saints and indicates that the spirit of promise can be sealed upon an individual by a living agent of God:

For these overcome, by their faith and their works, Being tried in their life time, as purified gold. And seal'd by the spirit of promise, to life, By men called of God, as was Aaron of old. (Stanza 43; emphasis added)

While the glorious doctrines of exaltation were being opened to them, Joseph cautioned the Saints:

'Tis wisdom that man never glory in man, But give God the glory for all that he hath. (Stanza 41)

Joseph Smith's Life and Mission

Just a few days before Joseph published the poem, he stated, "I know what I say; I understand my mission and business. God Almighty is my shield, and what can man do if God is my friend. I shall not be sacrificed until my time comes—then I shall be offered freely." [^32] Contemporary sources confirm the Prophet's sense of mission and his knowledge regarding his death. [^33] Joseph began his poetic rendition:

I will go, I will go, to the home of the Saints, Where the virtue's the value, and life the reward; But before I return to my former estate I must fulfil the mission I had from the Lord. (Stanza 1)

A foreboding feeling is found in the words "I will go, I will go." This theme is emphasized again:

I will go, I will go, while the secret of life, Is blooming in heaven, and blasting in hell; Is leaving on earth, and a budding in space:— I will go, I will go, with you, brother, farewell. (Stanza 78)

Early in his mission, Joseph felt confident of the protection God had promised him. In Nauvoo, he began to discover for himself and reveal to the Saints his mortal destiny—martyrdom. In two dramatic prophecies, the first dated 9 April 1842 and the second just a few weeks later, on 28 April, Joseph began to prepare the Saints for his early departure. During a funeral address, he reflected upon the sadness of parting prematurely from family and friends. He then stated:

"Some have supposed that Brother Joseph could not die, but this is a mistake. It is true there have been times when I have had the promise of my life to accomplish such and such things, but having accomplished those things I have not at present any lease of my life, and am as liable to die as other men." [^34]

The minutes of an early Nauvoo Relief Society noted:

"[Joseph] did not know as he should have many opportunities of teaching them, that they were going to be left to themselves; they would not long have him to instruct them; that the Church would not have his instructions long, and the world would not be troubled with him a great while and would not have his teachings." [^35]

These sources, along with many others, demonstrate the Prophet's foreknowledge of his impending death. The poetic version of Section 76 is another contemporary source that details Joseph's own sense of mission and his knowledge concerning his own mortal destiny. That a knowledge of his martyrdom made him somewhat melancholy on occasions is revealed in the emotionally charged phrase, "I will go, I will go, with you, brother, farewell."

Additional Insights

The poem also includes a number of additional insights. For example, the Prophet clarified the phrase, "meridian of time," when it was noted "he [Christ] came to the world in the middle of time" (stanza 33). The destiny of those who had turned from the truth was emphasized in these words:

And which is the torment apostates receive, But the end, or the place where the torment began, Save to them who are made to partake of the same, Was never, nor will be, revealed unto man. (Stanza 37)

And the eternal nature of the gospel was reemphasized:

Who receiv'd and believ'd, and repented likewise, And then were baptis'd, as a man always was, Who ask'd and receiv'd a remission of sin, And honored the kingdom by keeping its laws. (Stanza 41; emphasis added)

Conclusion

Over the Prophet's signature, a commentary on the Vision was published in Nauvoo. That poetic rendition of Doctrine and Covenants 76 adds to our understanding of the original principles communicated in the revelation as Joseph understood it or, alternatively, as he was willing to reveal it to the Saints in 1843. And, as the poem stated:

I, Joseph, the prophet, in spirit beheld, And the eyes of the inner man truly did see Eternity sketch'd in a vision from God, Of what was, and now is, and yet is to be. (Stanza 11)

Notes

32 . Woodruff Journal, 22 Jan. 1843 .

---
Notas:
[^1] From time to time, the Lord brings together a critical mass of Saints in order to build temples and to strengthen his people with regard to material things. [^5] The best example of this has been the nineteenth-century gathering to Utah, which facilitated, within its first fifty years, the construction of four temples. This gathering has also enabled the Saints to achieve a level of material prosperity such that they could afford to send their daughters and sons on missions to take the gospel message elsewhere. The Book of Mormon, because it was revealed in our time, is also properly called modern revelation, but it will not be included in this study.
[^2] There may be places where the idea of physical gathering or returning to promised lands is used metaphorically to represent the gathering to the gospel. This seems to be more the case in the Old Testament than in modern revelation. Gathering to Christ is the key issue. Spencer W. Kimball, "When the World Will Be Converted," Ensign, Oct. 1974, p. 7: "I feel that when we have done all in our power that the Lord will find a way to open doors. That is my faith. . . . Is anything too hard for the Lord? . . . If he commands, certainly he can fulfill. . . . I believe the Lord can do anything he sets his mind to do. But I can see no good reason why the Lord would open doors that we are not prepared to enter."
[^3] Boyd K. Packer, "To Be Learned Is Good If . . . ," Ensign, Nov. 1992, p. 73.
[^4] Ibid., p. 71. See also Spencer W. Kimball, The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, ed. Edward L. Kimball (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982), p. 439: "The gathering of Israel consists of joining the true church and their coming to a knowledge of the true God. . . . Any person, therefore, who has accepted the restored gospel, and who now seeks to worship the Lord in his own tongue and with the Saints in the nations where he lives, has complied with the law of the gathering of Israel and is heir to all of the blessings promised the Saints in these last days."
[^5] See Joseph Smith's comments on this in The Words of Joseph Smith, ed. Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1980), pp. 212-13. See also Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1938), p. 308.
[^6] Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 231.
[^7] See also Harold B. Lee, "Strengthen the Stakes of Zion," Ensign, July 1973, p. 3.
[^8] The Personal Writings of Joseph Smith, ed. Dean C. Jessee (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1984), pp. 308-9: "I know that Zion, in the own due time of the Lord will be redeemed, but how many will be the days of her purification, tribulation and affliction, the Lord has kept hid from my eyes; and when I enquire concerning this subject the voice of the Lord is, Be still, and know that I am God! . . . Now there are two things of which I am ignorant and the Lord will not show me. . . . and they are these, Why God hath suffered so great calamity to come upon Zion; or what the great moving cause of this great affliction is. . . . And again by what means he will return her back to her inheritance." See also Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 34.
[^9] Elder Packer spoke of self-appointed leaders who "are misleading members to gather to colonies or cults." He called them "deceivers" and warned strongly against them. "To Be Learned Is Good If . . . ," p. 73.
[^10] Ezra Taft Benson, "Prepare Yourselves for the Great Day of the Lord," in Brigham Young University Fireside and Devotional Speeches, 1981 (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University, 1981), p. 68.
[^11] Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 162.
[^12] Including "extreme preparations," as Elder M. Russell Ballard recently reminded us in "The Joy of Hope Fulfilled," Ensign, Nov. 1992, p. 32.
[^14] Marion G. Romney, "A Glorious Promise," Ensign, Jan. 1981, p. 2.
[^15] Harold B. Lee, "Admonitions for the Priesthood of God," Ensign, Jan. 1973, p. 106.
[^16] Packer, "To Be Learned Is Good If . . . ," p. 73; emphasis in the original.
[^17] Lee, "Admonitions for the Priesthood of God," p. 106. He recommended the following sources: [^21]; D&C 38; 45; 101; 133.
[^18] Harold B. Lee, "Follow the Leadership of the Church," Ensign, July 1973, pp. 97-98.
[^19] Boyd K. Packer, "Reverence Invites Revelation," Ensign, Nov. 1991, p. 21.
[^20] Ballard, "The Joy of Hope Fulfilled," p. 32.
[^21] In Eugene England, ed., "George Laub's Nauvoo Journal," Brigham Young University Studies, 18 (Winter 1978): 176; see also George Laub Journal, 27 Aug. 1843, LDS Church Archives.
[^22] The phrase "godified state" has been changed to "glorified state" in several twentieth-century versions of the poem; see, for example, Cracroft and Lambert, A Believing People, p. 186.
[^23] Woodruff Journal, 14 May 1843.
[^24] Diary of Charles Lowell Walker, ed. A. Karl Larson and Katharine Miles Larson (Logan: Utah State University Press, 1980), p. 465; see also Charles Lowell Walker Diary, 19 Aug. 1877, LDS Church Archives.
[^25] For thus saith the Lord, now concerning all those Who know of my power and partake of the same; And suffer themselves, that they be overcome By the power of Satan; despising my name:— 26. Defying my power, and denying the truth;— They are they—of the world, or of men, most forlorn, The Sons of Perdition, of whom, ah! I say, 'T were better for them had they never been born! 27. They're vessels of wrath, and dishonor to God, Doom'd to suffer his wrath, in the regions of woe, Through the terrific night of eternity's round, With the devil and all of his angels below: 28. Of whom it is said, no forgiveness is giv'n, In this world, alas! nor the world that's to come; For they have denied the spirit of God. After having receiv'd it: and mistry's their doom. 29. And denying the only begotten of God,— And crucify him to themselves, as they do, And openly put him to shame in their flesh, By gospel they cannot repentance renew. 30. They are they, who must go to the great lake of fire, Which burneth with brimstone, yet never consumes, And dwell with the devil, and angels of his, While eternity goes and eternity comes. 31. They are they, who must groan through the great second death, And are not redeemed in the time of the Lord; While all the rest are, through the triumph of Christ, Made partakers of grace, by the power of his word. 32. The myst'ry of Godliness truly is great;— The past, and the present, and what is to be; And this is the gospel—glad tidings to all, Which the voice from the heavens bore record to me: 33. That he came to the world in the middle of time, To lay down his life for his friends and his foes, And bear away sin as a mission of love; And sanctify earth for a blessed repose. It is evident that the use of uppercase and lowercase for many words was not consistent in manuscript and printed sources of the period, and it would be difficult to determine with certainty whether Joseph was directly responsible for typesetting the 1843 poem for publication. That it was intentional may be argued, however, because of a participant in its publication: Wilford Woodruff. He was working at the Nauvoo printing establishment during this period and two years later used the uppercase Gods for this verse in the first European edition of the Doctrine and Covenants (1845); see The Book of Doctrine & Covenants (Liverpool: James and Woodburn, Printers, 1845), p. 267. This capitalization continued in the next five European editions (1849, 1852, 1854, 1866, and 1869). The 1844 American edition was reprinted in 1845 and 1846, unchanged, from the same plates. Eventually, the third American edition (1876) was prepared for publication by Orson Pratt, under the direction of Brigham Young. This edition changed the word gods to Gods following the lead of Wilford Woodruff's 1845 European edition; see The Doctrine and Covenants (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Office, 1876), p. 248. Later, Pratt prepared a new European edition in 1879, and this edition's plates were used to print an 1880 American edition in Salt Lake City. Pratt retained the capitalization of Gods in both editions. From 1880 to 1920, the Church produced at least twenty-eight printings of this edition. The lowercase gods was reintroduced in the text of the 1921 edition.
[^26] See Book of Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (Cincinnati: Publishing Committee of the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints, 1864), p. 213.
[^27] Nauvoo Expositor, 1 (7 June 1844): 2.
[^28] Bullock Report, 16 June 1844.
[^29] Variations of this phrase were used by these Saints to describe their group. For a fuller discussion, see Richard Neitzel Holzapfel and Jeni Broberg Holzapfel, Women of Nauvoo (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1992), chap. 1, n. 9.
[^30] Section 91, Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of the Latter Day Saints (Kirtland, Ohio: F. G. Williams & Co., 1835), p. 228.
[^31] A Record of the Organization and Proceedings of the Female Relief Society of Nauvoo, 28 April 1842, LDS Church Archives; hereafter cited as Relief Society Minutes.
[^32] Kimball, in Times and Seasons, vol. 6, no. 5 (15 March 1845): 839.
[^33] See, for example, Ronald K. Esplin, "Joseph Smith's Mission and Timetable: 'God Will Protect Me until My Work Is Done,'" in Larry C. Porter and Susan Easton Black, eds., The Prophet Joseph: Essays on the Life and Mission of Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1988), pp. 280-319.
[^34] 'Tis decreed, that he'll save all the work of his hands, And sanctify them by his own precious blood; And purify earth for the Sabbath of rest, By the agent of fire, as it was by the flood. 35. The Savior will save all his Father did give, Even all that he gave in the regions abroad. Save the Sons of Perdition: They're lost; ever lost. And can never return to the presence of God. 36. They are they, who must reign with the devil in hell, In eternity now, and eternity then, Where the worm dieth not, and the fire is not quench'd;— And the punishment still, is eternal. Amen. 37. And which is the torment apostates receive, But the end, or the place where the torment began, Save to them who are made to partake of the same, Was never, nor will be, revealed unto man. 38. Yet God shows by vision a glimpse of their fate, And straightway he closes the scene that was shown: So the width, or the depth, or the misery thereof, Save to those that partake, is forever unknown. 39. And while I was pondering, the vision was closed; And the voice said to me, write the vision: for lo! 'Tis the end of the scene of the sufferings of those, Who remain filthy still in their anguish and woe. 40. And again I bear record of heavenly things, Where virtue's the value, above all that's pric'd— Of the truth of the gospel concerning the just, That rise in the first resurrection of Christ. 41. Who receiv'd and believ'd, and repented likewise, And then were baptis'd, as a man always was, Who ask'd and receiv'd a remission of sin, And honored the kingdom by keeping its laws. 42. Being buried in water, as Jesus had been, And keeping the whole of his holy commands, They received the gift of the spirit of truth, By the ordinance truly of laying on hands. Woodruff Journal, 9 Apr. 1842.
[^35] Relief Society Minutes, 28 Apr. 1842.
