Byron R. Merrill, Heavens Are Open: The 1992 Sperry Symposium on the Doctrine and Covenants and Church History ( 1993)

12

"My Disciples Shall Stand in Holy Places": Jesus Christ in the Twenty-First Century

Clark V. Johnson Brigham Young University

That the Doctrine and Covenants is a modern witness to a modern world of a living Christ makes it a unique book. It is not a modern translation of an ancient document revealing the Christ to a modern world. Rather, it contains revelations given to nineteenth- and twentieth-century prophets. In those revelations the Savior restores his Church to the earth, gives laws of conduct to his disciples, testifies of his own atonement, and reveals in vision the ultimate destiny of mankind. The book has too many divergent themes and subjects to make it a smooth, flowing narrative. It is the Author of the book, Jesus Christ, that gives the book continuity and deep meaning. The Lord speaks to us: "You can testify that you have heard my voice, and know my words" (D&C 18:36). The voice of Jesus Christ permeates the Doctrine and Covenants. In the first two verses, for example, the Lord invokes his power and authority, calling all to attention:

"Hearken, O ye people of my church, saith the voice of him who dwells on high, and whose eyes are upon all men . . . listen together. For verily the voice of the Lord is unto all men, and there is none to escape; and there is no eye that shall not see, neither ear that shall not hear, neither heart that shall not be penetrated" (D&C 1:1-2).

The Savior is clearly the center of the Doctrine and Covenants. He reveals himself to us in his own voice, telling us who he is and what he expects of us.

The revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants teach us that Jesus, or Jehovah, was the Savior of the ancients—Adam, Noah, Shem, Abraham—the Savior of those who are living today, and the Savior of those who will live in the twenty-first century. The revelations clearly point out that Jesus is our Head and that men and women who follow him become his children. The Doctrine and Covenants shows Jesus' love for all the children of God. Indeed, the Doctrine and Covenants teaches that the Father placed his name upon his Son, which gives Jesus full authority to act for the Father; and in return, Jesus gives the credit and glory to his Father. From the beginning, Jesus identifies himself as the Creator and as the God with whom we make covenants.

The revelations clearly establish Jesus as the head of his Church and show that he is concerned about individual people. Some sections of the Doctrine and Covenants are responses to personal inquiries. In each of those sections, the person is called to repent and to serve. Through repentance and under the Savior's tutelage, individuals grow spiritually, emotionally, and physically until they are ready to meet the Father. Jesus also gives to each person time to accomplish his or her mission in mortality. And he instructs his disciples to avoid deception by following his living prophets.

The Father Placed His Name upon Jesus

When the council of Gods met before the organization of the earth, the Father presented his plan to those who were present (D&C 121:32). [^1] During the meeting a conflict arose. Satan wanted to redeem all of God's children, and he demanded the credit (Moses 4:2). Jesus said, however, "Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever" (Moses 4:2). In this council, "the Father placed His name upon the Son; and Jesus Christ spoke and ministered in and through the Father's name; and so far as power, authority, and Godship are concerned His words and acts were and are those of the Father." [^2]

The Savior exercises his divine authority as he directs his Church and reveals the commandments and doctrines necessary to exalt those who make covenants with him. For example, Doctrine and Covenants 29 begins, "Listen to the voice of Jesus Christ, your Redeemer, the Great I AM, whose arm of mercy hath atoned for your sins" (D&C 29:1). Later in the same revelation the Savior says, "But, behold, I say unto you that I, the Lord God, gave unto Adam and unto his seed, that they should not die as to the temporal death, until I, the Lord God, should send forth angels to declare unto them repentance and redemption, through faith on the name of mine Only Begotten Son" (D&C 29:42). Jesus is still the God giving the information, but in verse 42 he is speaking as though he were the Father, which is his divine right. President Joseph Fielding Smith wrote:

"In giving revelations our Savior speaks at times for himself; at other times for the Father, and in the Father's name, as though he were the Father, and yet it is Jesus Christ, our Redeemer who gives the message." [^3] Even though the Father bestowed upon his Son the divine right to speak in the Father's name, Jesus gives the honor and glory to his Father. "Nevertheless, glory be to the Father, and I partook and finished my preparations unto the children of men" (D&C 19:19).

When the Savior gave directions establishing a storehouse for the poor in Zion, he said to his prophet that it was for the benefit of mankind, "to the glory of your Father who is in heaven," and to make Church members equal in "earthly things" so that they could become equal in "obtaining heavenly things" (D&C 78:4-6).

Jesus' earthly mission was to do the will of the Father. He stated that he and the Father are one (D&C 20:28). To the Nephites he said: "I am in the Father, and the Father in me, and the Father and I are one" (3 Nephi 11:27). During his appearance to the Nephite Twelve, he said, "I am even as the Father; and the Father and I are one" (3 Nephi 28:10). This passage is often interpreted to mean that they are one in purpose. While that is true, the scriptures teach that the relationship between the Father and the Savior goes beyond being one in purpose. In a revelation from Christ to Nephi, the son of Helaman, the Savior said: "I will bless thee forever . . . for thou shalt not ask that which is contrary to my will," meaning that whatever Nephi said would be done (Helaman 10:5). The scriptures further indicate that Nephi's desire in life had been to serve God. Jesus reminded Nephi that he had not sought the will of man and that he had served God "with unwearyingness" (Helaman 10:4). Nephi had reached a oneness with God that went beyond purpose. The words, acts, and deeds of Nephi were the words, acts, and deeds of Jehovah. Thus, the oneness spoken of by the Savior when referring to his relationship with the Father extends beyond purpose and means that the actions he has taken are the actions the Father would have taken were he present in place of the Son.

Jesus Christ, the Creator and Giver of Life

In the Book of Mormon, King Benjamin taught his people that Jesus was "the Father of heaven and earth, the Creator of all things from the beginning" (Mosiah 3:8). The Doctrine and Covenants affirms Jesus' role in the Creation. "Worlds were made by him . . . and through him, and of him" (D&C 93:10), and "I gave unto you a commandment that you should call your solemn assembly, that your fastings and your mourning might come up into the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth, which is by interpretation, the creator of the first day, the beginning and the end" (D&C 95:7). At a conference held nine months after the organization of the Church, Jesus said to those assembled: "Thus saith the Lord your God, even Jesus Christ, the Great I AM, Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the same which looked upon the wide expanse of eternity . . . before the world was made . . . I am the same which spake, and the world was made, and all things came by me" (D&C 38:1,3). Referring to his majesty and power, the revelations teach that "he is in the sun . . . in the moon . . . [and] the light of the stars, and the power thereof by which they were made" and shine (D&C 88:7-9). Christ did more than just organize the planets, how ever. He gives life to all his creations, including the children of God who live on the earth (D&C 88:13; 93:9). From him comes the "light that quickeneth" mankind's understanding and fills "the immensity of space" (D&C 88:11-12). Finally, Jesus is the person who redeems the soul, and through whom men and women may sanctify (purify) themselves from "all unrighteousness, that [they] may be prepared for the celestial glory" (D&C 88:18). Thus those who become disciples of Jesus become his "friends" after they have made covenants with him (D&C 84:77; see also 88:117; 93:45).

Jesus Christ Is the Head of His Church

Because of the power invested in him by his Father, the Savior spoke with full authority when he organized his Church in this last dispensation: "Hearken, O ye people of my church, saith the voice of him who dwells on high, and whose eyes are upon all men" (D&C 1:1). Jesus identified The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints as his Church (D&C 115:4). In a revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith shortly after the organization of the Church, the Savior reminded Joseph that he had given him "the keys of my kingdom, and a dispensation of the gospel for the last times; and for the fulness of times" (D&C 27:13). In the dispensation of the fulness of times, there will be a unifying of all of the Savior's work since the earth's creation. After the restoration of the "keys of [the] kingdom," conferences were held during which the organization of the Church was established. Bishops, apostles, and seventies were called during various conferences, and the organization of quorums took place (D&C 41; 107). Jesus gave the officers of his Church definite responsibilities. The First Presidency presided over all the quorums. The Quorum of Twelve Apostles was second in authority to the First Presidency, and the Quorum of Seventy served under the direction of the first two quorums (D&C 107:22-30).

As these officers began to function, Jesus increased the responsibilities of his followers. On one occasion he instructed them that when they give their own "substance unto the poor, ye will do it unto me." He further instructed that the donations "shall be laid before the bishop of my church and his counselors, two of the elders, or high priests, such as he shall appoint or has appointed and set apart for that purpose" (D&C 42:31). The Savior directed that the disposition of donated properties be handled by the First Presidency, the Quorum of the Twelve, and the Presiding Bishop and his council (D&C 120:1). On another occasion he called for his disciples, or Church members, "to labor in my vineyard, and to build up my church, and to bring forth Zion" (D&C 39:13).

Jesus Is the God with Whom We Covenant

King Benjamin taught that those who make covenants "shall be called the children of Christ" (Mosiah 5:7). The Doctrine and Covenants identifies the principles and ordinances attending that covenant relationship. The Prophet Joseph was commanded: "Thou shalt declare repentance and faith on the Savior, and remission of sins by baptism, and by fire, yea, even the Holy Ghost" (D&C 19:31). Those who accept baptism, who keep his commandments, and obey his law will be redeemed (D&C 49:5, 8-14; Mosiah 5:7; 15:30).

Jesus referred to the price he paid to save mankind. His suffering in Gethsemane caused him "to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit." The intense pain in Gethsemane caused the Savior to wish that he "might not drink the bitter cup" (D&C 19:18). In another revelation he says, "Even as many as have believed in my name, for I am Christ, and in mine own name, by the virtue of the blood which I have spilt, have I pleaded before the Father" for you (D&C 38:4). Clearly his suffering places him in a position to intercede in our behalf if we repent. "He redeemed us with his blood." [^4] His suffering and death give life to all mankind; however, only those who obey his law, enter into covenants with him, and receive the ordinances of the priesthood become his children. For them, redemption extends beyond mere salvation to include exaltation, or eternal life.

The Doctrine and Covenants teaches that the ordinances of the priesthood reveal to men and women the nature of God. Without the ordinances men and women cannot know God nor enter into his presence. The revelations teach that "in the ordinances [of the priesthood] . . . the power of godliness is manifest. And without the ordinances thereof, and the authority of the priesthood, the power of godliness is not manifest unto men in the flesh" (D&C 84:20-21). Thus, through faithful obedience to the ordinances of baptism, the gift of the Holy Ghost, the endowment, and temple marriage or sealing, all performed by the authority of the priesthood, men and women become Christ's sons and daughters (D&C 20:73, 77, 79; 25:1; 131:1-4; Mosiah 5-7).

The Prophet Joseph Smith understood this doctrine and taught the Saints "that baptism is a sign ordained of God, for the believer in Christ to take upon himself in order to enter into the kingdom of God. . . . Those who seek to enter [God's kingdom] in any other way will seek in vain; for God will not receive them." [^5] On another occasion the Prophet said, "I feel disposed to speak a few words . . . concerning the endowment: All who are prepared, and are sufficiently pure to abide the presence of the Savior will see Him in the solemn assembly." [^6] Concerning temple marriage, or sealing, Joseph taught: "If you have power to seal on earth and in heaven . . . [then] go and seal on earth your sons and daughters unto yourself, and yourself unto your fathers in eternal glory." [^7]

Once individuals have received all the ordinances of the temple, then Jesus' atonement in Gethsemane and on the cross has full effect upon them, providing they keep the covenants they have made. Nephi taught that it is "by grace that we are saved, after all we can do" (2 Nephi 25:23). The price the Savior paid in Gethsemane and on the cross ransomed man from physical and spiritual death. He did that which no mortal man or woman could do. He took upon himself the sins of each person who has lived or ever will live on the earth. He provided the way wherein men and women can reenter the presence of God if they repent. To Martin Harris the Savior said, "I, God, have suffered these things for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent; but if they would not repent they must suffer even as I" (D&C 19:16-17). The revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants clearly teach "that justification [and] . . . that sanctification through the grace of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is just and true, to all those who love and serve God with all their mights, minds, and strength" (D&C 20:30-31). People justify themselves when they make covenants with the Savior, and they become his "sons and daughters" through obedience to the promises they have made him (D&C 76:24). As they demonstrate their determination to serve him at all costs, he sanctifies them. Hence, the cleansing power of the Atonement takes time as each individual learns to do things the Savior's way. During that period the Savior responds to their needs, which helps them draw closer to him and his father.

Jesus' Concern for Individuals

Some of the revelations given in the Doctrine and Covenants were addressed to individual men and women. Joseph and Emma were visited by the Prophet's parents while they were living at Harmony, Pennsylvania, in February 1829. Father Smith made personal inquiry, asking what the Lord wanted him to do. Joseph received a revelation detailing the qualities of faith, hope, charity, brotherly kindness, and love, that Father Smith was required to have to serve in God's kingdom (D&C 4).

Oliver Cowdery made an inquiry similar to Father Smith's. Through the Prophet Joseph, Oliver was admonished to trust God and not to seek for the world's riches but to seek "wisdom" and that "the mysteries of God" would be "unfolded" to him (D&C 6:7). Oliver learned some lessons the hard way. In 1829 while he and Joseph worked to translate the Book of Mormon, Oliver desired that he too might have the gift of translation. The Lord promised Oliver that he would bless him with the gift of revelation. The Savior said, "I will tell you in your mind and in your heart, by the Holy Ghost, which shall come upon you and which shall dwell in your heart" (D&C 8:2). Oliver was also admonished to "not ask for that which you ought not" (D&C 8:10). Later in the same month Oliver tried to translate and failed. The Lord directed a second revelation to him through Joseph in which he told Oliver to "be patient, my son, for it is wisdom in me, and it is not expedient that you should translate at this present time" (D&C 9:3). The Savior reminded Oliver that he had been called to write for the Prophet and should labor in that capacity until he received further direction (D&C 9:4, 13-14).

Even though he mildly reprimanded Oliver, the Lord revealed to him the principles a person needs to use to receive revelation. Jesus said: "Behold, you have not understood; you have supposed that I would give it unto you, when you took no thought save it was to ask me. But, behold, I say unto you, that you must study it out in your mind; then you must ask me if it be right, and if it is right I will cause that your bosom shall burn within you; therefore, you shall feel that it is right. But if it be not right you shall have no such feelings, but you shall have a stupor of thought that shall cause you to forget the thing which is wrong" (D&C 9:7-9). Had Oliver known the principle and been obedient to it, he could have translated part of the Book of Mormon (D&C 9:10).

A few months after the Church was organized, the Lord directed a revelation to Emma Smith. In it the Savior called her an elect lady and gave her instructions regarding her conduct and a call "to make a selection of sacred hymns" (D&C 25:11; see also 3, 5, 7, 12). He also admonished Emma to give time "to writing and to learning much" (D&C 25:8).

In 1833, after the First Presidency had been organized, Frederick G. Williams, Sidney Rigdon, Newel K. Whitney and Joseph Smith, Jr., were all reprimanded by the Lord for not teaching their families the gospel (D&C 93:41, 44, 47, 50). Each was told to teach their children. The Lord "rebuked" Joseph and told him, "Your family must needs repent and forsake some things, and give more earnest heed unto your sayings, or be removed out of their place" (D&C 93:47-48).

Sometimes growth under the direction of the Master is painful because the individual must learn to do the required task Jesus' way for as long as he is called. A person must be stripped of pride and personal ambition; his only desire must be to serve God (6:19; 23:1; 88:121; 121:37). Christ consoled Oliver, saying, "Do not murmur, my son, for it is wisdom in me that I have dealt with you after this manner" (D&C 9:6).

Joseph Knight, David Whitmer, Peter Whitmer, Sr., John Whitmer, Peter Whitmer, Jr., Martin Harris, Hyrum Smith, Samuel H. Smith, Ziba Peterson, Thomas B. Marsh, Ezra Thayre, and others made inquiries and received personal responses from Jesus through his prophet. The Church has increased numerically to the point that the prophet cannot receive revelation in behalf of each Church member. Still, Jesus shows his love by providing stake patriarchs, bishops, priesthood leaders, home teachers, and fathers who, through the power of the priesthood, bless those over whom they preside. These blessings provide direction, comfort, and peace to the disciples of Christ, who struggle to follow him. Just as in the days when the Church was small, revelations are available for the individual's personal growth.

There Is a Time for Each Person

In the "day of this life," defined by Alma as beginning with our birth into mortality and ending when we are resurrected, each of us is confined by time. In our society, we are acutely aware that there are sixty seconds in a minute, sixty minutes in an hour, twenty-four hours in a day, three hundred sixty-five days in a year, and seventy years in an average life. Most of us forget that our Father in Heaven doesn't view time from our mortal perspective.

The revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants refer to timing, delay, waiting, limits, events, opportunity, progress, past, present, and future. Hyrum Smith was commanded to "wait a little longer" and to "hold [his] peace" until he received more knowledge before preaching the gospel (D&C 11:16, 22). Edward Partridge was called to "spend all his time in the labors of the church" (D&C 41:9).

After Martin Harris had lost the 116-page translation of the Book of Mormon, he was admonished: "You should have been faithful; and he [Christ] would have extended his arm and supported you . . . in every time of trouble" (D&C 3:8). Later, the Lord reminded Joseph that he had "lost [his] gift at the same time, and [his] mind became darkened" (D&C 10:2). Joseph learned that it takes time to repent, to learn the lesson the Lord is teaching, and that it takes time to heal from the pain resulting from disobedience.

The Savior taught that "there is a time appointed for every man, according as his works shall be" (D&C 121:25). Jesus revealed to Joseph, who was confined in Liberty Jail in March 1839, that his enemies'"bounds are set, they cannot pass." The Savior said to Joseph: "Thy days are known, and thy years shall not be numbered less; therefore, fear not what man can do" (D&C 122:9).

Jesus taught that time in mortality is a transition in eternity. He revealed that those who are ill and call for an administration from the priesthood, "if they die they shall die unto me, and if they live they shall live unto me. . . . It shall come to pass that he that hath faith in me to be healed, and is not appointed unto death, shall be healed" (D&C 42:44, 48). Every man, woman, and child has an appointed mission. Each is given time in mortality to pursue that divine mission. No matter how long mortality may last, each person born has the opportunity to prepare for eternal life (D&C 121:25).

The Redeemer's promise of life after mortality gives peace and assurance to his disciples as they struggle to comply with the covenants they have made. The promise of eternal life confirms for each of us the mental security that even though we may not understand, God is in control. President John Taylor's statement that "we are in the hands of God" gives hope to those of us who have lost a loved one through sin or death. [^8]

Frequently during early Church history mobs arose against the Saints. Referring to the violence suffered at the hands of their persecutors, the Lord promised the Saints: "I will smite them . . . in mine own due time" (D&C 24:16). The Lord told of Zion's redemption that would occur in his "own due time" (D&C 136:18). He explained that "God's time, angel's time, prophet's time, and man's time" depended upon "the planet on which they reside" (D&C 130:4). Jesus foretold of a "time to come in the which nothing shall be withheld" from his disciples (D&C 121:28).

The time referred to in these verses is apparently when the Bridegroom comes. Referring to himself as the Bridegroom and the Church as his bride, Jesus taught that "the Book of Mormon and the holy scriptures are given of me for your instruction" at this time and promised that "the power of my Spirit quickeneth all things. Wherefore, be faithful, praying always, having your lamps trimmed and burning, and oil with you, that [Church members] may be ready at the coming of the Bridegroom" (D&C 33:16-17; see also 133:19).

All references to the Bridegroom refer to the second coming of the Savior: "Prepare ye the supper of the Lamb, make ready for the Bridegroom" (D&C 65:3); "the Bridegroom cometh; go ye out to meet him. And immediately there shall appear a great sign in heaven, and all people shall see it together" (D&C 88:92-93).

With reference to the preparation necessary to meet the Bridegroom, the Prophet Joseph Smith taught that the Second Coming would not happen until "you are endowed and prepared to preach the Gospel to all nations, kindreds, and tongues, in their own languages." He counseled Church members to "faithfully warn all, and bind up the testimony, and seal up the law." He promised that "the Saints will be gathered . . . and stand in holy places ready to meet the Bridegroom when he comes." [^9] The instructions revealed concerning the coming of the Bridegroom teach us how to prepare to meet the Savior.

Jesus Instructs Us to Follow His Prophets

There were some who were deceived during Joseph Smith's life. Overcome by millennial fever, some declared visions and signs of the Second Coming. A Mr. Redding openly avowed that he had seen the Savior coming in the clouds of heaven. Referring to Mr. Redding's experience, the Prophet said, "I shall use my right, and declare that, notwithstanding Mr. Redding may have seen a wonderful appearance in the clouds one morning about sunrise (which is nothing very uncommon in the winter season) he has not seen the sign of the Son of Man, as foretold by Jesus; neither has any man, nor will any man, until after the sun shall have been darkened and the moon bathed in blood; for the Lord hath not shown me any such sign." [^10]

The Prophet Joseph Smith reminded us of the words of the ancient prophet Amos, who said, "Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets" (Amos 3:7). Joseph Smith taught the Saints that "the Lord will not come to reign over the righteous, in this world, in 1843, nor until everything for the Bridegroom is ready." [^11]

The revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants teach us how to avoid deception by following God's prophets. Jesus gives direction through his living prophet. Early in the history of the Church, some of the brethren objected to some of the language used in the revelations. They felt that parts of the revelations were true while other parts were not true, or at least weak, because of Joseph Smith's lack of ability (D&C 67:5). The Lord challenged them to "Seek" the weakest revelation they could find in "the Book of Commandments." The Savior challenged these men to "appoint him that is the most wise among you" to write a similar revelation. Then Jesus said, "If there be any among you that shall make one like unto it, then ye are justified in saying that ye do not know that they are true; but if ye cannot make one like unto it, ye are under condemnation if ye do not bear record that they are true" (D&C 67:6-8).

William E. M'Lellin stepped forward and "endeavored to write a commandment like unto one of the least of the Lord's, but failed." [^12] Joseph commented that it is "an awful responsibility to write in the name of the Lord." [^13] Jesus warned these men to "strip [themselves] from jealousies and fears, and humble" themselves before him and "continue in patience until ye are perfected" (D&C 67:10, 13).

When communicating to his Church, the Savior always speaks through his prophet (D&C 28:2, 5-7). The Doctrine and Covenants teaches that when we receive the words of the prophet, we receive the words of the Christ, and when we receive the words of the Christ, we receive the words of our Father in Heaven (see D&C 84:36-37). Following this prescription prepares us to return to the presence of God.

Personal Reflections

Joseph Smith said, "Knowledge through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is the grand key that unlocks the glories and mysteries of the kingdom of heaven." [^14] The Doctrine and Covenants more than testifies of the Savior: it places him next to the Father in power and glory.

The Doctrine and Covenants reiterates that the Savior is the Creator and the representative of the Father, it shows his desire for each person's eternal welfare, and it demonstrates that God gives "time" to each individual to work out his or her divine mission. The revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants show how Jesus organized his Church and teach how he accomplishes his work through living prophets.

Taken as a whole, the Doctrine and Covenants teaches that only through covenants, repentance, obedience, sacrifice, and service can we ever come to know Christ. Obedience and repentance are not so much what we abstain from as what we hope for. These principles allow us to remember and renew our covenants, which assure us of a secure and personal relationship with the Savior. The great Jehovah who made these same principles and covenants available to the ancients has made them available to us and will make them available to those living in the twenty-first century. Jesus "is the same yesterday, today, and forever," and his covenants and laws are the same forever (D&C 20:12; 35:1). Those who follow Jesus become his children.

When individuals choose this course in mortality, their lives are changed, they are born of the Spirit, and they know peace. From time to time they are taught by the Holy Ghost, and they catch glimpses of eternity by remembering the covenants they have made. Eventually these changes sanctify them, and when they are brought into the presence of the Savior, they will "see him as he is" because they have become "like him" (Moroni 7:48).

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Bruce R. McConkie, "The New Revelation on Priesthood," in Priesthood (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981), pp. 134-35.
[^2] Ibid., p. 131.
[^3] Spencer W. Kimball, "When the World Will Be Converted," Ensign, Oct. 1974, pp. 4-5.
[^4] McConkie, "New Revelation on Priesthood," p. 130.
[^5] See statement of the First Presidency of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 17 Aug. 1949, Archives, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah, as quoted in "Neither White Nor Black": Mormon Scholars Confront the Race Issue in a Universal Church, ed. Lester Bush and Armand Mauss (Midvale, Utah: Signature Books, [1984]), p. 221.
[^6] Spencer W. Kimball, "Revelation: The Word of the Lord to His Prophets," Ensign, May 1977, p. 78.
[^7] Spencer W. Kimball, The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, ed. Edward L. Kimball (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982), pp. 448-9.
[^8] Ibid.
[^9] Ibid.
[^10] See Martin Berkeley Hickman, David Matthew Kennedy: Banker, Statesman, Churchman (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co. with the David M. Kennedy Center for International Studies, 1987), pp. 343-44. See also address by David M. Kennedy to Religious Education faculty, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah, 2 Oct. 1992.
[^11] McConkie, "New Revelation on Priesthood," p. 130.
[^12] Ibid., pp. 131-32.
[^13] In Calgary Herald, 12 Jan. 1985.
[^14] In Daily Herald, Provo, Utah, 30 Jan. 1987.
