Byron R. Merrill, Heavens Are Open: The 1992 Sperry Symposium on the Doctrine and Covenants and Church History ( 1993)

17

God Tailors Revelation to the Individual

Jerry Perkins Brigham Young University

Our Eternal Father knows us as individuals, and he tailors his revelation to us as individuals. In the October 1978 general conference of the Church, Elder John H. Groberg, of the Seventy, shared a story that dramatically emphasizes those two important concepts. A young Tongan child, Felila, had been diagnosed as having hydrocephalus. Without help, she would die. Felila's parents, who were Latter-day Saints, went to the district president, who contacted Elder Groberg, the mission president in Tonga at the time. Elder Groberg said that the plight of this child united men and women, member and non-member, American and Tongan in seeking a way for her to be treated at Primary Children's Hospital in Utah. Many sacrifices were made, and all arrangements were settled, but at the very time the goal was to be realized, the little girl died. The faith of many was tried, including the faith of Elder Groberg. He said: "I was left alone, or so it seemed. I moved slowly and heavily down that dusty trail. Why? Why? After all that work and that strong faith of so many and those impressions [of the Spirit], why?"

This mission president honestly asked the God of the universe what the purpose was of this little girl's death. And our Father in Heaven tailored a revelation to this individual situation of sorrow being experienced by one of his sons. Elder Groberg continued:

"I was overcome by the Spirit. . . . And I heard a voice. . . . [It said,]

"'Come home Felila, my daughter. Come home to the care your loved ones have sought for you. . . . You have finished your mission in life. Hearts have been softened; souls have been stretched; faith has been increased. Come home now, Felila.'"

The Lord touched the individual life of this son. Brother Groberg exclaimed:

"He knew her! He knew her name. He knew all about her and about all those others. How perfect our Father's love! . . . In some marvelous way, which is beyond our mortal comprehension, he knows and understands all things." [^1]

In addition to knowing Felila, the Lord also knew John H. Groberg. An experience that could have perhaps crushed the faith of many was tailored for Elder Groberg to increase his faith, his love for his Savior, and his awe of this God who so gently cared for a little child.

The Great Parent of the Universe

The Lord is a God who desires to be personally close to each of his children. He is, as the Prophet Joseph taught, "the Great Parent of the universe [who] looks upon the whole of the human family with a fatherly care and paternal regard." [^2] He loves us. He cares for us. Why would we not want to seek assistance from this great God? His care and regard can be sensed, for instance, as he communed with his Saints in tones of encouragement when his Church was still in its infancy. The Lord stated:

"Verily, verily, I say unto you, . . . where two or three are gathered together in my name, . . . behold, there will I be in the midst of them—even so am I in the midst of you. Fear not to do good, my sons. . . . Therefore, fear not, little flock; do good; let earth and hell combine against you, for if ye are built upon my rock, they cannot prevail" (D&C 6:32-34).

He is a God of mercy, a God of love. When he says that we are his sons and daughters, his friends, his children, and his little flock, he communicates to us the relationships that are most important to him. As a Father, a Friend, a Shepherd, he desires to bless us with spiritual gifts that will be individually significant and designed to bring each of his children perfection and eternal life. President George Q. Cannon testified of the importance of this truth:

"I feel to bear testimony to you, my brethren and sisters, . . . that God is the same to-day as He was yesterday; that God is willing to bestow these [spiritual] gifts upon His children. . . . [This] is the design of God concerning His Church. He wants His Saints to be perfected in the truth. For this purpose He gives these gifts, and bestows them upon those who seek after them, in order that they may be a perfect people upon the face of the earth, . . . because God has promised to give the gifts that are necessary for their perfection." [^3]

If we but seek, if we but ask, each individual son and daughter of God can receive the gifts of the Spirit promised by an Eternal Father and subsequently use those gifts to become "perfected in the truth."

God Will Reveal to the Individual

God knows each of his children individually. He is seeking to help each of us perfect our life as individuals, and he will reveal specific truths, direction, guidance, and love to each of us. He has promised it. It is true. Revelation and spiritual gifts await the child who will earnestly ask and seek.

Great leaders pleadingly strive to motivate us to seek "for the power of God," receive "the precious promises," and "avail ourselves of the privileges which God has placed within our reach." [^4] Our leaders keep emphasizing that revelation is a means for a loving Father to communicate with each of his children. Joseph F. Smith sought to heighten our understanding of personal revelation. He stressed how individualistic revelation is:

"The gift of revelation, does not belong to one man solely; . . . it belongs to every individual member of the Church. . . . It is the privilege of every individual member of the Church to have revelation for his own guidance, for the direction of his life." [^5]

Elder James E. Faust asked how we, as members of the Church, could make decisions about important individual concerns without seeking revelation: "Members of the Church know that the promptings of the Spirit may be received upon all facets of life, including daily, ongoing decisions (see D&C 42:61). How could anyone think of making an important decision such as 'Who is to be my companion?', 'What is my work to be?', 'Where will I live?', and 'How will I live?', without seeking the inspiration of Almighty God?" [^6]

Prophet after prophet has made declarations to drive home the concept that the Lord wants to talk with his children. He wants to reveal truth to them. He wants to guide and direct them as they make decisions, as they fall in love, as they face heartrending problems, as they seek to bless the lives of their family, their friends, their associates, and even the entire world. And, the Lord wants to do it individually, with each son and each daughter. Great leaders of the latter day have emphasized this idea of individual revelation.

President Joseph Fielding Smith taught: "We believe that our Eternal Father is just as ready to converse with those who seek him now as he was in ancient days." [^7]

President Lorenzo Snow said: "The spirit of revelation . . . will reveal [to every man and woman], even in the simplest matters, what they shall do, by making suggestions to them." [^8]

Brigham Young declared: "Every member has the right of receiving revelations for themselves, both male and female. It is the very life of the Church of the living God. . . . It is the right of an individual to get revelation to guide himself. It is the right of the head of a family to get revelations to guide . . . his family." [^9]

Elder Bruce R. McConkie told us: "Revelation is something that should be received by every individual. . . . I think our concern to get personal revelation, to know for ourselves, independent of any other individual or set of individuals, what the mind and the will of the Lord is . . . as pertaining to us in our individual concerns. . . . The fact is that every person should be a prophet for himself and in his own concerns and in his own affairs." [^10]

The Lord Seeks to Reveal to Us as Individuals

The Lord is willing, waiting, and wanting to reveal his will to each of his children, but in order for that to occur, we must be individually prepared. Church leaders from Joseph Smith's era to the present have expressed great concern about the Latter-day Saint who is not prepared to receive the revelations of God.

The Prophet Joseph Smith cautioned: "Tell the people to be humble and faithful, and be sure to keep the Spirit of the Lord and it will lead them right. Be careful and not turn away the still small voice. [^11]

President Brigham Young feared that the Latter-day Saints would "have so much confidence in their leaders" that they would "settle down into a state of blind self-security," abandoning the responsibility to obtain their own revelation. He commanded: "Let every man and woman know, by the whispering of the Spirit of God to themselves, whether their leaders are walking in the path the Lord dictates or not." [^12]

President Joseph Fielding Smith said, "The Lord withholds much that he would otherwise reveal if the members of the Church were prepared to receive it." [^13]

President Spencer W. Kimball explained why the Lord withholds revelations: "The Lord will not force himself upon people, and if they do not believe, they will receive no revelation. If they are content to depend upon their own . . . calculations and interpretations, then, of course, the Lord will leave them to their chosen fate." [^14]

Elder Richard G. Scott spoke of missed revelation by saying, "I believe that we often leave the most precious personal direction of the Spirit unheard." [^15]

And finally, President Ezra Taft Benson put this entire issue into perspective: "The Spirit is the most important matter in this glorious work. " [^16]

How and Why Can I Receive Individual Revelation?

Because "the Spirit is the most important matter in this glorious work," how do we gain that Spirit so revelation is a part of our individual daily lives, as the Lord and his prophets envisioned?

Jay Jensen, now of the Seventy, indicated that gaining revelation and knowing the workings of the Spirit of God are some of the greatest challenges in life. When does one know one has received revelation?

At the Missionary Training Center, Brother Jensen often counseled with young missionaries who, in their opinion, had never received revelation. They had felt the Spirit rarely, if ever, in their lives. After Brother Jensen spoke with them for just a few minutes, asking gentle yet probing questions, he realized that the missionaries "had, in fact, had a number of spiritual experiences but had not realized it before. [^17] They were not aware of how the Spirit works.

Why is that so? Why do some of the greatest gifts of God, those involving the Spirit and personal revelation, go unnoticed by his children to whom he gave the gifts? And why do they go unnoticed, especially when those children need the gifts so urgently and are, in their view, actively seeking those gifts? Apparently, many of us do not understand the gifts of revelation offered by God, and so we ask, How does one receive revelation?

We need to understand the workings of the Spirit; we need to have confidence that the Lord knows his children's names and that he loves us individually; and we need to realize that there are many ways the Lord can communicate with us and that he tailors revelation to the individual.

Understand the Workings of the Spirit

In relating his experiences regarding the revelation that all worthy males were now eligible to receive the priesthood of God, Elder Bruce R. McConkie pointed out one significant reason that Latter-day Saints miss the prompting of the Spirit directed their way by the Lord. He stated: "Latter-day Saints have a complex" in regard to the things of the Spirit. [^18] He explained that we want more than what actually happens. Elder McConkie observed that many Latter-day Saints were disappointed with the revelation given to President Spencer W. Kimball and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles: "Many of them [Latter-day Saints] desire to magnify and build upon what has occurred, and they delight to think of miraculous things. And maybe some of them would like to believe that the Lord himself was there, or that the Prophet Joseph Smith came to deliver the revelation . . . Well, these things did not happen." [^19]

President Kimball reminded us that "the burning bushes, the smoking mountains, . . . the Cumorahs . . . were realities; but they were the exceptions." He taught us that the great volume of revelation comes in less spectacular ways. Finally, this prophet helped explain why many of us miss the revelations of God: "Always expecting the spectacular, many will miss entirely the constant flow of revealed communication. " [^20]

Elijah was reminded that the Lord was in the still small voice (1 Kings 19:11-12 ). We are reminded in Alma that "miracles [are] worked by small means" (Alma 37:41). The Doctrine and Covenants testifies that "a marvelous work is about to come forth among the children of men" (4:1), yet this work was so small at the outset that the Lord referred to the participants in it as his "little flock" (6:34).

Elder Graham Doxey of the Seventy addressed the issue of how personal revelation is missed by many: "On religious matters, too many of us are saying, 'What did you say? Speak up; I can't hear you.' And when he doesn't shout back, or cause the bush to burn, or write us a message in stone with his finger, we are inclined to think he doesn't listen, doesn't care about us. Some even conclude there is no God. . . .

"The questions are not 'Does God live? Does God love me? Does God speak to me?' The critical question is 'Are you listening to him?' . . . It is the same for you as it was for Elijah, as it is with the modern-day prophets: The still, small voice is still small." [^21]

Jay Jensen offered a similar explanation of why so many of us are unaware of how the Spirit of the Lord works. He felt that perhaps it was because there were so many references to "spectacular" revelation in Church talks, magazines, lesson manuals, testimony meetings. He said, "Frequent exposure to such experiences may lead some to believe that if they haven't experienced some similar kind of outpouring or manifestation, they haven't had a spiritual experience." [^22]

Modern day prophets and apostles, including Richard G. Scott, Bruce R. McConkie, Spencer W. Kimball, Boyd K. Packer, Ezra Taft Benson, Thomas S. Monson, and Gordon B. Hinckley have stressed that the revelations from the Lord usually come in simple, quiet ways. The passages of the Doctrine and Covenants that seem to be quoted most often by the Brethren as they seek to explain revelation are "enlighten thy mind" (6:15); "peace to your mind" (6:23); "I will tell you in your mind and in your heart" (8:2); "study it out in your mind" and "cause that your bosom shall burn" (9:8); and "enlighten your mind" and "fill your soul with joy" (11:13).

Though visions and audible voices are ways the Lord reveals his truth, more commonly he whispers to the mind and the heart. One key to recognizing the Spirit is to realize that it influences the mind and the feelings at the same time. The Spirit gives us ideas in our minds that we feel good about in our hearts, or feelings in our hearts that are reasonable to our minds. There is an interaction of reason and emotion that the scriptures underscore.

The Brethren also emphasize this interaction in their writings. Elder Boyd K. Packer emphasized feelings: "I have come to know that inspiration comes more as a feeling than as a sound." [^23]

Elder Richard G. Scott emphasized the interrelationship of mind and emotions in revelation: "When we receive an impression in our heart, we can use our mind either to rationalize it away or to accomplish it. Be careful what you do with an impression from the Lord." [^24] President Benson stressed the role of emotions in receiving revelation: "We hear the words of the Lord most often by a feeling. If we are humble and sensitive, the Lord will prompt us through our feelings. That is why spiritual promptings move us on occasion to great joy, sometimes to tears. . . . The Holy Ghost causes our feelings to be more tender. . . . We have a greater capacity to love. People want to be around us because our very countenances radiate the influence of the Spirit." [^25]

Elder Dallin Oaks stressed the role of the mind when he emphasized the sequential relationship of reason and revelation: "In the acquisition of knowledge about the things of God, reason is not an alternative to revelation. Study and reason can find the truth on many of these subjects, but only revelation can confirm it. Study and reason are a means to an end, and the end is revelation from God." [^26]

For revelation to occur, the individual child of God must understand how the Spirit works. Several important teachings about the workings of the Spirit are that we as Latter-day Saints "have a complex" about the revelations of God and we "delight to think of miraculous things" (McConkie); we miss revelation because "we're always expecting the spectacular" (Kimball); and "the still small voice is still small" (Doxey) as it speaks to the mind and the emotions in an interrelated way (Packer, Scott, Benson, Oaks).

The Lord Knows His Children's Names

The evidences of how our Father specifically helps his children are abundant in scripture, Church history, in testimony meetings, and in the lives of God's children. In the story of the little Tongan girl who needed help, Elder Groberg realized that the Lord knew Felila's name and loved her individually.

The Book of Mormon prophet Enos was also known by name to the Lord, and He knew exactly what His son needed. When Enos wrestled before God for a remission of his sins, a voice came to him and called him by name, "Enos" (Enos 1:5). Just as the little Tongan girl was known by her individual name, "Felila," so also was Enos known by name. Just as the Lord knew Felila's mission in life, so did he know the potential mission of Enos, this great, struggling soul before him. The Lord knew Enos was on the verge of a significant change in his life. Therefore, he touched Enos' life deeply with statements such as "thy sins are forgiven thee" (Enos 1:5), "thou shalt be blessed" (Enos 1:5), "because of thy faith in Christ" (Enos 1:8), and "thy faith hath made thee whole" (Enos 1:8). The Lord knew Enos well. He knew change was imminent: "And after I, Enos, had heard these words, my faith began to be unshaken in the Lord" (Enos 1:11). The time was right. The Lord knew it. An individual life was changed forever because of a revealed spiritual gift to an individual son by a Father who knew precisely what His son needed.

Joseph Smith was another son whom the Father knew by name. In April of 1830, Joseph was in Colesville, New York, at the home of Joseph Knight, Sr. Newel Knight, Joseph Knight's son, had been plagued by evil spirits, and Joseph Smith cast out the spirits. The result of this miracle divided the people of Colesville. Many were converted, but opposition to the Church also increased. Baptisms were interfered with, and the Prophet was involved in troublesome lawsuits that delayed the work the Lord had for him. Joseph had much to do. He was behind in the great work of the Restoration. He had to counsel and guide and direct this infant Church. Yet he also had the responsibility of caring for his family and tending to the farm—chores that would not wait. Into this scene of conflicting responsibilities and overwhelming duties entered a loving Lord, who reduced tension by reminding Joseph that God was with him:

"Behold, thou wast called and chosen to write the Book of Mormon, and to my ministry; and I have lifted thee up out of thine afflictions, and have counseled thee, that thou hast been delivered from all thine enemies, and thou hast been delivered from the powers of Satan and from darkness!" (D&C 24:1).

In the next verse, the Lord told Joseph to avoid sin. Then He told Joseph to "magnify thine office." One could imagine the pangs of guilt this admonition could cause the Prophet; so much to do, so many responsibilities left unattended. But the Lord understood, and so he got very specific. He relieved Joseph of immediate responsibility by giving him some priorities: "After thou hast sowed thy fields and secured them" (D&C 24:3), then go forth and serve the Lord. The Savior's individual counsel to Joseph shows how much our Lord is concerned with the problems of our day to day life. The tender, all-knowing Father realized the turmoil in Joseph's heart caused by being caught between dedication to family and dedication to the Lord's service. In kindness and love, the Lord resolved the conflict by saying, in effect, "Joseph, my son, take care of your fields and your family first; then, go 'speedily' back to my work."

Another Joseph was individually known to God. He was not a prophet and not well-known by mankind, but he was known to our magnificent God of love and goodness. The Lord stated that he is "no respecter of persons" (D&C 1:35), and the fact that he knows a Joseph Millett as well as a Joseph Smith indicates that he truly is "no respecter of persons." Joseph Millett is known to us because he kept a journal. In that journal he recorded his Church mission experiences. Elder Millett served a mission in Nova Scotia and in New England. He was faithful. He sacrificed much. He brought many into the true church of Christ.

Joseph Millett was given permission by Orson Pratt, his mission president, to seek a wife among the eastern Latter-day Saints. He then met and married Sarah Elizabeth Glines. The young couple traveled to Boston and bolstered the Saints there, went on to upstate New York and to Vermont and taught eleven converts, and then helped a group of Saints from Nova Scotia prepare to move west. Finally, Joseph and Elizabeth made their own way west, first by train to Chicago and then on foot. On their way "they stopped to work and prepare for the journey across the plains and to give rest to Sarah, who was pregnant and ill during the spring and summer [Joseph's journal reads]: 'She [Elizabeth] was confined on the 28th of June, 1855. For months I hardly got an hour's sleep in 24. Our little boy Artemus died [on the] 7th of August 1855. The Saints did all they could for us.'" [^27]

A simple journal statement fraught with the tender sacrifice of the Milletts. The Millett family then began their journey in earnest and arrived in Utah in 1856. They faithfully responded to the calls of Brigham Young to help settle Manti, Sevier Valley, Dixie, and finally, in 1868, the extremely harsh Spring Valley in Nevada.

One of Joseph Millett's sons stated:

"[My father] lived a faithful life, was kind and benevolent to all, full of charity and sympathy, ever seeking where he might do good to the poor and fatherless and those in need, denying himself the comforts he might have enjoyed had not his means been spent helping others." [^28]

Now comes the most important part of this story of an ordinary man known by the Lord. In 1871 in Spring Valley, Nevada, the situation was difficult for all the Saints. Joseph and Elizabeth had lost their oldest daughter to typhoid, and the entire family had suffered great sickness and hunger. The entire valley was in desperate straits. Joseph Millett wrote in his journal:

"One of my children came in, said that Brother Newton Hall's folks were out of bread. Had none that day. I put . . . our flour in sack to send up to Brother Hall's. Just then Brother Hall came in. Says I, 'Brother Hall, how are you out for flour.' 'Brother Millett, we have none.' 'Well, Brother Hall, there is some in that sack. I have divided and was going to send it to you. Your children told mine that you were out.' Brother Hall began to cry. Said he had tried others. Could not get any. Went to the cedars and prayed to the Lord and the Lord told him to go to Joseph Millett. 'Well, Brother Hall, you needn't bring this back if the Lord sent you for it. You don't owe me for it.' You can't tell how good it made me feel to know that the Lord knew that there was such a person as Joseph Millett." [^29]

The Lord knows our names. He knows our needs and concerns and the challenges of our daily lives. He wants to help us, and so he has promised to reveal his will to those who earnestly seek and ask.

The Lord Tailors Revelation to the Individual

Personal revelation cannot be vicarious. Joseph Smith emphasized the importance of the personal experience of revelation: "Reading the experience of others, or the revelation given to them, can never give us a comprehensive view of our condition and true relation to God. Knowledge of these things can only be obtained by experience through the ordinances of God set forth for that purpose [i.e., personal revelation]." [^30]

Just as the Lord was revealed to the individual Joseph Smith with this statement, "This is My Beloved Son. Hear Him!" (JS-H 1:17), so does He also desire to reveal Himself to each of us.

Joseph Smith taught: "By learning the Spirit of God and understanding it, you may grow into the principle of revelation." [^31] That is an interesting phrase, "grow into the principle of revelation." It indicates that our capacity for revelation changes. As that capacity changes, God will tailor revelation to that new capacity, both as to the message and to the mode of delivery.

During a Doctrine and Covenants class at Brigham Young University, I asked the students to explain how the Lord gave revelation. With rare exception, the explanation focused on Doctrine and Covenants 9, with special emphasis upon the phrase "and if it is right I will cause that your bosom shall burn within you" (D&C 9:8). I then asked if someone could explain this burning, and it was very difficult for any of us to do so.

A concern and some questions came to me after this experience. Are we defining revelation in terms that are too narrow? Does the acceptance of this narrow definition of spiritual matters cause us not to fully understand revelation? If we do not understand revelation and the workings of the Spirit, can we understand when we have received revelation?

Robert Millet, dean of Religious Education at Brigham Young University, cautioned:

"It would be a mistake for the Latter-day Saints to suppose that answers and confirmations come only in one way—as a burning of the bosom, for example. The Lord desires to communicate with his children and will choose the means which will most clearly and persuasively convey his holy words and his perfect will to those who seek him diligently." [^32]

A teacher who only lectures runs the risk of diminishing communication. That teacher does not take into account the individual learning styles of the students, nor the specific nature of the subject matter being taught, nor the special circumstances of the day, the season, the mood of the class, or the situation in which the teacher and the students find themselves.

The Lord, however, is a Master Teacher. He is not solely a lecturer. He fully understands his students, and therefore he uses a vast array of ways to communicate with them. Most of the time, revelation comes in very simple ways, touching our feelings, enhancing our thoughts; however, the specific manner by which revelation is given is as varied as our Father's children.

A great seminary teacher I know, Brother Ted Gibbons, has wrestled often with the question, How does the Lord reveal his will to his children? Though the Spirit of revelation is stressed in the phrase "tell you in your mind and heart" and that is the Lord's main emphasis when he seeks to help us understand how he communicates with us, Brother Gibbons's findings [^33] indicate how many different ways the Lord can tell us in our minds and hearts:

Audible voice. See 1 Samuel 3:4, 5, 10.

Still small voice. See 1 Kings 19:12.

God gives understanding. See Job 32:8.

Heart burns when you open the scriptures. See Luke 24:32.

Feel love, joy, gentleness, peace. See Galatians 5:22.

Led by Spirit, not knowing. See 1 Nephi 4:6.

Spirit constraineth. See Alma 14:11.

Lord's voice in the mind. See Enos 1:10.

Peace to your mind. See Doctrine and Covenants 6:23.

Burning in the bosom. See Doctrine and Covenants 9:6-9.

Spirit leads to do good, to do justly, to walk humbly, to judge righteously. See Doctrine and Covenants 11:12.

Spirit enlightens mind and fills soul with joy. See Doctrine and Covenants 11:13.

Spirit occupies mind with an issue, concept, idea, etc. See Doctrine and Covenants 128:1.

Write by the Spirit of inspiration. See Moses 6:5.

From the still small voice of Elijah to the open visions of the Prophet Joseph Smith, the Lord has unlimited ways to communicate spiritually with those who seek revelation. As we grow into the principle of revelation, the Lord will tailor that revelation to our capacity and situation along that pathway of growth.

After considering the ways revelation is granted unto mankind, this statement of Robert L. Millet becomes quite appropriate: "The nature of the occasion, as well as the readiness and need of the recipient, dictates how a message from God may be communicated. Certain situations require a message which pierces to the very soul, others where that voice, although still and small, makes 'the bones to quake' while it makes manifest the mind of the Lord (D&C 85:6; see also Helaman 5:30; 3 Nephi 11:3). . . .

" . . . The Lord desires to communicate with his children and will choose the means which will most clearly and persuasively convey his holy words and his perfect will to those who seek him diligently." [^34]

In Doctrine and Covenants 56:4, the Lord states, "Wherefore I, the Lord, command and revoke, as it seemeth me good." That is not capriciousness on the part of the Lord. Joseph Smith explained: "That which is wrong under one circumstance, may be, and often is, right under another.

"God said, 'Thou shalt not kill;' at another time He said, 'Thou shalt utterly destroy'. This is the principle on which the government of heaven is conducted—by revelations adapted to the circumstances in which the children of the kingdom are placed." [^35]

Revelation is dynamic. The Lord, knowing the specific needs of his children, not only reveals specific messages for the individual but chooses the most appropriate way to reveal the message.

We can see how the Lord varied both the message and the means of revelation as Joseph Smith "grew into the principle of revelation." Joseph received the First Vision. The message was basic—the churches of the earth had gone astray, and the Lord would restore the true church of Christ upon the earth. The means of this revelation was a personal visitation. All of Joseph's senses were attuned to the message, making the revelation poignant and powerful. God the Father and Jesus the Christ lived. They knew his name! And Joseph was now called.

Three years later, Moroni appeared to Joseph. Still the mode of communication was personal visitation. The angel Moroni visited three times that night and then again the next morning. There was no conceivable way that the young man could doubt what was happening to him. The revelation was designed specifically—tailored—to cast out all doubt. The message was much more complex than that of the First Vision. One part of the message could very possibly have sent the youth's head whirling with thoughts such as: "God is going to reveal the priesthood? By the hand of the Old Testament prophet Elijah? Why Elijah? And when is the great and dreadful day of the Lord? What exactly is Moroni talking about, 'plant in the hearts of the children the promises made to the fathers'? Why would the earth be utterly wasted?" Joseph must have been overwhelmed. He knew the message was real, because he saw and heard it so many times. But what did it mean? Perhaps this message was tailored to the thoughts of a deep thinking boy to challenge him, to prepare him for what was to come, to let him know there was to be a restoration in the fulness of times.

Joseph's capacity with revelation increased; he was growing into the principle. The Urim and Thummim were next given to Joseph Smith along with the plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated. Joseph used the Urim and Thummim to translate, or, in other words, to receive revelation. The mode of revelation was no longer personal visitation, but a tangible instrument of revelation was still being used.

In addition to translating the Book of Mormon, Joseph used the Urim and Thummim to receive revelation in behalf of others who would make inquiries of the Lord through him. The Lord also communicated directly with Joseph by means of the Urim and Thummim. For instance, when Martin Harris lost the 116 pages of the Book of Mormon manuscript, the following "tailored" message was revealed to Joseph Smith:

"For although a man may have many revelations, and have power to do many mighty works, yet if he boasts in his own strength, and sets at naught the counsels of God, and follows after the dictates of his own will and carnal desires, he must fall and incur the vengeance of a just God upon him" (D&C 3:4).

That was exactly what Joseph needed to hear. He had "feared man more than God," and if the direction of Joseph's allegiance was not immediately changed, he would be in danger of the prophecies of Moroni coming true—that Joseph would be destroyed by the Lord's enemies (JS-H 1:42). One can imagine how grateful Joseph was that the means of this revelation was the Urim and Thummim. Imagine what it would have been like to stand before the Lord and receive such a direct and powerful message from the Master himself.

Elder John A. Widtsoe made the following comments regarding the Urim and Thummim: "It must be concluded that the stones were essential to the work of translation.

"Though the Urim and Thummim was necessary, it need not be concluded that it relieved the person who used it of effort on his part. . . . It required great concentration of desire and thought, even with the Urim and Thummim, to secure the sought-for results in translation or revelation. At the best, this instrument served as an aid to the Prophet's natural senses." [^36]

Soon, however, the Prophet no longer used the Urim and Thummim. Brother Richard Cowan, professor of Religious Education at Brigham Young University, estimates that one-half of all the revelations the Prophet received before the Melchizedek Priesthood was restored were received through the Urim and Thummim. [^37] After he received the Melchizedek Priesthood, he no longer used the device. Elder Widtsoe explained why: "The Prophet did not always receive revelations by the aid of the Urim and Thummim. As he grew in spiritual power, he learned to bring his mind into such harmony with divine forces that it became, as it were, itself a Urim and Thummim to him; and God's will was revealed without the intervention of external aids; that is, truth may become known without outside help when one is in harmony or in full tune with the requirements of the subject in hand." [^38]

Joseph had continued to grow into the principle of revelation. To assist in that growth and help get Joseph in "harmony or in full tune," the Lord gave a special assignment to the Prophet when He revealed to Joseph information about His millennial reign. Suddenly, in the midst of teaching the Prophet, the Lord stopped and said:

"And now, behold, I say unto you, it shall not be given unto you to know any further concerning this chapter, until the New Testament be translated. . . . Wherefore I give unto you that ye may now translate it, that ye may be prepared for the things to come. For verily I say unto you, that great things await you" (D&C 45:60-62; emphasis added).

The Lord continued increasing the spiritual maturity of the Prophet. As Joseph translated the New Testament, no longer did he need the Urim and Thummim, for his mind was in harmony with the Divine and had become, as it were, a Urim and Thummim unto itself. Joseph continued to increase his capacity for revelation, and by so doing he was becoming eligible for what the Lord said were "the great things to come."

In Doctrine and Covenants 73, the Lord said to Joseph, "It is expedient to translate again" (v. 3). That was 10 January 1832. A little more than a month later, the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon mentally wrestled with the concept of the resurrection of the just and unjust, which was triggered by their study of John 5:28-29. Great things were in store for the Prophet. He had so fully grown into the principle of revelation and had come into harmony with the Lord that he qualified to receive one of the greatest revelations ever given to mankind. God tailored this revelation to Joseph's heightened capacity. "The Vision," the personal witness of Christ, a view of Lucifer's designs upon mankind, the three degrees of glory—all were seen by Joseph and Sidney. Wilford Woodruff said of this great vision: "[It] gives more light, more truth, and more principle than any revelation contained in any other book we ever read." [^39] The magnitude of the revelation was also indicated in the way it was given: a series of visions of God the Father and his Son Jesus Christ; a vision of Satan and his designs upon the world; a vision regarding the ultimate destiny of the just and the unjust who are resurrected. A further indication of the individual capacity of different people for receiving revelation is in this observation: "Joseph sat firmly and calmly all the time in the midst of a magnificent glory, but Sidney sat limp and pale, apparently as limber as a rag, observing which, Joseph remarked, smilingly, 'Sidney is not used to it as I am.'" [^40]

Joseph's progression in revelation continued, and another site of advancement in spiritual maturity was Liberty Jail. Joseph cried: "O God, where art thou? . . . How long shall thy hand be stayed . . . ? Yea, O Lord, how long shall they suffer these wrongs and unlawful oppressions, before thine heart shall be softened toward them . . . ? O Lord God Almighty, maker of heaven, earth, and seas . . . stretch forth thy hand. . . . Let thine anger be kindled against our enemies. . . . Remember thy suffering saints, O our God" (D&C 121:1-6).

When the heart of Joseph was sufficiently prepared, the Lord tenderly replied: "My son, peace be unto thy soul . . . thine afflictions shall be but a small moment; and then, if thou endure it well, God shall exalt thee on high; thou shalt triumph over all thy foes. . . . Know thou my son, that all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good" (D&C 121:7-8; 122:7).

The teachings of Elder Neal A. Maxwell indicate the deepening changes to Joseph's spirit that were occurring. Many of the revelations the Lord had prepared for Joseph could not be given until after the Prophet had endured what the Lord termed adversity and afflictions, which would be "but a small moment" (D&C 121:7). Elder Maxwell stated:

"The whole experience in Liberty Jail, as Joseph indicated, was such that without it he could not possibly have understood certain dimensions of suffering. It was just as promised in an 1834 blessing given him by his father: 'Thy heart shall meditate great wisdom and comprehend the deep things of God.' . . .

"Thus at the very time he was suffering telestial abuse and oppression from secular authorities . . . Joseph was instructed on the completely opposite manner, the celestial way, in which the Lord's priesthood leaders are to lead!

"'No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the Priesthood, only by . . . gentleness and meekness' [D&C 121:41]. . . .

"In the timing and wisdom of the Lord, the schooling revelations of March 1839 [D&C 121-23] were given when the Prophet was fully ready to receive them. They were not given just after the First Vision, or . . . during Joseph's remarkable translation of the Book of Mormon. Schooling has its seasons, even for prophets." [^41]

The Prophet had changed within the walls of this prison, never to be the same. He understood, to a greater degree than almost any other man, what the Savior had done for him as an individual. When the Lord said, "The Son of Man hath descended below them all. Art thou greater than he?" (D&C 122:8), a powerful union had been forged. To be mentioned in the same verse with the Christ in the context of suffering indicates the depths of suffering Joseph had experienced. How pensive Joseph must have felt as the Lord expressed: "Thy days are known and thy years shall not be numbered less; therefore fear not what man can do, for God shall be with you forever and ever" (D&C 122:9).

The individuality of the message indicates God's knowledge of Joseph. The Lord knew Joseph Smith. The Lord loved him. The Lord revealed life and the eternities to his son. The Prophet had spiritually matured and had "grown into the principle of revelation." Though excruciatingly hard on Joseph at times, the Lord had consistently tailored revelation to the individuality of his son, the Prophet.

Conclusion

The principle of personal, individualized revelation is not one of past ages, reserved solely for the Elijahs, the Almas, or even the Joseph Smiths. It is a vibrant principle that daily influences God's "friends," "his sons and daughters," "his little flock." The well-worn phrase, God "is the same yesterday, to-day, and forever" (1 Nephi 10:18) is made even more vivid by understanding the dynamic nature of personal revelation. God's children learn that he really is the same today because he continues to bless the lives of his children with revealed messages designed specifically for them.

Revelation is between the Father and his children. For Elder Richard G. Scott, son of God, revelation is real, it is powerful, it is individual. When he was on a Church assignment in Mexico City, he attended a priesthood meeting taught by a humble, unschooled priesthood leader. This teacher struggled in his efforts to teach principles that had obviously changed his life. Elder Scott noted how desperately this humble teacher wanted to teach the gospel of the Savior. The love the teacher expressed for the Savior and his teachings was obvious, and the teacher's spirit "permitted a spiritual strength to envelop the room." Elder Scott was so touched by this spirit, he began to receive strong impressions or revelation "as an extension of those principles taught by the humble instructor." Elder Scott testified, "These impressions were intended for me personally and were related to my assignments in the area." The overall message the Lord was communicating to his son was, "You are to continue to build the Church on the foundation of true principles, but with an increased expression of love and appreciation . . . for the great Lamanite people." Elder Scott knew this message was tailored specifically for him, and it was uniquely designed to help him serve the Mexican people. He said, "Specific directions followed, instructions and conditioned promises that have altered the course of my life." [^42]

The Lord reveals messages designed for the situation at hand. On 4 April 1974, the general authorities and Church leaders from around the world came to Salt Lake City to be instructed in the ways of God. President Lee had died, and, according to Elder W. Grant Bangerter, the thoughts of many were "'How can we proceed without our great leader?' 'How can President Kimball fill the empty space?' And again the prayers went forth: 'Please bless President Kimball.'" [^43]

President Kimball perhaps had been perceived as a kindly servant of God who would probably never be the prophet because of age and health problems. Perhaps he was viewed as a gentle yet not overly dynamic leader noted more for his love and humility rather than his power. The thought hung heavily, "We will miss President Lee."

When President Kimball began to speak, however, Elder Bangerter noted: "The Spirit of the Lord was upon President Kimball and it proceeded from him to us as a tangible presence, which was at once both moving and shocking. He unrolled to our view a glorious vision. . . . He showed us how the Church was not fully living in the faithfulness that the Lord expects of His people. . . . We had settled into a spirit of complacency. . . . It was at that moment that he sounded the now famous slogan, 'We must lengthen our stride.' . . .

"President Kimball spoke under this special influence for an hour and ten minutes. It was a message totally unlike any other in my experience. I realized that it was similar to the occasion on the 8th of August, 1844, when Brigham Young spoke to the Saints in Nauvoo following the death of the Prophet Joseph. . . . Many people testified, however, that as Brigham Young arose, the power of the Lord rested upon him to the extent that he was transfigured before them, with the appearance and the voice of Joseph Smith. That moment was decisive in the history of the Church, and the occasion of April 4, 1974, is parallel.

"When President Kimball concluded, President Ezra Taft Benson arose and with a voice filled with emotion, echoing the feeling of all present, said, in substance: 'President Kimball, through all the years that these meetings have been held, we have never heard such an address as you have just given. Truly, there is a prophet in Israel.'" [^44] The Lord was seeking to reveal to the united leadership of the Church— a message tailored for the situation—that "truly, there is a prophet in Israel."

Revelation, however, does not belong only to the realm of leaders wrestling with important issues at decisive junctures in history. It is accessible to all of God's sons and daughters. A young man, returning home at Christmas to give an engagement ring to his sweetheart, heard the Spirit whisper, "Pull over into the far right lane and slow down." His life was saved because he followed these instructions of personal revelation. [^45]

A doctor, who wept because of the suffering of a dying patient, asked God if there was anything else that the medical profession could do to help the family. He said, "At that moment, a thought came forcefully into my mind. The only way [she] could be restored to her full capacity was to leave her disabled, diseased body behind and move on to the next life. . . .

"My grief was gone. I felt only joy—the unmistakable joy and peace that only the Holy Ghost can bring. I remembered the Lord's words, 'I will impart unto you of my Spirit, which shall enlighten your mind, which shall fill your soul with joy' [D&C 11:13].

"I left the doctors' lounge with peace in my heart. A few hours later [she] died quietly and peacefully." [^46]

A woman swept out to sea on an outrigger canoe near the Philippines heard a voice that told her, "Don't leave the boat." Obedience to that voice saved her life. [^47]

A schoolteacher in 1970 read the tragic tale of a black officer in the United States cavalry who had been improperly court-martialed in 1881. The teacher was so deeply moved by the injustice that he spent the next eight years clearing the lieutenant's name. When the teacher's spirits drooped or his efforts lagged, he would dream of the officer, who came to him in his dreams and said, "What have you done for me today?" [^48]

Truly, God tailors revelation to the individual needs and capacities of his children. He waits to bless all of his children who will simply seek his counsel. He waits to instruct his "friends," his "little flock," his "sons and daughters."

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Elder Neal A. Maxwell has written a great deal about tribulation, especially that of Joseph Smith in Liberty Jail. Some of his best works on this subject are All These Things Shall Give Thee Experience (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979), "But for a Small Moment" (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1986), and Meek and Lowly (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1987).
[^2] Elder B. H. Roberts called Liberty Jail the "Temple Prison" and said: "It was more temple than prison, so long as the Prophet was there. It was a place of meditation and prayer. A temple, first of all, is a place of prayer; and prayer is communion with God. It is the 'infinite in man seeking the infinite in God.' Where they kind each other, there is holy sanctuary—a temple. Joseph Smith sought God in this rude prison, and found him." B. H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1930), 1:526.
[^3] See Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 2d ed. rev., edited by B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1957), 3:420, 448.
[^4] Ibid., p. 290.
[^5] Ibid., p. 418.
[^6] Ibid., p. 264; see also Times and Seasons, 5 (1 October 1844): 666.
[^7] Smith, History of the Church, 6:47-49.
[^8] Ibid., pp. 592-93.
[^9] Ibid., 7:268-69.
[^10] Doctrine and Covenants, Section I through Section 102, Gospel Doctrine Teacher's Supplement (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1978), p. 59.
[^11] Ibid.
[^12] Smith, History of the Church, 3:290.
[^13] Ibid., p. 293; emphasis added.
[^14] Neal A. Maxwell, "Premortality, a Glorious Reality," Ensign, Nov. 1985, p. 17.
[^15] Marion G. Romney, in Conference Report, Oct. 1969, pp. 58-59.
[^16] Smith, History of the Church, 3:294.
[^17] Dean C. Jessee, Personal Writings of the Prophet Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1971), p. 284; spelling and punctuation standardized.
[^18] Smith, History of the Church, 3:294.
[^19] The Saints' Herald, 6 Nov. 1934, p. 1414.
[^20] Orson F. Whitney, Improvement Era 22 (November 1918): 5-7; emphasis added.
[^21] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses (London: Latter-day Saints' Book Depot, 1854-86), 2:7.
[^22] Spencer W. Kimball, Faith Precedes the Miracle (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1973), pp. 97, 99.
[^23] Ibid., p. 96.
[^24] Richard G. Scott, in Conference Report, Oct. 1989, p. 39.
[^25] As quoted in Robert L. Millet, "Learning the Spirit of Revelation," in Insights into the Doctrine and Covenants, the Capstone of Our Religion, ed. Robert L. Millet and Larry E. Dahl (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1989), p. 49.
[^26] Dallin H. Oaks, The Lord's Way (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1991), p. 65.
[^27] Eugene England, Why the Church Is As True As the Gospel (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1986), p. 29.
[^28] Ibid., p. 30.
[^29] Ibid.
[^30] Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 2d ed. rev., edited by B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 6:50.
[^31] Ibid., 3:381.
[^32] Millet, "Learning the Spirit of Revelation," p. 50.
[^33] Ted L. Gibbons, Pleasant Grove Seminary lesson plan for 1 Samuel 3, Jan. 1992.
[^34] Millet, "Learning the Spirit of Revelation," pp. 49-50.
[^35] Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 256.
[^36] John A. Widtsoe, Joseph Smith, Seeker after Truth, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1951), pp. 266-67.
[^37] Richard O. Cowan, The Doctrine and Covenants, Our Modern Scripture (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1985), p. 3.
[^38] Widtsoe, Joseph Smith, p. 267.
[^39] Wilford Woodruff, in Journal of Discourses, 22:146.
[^40] Philo Dibble, in Juvenile Instructor, May 1892, p. 304.
[^41] Neal A. Maxwell, "But for a Small Moment" (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1986), pp. 7, 10, 13.
[^42] Scott, "Spiritual Communication," pp. 6-8; emphasis added.
[^43] W. Grant Bangerter, in Conference Report, Oct. 1977, p. 38.
[^44] Ibid., pp. 38-39.
[^45] Terry J. Moyer, "A Voice in the Fog," New Era, Dec. 1989, p. 12.
[^46] Stanton McDonald, "A Blessing Fulfilled," Ensign, Mar. 1988, pp. 42-43.
[^47] Michelle Hamilton, "Swept to Sea," Reader's Digest, Aug. 1992, p. 128.
[^48] David Maraniss, "Justice for a Buffalo Soldier," Washington Post Magazine, 20 Jan. 1991, as quoted in Reader's Digest, May 1991, p. 90.
