Byron R. Merrill, Heavens Are Open: The 1992 Sperry Symposium on the Doctrine and Covenants and Church History ( 1993)

18

Trials and Tribulations in Our Spiritual Growth: Insights from Doctrine & Covenants 121 and 122

Keith W. Perkins Brigham Young University

One of the age-old questions of the world is "Why do the wicked seem to prosper and the righteous suffer?" Great literary masterpieces, such as the book of Job, deal with this question. Examples from the lives of many individuals illustrate it. But perhaps no better answer to the question of suffering can be found than in the words of the Lord to Joseph Smith while the Prophet lay imprisoned in Liberty Jail. [^1]

Trials and tribulations can make people more kind, gentle, and loving, or they can make people bitter. An example of this tendency is found in Alma 62:41: "But behold, because of the exceedingly great length of the war between the Nephites and the Lamanites many had become hardened, because of the exceedingly great length of the war; and many were softened because of their afflictions, insomuch that they did humble themselves before God, even in the depth of humility."

The life of the greatest Being who ever lived on this earth, the Lord Jesus Christ, illustrates this tendency more than that of any other being. What Christ suffered is beyond our comprehension. He, the greatest of all, cried out in the Garden of Gethsemane: "O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless not as I will, but as thou wilt" (Matthew 26:39). And on the cross he further cried out, "Eli, Eli, lame sabachthani? that is to say, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" (Matthew 27:46). Yet he accepted the will of the Father and suffered for our sins, pains, temptations, sicknesses, and afflictions. Thus his love and understanding increased (Alma 7:11). His love is so great that when the prophets speak of the ultimate love, they call it the "pure love of Christ" (Moroni 7:47).

In this dispensation, the best contrast between the potential good and the potential ill effects of trials and tribulations is found in the cases of Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon. In the dark days of betrayal and apostasy, these two men, along with others, were illegally thrown into the foul jails of Richmond and Liberty, Missouri. They spent almost four long months in Liberty Jail, a "Temple Prison." [^2] Here they suffered all kinds of abuse. They were poisoned three or four times and fed human flesh. Their food was brought to them in a basket which still had on it the droppings of chickens who had roosted on it the night before. [^3] They had been sentenced to be shot and were saved only because a brave man, General Alexander Doniphan, refused to carry out the order. They had listened to the guards' foul oaths and boasting of their terrible deeds of murder, rape, and abuse. "We are compelled to hear nothing but blasphemous oaths, and witness a scene of blasphemy, and drunkenness and hypocrisy, and debaucheries of every description," wrote the Prophet Joseph Smith. [^4] They had learned from the visits of family members and friends to their prison of other atrocities committed against the Saints. Besides the terrible conditions under which the prisoners suffered, at times Joseph was also very sick with a toothache and a terrible pain in his face from a severe cold. [^5]

Sidney Rigdon was released from jail after a few months, but before leaving he declared that "the sufferings of Jesus Christ were a fool to his." [^6] After this experience he was no longer the great leader in the Church that he had been. Joseph Smith rejected him as a counselor because of his unfaithfulness. [^7] The Prophet later remarked that if Sidney led the Church, he would lead the Church to destruction in less than five years. [^8] After the death of the Prophet Joseph Smith, Sidney returned to Nauvoo from Pittsburgh, where he had gone in spite of the Lord's counsel (D&C 124:108). Sidney claimed he should be the guardian for the Church. When he secretly began plotting against the Twelve, after originally agreeing to support them, he was excommunicated. [^9] These events show that Sidney Rigdon chose to allow his trials and tribulations to make him a bitter man, finally losing his testimony, faith, and honor.

If we say that suffering and trials were the ruin of Sidney Rigdon, we could say that tribulations were the making of Joseph Smith. We learn the most about the Prophet's positive response to trials and tribulations from letters he wrote while in Liberty Jail.

A heartrending letter from the Prophet's wife, Emma, was the specific catalyst for Joseph's epistles. Emma told not only of her personal suffering but of the suffering of all the Saints: "The daily sufferings of our brethren in traveling and camping out nights, and those on the other side of the river would beggar the most lively description." [^10] She also apprised him of the growth and progress of his family, especially their baby son, who was growing and learning to walk without his father there to enjoy those precious moments. "We are all well at present, except Fredrick, who is quite sick. Little Alexander who is now in my arms is one of the finest little fellows, you ever saw in your life, he is so strong that with the assistance of a chair he will run all round the room." [^11] This news must have torn at the heartstrings of this tender, loving man, making his imprisonment even harder to bear. Yet Joseph reveals his understanding of the purposes of pain in a message to the Church, which he sent with his response to Emma's letter.

This epistle to the Church has become a classic in Latter-day Saint literature. Portions were selected by Elder Orson Pratt when he was assigned to prepare the 1876 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants and have become sections 121, 122, and 123 in our present edition. These are some of the finest words of counsel on the purpose and benefits of trials and tribulation. They give us answers to these perplexing questions and comfort to those who strive to understand the precious truths. Truly the Lord fulfilled his promise that he would reveal those things "that [have] not been revealed since the world was until now; which our forefathers have awaited with anxious expectation . . . a time to come in the which nothing shall be withheld" (D&C 121:26-28; see also Matthew 13:21; D&C 28:7; 42:61; 90:14; 101:32-33). Certainly the age-old question of why the righteous suffer and the wicked seem to prosper was one of the "mysteries" to be revealed.

Now let us look at Joseph's epistle to the Church. Some of the best answers to the question at hand were not mined by Elder Pratt and have been left like golden nuggets for us to find ourselves.

Joseph Smith first reminds the Saints of the characteristics they must have if they are going to grow from the trials they have recently experienced. "May faith and virtue, and knowledge and temperance and patience and godliness, and brotherly kindness and charity be in you and abound, that you may not be barren in anything, nor unfruitful." [^12]

Then he shares with them some of the most intimate and heartrending prayers that he had uttered while in prison: "O God, where art thou? And where is the pavilion that covereth thy hiding place?

"How long shall thy hand be stayed, and thine eye, yea thy pure eye, behold from the eternal heavens the wrongs of thy people and of thy servants, and thine ear be penetrated with their cries?

"Yea, O Lord, how long shall they suffer these wrongs and unlawful oppressions, before thine heart shall be softened toward them, and thy bowels be moved with compassion toward them?

"O Lord God Almighty, maker of heaven, earth, and seas, and of all things that in them are, and who controllest and subjectest the devil, and the dark and benighted dominion of Sheol—stretch forth thy hand; let thine eye pierce; let thy pavilion be taken up; let thy hiding place no longer be covered; let thine ear be inclined; let thine heart be softened, and thy bowels moved with compassion toward us.

"Let thine anger be kindled against our enemies; and, in the fury of thine heart, with thy sword avenge us of our wrongs.

"Remember thy suffering saints, O our God; and thy servants will rejoice in thy name forever" (D&C 121:1-6).

We do not know how long Joseph Smith must have prayed, whether hours, weeks, even months; but finally the loving answer from his Heavenly Father came. Joseph describes the important spiritual effects of this period of supplication in his preliminary remarks: "The floodgates of our hearts were lifted and our eyes were a fountain of tears, but those who have not been enclosed in the walls of prison without cause or provocation, can have but little idea how sweet the voice of a friend is; one token of friendship from any source whatever awakens and calls into action every sympathetic feeling; it brings up in an instant everything that is passed; it seizes the present with the avidity of lightning; it grasps after the future with the fierceness of a tiger; it moves the mind backward and forward, from one thing to another, until finally all enmity, malice and hatred, and past differences, misunderstandings and mismanagements are slain victorious at the feet of hope; and when the heart is sufficiently contrite, then the voice of inspiration steals along and whispers, My son, peace be unto thy soul; thine adversity and thine afflictions shall be but a small moment; and then if thou endure it well, God shall exalt thee on high; thou shalt triumph over all thy foes; thy friends do stand by thee, and they shall hail thee again, with warm hearts and friendly hands; thou art not yet as Job; thy friends do not contend against thee, neither charge thee with transgression, as they did Job; and they who do charge thee with transgression, their hope shall be blasted and their prospects shall melt away as the hoar frost melteth before the burning rays of the rising sun." [^13]

Note that the answer to even the Prophet's prayer does not come until finally "all enmity, malice and hatred . . . are slain victorious at the feet of hope." Then, and only then, does it come, and so it is with all of us. We cannot have hatred and malice and have the Spirit of the Lord.

We also learn from this portion of the letter that our life on this earth is very short—the Lord calls it "a small moment." Elder Neal A. Maxwell has given us some excellent insights into this portion of the Lord's revelation to Joseph Smith: "In the Apocryphon of James, Jesus reportedly told an afflicted Peter and James, 'If you consider how long the world existed before you, and how long it will exist after you, you will find that your life is one single day and your sufferings one single hour.' ('The Apocryphon of James,' in The Nag Hammadi Library in English, ed. James M. Robinson, San Francisco: Harper and Row, 1918, p. 31.)

"How like what the Lord told suffering Joseph in jail: 'My son, . . . thine adversity and thine afflictions shall be but a small moment.' (D&C 121:7.)

"One's life, therefore, is brevity compared to eternity—like being dropped off by a parent for a day at school. But what a day!" [^14]

In addition to Elder Maxwell's insights into this revelation, President Marion G. Romney's comments help us appreciate the tremendous growth that came to Joseph Smith during this "brief moment" of suffering in Liberty Jail and help us gain appreciation for the Prophet's greatness as a result of this experience. President Romney said: "Speaking for himself and his fellow prisoners, he [Joseph] said: ' . . . in His Almighty name we are determined to endure tribulation as good soldiers unto the end.' (DHC, Vol. 3, p. 297.) And counseling the Saints to do likewise, he said: ' . . . let thy bowels . . . be full of charity towards all men. . . . ' (DHC, Vol. 3, p. 300.)

"This admonition, considered in light of the circumstances under which it was given, seems to me to almost equal the Master's statement from the cross: 'Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do.' (Luke 23:34.) . . .

"No wonder the Lord could say to him, as he did, ' . . . I seal upon you your exaltation, and prepare a throne for you in the kingdom of my Father, with Abraham your father.

"'Behold, I have seen your sacrifices, and will forgive all your sins; I have seen your sacrifices in obedience to that which I have told you. . . . ' (D&C 132:49-50.)" [^15]

In his letter from Liberty Jail, Joseph Smith demonstrated his understanding of the principle of growth through trial. He taught the Saints that their sufferings in Missouri were the crucible of the Lord to refine them into pure gold. Joseph wrote: "And now, beloved brethren, we say unto you, that inasmuch as God hath said that He would have a tried people, that He would purge them as gold, now we think that this time He has chosen His own crucible, wherein we have been tried; and we think if we get through with any degree of safety, and shall have kept the faith, that it will be a sign to this generation, altogether sufficient to leave them without excuse; and we think also, it will be a trial of our faith equal to that of Abraham, and that the ancients will not have whereof to boast over us in the day of judgment, as being called to pass through heavier afflictions; that we may hold an even weight in the balance with them; but now, after having suffered so great sacrifice and having passed through so great a season of sorrow, we trust that a ram may be caught in the thicket speedily, to relieve the sons and daughters of Abraham from their great anxiety." [^16]

It may sound strange to us for the Prophet Joseph Smith to state that this trial of their faith would be equal to Abraham's (compare D&C 132:49-50). We remember that in the case of Abraham, the ultimate sacrifice was not required, only asked; but many of the Saints had sacrificed their very lives and the lives of their loved ones. The Prophet spoke of that issue on another occasion: "And again the affliction of my Brethren reminds me of Abraham offering up Isaac his only son, but my Brethren have been called to give up even more than this, their wives and their children, yea and their own life also. O Lord what more dost thou require at their hands before thou wilt come and save. . . . Lord thou wilt save them out of the hands of their enemies. Thou hast tried them in the furnace of affliction, a furnace of thine own choosing, and couldst thou have tried them more than thou hast? O Lord then let this suffice and from henceforth let this be recorded in heaven for thine angels to look upon and for a testimony against all those ungodly men who have committed those ungodly deeds [for ever and] ever." [^17]

The purposes and benefits of our trials and tribulations begin to be revealed, like the hidden treasure in this epistle from the Lord's prophet. First, we learn from the Lord that suffering refines us into purer, more perfect people. Just as refined gold is more brightly beautiful than contaminated ore, so do we become more loving, kind, and considerate and thus more beautiful to the Lord. Second, by suffering we are able to "hold an even weight in the balance with [the ancient Saints];" [^18] that is, we are worthy of the same reward they received because we paid the same price they did. Third, the Prophet tells us that after our tribulations, "God shall give unto [us] knowledge by His Holy Spirit, yea by the unspeakable gift of the Holy Ghost, that has not been revealed since the world was until now; which our forefathers have waited with anxious expectation to be revealed in the last times, which their minds were pointed to by the angels, as held in reserve for the fulness of their glory; a time to come in the which nothing shall be withheld" (D&C 121:26-28). Thus one of the greatest gifts that God can give us, the gift of the Holy Ghost, comes as a direct result of our trials and tribulations.

The Lord also told the Prophet Joseph Smith: "If thou art called to pass through tribulation; if thou art in perils among false brethren; if thou art in perils among robbers; if thou art in perils by land or by sea;

"If thou art accused with all manner of false accusations; if thine enemies fall upon thee; if they tear thee from the society of thy father and mother and brethren and sisters; and if with a drawn sword thine enemies tear thee from the bosom of thy wife, and of thine offspring, and thine elder son, although but six years of age, shall cling to thy garments, and shall say, My father, my father, why can't you stay with us? O, my father, what are the men going to do with you? and if then he shall be thrust from thee by the sword, and thou be dragged to prison, and thine enemies prowl around thee like wolves for the blood of the lamb;

"And if thou shouldst be cast into the pit, or into the hands of murderers, and the sentence of death passed upon thee; if thou be cast into the deep; if the billowing surge conspire against thee; if fierce winds become thine enemy; if the heavens gather blackness, and all the elements combine to hedge up the way; and above all, if the very jaws of hell shall gape open the mouth wide after thee, know thou, my son, that all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good.

"The Son of Man hath descended below them all. Art thou greater than he?

"Therefore, hold on thy way, and the priesthood shall remain with thee; for their bounds are set, they cannot pass. Thy days are known, and thy years shall not be numbered less; therefore, fear not what man can do, for God shall be with you forever and ever" (D&C 122:5-9; emphasis added).

For the most part this excerpt is not a prediction to the Prophet of what could or would happen but a rehearsal of his history. The six-year-old son mentioned in the passage, Joseph Smith III, relates what the experience referred to was like:

"I remember vividly the morning my father came to visit his family after the arrest that took place in the fall of 1838. When he was brought to the house by an armed guard I ran out of the gate to greet him, but was roughly pushed away from his side by a sword in the hand of the guard and not allowed to go near him. My mother, also, was not permitted to approach him and had to receive his farewell by word of lip only. The guard did not permit him to pass into the house nor her to pass out, either because he feared an attempt would be made to rescue his prisoner or because of some brutal instinct in his own breast. Who shall say" [^19]

The Lord told Joseph the ultimate reason for trials and tribulations: "All these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good."

"What an experience!" we say and hope it never happens to us. But when we know that our suffering will give us experiences necessary for our exaltation and will ultimately be for our good, then such experiences become easier to bear. And, as the Lord said to Joseph, no matter how hard our trials and tribulations have been, we still know there is One who has suffered far more than we. Because of his sufferings, he bears our infirmities, our pains, and our sicknesses (Alma 7:11-12). He knows what we are going through, for "the Son of Man hath descended below them all" (D&C 122:8).

Now we can see why Joseph Smith understood so much about suffering. Very early, the Lord had told him: "Be patient in afflictions, for thou shalt have many; but endure them, for, lo, I am with thee, even unto the end of thy days" (D&C 24:8). And near the end of Joseph's life the Prophet could, like Paul (2 Timothy 4:7), report how he had finished the course which the Lord had laid out for him: "And as for the perils which I am called to pass through, they seem but a small thing to me, as the envy and wrath of man have been my common lot all the days of my life; and for what cause it seems mysterious, unless I was ordained from before the foundation of the world for some good end, or bad, as you may choose to call it. Judge ye for yourselves. God knoweth all these things, whether it be good or bad. But nevertheless, deep water is what I am wont to swim in. It all has become a second nature to me; and I feel, like Paul, to glory in tribulation; for to this day has the God of my fathers delivered me out of them all, and will deliver me from henceforth; for behold, and lo, I shall triumph over all my enemies, for the Lord God hath spoken it" (D&C 127:2).

Orson F. Whitney said of Joseph Smith: "It remained for the Prophet Joseph Smith to . . . set forth the why and wherefore of human suffering; and in revealing it he gave us a strength and power to endure that we did not before possess. For when men know why they suffer, and realize that it is for a good and wise purpose, they can bear it much better than they can in ignorance. . . .

" . . . It is for our development, our purification, our growth, our education and advancement, that we buffet the fierce waves of sorrow and misfortune; and we shall be all the stronger and better when we have swam the flood and stand upon the farther shore. . . .

" . . . When we want counsel and comfort, we do not go to children, nor to those who know nothing but pleasure and self-gratification. We go to men and women of thought and sympathy, men and women who have suffered themselves and can give us the comfort that we need. Is not this God's purpose in causing [allowing] his children to suffer? He wants them to become more like himself. God has suffered far more than man ever did or ever will, and is therefore the great source of sympathy and consolation: 'Who are these arrayed in white, nearest to the throne of God?' asked John the Apostle, wrapt in his mighty vision. The answer was: 'These are they who have come up through great tribulation, and washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.' [Revelation 7:14]

"There is always a blessing in sorrow and humiliation. They who escape these things are not the fortunate ones. 'Whom God loveth he chasteneth.' When he desires to make a great man he takes a little street waif, or a boy in the back woods, such as Lincoln or Joseph Smith, and brings him up through hardship and privation to be the grand and successful leader of a people. Flowers shed most of their perfume when they are crushed. Men and women have to suffer just so much in order to bring out the best that is in them." [^20]

No wonder Brigham Young said that Joseph Smith became more nearly perfect in the almost thirty-nine years he lived with persecution than he could have in a thousand years without the trials that he faced. [^21]

When he was a member of the Quorum of the Twelve, Spencer W. Kimball gave one of his finest talks on the subject of growth through trial. He entitled his discourse, "Tragedy or Destiny?" A few brief excerpts from this masterful address help us to answer the question of the ages concerning suffering:

"Is there not wisdom in his giving us trials that we might rise above them, responsibilities that we might achieve, work to harden our muscles, sorrows to try our souls? Are we not exposed to temptations to test our strength, sickness that we might learn patience, death that we might be immortalized and glorified? . . .

"I like also the words of these verses, the author of which I do not know:

"Pain stayed so long I said to him today, "'I will not have you with me any more.' "I stamped my foot and said, 'Be on your way,' "And paused there, startled at the look he wore. "'I, who have been your friend,' he said to me, "'I, who have been your teacher—all you know "'Of understanding love, of sympathy, "'And patience, I have taught you. Shall I go?' "He spoke the truth, this strange unwelcome guest; "I watched him leave, and knew that he was wise. "He left a heart grown tender in my breast, "He left a far, clear vision in my eyes. "I dried my tears, and lifted up a song— "Even for one who'd tortured me so long." [^22]

Sometimes sufferings, trials, and afflictions come upon us because of our own sins and transgressions. Such was the case with the Saints who were driven out of Jackson County, Missouri, in 1833. Even though they had been driven out, the Lord still held out the promise of eternal life, if they repented: "Verily I say unto you, concerning your brethren who have been afflicted, and persecuted, and cast out from the land of their inheritance—I, the Lord, have suffered the affliction to come upon them, wherewith they have been afflicted, in consequence of their transgressions; yet I will own them, and they shall be mine in that day when I shall come to make up my jewels" (D&C 101:1-3).

President Kimball gave us a fourth reason why people suffer: accidents. They are a part of mortality. The Lord sends his rain upon the just and the unjust (Matthew 5:45). After relating a number of tragic accidents, President Kimball asked, "Could the Lord have prevented these tragedies? The answer is, Yes. The Lord is omnipotent, with all power to control our lives, save us pain, prevent all accidents, drive all planes and cars, feed us, protect us, save us from labor, effort, sickness, even from death, if he will. But he will not.

"We should be able to understand this, because we can realize how unwise it would be for us to shield our children from all effort, from disappointments, temptations, sorrows, and suffering.

"The basic gospel law is free agency and eternal development. To force us to be careful or righteous would be to nullify that fundamental law and make growth impossible." [^23]

We have reviewed from scriptures and from living prophets the four major reasons for suffering: (1) experience, (2) our good, (3) our own sins, and (4) accidents. It is important for our spiritual growth that we recognize the validity of these reasons. Regardless of how our trials, tribulations, and sufferings come upon us, however, it is our attitude toward them that will determine whether they become stumbling blocks or stepping-stones. We need to remind ourselves of the promises the Lord made to the Prophet Joseph Smith as he neared the end of his months of ordeal in the jails in Missouri: "And although their influence shall cast thee into trouble, and into bars and walls, thou shalt be had in honor; and but for a small moment and thy voice shall be more terrible in the midst of thine enemies than the fierce lion, because of thy righteousness; and thy God shall stand by thee forever and ever. . . . Therefore, hold on thy way, and the priesthood shall remain with thee; for their bounds are set, they cannot pass. Thy days are known, and thy years shall not be numbered less; therefore, fear not what man can do, for God shall be with you forever and ever" (D&C 122:4, 9).

From these examples we can see that when we handle the trials, tribulations, and suffering as we should, then we will be able to claim the blessings the Lord has in store for us. He tells us of them in Doctrine and Covenants 58:3-4, saying, "Ye cannot behold with your natural eyes, for the present time, the design of your God concerning those things which shall come hereafter, and the glory which shall follow after much tribulation. For after much tribulation come the blessings. Wherefore the day cometh that ye shall be crowned with much glory; the hour is not yet, but is nigh at hand."

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Ancestral File (more than 12 million names linked together by family groups and pedigrees, along with names and addresses of submitters and other information). Anne B. Prusha, A History of Kirtland, Ohio (Mentor, Ohio: Lakeland Community College Press, 1982). In addition to the Mormon experience in Kirtland, Prusha discusses the growth of the community and the relationship of the Mormons to the non-Mormons. See also Mrs. Peter S. Hitchock, "Joseph Smith and the Kirtland Temple," The Historical Society Quarterly, Lake County, Ohio 7 (Nov. 1965): 127-32. The Mormon experience in the Kirtland area is recorded in various issues of the Painesvi11e Telegraph and in local histories of Western Reserve counties, although not always favorably. The Kirtland Temple is now owned and maintained by the Reorganized Church Jesus Christ Latter Day Saints, with headquarters in Independence, Missouri.
[^2] International Genealogical Index (more than 184 million names of deceased individuals for whom temple ordinances have been cleared or already performed). The IGI helps members avoid duplicating temple ordinances. Karl Ricks Anderson, Joseph Smith's Kirtland: Eyewitness Accounts (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1989), pp. 169-77. See also Milton V. Backman, Jr., The Heavens Resound: A History of the Latter-day Saints in Ohio, 1830-1838 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1983), pp. 302-9.
[^3] Social Security Death Index (39.5 million names of deceased people who had Social Security numbers and whose deaths were reported to the Social Security Administration between 1962 and 1988, with some names as early as 1937 and some as late as 1989). Richard O. Cowan, "The House of the Lord in Kirtland: A 'Preliminary' Temple," Regional Studies in Latter day Saint Church History: Ohio, ed. Milton V. Backman, Jr. (Provo, Utah: Department of Church History and Doctrine, Brigham Young University, 1990), pp. 105-22.
[^4] Military Index (individuals in the U.S. military service who died in Korea or Vietnam from 1950 to 1975). See also Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 2d ed. rev., edited by B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1948), 2:435-36.
[^5] Family History Library Catalog (an automated edition of the catalog which describes records at the Family History Library in Salt Lake City). Smith, History of the Church, 6: 183-84; see also D&C 2.
[^6] TempleReady (a computer program that helps Church members prepare names of ancestors for temple ordinances and take the names to the temple). Jacob Neusner, ed., Judaisms and Their Messiahs at the Turn of the Christian Era (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987), p. 274. To quote further, "The resurrection of the dead comes through Elijah" (p. 273).
[^7] Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 172; see also pp. 337-38.
[^8] Richard O. Cowan, Temples to Dot the Earth (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1989), p. 32.
[^9] Boyd K. Packer, The Holy Temple (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1980), p. 210.
[^10] Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, comp. Bruce R. McConkie (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56), 2:127-28.
[^11] Larry C. Porter and Milton V. Backman, Jr., "Doctrine and the Temple in Nauvoo," Brigham Young University Studies, 32 (1992): 51-53.
[^12] Mark E. Petersen, "Why Mormons Build Temples," Temples and the Latter-day Saints (Salt Lake City: Mutual Improvement Associations of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1967), p. 16.
[^13] The years that civil registration of vital records began in the following states are examples: Massachusetts, 1841; New Jersey, 1848; Rhode Island, 1853; Michigan and Ohio, 1867; to name just a few. Throughout the nineteenth century and into the early twentieth century, other states passed legislation requiring the recording of vital records.
[^14] See D&C 135 and Smith, History of the Church, 6:629-31.
[^15] Addresses and information regarding genealogical and historical societies, libraries, vital record offices, ethnic archives and societies, periodicals and newsletters, etc., can be found in Elizabeth Petty Bentley, The Genealogist's Address Book (Baltimore: Genealogical Publishing Co., 1991).
[^16] The largest repositories of LDS Church records for genealogical use are the Historical Department, in the east wing of the Church Office Building, Salt Lake City; Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University; and the Family History Library, Salt Lake City. Other large libraries, such as the Library of Congress and Yale University, also collect Mormon Americana.
[^17] The Family History Library is located at 35 North West Temple Street, Salt Lake City, UT 84150 (telephone 801-240-2331).
[^18] Many of the Family History Library's resources are described in Johni Cerny and Wendy Elliott, eds., The Library: A Guide to the LDS Family History Library (Salt Lake City: Ancestry Publishing, 1988). The most up-to-date listing Library holdings, however, is the Family History Library Catalog (FHLC) on microfiche, on compact disc, and on-line.
[^19] M. Russell Ballard, in Church News, 8 Mar. 1980, p. 4.
[^20] For example, Sidney Branton Sperry appears in the Ancestral File, International Genealogical Index, and the Social Security Death Index. Born 26 December 1895 in Salt Lake City, Utah, he was the son of Harrison Sperry, Jr., and Josephine Titcomb Sperry. The Ancestral File traces his ancestry to Richard Sperry, an immigrant who resided in New Haven, Connecticut. Dr. Sperry died on 4 September 1977 in Provo, Utah. The Sidney B. Sperry manuscript collection is housed in the Department Archives and Manuscripts, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah (see "Register the Sidney B. Sperry Collection," compiled by Dale Lyons and Brian Cannon, UA 618). (N.B. The author is also a descendant of Richard Sperry, the immigrant.)
[^21] Family History Department, Member Services Division, statistical sheet (Salt Lake City, 1992).
[^22] Archibald F. Bennett, Searching with Success: A Genealogical Text (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1962), pp. 82-83.
[^23] Leaun G. Otten and C. Max Caldwell, Sacred Truths of the Doctrine and Covenants, 2d ed. (Springville, Utah: LEMB, 1983), 2:249.
