Byron R. Merrill, Heavens Are Open: The 1992 Sperry Symposium on the Doctrine and Covenants and Church History ( 1993)

20

The Weak Things of the World

Brett P. Thomas Brigham Young University

The weak and simple who come unto Christ will break down the strong and mighty. By proclaiming the commandments of God and thrusting in their sickle with all their might, they will confound the wise, thrash the nations by the power of God's Spirit, and lay up for themselves treasures in heaven and salvation to their souls (see D&C 1:18-23; 4:4; 133:59; 1 Corinthians 1:27).

Such power and salvation will come not because their weaknesses have been wrapped up, shelved, and forgotten, but rather because Christ has promised that the light of the gospel will reveal their weaknesses. If these servants respond by turning unto Christ in humility and faith, the sculptor of souls will endow them with his grace and will mold, shape, and transform these weaknesses into divine strengths (see Ether 12:27-37; 2 Corinthians 12:9-10).

This divine process, however, is absolute foolishness to the world and is often enigmatic to the Saint. The purpose of this paper is to examine the paradox of human frailty as a divine vehicle which testifies to the world of the grandeur and perfection of God. These frailties are not a deterrent to heaven, but rather an integral part of the pilgrimage to God and his glory.

In Doctrine and Covenants 1, the Lord cites four reasons why he has chosen the weak and simple to proclaim the fulness of his gospel to the ends of the world:

The Weak Break Down the Strong

The weak and simple break down the strong and mighty by teaching the truth by the power of the Holy Ghost. "Wherefore, I the Lord ask you this question—unto what were ye ordained? To preach my gospel by the Spirit, even the Comforter which was sent forth to teach the truth" (D&C 50:13-14). This truth teaches that Jesus is the Christ, the literal son of God, and "that he came into the world, even Jesus, to be crucified for the world, and to bear the sins of the world, and to sanctify the world, and to cleanse it from all unrighteousness; that through him all might be saved" (D&C 76:41-42). The salvation of souls is his work and his glory. In short, the truth teaches the glory of God.

Those who emulate the Savior through obedience to the commandments receive light and truth and come to know of God's glory (see D&C 93:28, 36). Because "light and truth forsake that evil one" (D&C 93:37), they lose every desire to be supported by the strength of the world; indeed, the strength of the world holds no appeal. A classic example of that is Moses' dramatic encounter with the glory of God and the glory of the world. On an "exceedingly high mountain," Moses talked with God and "the glory of God was upon Moses; therefore Moses could endure his presence" (Moses 1:1-2). The Lord taught: "I have a work for thee, Moses, my son; and thou art in the similitude of mine Only Begotten; and mine Only Begotten is and shall be the Savior, for he is full of grace and truth; but there is no God beside me, and all things are present with me, for I know them all" (Moses 1:6). Moses was then shown a marvelous vision of the "world and the ends thereof, and all the children of men which are, and which were created; of the same he greatly marveled and wondered" (Moses 1:8).

But then the lights went out:

"And the presence of God withdrew from Moses, that his glory was not upon Moses; and Moses was left unto himself. And as he was left unto himself, he fell unto the earth.

"And it came to pass that it was for the space of many hours before Moses did again receive his natural strength like unto man; and he said unto himself: Now, for this cause I know that man is nothing, which thing I never had supposed.

"But now mine own eyes have beheld God; but not my natural, but my spiritual eyes, for my natural eyes could not have beheld; for I should have withered and died in his presence; but his glory was upon me; and I beheld his face, for I was transfigured before him.

"And it came to pass that when Moses had said these words, behold, Satan came tempting him, saying: Moses, son of man, worship me.

"And it came to pass that Moses looked upon Satan and said: Who art thou? For behold, I am a son of God, in the similitude of his Only Begotten; and where is thy glory, that I should worship thee?" (Moses 1:9-13; emphasis added).

Satan was stuck by that question, and he knew it. His glory was nothing compared to God's. Moses continued with this stark juxtaposition:

"For behold, I could not look upon God, except his glory should come upon me, and I were transfigured before him. But I can look upon thee in the natural man. Is it not so, surely?

"Blessed be the name of my God, for his Spirit hath not altogether withdrawn from me, or else where is thy glory, for it is darkness unto me? And I can judge between thee and God; for God said unto me: Worship God, for him only shalt thou serve.

"Get thee hence, Satan; deceive me not; for God said unto me: Thou art after the similitude of mine Only Begotten.

"And he also gave me commandments when he called unto me out of the burning bush, saying: Call upon God in the name of mine Only Begotten, and worship me.

"And again Moses said: I will not cease to call upon God, I have other things to inquire of him: for his glory has been upon me, wherefore I can judge between him and thee. Depart hence, Satan" (Moses 1:14-18; emphasis added).

Because Moses knew he was the son of God after the similitude of Jesus Christ and that "man is nothing" or powerless without the sustaining grace and glory of the Savior, he was able to clearly discern the weakness of the world. The power of truth exposes the shallowness of the world's strength. The world's glory simply cannot compare. Therefore, the power of the truth breaks down the "mighty and strong" by revealing the glory of God.

Jesus Christ shatters the world's stereotype of strength. The strength of Christ is the antithesis of the arm of flesh. His mission is to reveal his perfect attributes unto man and to invite them to be like him through his atonement. These truths expose the utter futility in trusting in the arm of flesh. For example, his attributes of faith, hope, and charity are eternally stronger than doubt, despair, and pride; and his attributes of meekness, purity, and mercy are infinitely superior to the raging destructiveness of anger and the spiritual atrophy of bitter, torn, and unforgiving relationships. His perfect mastery of power shows clearly by contrast the corrupt nature of mankind's power, which throughout history has trampled and enslaved their fellowman. In short, he teaches the terrible weakness of sin and that only through him and by him can mankind be saved. He invites the world to a greater strength—a complete submissiveness unto the will of the Father and a perfection in righteousness.

"But wait a minute!" the weak and simple exclaim: "How can we with our finite tongues possibly do justice to God's infinite glory? And how can we in our imperfections possibly testify of Jesus Christ and his divine nature?" The answer, of course, is we can't—but God can, through us. When Enoch received his call from God he queried: "Why is it that I have found favor in thy sight, and am but a lad, and all the people hate me; for I am slow of speech; wherefore am I thy servant? And the Lord said unto Enoch: Go forth and do as I have commanded thee, and no man shall pierce thee. Open thy mouth, and it shall be filled, and I will give thee utterance, for all flesh is in my hands, and I will do as seemeth me good" (Moses 6:31-32; emphasis added). The salient testimony of the scriptures is that God and his Spirit support those who faithfully obey him and keep his commandments, "for I will go before your face. I will be on your right hand and on your left, and my Spirit shall be in your hearts, and mine angels round about you, to bear you up" (D&C 84:88).

The weak and simple are to "speak in the name of God the Lord, even the Savior of the world" (D&C 1:20). Those who speak in the name of Jesus Christ express their willingness by covenant to take upon themselves his name. They represent him, act, speak, and do as the Savior would do if he were present. No mortal, of course, can possibly do that alone, so God promises the companionship and power of the Holy Ghost through the ordinances of the gospel (D&C 39:4-12). This grace, or enabling power, remits sins, heals souls, empowers to do the works of Christ, and, if individuals are proven faithful, will one day, after they pass through the veil, endow them with the very attributes of Christ. Therefore, by "speak[ing] in the name of God the Lord, even the Savior of the world," the weak and simple speak with the power of the Holy Ghost and invite all to come unto Christ and to learn of him. This invitation, of course, begins with faith.

That Faith Might Increase in the Earth

The apostle Paul has given us an important insight into why God has chosen the simple and weak to help faith increase in the earth: "And I, brethren, when I came to you, came not with excellency of speech or of wisdom, declaring unto you the testimony of God. For I determined not to know any thing among you save Jesus Christ, and him crucified. And I was with you in weakness, and in fear, and in much trembling. And my speech and my preaching was not with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power: That your faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God" (1 Corinthians 2:1-5; emphasis added).

Paul's phrase "your faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God" points to the problem of mankind's tendency to lean on the ways of the world and their difficulty in developing faith in the ways of God. An illustration of this principle is found in God's choosing of his prophets. When President David O. McKay died, a Church member approached Elder Harold B. Lee and questioned him about the prospect of Joseph Fielding Smith, president of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, becoming the next prophet. Elder Gene R. Cook described the dialogue as follows:

"'Is it correct what I have heard that they're going to make Joseph Fielding Smith the President of the Church?'

" . . . Elder Lee answered politely and confirmed that he thought that would be the case.

"But the man persisted and said, 'How can that be? I can't believe that. How can we sustain Joseph Fielding Smith? He's ninety-three years old. Why, he's so old I'm not sure he is really quite with it.' The man continued developing this point—how could a man of that age, his body weak and worn down, still direct this Church?

"President Lee listened for a while, but his sharp mind was spinning. He responded, 'My good brother, do you know what it takes to be a prophet of the Lord?'

"The man said, 'Well, I guess I really don't know exactly.'

"'Well,' said Elder Lee, 'what do you think it would take?'

"The fellow then said, 'Well, I suppose he'd have to know all about genealogy, the missionary program of the Church, and all the missionaries and what they're doing and how to supervise them. He would need to know about the Primary and the Relief Society and the building and construction programs.' He named quite a few other major functions of the Church.

"When he finished Elder Lee said, 'That's all wrong.' He could sometimes say that quite pointedly. The man was taken back a bit. Then Elder Lee answered his question by stating, 'Shall I tell you what it takes to be a prophet? There's only one capacity; just one. And that is to be able to hear the voice of the Lord. That's all. He's got all the rest of us to do the work. He just has to do one function. Do you suppose that this great living Apostle, who has been sustained a prophet for six decades, longer than any other man on earth, might be able to do that?'" [^1]

Surely, "as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are [God's] ways higher than [our] ways" (Isaiah 55:9). These heavenly ways include the intentional transmission of divine truths through the mouths of the weak and simple so that we will be directly confronted with the issue of faith (see D&C 21:4-5). Those who learn to embrace this principle of faith, cleave and draw near unto God by trying the virtue of his word. Striving to become acquainted with his voice, they search the scriptures and immerse themselves into the words of his servants. Indeed, they begin to testify that "these words are not of men nor of man, but of [God]" (D&C 18:34). Thus, as they begin to treasure these words and hearken unto them, their faith is increased in Jesus Christ, the Savior of the world, and they are enabled to "let the solemnities of eternity rest upon [their] minds" (D&C 43:34).

That God's Everlasting Covenant Might Be Established

Hearkening unto the words of eternal life through the weak and simple leads us to the ordinances of God. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught: "Reading the experience of others, or the revelation given to them, can never give us a comprehensive view of our condition and true relation to God. Knowledge of these things can only be obtained by experience through the ordinances of God set forth for that purpose." [^2] Through the ordinances of the gospel and the authority of the priesthood, the powers of godliness are manifest unto men in the flesh (see D&C 84:21). Thus, through the weak and simple whom God has authorized to act in his name, God and man enter into an everlasting covenant, even the fulness of the gospel (see D&C 66:2). This covenant promises to sanctify mortal man, make him holy, and enable him to dwell in God's presence and live as he lives. Jesus Christ has promised: "Unto as many as received me gave I power to do many miracles, and to become the sons of God; and even unto them that believed on my name gave I power to obtain eternal life. And even so I have sent mine everlasting covenant into the world, to be a light to the world, and to be a standard for my people" (D&C 45:8-9).

This standard is a great strength to those who strive to follow him. God sustains those who bind themselves to him through holy and sacred covenants. When the weak and simple repent and worthily renew those covenants, the Savior empowers them unto righteousness, the powers of heaven pour down upon them, the doctrine of the priesthood distills upon their souls, and, ultimately, they are promised that "the Holy Ghost shall be [their] constant companion, and [their] scepter an unchanging scepter of righteousness and truth; and [their] dominion shall be an everlasting dominion, and without compulsory means it shall flow unto [them] forever and ever" (D&C 121:46).

That They Might Come to Understanding

Finally, God has given his commandments unto his servants "in their weakness, after the manner of their language, that they might come to understanding" (D&C 1:24). Understanding comes by receiving the Spirit of God as it is preached by the Spirit of God through God's servants (see D&C 50:16-22) and by living and applying the truth (see Mosiah 12:27; Proverbs 9:10; John 7:15-19). The weak and simple will learn the truth line upon line, precept upon precept, and grace for grace as they learn to emulate the truth—even the Savior of the world (see D&C 93:20; 98:12-14). Paradoxically, as we are confronted with our own weaknesses and the weaknesses of others, we learn to apply our hearts to understanding and coming to know the strengths of our Savior, Jesus Christ.

Confronting Weakness "after the Manner of Their Language"

On 1 November 1831, ten elders met in conference to discuss the publication of revelations given to the Prophet Joseph Smith. The compilation of these revelations would be titled "The Book of Commandments." So important was this event that the heavens were opened, and God endowed Joseph with one of the greatest revelations ever given to man. It is known today as Section 1 of the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord's Preface. Not all of the elders present at the conference were enthusiastic about this new revelation, however. William E. McLellin felt that the language of it was inferior and needed to be improved. In response to his complaint, McLellin received through Joseph the following revelation from the Lord:

"Your eyes have been upon my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., and his language you have known, and his imperfections you have known; and you have sought in your hearts knowledge that you might express beyond his language; this you also know.

"Now, seek ye out of the Book of Commandments, even the least that is among them, and appoint him that is the most wise among you;

"Or, if there be any among you that shall make one like unto it, then ye are justified in saying that ye do not know that they are true;

"But if ye cannot make one like unto it, ye are under condemnation if ye do not bear record that they are true" (D&C 67:5-8).

In other words, the Lord was challenging anyone present at the conference to write a revelation. William McLellin, who had boasted of his literary prowess, accepted the challenge and left the room to try. After a period of time, he returned to the conference in tears without a single written word. Instead of drinking deeply from the fountain of living waters, McLellin, when confronted with "weakness, after the manner of [Joseph Smith's] language" (D&C 1:24), saw only the weakness—which cost him the Spirit and crippled his ability to see the grandeur of this glorious revelation.

King Benjamin spoke on this issue. Keenly aware of his weak and trembling mortal frame (see Mosiah 2:26-30), Benjamin introduced his great sermon with these cautionary words: "I have not commanded you to come up hither to trifle the words which I shall speak, but that you should hearken unto me, and open your ears that ye may hear, and your hearts that ye may understand, and your minds that the mysteries of God may be unfolded to your view" (Mosiah 2:9; emphasis added). The Spirit pours down upon the souls of those who are prepared to hear. Trifling with words or focusing unduly on the weakness of God's servants inhibits that divine outpouring.

President Heber J. Grant shared the following testimony:

"I call to mind one incident . . . when I was a young man, probably seventeen or eighteen years of age. I heard the late Bishop Millen Atwood preach a sermon in the Thirteenth Ward. I was studying grammar at the time, and he made some grammatical errors in his talk.

"I wrote down his first sentence, smiled to myself, and said: 'I am going to get here tonight, during the thirty minutes that Brother Atwood speaks, enough material to last me for the entire winter in my night school grammar class.' We had to take to the class for each lesson two sentences, or four sentences a week, that were not grammatically correct, together with our corrections.

"I contemplated making my corrections and listening to Bishop Atwood's sermon at the same time. But I did not write anything more after that first sentence—not a word; and when Millen Atwood stopped preaching, tears were rolling down my cheeks, tears of gratitude and thanksgiving that welled up in my eyes because of the marvelous testimony which that man bore of the divine mission of Joseph Smith, the prophet of God, and of the wonderful inspiration that attended the prophet in all his labors.

"Although it is now more than sixty-five years since I listened to that sermon, it is just as vivid today, and the sensations and feelings that I had are just as fixed with me as they were the day I heard it. Do you know, I would no more have thought of using those sentences in which he had made grammatical mistakes than I would think of standing up in class and profaning the name of God. That testimony made the first profound impression that was ever made upon my heart and soul of the divine mission of the prophet. I had heard many testimonies that had pleased me and made their impression, but his was the first testimony that had melted me to tears under the inspiration of the Spirit of God to that man." [^3]

"Remember that which cometh from above is sacred, and must be spoken [and received] with care, and by constraint of the Spirit" (D&C 63:64). This principle has tremendous ramifications. Ordinary Latter-day Saints preach sermons, teach lessons, administer ordinances, and covenant to act as representatives of Jesus Christ. Some Saints feel overwhelmed, nervous, and insecure. Others may be overbearing, smug, and dogmatic. None of us bears one another's burdens without our own debilitating blemishes. It matters not where the weakness lies, be it our own or another's; rather, the test is how we respond to the weakness—the condition of our hearts.

Succor the Weak

Lehi's dream teaches us that hard hearts and blind minds fail to see God's hand in his work. They scoff, mock, and point their fingers toward those who struggle to press forward in Christ (see 1 Nephi 8:27-28). The pure in heart, however, "succor the weak, lift up the hands which hang down, and strengthen the feeble knees" (D&C 81:5). Modern revelation instructs: "If any man among you be strong in the Spirit, let him take with him him that is weak, that he may be edified in all meekness, that he may become strong also" (D&C 84:106). It would be arrogant and presumptuous for one member to categorize himself or herself as the strong and label someone else as the weak. Equally erroneous would be members wallowing in self-pity, seeing themselves only as the weak and others as the strong. There is a divine mixture of weakness and strength in all of us, and so much of our probation rests on our willingness to see each other and help each other as God does—in other words, with faith, hope and charity. In this holy process we are edified together, not in spite of each other, but because of each other.

Anciently, when Israel was fighting the Amalekites, Joshua's army was strengthened as long as Moses could hold up his arms with the rod of God. The record reads: "And it came to pass, when Moses held up his hand, that Israel prevailed: and when he let down his hand Amalek prevailed. But Moses' hands were heavy; and they took a stone, and put it under him, and he sat thereon; and Aaron and Hur stayed up his hands, the one on the one side, and the other on the other side; and his hands were steady until the going down of the sun" (Exodus 17:11-12) .

In other words, when his arms dropped because of fatigue, so did the strength of Israel's armies and they began to fall back. At length, when Aaron and Hur sustained the arms of Moses, Israel was empowered to victory. Note the interrelationship of strengths and weakness. As we sustain the servants of God, we are strengthened from on high. Both prophet and servant are edified together through their strengths and their weaknesses. In a very real way, we can sustain one another in our hearts, thoughts, prayers, and actions. Indeed, we are commanded to strengthen one another in "all [our] conversation, in all [our] prayers, in all [our] exhortations, and in all [our] doings" (D&C 108:7). As Jesus taught Peter, the true test of conversion is whether we strengthen one another. Charity is born of such conversion, enabling us to see the good, or "god," in our fellowman. We will then see no ordinary people; rather, as C. S. Lewis has written, we will see the glory of God:

"The load, or weight, or burden of my neighbour's glory should be laid on my back, a load so heavy that only humility can carry it, and the backs of the proud will be broken. It is a serious thing to live in a society of possible gods and goddesses, to remember that the dullest and most uninteresting person you can talk to may one day be a creature which, if you sa[w] it now, you would be strongly tempted to worship, or else a horror and a corruption such as you now meet, if at all, only in a nightmare. All day long we are, in some degree, helping each other to one or other of these destinations. It is in the light of these overwhelming possibilities, it is with the awe and circumspection proper to them, that we should conduct all our dealings with one another, all friendships, all loves, all play, all politics. There are no ordinary people. You have never talked to a mere mortal." [^4]

Because Thou Hast Seen Thy Weakness, Thou Shalt Be Made Strong

It is precisely in the process of shouldering our neighbor's glory and bearing his burdens that they may be light that we begin following in the footsteps of Jesus Christ—a path which is laden with the promise: "If men come unto me I will show unto them their weakness. I give unto men weakness that they may be humble" (Ether 12:27). This promise, to put it mildly, is a painful one. C. S. Lewis likened it to suddenly opening the door to a cellar and seeing rats scurrying to safety. The sudden light from above did not create the rat, or, symbolically, the sin or weakness; it simply exposed it. [^5] In a like manner, when we come unto Christ, we will discover our own rats in the cellar which the light of the gospel will continue to reveal unto us, demanding that we deal with them, despite our natural inclination to turn our heads and look the other way. For example, only those who desire humility discover the powerful pull of pride, only those who strive to be submissive discover how dearly they like hanging onto their own will, and only those who truly desire repentance discover the seriousness of sin. We can learn a great deal from the prophets, who, when given additional light that exposed their weaknesses, didn't close the door to their cellar and bolt it shut. On the contrary, in humility they approached the Lord and learned difficult but vital lessons, repented, and received line upon line, precept upon precept, and gradually became pillars of strength, not in spite of their weaknesses, but because of them.

Consider Joseph Smith. Early in his ministry he learned the folly of trusting in the arm of flesh. After the loss of 116 pages of manuscript he was chastised: "You should not have feared man more than God. . . . Behold, thou art Joseph, and thou wast chosen to do the work of the Lord, but because of transgression, if thou art not aware thou wilt fall" (D&C 3:7, 9). The Prophet pleaded for forgiveness, and he learned an invaluable lesson. He learned to do the will of God at all costs. His watchword became, "Whatever God requires is right, no matter what it is" [^6] and "I made this my rule: When the Lord commands, do it. " [^7] Because Joseph continually turned to the Lord in humility, the Lord continually turned his weaknesses into strengths.

The natural man has a terrible time acquiring that eternal yet elusive attribute of humility. Without weakness, humility seems almost impossible to obtain (at least during this mortal probation). Paul shared with the Corinthians: "Lest I should be exalted above measure through the abundance of the revelations, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh. . . . For this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me. And he said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee: for my strength is made perfect in weakness. Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities that the power of Christ may rest upon me. . . . For when I am weak, then am I strong" (2 Corinthians 12:7-10).

The power of Christ rests upon us when we partake of his atonement. Only through the atonement of Christ can we acquire his attributes, such as humility, submissiveness, patience, brotherly kindness, long suffering, and charity (see Mosiah 3:19; Alma 7:23; 2 Peter 1:2-8). Nevertheless, even those who appear to have mastered these attributes and have seemingly arrived at an apex of righteousness— even they—still acknowledge the vital role of weakness in their lives.

The prophet Jacob testified: "Our faith becometh unshaken, insomuch that we truly can command in the name of Jesus and the very trees obey us, or the mountains, or the waves of the sea. Nevertheless, the Lord God showeth us our weakness that we may know that it is by his grace, and his great condescensions unto the children of men, that we have power to do these things" (Jacob 4:6-7).

The prophets can inspire us to stretch ourselves to reach their heights. Indeed, some of the greatest souls who have ever graced this earth have been the prophets of God. Yet, even though we stand in awe of a Nephi's faith, an Alma's conversion, or a Joseph Smith's visionary communion with God, we can also gain needed hope from their weaknesses as well. The scriptures are amazingly candid concerning the personal struggles of the servants of God. Like Paul, all the prophets seemed to have their particular "thorn in the flesh."

At the conclusion of general conference on 3 April 1977, a prophet, seer, and revelator arose and spoke with a raspy voice. That unique, endearing voice was that of President Spencer W. Kimball. Twenty years earlier, as an apostle of God, he had undergone surgery in which one vocal cord and part of another were completely removed. It had not been easy for this apostle to return to the pulpit. Six months after the surgery, he was asked by Elder Harold B. Lee to speak in a stake conference. Edward Kimball records:

"He stood and 'made the most terrible sound you can imagine' until finally he found his voice and gave his sermon. Then he sat down, buried his head in his hands and mourned. 'I was crying gallons of tears inside. I don't think they showed. But I really thought I was through, that I'd never preach again, that I wouldn't even try.'" [^8]

But try he did, and this humble, voiceless man from Arizona became a prophet among prophets, a voice of God. This "weak" voice declared on that conference day in April 1977:

"I say, in the deepest of humility, but also by the power and force of a burning testimony in my soul, that from the prophet of the Restoration to the prophet of our own year, the communication line is unbroken, the authority is continuous, and light, brilliant and penetrating, continues to shine. The sound of the voice of the Lord is a continuous melody and a thunderous appeal. For nearly a century and a half there has been no interruption." [^9]

Who can doubt that the afflictions of Spencer W. Kimball were crucial in the development of his humility, which in turn helped him become so acquainted with God's voice that he would describe that voice as "a continuous melody and a thunderous appeal."

Those who come unto Christ will become "stronger and stronger in their humility, and firmer and firmer in the faith of Christ" (Helaman 3:35). When we humble ourselves before God and have faith in him, we are in effect saying: "O Lord, thou art our father; we are the clay, and thou our potter; and we all are the work of thy hand" (Isaiah 64:8). This divine sculpting of souls will produce extremes in experience. At times we will "glory in that which the Lord hath commanded me; yea, and this is my glory, that perhaps I may be an instrument in the hands of God to bring some soul to repentance; and this is my joy" (Alma 29:9), but at other times, the glory and the joy will not be so apparent as we agonize over our discipleship because "we behold our weakness, and stumble" (Ether 12:25). But wherever we are in the spectrum of these experiences, we can be assured that God is near, that he cares deeply, and that he will succor us perfectly. "Yet thou art there," Enoch testified, "and thy bosom is there; and also thou art just; thou art merciful and kind forever" (Moses 7:30). Descending into the depths of all human experience, Jesus Christ took upon himself not only our sins but our afflictions of every kind "that his bowels may be filled with mercy, according to the flesh, that he may know according to the flesh how to succor his people according to their infirmities" (Alma 7:12). Who can measure the depth and breadth of his grace?

The Lord revealed to Moroni: "My grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me; for if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them. Behold, I will show unto the Gentiles their weakness and I will show unto them that faith, hope and charity bringeth unto me— the fountain of all righteousness" (Ether 12:27-28).

Conclusion

Christ is the fountain of all righteousness. He has promised the faithful: "Because thou hast seen thy weakness thou shalt be made strong, even unto the sitting down in the place which I have prepared in the mansions of my Father" (Ether 12:37). Beholding our weaknesses teaches us to see with the "eye of faith," which drives us to our knees, in humility "relying wholly upon the merits of him who is mighty to save" (2 Nephi 31:19). Through sacred and holy covenants we express our willingness to take upon ourselves the name of Christ and to take upon ourselves the burdens of one another, "to mourn with those that mourn," to "comfort those that stand in need of comfort, and to stand as witnesses of God at all times and in all things, and in all places" (Mosiah 18:9).

Such emulation of the Savior prepares us to receive grace for grace. That is to say, we receive grace as we give grace to others by blessing their lives. The fountain of all righteousness endows us with his grace by pouring his Spirit upon us in abundance and filling us with a "more excellent hope" (Ether 12:32) and a "perfect love" (Moroni 8:26). These tender mercies assure us that Heavenly Father loves us and that his Son loves us, even to the laying down of his Son's life for us (see Ether 12:32-34). As we embrace this charity and "seek this Jesus of whom the prophets and apostles have written" (Ether 12:41), we shall be redeemed by him, and strengthened by him, to be in the presence of him:

"[They] shall be in the presence of the Lamb. And the graves of the saints shall be opened; and they shall come forth and stand on the right hand of the Lamb, when he shall stand upon Mount Zion, and upon the holy city, the New Jerusalem; and they shall sing the song of the Lamb, day and night forever and ever. And for this cause, that men might be made partakers of the glories which were to be revealed, the Lord sent forth the fulness of his gospel, his everlasting covenant, reasoning in plainness and simplicity—to prepare the weak for those things which are coming on the earth" (D&C 133:55-58).

Surely, preparing to be "in the presence of the Lamb" and to "be made partakers" of his glory is a strength worth striving for.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] "The weak things of the world shall come forth and break down the mighty and strong ones, that man should not counsel his fellow man, neither trust in the arm of flesh—but that every man might speak in the name of God the Lord, even the Savior of the world" (vv. 19-20). L. Brent Goates, ed., He Changed My Life (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1988), pp. 32-33.
[^2] "Faith also might increase in the earth" (v. 21). Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 324.
[^3] "[God's] everlasting covenant might be established" (v. 22). Heber J. Grant, Gospel Standards: Selections from the Sermons and Writings of Heber J. Grant, ed. G. Homer Durham (Salt Lake City: Improvement Era., 1969), pp. 294-95.
[^4] The commandments of God would be "given unto [his] servants in their weakness, after the manner of their language, that they might come to understanding" (v. 24). C. S. Lewis, The Weight of Glory and Other Addresses (New York: Collier Books, 1980), pp. 18-19.
[^5] C. S. Lewis, Mere Christianity (New York: Macmillan, 1960), pp. 164-65.
[^6] Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 256.
[^7] Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 2d ed. rev., edited by B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 2:170.
[^8] Edward L. Kimball and Andrew E. Kimball, Jr., Spencer W. Kimball: Twelfth President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1977), p. 312.
[^9] Spencer W. Kimball, "Revelation: The Word of the Lord to His Prophets," Ensign, May 1977, p. 78.
