Some apparent printer's errors, especially spelling errors, have been resolved as seemed reasonable.

Page 42: Changed "thess Indians" to "these Indians"

Page 75: Changed "prarie wolves" to "prairie wolves"

Page 80: Changed "providental Food Supply" to "providential Food Supply"

Page 124: Changed "One man who had married a daugher" to "One man who had married a daughter"

Page 132: Changed "campany" to "company"

Page 161: Changed "general" to "general"

Page 176: Changed "instucted" to "instructed"

Page 177: Changed "comnenced" to "commenced"

Page 185: Changed "cirsumstances" to "circumstances"

Page 186: Changed "look ng" to "looking"

Page 186: Changed "thinking t looked" to "thinking it looked"

Page 201: Changed "Mr Dodge" to "Mr. Dodge"

Page 205: Changed "ruose" to "rouse"

Page 208: Changed "ouside" to "outside"

Page 329: Changed "apprciated" to "appreciated"

Page 336: Changed "aud" to "and"

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FORTY YEARS AMONG THE INDIANS ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE
