Noel B. Reynolds, Book of Mormon Authorship: New Light on Ancient Origins ( 1982)

2

Chiasmus in the Book of Mormon

John W. Welch

John W. Welch, an attorney specializing in tax matters, joined the faculty of the J. Reuben Clark Law School in 1980. He is the author of several articles on literary structure in the Book of Mormon. President of the Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies, he has contributed to BYU Studies and is co-author and general editor of the recently published book, Chiasmus in Antiquity. He received a B.A. in history and an M.A. in classical languages from Brigham Young University, where he was valedictorian and became a Woodrow Wilson Fellow. He went on to study at Oxford University, and received his J.D. from Duke University in 1975. His research into literary forms in ancient scriptures led him to the original discovery in 1967 of chiasmus in the Book of Mormon. Chiasmus, a rhetorical device used prevalently in the Bible and in other ancient literatures, was relegated to the intellectual sub-consciousness of modern Western civilization until the mid-nineteenth century. Since there is no evidence that anyone in America understood chiasmus in 1830 when the Book of Mormon was published, the remarkable presence of complex chiasms in the Book of Mormon testifies to the ancient origin of the text. It also amplifies the significance of central events and enhances interpretation of many scriptures.

From the day the Book of Mormon rolled off the press in 1830, those who gave it credence asserted that it obviously read like a Hebrew text. Those who were not so convinced insisted that it obviously read like anything but a Hebrew text. [^1] Actually, all that became obvious was the failure of both believers and unbelievers to cite much specific evidence. However, numerous Hebrew characteristics of the Book of Mormon have been recognized in recent literature; [^2] in addition to these we can now cite many specific passages which bear the distinct stamp of an ancient Hebraic literary form which scholars call chiasmus.

WHAT IS CHIASMUS?

Chiasmus appears to have begun as a structural form that later developed into an intriguing rhetorical device which has been used sporadically in prose and poetry for nearly three thousand years. Despite its long usage, awareness of the form in its extended instances remained, except in isolated cases, a part of the intellectual subconsciousness of modern Western Europe until frequent chiastic passages were discovered in the Bible. Since that time in the mid-nineteenth century, several reputable scholars, mostly theologians, have published on the subject. Their works indicate that, although chiasms appear in Greek, Latin, English, and other languages, the form was much more highly developed in Hebrew and dates to the oldest sections of the Hebrew Bible and beyond.

Chiasmus can be defined most simply as an inverted type of parallelism. Two lines of poetry are said to be parallel if the component elements of one line correspond directly to those of the other in a one-to-one relationship. There are numerous examples of direct parallelism in Proverbs, e.g.,

A soft answer turneth away wrath: But grievous words stir up anger. (Proverbs 15:1)

If the second line of a parallelism is inverted, that is to say, if its last element is placed first and the first, last, then a chiasm is created, as, for example, in the following verse:

For my thoughts are not your thoughts, Neither are your ways my ways, saith the Lord. (Isaiah 55:8)

And from the New Testament:

He that findeth his life shall lose it: And he that loseth his life for my sake shall find it. (Matthew 10:39)

Formulating this graphically, the simple chiasm takes on the form of a x:

questiomark

The name chiasmus, derived from chi (x), the twenty-second letter in the Greek alphabet, and the Greek chiazein ("to mark with a x"), is thus descriptive of the form itself.

As a literary device, chiasmus has proved durable and useful because of its many applications. For example, Heraclitus, one of the earliest Greek philosophers, used chiasmus to accentuate his notion of eternal flux and opposition:

Cold things grow warm, What is warm cools; the moist dries, the dry dampens. (Fragment 39)

Immortals are mortal, mortals are immortal, each living the others' death and dying the others' life. (Fragment 67)

Several centuries later, Cicero effectively used chiastic lines as a rhetorical device for placing emphasis:

Matrem habemus, ignoramus patrem. (Republic 2:33)

Some English authors, perhaps influenced by their training in the classics, used chiasmus in poetry. In Pope's "Essay on Man" this short chiasm appears:

... flame lawless through the void, Destroying others, by himself destroyed. (2.65-66)

Even in our modern nursery rhymes and maxims, the natural rhythm and immediate appeal of chiastic lines is apparent. Thus, "Old King Cole was a merry old soul, and a merry old soul was he" is charming; and "He who fails to prepare, prepares to fail" sounds solid and convincing.

The reader, however, will notice that all these chiasms contain only two elements, whose order is then reversed. This is significant in differentiating the relatively simple chiasmus known for some time in the West from the much more complex chiasmus characteristic of Hebrew and other such ancient languages. Whereas in languages such as Greek, Latin, and English, chiasms are most often composed of two elements, in Hebrew there appears to be no limit to the number of terms or ideas that may commonly be employed. A chiasm may be expanded to include any number of terms written first in one order and then exactly in the reverse order,i.e.,

a-b-c-d- ... -x-x- ... -d-c-b-a.

Such structures might be several verses or even several chapters long. A simple illustration of this, with five elements in an inverted parallelism, is found in Psalm 3:7-8: [^3]

Save me O my God, For thou hast smitten All my enemies On the cheek-bone The teeth Of the wicked Thou hast broken. To Yahweh The salvation.

A second example comes from Isaiah 60:1-3:

Arise, Shine, For thy light is come, And the glory Of Yahweh Upon thee is risen. For behold, dimness shall cover the earth And gross darkness the peoples. But upon thee will arise Yahweh And his glory shall upon thee be seen And nations shall come to thy light And kings to the brightness Of thy rising.

There are several good reasons why a literary form of this peculiar type was particularly attractive to the ancient Hebrews. First, chiasms are easy to memorize. The Hebrew tradition, unlike the written Greek tradition, was oral. Not only were manuscripts and scrolls scarce, but there were also few who could read them. Therefore, the tales of early Israel and the songs of her prophets were handed down through generations by word of mouth, and long passages of the Torah were committed to memory. [^4] In their memorization and recitation, the ancients were surely aided by chiastic groupings and repetitions. Second, chiasmus was simply a vogue. Just as sixteenth-century English poets were fond of the sonnet, chiasmus seems to have been preferred by many of the ancient Hebrew writers of the Old Testament. Third, the form can be very pleasing aesthetically because of its vast potential to coordinate abrupt juxta-positions within a single unified literary system while focusing simultaneously on a point of central concern. Furthermore, and perhaps most significantly, chiasmus afforded a seriously needed element of internal organization in ancient writing, which did not have paragraphs, punctuation, capitalization, and other such synthetic devices to demarcate the conclusion of one idea and the commencement of the next. Ancient texts were written in a steady stream of letters from the beginning of a book to the end, sometimes even without spaces between the words. Chiastic or other parallel forms, therefore, could serve an important organizational function by indicating units of thought or sections of text. Finally, ancient religious literature frequently served liturgical purposes, and the structure of chiastic writing may have made it suitable for use in certain ritual settings requiring alternate recitations.

Chiasmus remained a common literary device in much of ancient literature and was one which was expressly recognized, for example, by the scholiasts in Alexandria in the second century B.C. But the form, especially in its more elaborate manifestations, appears to have fallen into disuse and obscurity in the first centuries after Christ, when many ancient institutions from Greek, Roman, Jewish, and other civilizations underwent great change, if not destruction, and when more familiar modern manners of writing began to develop.

The rediscovery of chiasmus in the Bible can be credited to three theologians of the nineteenth century: Robert Lowth, John Jebb, and John Forbes. Lowth, the Bishop of London, and Jebb, the Bishop of Limerick, both wrote 300-page volumes describing Hebraisms in the holy scriptures. [^5] Although both made initial observations of the chiastic form, their emphasis was placed almost entirely on poetic imagery and direct parallelism, and only Jebb paid much attention to epanodos (the Greek term he used to describe inverted parallelism). In 1854, however, John Forbes completed a much more extensive study, The Symmetrical Structures of Scripture. [^6] With the publication of Forbes's book, it is possible to begin speaking of relatively well-developed appreciation of chiastic forms in the Bible. Since then numerous other writers have utilized a knowledge of the form in critical studies of the holy scriptures, indicating that it has been recognized as genuine and significant. [^7]

CHIASMUS IN THE OLD AND NEW TESTAMENTS

As the Old Testament represents the earliest extant Hebrew writings, it is the best evidence of the antiquity and general nature of chiasmus as developed by the Hebrews. Based on his detailed modern analysis of biblical chiasmus, Nils Lund has formulated seven rules of chiastic passages, three of which are most interesting for this study. [^8] The first states that the center of the passage is always the turning point. The third notes that identical ideas will often be distributed so as to occur at the beginning, middle, and end of a chiasm, but nowhere else. The seventh claims that there is often a mixture of directly parallel and inverted parallel lines in the same unit. These characteristics are readily apparent in the following biblical passages:

Example 1

And all flesh died that moved upon the earth, Both birds, And cattle, And beasts, And every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth, And every man: All in whose nostrils was the breath of the spirit of life Of all that was on the dry land Died; And was destroyed Every living thing That was upon the face of the ground Both man, And creeping things, (And beasts), And cattle, And birds of the heavens, And they were destroyed from the earth. (Genesis 7:21-23)

Example 2

Seek ye me, and ye shall live. But seek not after Bethel, Nor enter into Gilgal, And pass not to Beer-sheba: For Gilgal shall shall surely go into captivity, And Bethel shall come to naught. Seek Yahweh, and ye shall live. (Amos 5:4b-6a)

Example 3

Do ye indeed, O gods, speak righteousness? Do ye judge uprightly, O ye sons of men? Nay, in the heart ye work wickedness Ye weigh out the violence of your hands in the earth. The wicked are estranged from the womb They go astray as soon as they are born, speaking lies. Their poison is like the poison of a serpent Like the deaf adder that stoppeth her ear Which hearkeneth not to the voice of charmers, The most cunning binder of spells. O God, Break Their teeth in their mouth; The great teeth of the young lions Break out O Yahweh. They shall melt away like waters, They shall go away for them, Like tender grass which wilts away. Like a snail will melt as it goes along. Abortions of a woman That have not beheld the sun! The righteous shall rejoice when he seeth the vengeance He shall wash his feet in the blood of the wicked. And men shall say, surely there is a reward for the righteous Surely there is a God that judgeth the earth. (Psalm 58)

Example 4

Therefore I speak to them in parables: Because they seeing see not; and hearing they hear not. In them is fulfilled the prophecy of Esaias which sayeth By hearing ye shall hear not; and seeing ye shall see not For this people's heart is waxed gross And their ears are dull of hearing And their eyes they have closed lest at any time they should see With their eyes And hear with their ears, And should understand with their heart and be converted. Blessed are your eyes, for they see and your ears, for they hear Many prophets and righteous men Have longed to see what you see and hear what you hear and have not. Hear ye therefore the parable of the sower. (Matthew 13:13-18)

CHIASMUS IN THE BOOK OF MORMON

We now turn to the question of chiasmus in the Book of Mormon. The first chapter of the book claims that it was written in "the language of the Egyptians" but according to "the learning of the Jews" (1 Nephi 1:2); that is, it was written with Egyptian characters and elements but in Hebraic style. If the Book of Mormon truly is a direct translation of a text formulated in accordance with ancient Hebrew learning, chiasmus might well be present as an integral part of its literary style. If so, an understanding of chiasmus should be helpful in interpreting and understanding the design of the total book.

If chiasmus can be convincingly identified in the Book of Mormon, it will testify of the book's ancient origin. No one in America, let alone in western New York, fully understood chiasmus in 1830. Joseph Smith had been dead ten full years before John Forbes's book was published in Scotland. Even many prominent Bible scholars today know little about chiastic forms beyond the name and a few passages where they might to found. The possibility of Joseph Smith's noticing the form accidentally is also remote, since most biblical passages containing inverted word orders have been rearranged into natural word orders in the King James translation. Even had he known of the form, he would still have had the overwhelming task of written original, artistic chiastic sentences. Try writing a sonnet of a multi-termed chiasm yourself: your appreciation of these forms will turn to awe. If the Book of Mormon is found to contain true chiastic forms in an ancient style, then is not the book's own repeated claim to be the product of an ancient culture veritated substantiated?

An understanding of chiasmus will also greatly enhance interpretation of Book of Mormon scriptures. If the another authors of the Book of Mormon consciously set particular elements parallel to each other, then these elements must be considered together in order to be fully understood in their complete context. Moreover, the thoughts which appear at the center of a chiastic passage must always be given special attention, and any antithetical ideas introduced at the turning point must be contrasted with their properly corresponding ideas. Knowledge of chiasmus will clarify questions of structure with shorter passages and of unity within whole books. [^9] For example, why Nephi divided his writings into two books instead of leaving them all in one, will be explained in chiasmus. Stylistic devices, especially the frequent repetition which have often been seen as ignorant and redundant, will be appreciated in the light in which they originally shone.

Chiasms may appear anywhere in the Book of Mormon although they primarily typify the style of only three of the numerous authors—Nephi, Benjamin, and Alma the Younger. These writers use chiasms in practically every possible context from passages of straight narration or argumentation to other of beautiful poetic eloquence. The following examples speaking themselves and require little further explanation.

Example 1

The jews shall have the words of the Nephites, and the Nephites shall have the words of the jews and the Nephites and the Jews shall have the words of the lost tribes of Israel; and the lost tribes of Israel shall have the words of the Nephites and the jews. (2 Nephi 29:13)

Example 2

But men drink damnation to their own souls except they humble themselves and become as little children, and believe that salvation ... is ... in and through the atoning blood of Christ, the Lord ... For the natural man is an enemy to God, and has been from the fall of Adam, and will be, forever and ever, unless he yields to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, and putteth off the natural man and becometh a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord, and becometh as a child, questiomark meek, humble ... (Mosiah 3:18-19)

Example 3

Whosoever shall not take upon him the name of Christ must be called by some other name; therefore, he findeth himself on the left hand of God. And I would that ye should remember also , that this is the name ... that never should be blotted out, except it be through transgression; therefore, take heed that ye do not transgress, that the name be not blotted out of your hearts. ... I would that ye should remember to retain the name ... that ye are not found on the left hand of God but that ye hear and know the voice by which ye shall be called, and also, the name by which he shall call you. (Mosiah 5:10-12)

Needless to say, the word order in these last two examples is especially striking. These passages are just two small parts of the very complex chiastic structure of King Benjamin's entire speech. [^10] His use of chiasmus is not illogical: at the time that he delivered this famous speech, he was acting in a traditional coronation and would naturally be using the most traditional and convincing rhetoric at his command. Benjamin's thoughts had been carefully prepared beforehand and had even been "written and sent forth among those that were not under the sound of his voice" (Mosiah 2:8). This degree of painstaking deliberation in writing was the rule, rather than the exception, among the Book of Mormon prophets. In cases such as these, chiasmus is used to give emphasis to points of special importance.

Example 4

And they said unto me: We have not; for the Lord maketh on such thing known unto us. Behold, I said unto them: How is it that ye do not keep the commandments of the Lord? How is it that ye will perish, because of the hardness of your hearts? Do ye not remember the things which the Lord hath said? —If ye will not harden your hearts, and ask me in faith, believing that ye shall receive, with diligence in keeping my commandments, surely these things shall be made known unto you. (1 Nephi 15:9-11)

A chiasm may also appear as a logical device, for its completeness rounds out a thought forcefully and ties in all loose ends tightly. Nephi so successfully used the foregoing line of reasoning against his rebellious brothers that, as he later recorded the events of his family's lengthy journey to the New World, he could still recall his unanswerable rebuttal. The turning point of the argument is a piercing question: "Do ye not remember the things which the Lord hath said?" The same thought, concerning that which the Lord has said or will say, appropriately appears at the extremes as well as in the middle of this chiasm. Notice also that the first half of the chiasm contains the words of Nephi, while the second half is built from the words of the Lord, comprising a deft shift at the center. What better debate partner could Nephi have in his parallelism than the Lord? The only key terms in the passage which are parallel but not identical are perish and ask in faith. Perhaps Nephi uses them to contrast the living strength of true faith with the fear of death which accompanies any traveler through the wilderness.

Example 5

A Behold, the Lord hath created the earth that it should be inhabited; and he hath created his children that they should possess it. B And he raiseth up a righteous nation, and destroyeth the nations of the wicked. B' And he leadeth away the righteous into precious lands, and the wicked he destroyeth, and curseth the land unto them for their sakes. A' He ruleth high in the heavens, for it is his throne, and this earth is his footstool. (1 Nephi 17:36-39)

This passage is an intricate gem. It masterfully combines direct parallelisms with inverted parallelisms. Parts A and A' each contain two directly parallel thoughts, in A the Lord's creation of the earth and the creation of his children, and in A' the Lord's throne and his footstool. It is interesting that the word earth appears in both A and A'. Parts B and B' are built of four poetical lines, each containing three parts. In both B and B', two of the three parts are inverted when they reappear the second time, i.e.,

righteous / nation nations / of the wicked he leadeth away / the righteous the wicked / he destroyeth

Furthermore, these inverted parts come at the end of the lines in B but at the beginning of the lines in B'. This leaves the words raiseth up and destroyeth at the beginning of B and precious lands and curseth the land at the end of B' in direct parallel form. Thus another chiasm is formed between the directly parallel portions of B and B' and the inverted portions of B and B', i.e.,

B inverted direct

B' direct inverted

For extra measure the first line in B and the first line in B' express the same idea, the blessing of the righteous, while the second line in B and the second line in B' both express the idea of being punished. So in the midst of inverted parallelisms, the direct parallelism is also skillfully maintained.

Example 6

A 1 And, notwithstanding we believe in Christ, we keep the law of Moses, 2 and look forward with steadfastness unto Christ, 3 until the law shall be fulfilled. 4 For, for this end was the law given; B wherefore the law hath become dead unto us, and we are made alive in Christ because of our faith; yet we keep the law because of the commandments. C And we talk of Christ, we rejoice in Christ, we preach of Christ, we prophesy of Christ, C' and we write according to our prophecies, that our children may know to what source they may look for a remission of their sins. B' Wherefore, we speak concerning the law that our children may know the deadness of the law; and ... may look forward unto that life which is in Christ, A' 4 and know for what end the law was given. 3 And after the law is fulfilled 2 in Christ, that they need not harden their hearts against him 1 when the law ought to be done away. (2 Nephi 25:24-27)

Example 7

A The meaning of the word restoration is to bring back again B evil for evil, or carnal for carnal, or devilish for devilish— wquestiomark1wquestiomark2 good for that which is good; xquestiomark1xquestiomark2 righteous for that which is righteous yquestiomark1yquestiomark2 just for that which is just; zquestiomark1zquestiomark2 merciful for that which is merciful. Therefore, my son, see that you are z'questiomark2 merciful unto your brethren; y'questiomark2 deal justly, x'questiomark2 judge righteously, w'questiomark2 and do good continually; and if ye do all these things then shall ye receive your reward; yea, z'questiomark1 ye shall have mercy restored unto you again; y'questiomark1 ye shall have justice restored unto you again; x'questiomark1 ye shall have a righteous judgement restored unto you again; w'questiomark1 and ye shall have good rewarded unto you again. B' For that which ye do send out shall return unto you again, and be restored; A' therefore, the word restoration more fully condemneth the sinner, and justifieth him not at all. (Alma 41:13-15)

The twist here is clever: after listing four pairs of terms, Alma pairs two lists of four terms and reverses their order at the same time. Or to use a chiasm to describe this chiasm: Alma writes a list of pairs and then a pair of lists. The chiasmus here reaches yet a further level, since the first nominatives in the list of pairs (wquestiomark1, xquestiomark1, yquestiomark1, and zquestiomark1) and the last list in the pair of lists (w'questiomark1, x'questiomark1, y'questiomark1 and z'questiomark1) both describe the reward to be received, while the second nominatives (wquestiomark2, xquestiomark2, yquestiomark2 and zquestiomark2) and the first of the separate lists (w'questiomark2, x'questiomark2, y'questiomark2, and z'questiomark2) describe the attributes necessary to obtain those rewards. In all seriousness, a great play on words.

By far the most subtle use of chiasmus is its role in the structural design of longer passages and books. The book of Mosiah, for example, utilizes a chiastic structure in its underlying organization, at the expense of chronological order.11 Like the book of Mosiah, the book of 1 Nephi, King Benjamin's speech, and Alma chapter 36 also use a chiastic framework as a foundation. Of this group, only Alma 36 is sufficiently brief for effective illustration here of the way in which complex chiasmus can be employed in a longer passage to emphasize a central theme.12 In this chapter Alma recounts to his son Helaman the story of his conversion. Contrary to what one might be led to believe from Alma's earlier account of his conversion (Mosiah 27:10-31), the supernatural events associated with his conversion were not of primary importance to him as he remembered them in his more mature years. The structure of the chapter shows that Alma's conversion centered instead upon a spiritual confrontation in which Alma turned to Jesus Christ for deliverance from his sins:

Example 8

My son, give ear to my words(1) Keep the commandments and ye shall prosper in the land(1) Do as I have done(2) Captivity of our fathers—their bondage(2) He surely did deliver them(2) Trust in God(3)

Support in trials, troubles and afflictions (3)

I know this not of myself but of God (4)

Born of God (5)

Alma seeks to harm the church (6)

Limbs paralyzed (10)

Fear of the presence of God (14)

Pains of a damned soul (16)

Alma remembers one Jesus Christ (17)

Christ will atone for the sins of the world (17)

Alma calls upon Jesus Christ (18)

Joy as exceeding as the pain (20)

Longing to be with God (22)

Use of limbs returns (23)

Alma seeks to bring souls unto God (24)

Born of God (26)

My knowledge is God (26)

Supported under trials, troubles, and afflictions (27)

Trust in him (27)

He will deliver me (27)

Egypt—captivity (28-29)

Know as I do know (30)

Keep the commandments and ye shall prosper in the land (30)

This is according to his word (30)

(Alma 36)

Given our twentieth-century understanding of chiastic writings and their historical occurrences, this one chapter is strong evidence that the Book of Mormon was not written in the nineteenth century.

This chapter is as extensive and precise as any chiastic passage I am aware of in ancient literature. Besides having practical structural value, chiasmus has a distinct charm and beauty in a passage such as this. The first ten verses and the last eight form an artistic frame around the central motif which contrasts the agony of conversion with the joy of conversion. In the center Alma makes this contrast explicit, when he says in verse 20, "my soul was filled with joy as exceeding as was my pain." No literary device could make this contrast more forcefully than chiasmus. Moreover, chiasmus allows Alma to place the very turning point of his entire life exactly at the turning point of this chapter: Christ, because of the effects of the future atonement, belongs at the center of both. Compared with the abrupt antithetic parallelisms found in the recounting of this incident recorded in Mosiah 27, the chiasmus in Alma 36 is monumental and meaningful. The chiastic structure amplifies the significance of Alma's conversion and the centrality of spiritual realities around which it turned.

CONCLUSION

The intent of this article is to introduce one concept of formal analysis into Book of Mormon studies. The form which has been examined is chiasmus, a basic element of ancient literature, particularly that of the ancient Hebrews. Although all knowledge of this form lay dormant for centuries, it was rediscovered and reexplored in the nineteenth century when formal criticism began to emerge. But by the time the concept of chiasmus received currency or recognition, the Book of Mormon had long been in print. Since the Book of Mormon contains numerous chiasms, it thus becomes logical to consider the book a product of the ancient world and to judge its literary qualities accordingly. The book reviewed in this way is moving; it deserves to be read more carefully.

NOTES

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Nephi makes a record (or account) 1. Nephi now commences to give an Both accounts are prefaced in the usual way by a command given to Lehi. Both open with a family going into the wilderness because of the Lord's command to Lehi. Nephi discusses his record, and he testifies it is true (1:1-3). Lehi expands on his great vision, detailing prophecies about the Each story begins as the voice of the Lord commands Lehi to depart on a journey. Both stories are preceded by verses which state that Lehi had kept all of the commandments he had received from God and that he (A-3) and Nephi (B-5) had been greatly blessed by God. Lehi summarizes the contents of the brass plates, mentioning his Nephi is commanded to construct a ship (17:8). Hugh Nibley, An Approach to the Book of Mormon, 2nd ed. (Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret Book Co., 1976); John W. Welch, "Chiasmus in the Book of Mormon," Brigham Young University Studies 10 (Autumn 1969): 69-84; and Richard L. Bushman, "The Book of Mormon and the American Revolution," BYU Studies 17 (Autumn 1976): 3-20. The Welch and Bushman articles are now contained in this volume, chapters 2 and 8 respectively.
[^2] Nephi gives a brief account of 2. Nephi reports Lehi's prophecies In each case Nephi's brothers first became rebellious because of their afflictions and lack of faith. This departure is followed in both instances by the murmuring and rebellion of Laman and Lemuel, who desire to return to Jerusalem. Lehi's early visions are reported, followed by his preaching Nephi explains that all men can know the mysteries of God In both instances the group gathers all their provisions and their seeds. (It is noteworthy that the only three references to these seeds occur exactly in the parallels that have been mentioned.) Each story begins with the same elements: the Lord commands Lehi to take his family into the wilderness, they gather provisions, and they depart. Nephi testifies to his thesis—Lehi is glad (3:7-8). The Lord tells Nephi where to find ore for tools (17:9-10). Jacob 3:13-14 (cf. 1 Nephi 9:2).
[^3] Lehi is commanded to journey 3. Nephi desires to see, hear, and After Nephi's exhortations, they rebel against him and bind him with cords. In each case, Laman and Lemuel are then admonished—in the first episode by Lehi, in the second by Nephi. Lehi takes his family into the wilderness (2:2-15). Nephi reports the great visions and prophecies given to In the first they depart across the river;in the second they put forth into the sea. In both accounts they pitch their tents after a three-or four-day journey and Lehi names the campsite. Laban attempts to slay Laman (3:9-14). The Lord blesses them miraculously in the wilderness, 2 Nephi 5:30 (cf. 1 Nephi 19:1-5); 2 Nephi 5:34. Certainly part of the reason it took Nephi so long to write these chapters was the difficulty of making and engraving gold plates; see Jacob 4:1.
[^4] Lehi teaches and exhorts his sons, 4. Nephi instructs and exhorts his In the first story Nephi is given power from God to burst his bonds, but in the second he specifies that the Lord permitted him to be bound for a purpose. The Lord speaks prophecies to Nephi about Lehi's seed (2:19-24). Lehi testifies in the first story that Jerusalem will be destroyed, and in the second story Nephi testifies of the same. Overcome by the hardness of his brethren, Nephi The journey has barely begun before Nephi's brothers begin murmuring—in the first case because of the difficulties resulting from the loss of Nephi's bow, and in the second because they have forgotten the divine power that has brought them there. When Laman and Lemuel rebel, they are confounded: in the first story by Lehi "filled with the Spirit" and in the second by Nephi speaking "with all the energies" of his soul. Lehi's sons are sorrowful, but Nephi exhorts them (3:14-21). Laman and Lemuel murmur and complain, not Italics added.
[^5] Nephi desires to know the mys- 5. Lehi is commanded to journey In both instances one of Ishmael's daughters and others plead with Laman and Lemuel to reconcile themselves with Nephi. Lehi's sons obtain the brass plates, and Nephi In the first episode Laman and Lemuel seek to kill their father, and at the same point in the second they seek to kill Nephi. Lehi takes his family further into the wilderness In the first story Nephi successfully rebukes the murmurers, but in the second he has no such success. Finally, Nephi breaks B-5 into two parts; in both accounts he details the rebellion and chastening of his brothers as a postscript to the stories of the journey. (Although this device adequately establishes the parallel elements in stories B-5 and B-7, it does not have the same effect with A-3.) Nephi fails to obtain the brass plates by using Laman and Lemuel repeat the elements of their Nephi's father, Lehi, is the first in the Book of Mormon to affirm this; see 1 Nephi 1:14.
[^6] Lehi is commanded in a dream to 6. Nephi is commanded by the voice In the first story they are successful, but in the second these pleas fail and the older brothers are persuaded to relent only when the power of God threatens them with destruction by a storm. In the first story Lehi is spared as he confounds Laman and Lemuel by the power of the Spirit, and in the second story Nephi is spared as he bursts his bonds through the power of God. Nephi builds a ship and records his most Because of his success in the first story, the families receive instructions from the Liahona or "director," which, Nephi explains, works only by faith. At the corresponding point in the second story, the same director ceases functioning. The parallel statement in the first story gives the explanation for the failure of the compass in the second story. Laman and Lemuel murmur, and they beat Nephi responds to the murmuring of Laman 1 Nephi 1:11-17 (cf. 1:1-3); 10:1; 9:6; 22:31.
[^7] In response to a command from 7. In response to a command from In each case relief comes as Nephi prays. Both stories then report the submission of the rebellious brothers: in the first case they obey their father and in the second as they seek their brother's forgiveness. The death of Ishmael, the afflictions of his daughters, and the attempts of Laman and Lemuel to kill Lehi and Nephi are paralleled in the second story by the report of Lehi and Sariah's grief (almost unto death) and suffering due to the sins of Laman and Lemuel. An angel intervenes, saying that the The numbering system used in this table is used throughout the article to identify and discuss the various stories in 1 Nephi.
[^8] They gather seeds of every kind 8. Lehi's family plants the seeds and Both times Laman and Lemuel repent of their actions. This analysis shows eight analogous items in the same order in two completely different stories which occupy parallel positions in the structural halves of 1 Nephi. The strength of the claim of parallelism between these two stories does not rest primarily on the uniqueness of the matched items, as only two elements in the series of eight are unique to these two stories. Rather, as in examples which will follow, the strength of the claim rests on the precise order of the parallel elements within each episode. Each story ends at Lehi's tent. In the first story the voice of the Lord chastens Laman and Lemuel, thus sparing the lives of Lehi and Nephi. In the second only the Lord's power in the storm can soften Laman and Lemuel's hearts. Laman and Lemuel murmur again. The first nine chapters obviously contain several autobiographical sections which appear to be Nephi's substitutes for Lehi's secondhand accounts of Nephi's experiences.
[^9] Lehi reports to his sons details of 9. Nephi details the distinctions In each case, the chastening is followed by a period of travel. In the first story, the Lord nourishes the group for eight years in the wilderness. In the second, Nephi guides the ship for many days by following the compass (which now functions perfectly). For a more thorough explanation of chiasmus, see John W. Welch, "A Study Relating Chiasmus in the Book of Mormon to Chiasmus in the Old Testament, Ugaritic Epics, Homer, and Selected Greek and Latin Authors" (M.A. thesis, Brigham Young University, 1970).
[^10] Lehi exhorts Laman and Lemuel, 10. Nephi preaches and prophesies The first story concludes as the families arrive in the land Bountiful, pitch their tents, and find much fruit and honey. The second story ends as they arrive in the promised land, pitch their tents, find beasts in the forest and a variety of ores. These chiasms emerge when major adjacent items in Table 1 are combined. Welch proposes a different chiastic analysis of 1 Nephi which also recognizes the parallel between these key stories; ibid., p. 152.
