In 2016—in the midst of nearly three decades of marriage, bearing and nurturing and loving our three sons, practicing law full-time, serving in Church callings, and attending to the needs of our extended family—my husband, Doug, and I were called to serve for three years as mission leaders in Arequipa, Peru. We left just after our first grandson was born.

We returned home in 2019 to two new granddaughters. Our two oldest sons were married, and the youngest was in love and soon to be married. I returned to practicing law, and my favorite calling was as Mom and Grammy.

And then the call came to serve as the Primary General President. The comfortable narrative I had written for myself was spending time with my family, another decade practicing law to ensure financial security, and serving in my ward or in the temple.

What if I had stuck with this comfortable narrative?

I would have enjoyed spending more time with my grandchildren and I could have been assured some financial security. And I would have missed a stretching, soul-searching, and faith-building experience. Uphill? Yes. Worth it? Oh, yes!

I offer my witness that “because [the Savior] knows our potential perfectly, He will take us to places we never imagined ourselves.” I am confident He will take you to places you never imagined, and your service will be soul-stretching. Let God guide you to walk beside someone who needs you.

You may find yourself teaching adults to read. Or perhaps serving immigrants. Maybe you will lead a community group to maintain and keep parks safe for families. When we let God prevail, He will take us where He needs us and to places we never imagined.

President Russell M. Nelson declared that we “receive more faith by doing something that requires more faith.”

I know that is true. Because in letting God prevail in my life, in letting Him author my story, my faith in Jesus Christ has increased.

How, then, will you let Him prevail?

What does that look like to a young person who is pursuing an education and wants to marry and have a family? President Dallin H. Oaks, First Counselor in the First Presidency, has explained that the choice is not between family or education or career. He said: “Timing is what we have to choose, and we seek the inspiration of the Lord and the teachings of His servants in doing that.”

In addressing this topic, I wish to be sensitive to those who have a sincere and abiding desire to marry and have children in this life and who are single. I recognize many are parenting alone because of death or divorce. I know of countless couples who are married and desire children and are suffering with infertility and miscarriage. I know you are suffering. You want the timing to change. This isn’t the narrative you have written for yourself. My heart aches for you.

I pursued an education, both undergraduate and a law degree. I was married midway through my legal education. I had my first son the year after I passed the bar. I had babies, and my husband and I loved and nurtured them while we were both working. It was busy, sometimes hectic; we were stretched and sometimes tired. I supported him, and he supported me. Family was, and still is, our top priority. My husband and I sought inspiration in these choices and in the timing. It was what we felt impressed to do. We were trying to let God prevail.

From a financial and professional perspective, it would have made sense to put off having children until I was more established in my career. But in letting the Lord author our stories, we sometimes do things that the world can’t make sense of. I juggled pregnancy, birthing babies, nurturing children, carpools, little league, Church responsibilities, being a supportive spouse, and my professional pursuits. It was a joyful juggle I wouldn’t change. We felt confident in our course because we were letting God prevail.

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="167767924" id="p_aKLUh">In letting the Lord author our stories, we sometimes do things that the world can’t make sense of.</p> [/SIDEBAR]

Please don’t misunderstand. I am not suggesting everyone should follow my course. Our stories are not the same. I share mine because it’s what I know. However, the one thing we do have in common is our motivation: to let God prevail.

Being a mother is my highest priority. It is my ultimate joy. God blessed our first parents and commanded them to “be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth” (Genesis 1:28). The first commandment given to Adam and Eve “pertained to their potential for parenthood.”

My primary orientation is toward motherhood. That orientation was not inconsistent with my diligent pursuit of an education. We are commanded to seek learning—some of which comes in our pursuit of education. It also comes from parenthood, where we learn to become god-like as we cultivate attributes of love, compassion, and patience.

Letting God prevail does include inviting Him to be involved in the timing of our choices.

I am eternally grateful to have received inspiration from the Lord and direction from prophets to help my husband and me in the timing of our choice to invite children into our family when we did. I am oh so grateful I acted on the promptings and did not let worldly influences, convenience, honor, or money get in the way of the choice to fulfill my divine potential in bearing and rearing children.

If men and women cease to have and nurture children, this mortal experience ends. It is vitally important, then, that we neither neglect nor dismiss the sacred responsibility of parenthood.

An abundance of social science data demonstrates the decisive, negative impact to nations and civilizations that stop having children. In many parts of the world, the average number of live births per woman is fewer than two. That means we are not replacing ourselves.

As leaders of the Church, we are concerned about recent trends in marriage and childbirth. In the United States, over the last 30 years, we have seen an eight to nine percentage point drop in those citizens who have ever been married. These figures “represent a worldwide problem.” When people do not marry, fewer children are born.

The United States recently crossed a “threshold where, of adults aged 18–55, there is now a greater share of single adults with no children than there are married adults with children.”

Children are vital to maintaining civilization. They are vital to the glorious plan of happiness. The commandment for us to multiply and replenish the earth “remains in force.”

I know the sincere desire of many hearts may be to marry and raise children. Yet many are single or suffer infertility. My fondest friend, who has never married and had children of her own, has loved and cared for mine. It is not a substitute for children of her own. It is evidence that her orientation remains toward motherhood.

My son and daughter-in-law have worked through the challenge of repeated miscarriages. Their desire is righteous. They are seeking to let God prevail in their lives. Remember, when we ask in faith to let Jesus Christ be the author and finisher of our story, we must be prepared to play out an uncomfortable narrative in the hope of one that is, while painful, ultimately grander and more celestial than we can imagine.

Among my dear friends is a childless couple who married later in life and suffered with infertility. They asked in faith whether they should adopt children. Rather than a baby, they felt impressed to adopt four sisters—ages 5 to 17. Absolutely, positively, not the narrative they had written for themselves. But oh, how magnificent a story He has penned with them.

Whatever our personal circumstances, we are all part of the family of God, members of an earthly family, and preparing to be eternal parents. The blessings of exaltation made available to us through the Savior, Jesus Christ, include posterity. And so, whether we are sealed and bear children in this life or the next, our object is exaltation—which can be ours if we make and keep covenants. When we enter a covenant relationship with God, we are bound vertically to Him, and we are never alone. We are blessed with “an extra measure of [His] love and mercy.”

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="167768003" id="p_s05Dv">Whatever our personal circumstances, we are all part of the family of God, members of an earthly family, and preparing to be eternal parents.</p> [/SIDEBAR]

As covenant people, we plan and prepare for marriage and to have and nurture children. What a sacred and holy calling! We love and lead and minister and parent to show our love for God and His children—because we want Him to prevail in our lives.

It is a glorious time to be alive and make covenants in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Understanding our role, purpose, and responsibility in the plan of happiness is ennobling, reassuring, and joyful. Knowing that we have a living prophet preparing us for what lies ahead brings me peace and even optimism amid uncertainty. My covenant relationship with God gives me confidence. My covenant confidence is in Jesus Christ.

I testify that He lives, that His love for us is manifest in His willingness to offer His life and Atonement for each of us.

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="167768023" id="p_qG1eH">From a keynote address at the 2024 Brigham Young University Women’s Conference. Watch President Johnson’s full address by going to “<a class="cross-ref" href="/study/broadcasts/byu-womens-conference/2024/05/08-johnson?lang=eng&amp;id=title1#title1">2024 BYU Women’s Conference</a>” in the Gospel Library.</p> [/SIDEBAR]
