Elder Scott Spencer, from the Northeast of England, was sustained as an Area Seventy at the General Conference leadership session on Thursday 3rd April 2025. Elder Spencer will serve in the Europe North Area.

Elder Spencer’s great-grandmother was baptised in 1903 after being taught by missionaries. He grew up in the church, participated in the primary and young men’s organisations and attended both the seminary and institute programmes.

Originally from Grimsby, Elder Spencer moved to the Gateshead area two years after getting married. He is married to Emma Louise Wilkinson. They have 7 children: 5 sons first and then 2 daughters. Their ages range from 7 to 20 years old. Their eldest son is serving a full-time mission in the Sao Paulo North Mission.

Elder Spencer served in the England Bristol Mission from April 1997 to April 1999.

Elder Spencer has served as bishop of the Gateshead Ward and stake president of the Sunderland Stake. After his release, he and Emma were assigned to develop and teach a course for people in the United Kingdom called ‘Strengthening Faith in Jesus Christ’. He was serving as the Elders Quorum president in the Stanley Ward when he received his new call as an Area Seventy.

Professionally, Elder Spencer joined the Tyne and Wear Fire and Rescue Service as a firefighter in September 2000. He served on the operational fire appliances for 20 years, progressing to be a Watch Manager. For the past four years, he has worked in the Learning and Development department, responsible for apprenticeships, training, leadership and management development. He also responds to operational incidents as a station manager.

Outside of work and his Church service, Elder Spencer enjoys spending time with family, walking, keeping fit, paddle boarding and
reading.

Regarding his initial feelings about his new call, Elder Spencer said: “I have felt a sway of emotions from apprehension and feelings of inadequacy to eager excitement at the privilege to serve. Following my ordination and setting apart at General Conference, I feel uplifted and strengthened by the Holy Ghost and eager to serve.”

Area Seventies are leaders of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints called by the First Presidency to be “special witnesses” and to assist the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles in “building up the church and regulating all the affairs” and “preaching and administering the gospel” in their assigned areas. They act under the keys and direction of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles.

Area Seventies are called and set apart to serve in specific geographical areas, but may also be assigned to serve in other areas as needed. They are not called to full-time service and typically serve for five years. The call was extended by the Europe North Area President, Elder Scott D. Whiting. Elder Spencer was ordained and set apart by Elder Quentin L. Cook, assisted by Elder Michael T. Ringwood.
