Gerald N. Lund, Jesus Christ, Key to the Plan of Salvation (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1991)

Acknowledgments

Chapters 2, 4-6, 8, 10-13 have been adapted from the following articles:

"Do the scriptures give any indication as to what happened to the family of Jesus after his death and resurrection?" September 1975, Ensign (c) The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Used by permission.

"An Exploration of the Process of Faith As Taught in the Book of Mormon," in The Second Annual Church Educational System Religious Educators' Symposium: A Symposium on the Book of Mormon, August 17-19, 1978 (c) The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Used by permission.

"Old Testament Types and Symbols," in The Third Annual Church Educational System Religious Educators' Symposium: A Symposium on the Old Testament, August 16-18, 1979 (c) The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Used by permission.

"Salvation: By Grace or by Works?" April 1981, Ensign (c) The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Used by permission.

"To This End Was I Born," in A Symposium on the New Testament, 1984 (c) The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Used by permission.

"The Savior said that we should be perfect, even as he and our Father in Heaven are perfect. (See 3 Ne. 12:48.) Are we expected to achieve perfection in this life? If so, how can I avoid becoming discouraged with myself as I try to achieve it?" August 1986, Ensign (c) The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Used by permission.

"Reflections on the Christmas Story," in A Celebration of Christmas (c) 1988 Deseret Book Company.

"The Fall of Man and His Redemption," in The Book of Mormon: Second Nephi, The Doctrinal Structure (c) 1989 Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University. Used by permission.

"Divine Indebtedness and the Atonement," in The Book of Mormon: The Book of Mosiah, Salvation Only Through Christ (c) 1990 Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University. Used by permission.
