Gerald N. Lund, Jesus Christ, Key to the Plan of Salvation (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1991)

Chapter 1

"No Other Name" (Mosiah 3:17)

"Wherefore, thou shalt do all that thou doest in the name of the Son, and thou shalt repent and call upon God in the name of the Son forevermore." (Moses 5:8; italics added.) So spoke the angel to Adam at the beginning of the world's history. And thus spoke the Lord through the Prophet Joseph Smith in our dispensation: "And again, I say unto you, all things must be done in the name of Christ." (D&C 46:31; italics added.)

From the foundation of the world to the present day, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ has been the central figure in the plan of the Father to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man:

He it was who stepped forward in the Great Council in heaven and offered his life as ransom for all. (See Moses 4:1-2.)

He it was who, under the direction of the Father, created worlds without number. (See Moses 1:32-33.)

He it was who directed men as Jehovah, God of the Old Testament, for the first four thousand years of this world's history. (See, for example, Abr. 2:6-8.)

He it was who put aside his godly glory, thinking it not unseemly to take upon himself the frail and corruptible body of mortality. (See Philip. 2:6-8.)

He it was who sweat blood for us in a garden of olive trees; who endured mockery and cruel jibes; who stood with spittle running down his face; who endured the lacerating pain of a Roman scourging and the unspeakable horror of death by crucifixion—all that he might save us from the results of our foolishness and rebellion. (See Luke 22:44; Mark 14:65; 15:29-32; 1 Ne. 19:9.)

He it is who will overthrow Babylon and make the kingdoms of the world become the kingdoms of our God and his Christ. (See Rev. 11:15.)

He it is who will come again in such resplendent glory that the mountains will flow down at his presence and the sun will hide its face in shame. (See D&C 133:44, 49.)

It is little wonder then that Nephi proclaimed, "We talk of Christ, we rejoice in Christ, we preach of Christ, we prophesy of Christ, and we write according to our prophecies, that our children may know to what source they may look for a remission of their sins." (2 Ne. 25:26.)

If one were to count all the times the various names and titles of Jesus are used in scripture—Lord, Savior, Redeemer, Messiah, God, the Lamb, Jesus, Alpha and Omega, the Son of Man, Christ, Master, and dozens more—the total would approach some twenty-five thousand usages in the four standard works. That averages about ten uses per page of scripture! Surely that says something about the central role he plays in our lives and in the destiny of all mankind.

For over a quarter of a century, I have had the opportunity to serve in the Church Educational System of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. As seminary teacher, institute instructor and director, curriculum writer, and administrator, I have been privileged to spend much of my adult life reading, studying, teaching, and writing about the life and mission of the Savior of the world. It has been a labor accompanied by a never-ending and ever-growing sense of awe at the majesty and perfections of the Son of Man. I understand now with much greater clarity the Master's statement when he said, "My yoke is easy, and my burden is light." (Matt. 11:30.)

This work is made up of articles, talks, and teaching aids given over the past few years in various settings and is adapted to focus on Jesus Christ and his place in the plan of salvation. Each piece in its own way was and is meant to bear witness of the Son of God and of the great plan of the Father. My sincere hope is that they bring greater understanding to you and strengthen your own testimony of Jesus Christ and your desire to be more like him and our Heavenly Father. My own testimony is, as King Benjamin said it so well 2,100 years ago, "there shall be no other name given nor any other way nor means whereby salvation can come unto the children of men, only in and through the name of Christ, the Lord Omnipotent." (Mosiah 3:17; italics added.)
