Gerald N. Lund, Jesus Christ, Key to the Plan of Salvation (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1991)

Chapter 3

"He Hath Anointed Me to Preach the Gospel to the Poor" (Luke 4:18)

One time at lunch, a friend raised an interesting question: Suppose the Savior were to visit your ward this Sunday, where would he go first? There were several of us at the table, but we all agreed that he might stop first at the bishop's office and say something like "I thought I'd let you know I'm here. I'll be back to see you in a while." Then he'd go to the nursery, where he would kneel, and the children would gather around him. Then we decided he would go next to the Primary.

From there we weren't sure where he would go. Someone said, "I think I know what he'd do next," and he cited a scripture in the Book of Luke, chapter four. As the chapter number indicates, the Savior's ministry had just begun. In fact, the beginning parts of chapter four are the temptations of Jesus. Verse thirteen relates that, after the devil had ended all the temptations, Satan departed from the Lord for a season, and verse fourteen says that Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit into Galilee. That is the setting.

In the Synagogue

Verse sixteen begins the scene: "And he came to Nazareth, where he had been brought up: and, as his custom was, he went into the synagogue on the sabbath day." The phrase "as his custom was" reveals quite a bit about the Lord's habits and priorities. As important as the Savior's word was, and as many people as were demanding to be with him, every sabbath day he was in the synagogue where he should have been.

"And stood up for to read." The Jewish practice was for all the people in the synagogue to sit on benches. However, they never sat to read the scriptures—they stood. The great scroll of the scriptures was opened, and various members of the synagogue would come up and read from the scriptures. Thus the Savior stood to take that privilege.

"And there was delivered unto him the book of the prophet Esaias [or Isaiah]. And when he had opened the book, he found the place where it was written." (V. 17.) That last phrase suggests that Jesus went specifically to a scripture that he wanted to read, rather than just choosing a verse at random.

This is what he read from Isaiah on the scroll: "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor; he hath sent me to heal the brokenhearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised, to preach the acceptable year of the Lord." (Vv. 18-19.)

The Messiah "closed the book, and he gave it again to the minister, and sat down. And the eyes of all them that were in the synagogue were fastened on him. And he began to say unto them, This day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears." (Vv. 20-21.) The implication was obvious—Jesus Christ was suggesting, I am the fulfillment of what I just read.

The Lord's Ministry

The man in our lunch group who referred to those verses in Luke said, "I think that after the Savior visited the Primary, he would return to the bishop and ask, ‘Do you have anyone in your ward with a special need? Do you have anyone who is in particular stress right now? Have you anyone who is deeply sorrowful? I would like to visit them. Then I'll come back and talk with you and other members of the ward to see what other needs you have.’ " I too think that is what the Savior would do because that is what he said his calling was.

What, then, was the Savior's ministry, as Isaiah defined it and the Savior announced it? Notice what verse eighteen says, "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor." (Emphasis added.) The one word because may seem unusual here. The Lord didn't say the Spirit of the Lord is upon me, therefore I will teach the gospel to the poor. Nor did he say the Spirit of the Lord is upon me so that I can preach the gospel. He said the Spirit of the Lord is upon me because I have been anointed to preach to the poor. Perhaps I am reading more into the word than is actually there, but as I read it, I think the Lord was saying because of the challenges inherent in what I have been called to do—to preach to the poor, to reach the broken-hearted, and so on—because of that, I have the Spirit. In other words, success in fulfilling those needs necessitates having the Spirit.

The entire phrase, "because he hath anointed me," is also significant. In Greek the verb for anoint is chrio, from which comes from the word Christos or, in English, Christ. In Hebrew the verb for anoint is mashack, from which comes the Hebrew title Messhiach or, in English, Messiah. The titles Christ or Messiah thus mean "the anointed one." So when the Savior said, "he has anointed me," he was identifying himself as the anointed one, the long-awaited Messiah, the Christ. It was very clearly an announcement of who he was.

Isaiah succinctly describes what the Messiah would be anointed to do: "to preach the gospel to the poor." In Greek, two different words for poor people are used in the New Testament. One means specifically a person who earns a very meager or scanty wage. The other means someone who is totally destitute. The second word is often applied to beggars because they earn no wage and therefore have to live upon the alms of others. Interestingly, Luke here used the latter word, so that Jesus was saying, "The Lord has anointed me to preach the gospel to those who are totally destitute." Those who are beggars spiritually, who basically have no resources are the ones the Savior is to provide resources for. (Compare with King Benjamin's reminder in Mosiah 4:19-20 that we are all beggars before God.)

The next phrase, "he hath sent me to heal the brokenhearted," is especially full of hope. How many broken hearts are there in the world? How many of us are sorrowing, suffering from difficult circumstances or challenges? The Lord was sent to heal such people—to make whole those hearts that have been rent asunder.

The word captive in the next phrase, "to preach deliverance to the captives," is also a bit peculiar. In Greek it is a combination of two words meaning those who are taken at spear point. So a captive is not just a prisoner, but a prisoner of war. What an apt description. How many prisoners of the great war that started in the premortal existence and continues to our day do we see before us? Appropriately, Nephi spoke of "the captivity of the devil"—it is Satan who takes captive those who have delivered themselves over "to the hardness of their hearts and the blindness of their minds." (1 Ne. 14:7.)

Appropriately, such captives are delivered not through mighty power, but through preaching. They have enslaved themselves, and hearing the truth and accepting it can free them. Did not the Lord also say, "Ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free." (John 8:32.) Jesus said he was sent to preach deliverance. The word preach implies so much more than simply teaching, because preaching in the New Testament involves declaring and bearing testimony of God's word so that the Spirit can validate that testimony as truthful.

The next phrase, "and recovering of sight to the blind," also contains a highly significant word. Jesus did not talk about giving sight to the blind, but about recovering sight to the blind. These are people who once saw but now are blinded. I suspect that the blinding could come from many kinds of darkness—sin, guilt, shame, low self-esteem, ignorance, and so on. It doesn't really matter what the cause of darkness is if a person cannot see. But in all cases Christ provides the illumination to help us see again.

The final phrase, "to set at liberty them that are bruised," in Greek means literally those who are broken to pieces, those who are battered. The Lord does more than heal broken-hearted people. His mission is to free from abuse those who are battered. This is a great message of hope to those who see no way out from misery.

The Jubilee Year

In verse nineteen, the Lord declared that he was come "to preach the acceptable year of the Lord." That is a difficult phrase because we're not exactly sure what the acceptable year of the Lord is. An alternate translation of the phrase is "to preach the year of the Lord's favor." Thus many biblical scholars feel that the phrase alludes to the jubilee year of the Old Testament, which is the most holy year the Lord has decreed and thus the most favorable, or acceptable, to him. Leviticus 25:8 explains how often a jubilee year was to occur: "Thou shalt number seven sabbaths of years unto thee, seven times seven years; and the space of the seven sabbaths of years shall be unto thee forty and nine years." So every fiftieth year came to be called the jubilee year (from verse eleven: "A jubile shall that fiftieth year be unto you.")

The jubilee year was a special sabbatical year. Every seventh year, the land was to rest—nothing could be planted, cultivated, or pruned. People were to eat only what grew of itself and then only what they needed at the time. (See Lev. 25:1-7.) The Lord promised that the year before, the sixth year, the land would bear three times its normal yield to feed the people during the sabbath year: "If ye shall say, What shall we eat the seventh year? behold, we shall not sow, nor gather in our increase: then I will command my blessing upon you in the sixth year, and it shall bring forth fruit for three years." (Vv. 20-21.)

Verses nine and ten in particular explain some of the unique features of the jubilee year: "Then shalt thou cause the trumpet of the jubile to sound on the tenth day of the seventh month, in the day of atonement shall ye make the trumpet sound throughout all your land. And ye shall hallow the fiftieth year, and proclaim liberty throughout all the land unto all the inhabitants thereof: . . . ye shall return every man unto his possession, and ye shall return every man unto his family."

Israelites were to set any bond servants free, give any slaves their liberty, and forgive any debtors their debts. What sweeping changes in an economy! Imagine the panic that would be sent into the banking community today to say all debts would be forgiven. Imagine too the consequences of property being returned. If a person, perhaps through foolishness or because of poverty, had sold his inheritance, that family property would be restored to him on the fiftieth year.

Though the meaning of the phrase "to preach the acceptable year of the Lord" may seem obscure to us, the imagery the Lord evoked in the minds of the people who heard him was powerful and sweeping. Its import was "I am here. I have been anointed to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord. This is a jubilee year: a year when we shall set the captives free, when we shall free the debtors from debt, and when we shall restore them to their inheritances."

Isaiah's Prophecy of the Messiah's Ministry

In the synagogue, the Lord quoted from Isaiah 61:1-2. [^1] He did not quote all of Isaiah's prophecy, however, or at least Luke does not record that he quoted all of it. The prophecy in Isaiah that refers to what the Messiah would do continues to the end of verse three. It expands further upon the Lord's ministry. Verse two, for instance, tells us that the Messiah was to also proclaim "the day of vengeance of our God." The Lord would preach a spiritual year of jubilee, but at the same time he would proclaim that the day of retribution would fall upon the wicked. Though the world can look to the Savior with great hope, those who refuse to repent and who continue in unrighteousness will have great need to fear the justice of God.

Verses two and three continue with these words about mourning: "To comfort all that mourn; to appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness." While there is no object after the word appoint, the implication from the three phrases that follow, which tell what is to be appointed, suggest that gladness will come to those who mourn in Zion. Such sufferers, then, have the promise that the Savior will comfort them and turn their sorrow to joy.

In Old Testament times during periods of deep, deep grief or tragedy, mourners took off the normal clothes and put on sackcloth, which is made from black, woven goat hair five times rougher than burlap. They then took ashes and put them on their heads and on their bodies. This was the sign of mourning, and that is the imagery Isaiah uses here. The Savior will take away the ashes and give them beauty; instead of mourning, there will be the oil of joy.

The Savior will also exchange "the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness." Think how many of us have the spirit of heaviness. Too often, we may have this spirit not through faulty pride, but through a faulty sense of insecurity, a sense that God is not pleased with us. So we become heavy in our minds and hearts. Instead, the Savior will use a garment of praise for what we are. Compared to the world's criticism, this will be glorious clothing indeed.

I think I learned in a small way what this means. When one of my sons was sixteen, he seemed to have a gift for getting under my skin. One day, after I had asked him many times to close the garage door because the garage had some things in it I didn't want to show up missing, I gritted my teeth and said, "Stephen, let me say something to you." He hunched down, expecting an attack.

Right at that moment, a thought suddenly flashed into my mind: "You're always comparing him to what he ought to be, and he always falls short. But have you ever compared him to what he is and has done?" I thought of a good friend whose sixteen-year-old was in a reform school, and I thought of other sixteen-year-olds I had met whose lives were wrecked. So I said to him, "Are you listening?"

"Yeah, I'm listening," he replied.

I said, "I just want to say to you, thanks for what you are. I've never had to hassle you about going to Church. You always do your priesthood duties. You didn't date until you were sixteen, and that was your own free will and choice. I've never said this before, and I just thought it was about time to say, thanks for what you are."

He gave me a long, incredulous look and finally said, "Are you kidding me?" I thought, What a tragedy. He's been criticized so often he doesn't expect praise. Too often we press on our youth the garment of heaviness rather than the garment of praise.

The final image in Isaiah's prophecy is truly beautiful. Isaiah gives the reason why the Savior would do what he does—why he appoints gladness for joy, why he changes mourning into happiness, why he gives praise instead of heaviness. He does it all so that we "might be called trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that he might be glorified." His purpose is that we might be as sturdy as trees in our righteousness, cultivated by the Lord; not that we might be glorified but that God might be glorified.

By his own direct revelation in the synagogue at Nazareth, Jesus Christ has told us what his ministry is. And we know, because we are trying to be one with him, that it is a shared ministry with his disciples: "Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me through their word; that they all may be one; as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us: that the world may believe that thou hast sent me." (John 17:20-21.)

His purposes are also ours—that we reach out to the poor, that we touch the brokenhearted, that we seek out those who are bruised, that we find those who are laden with heaviness and lighten that heaviness with genuine praise, that we seek those who mourn, whether from family problems, physical impairments, or mental difficulties, it doesn't matter. We seek everyone at the level of his or her needs. We try to show them what the will of the Lord is for them, and then we help them discover how to implement that will in their lives. That is our mission—whether we are General Authorities, teachers of the incarcerated, or neighbors with simple faith. The wonderful hope the Savior offers may be realized by any one of his brothers and sisters, and we may share in that divine work.

Footnotes

KJV Isaiah 61:1-2: "The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me; because the Lord [he in Luke 4:18] hath anointed me to preach good tidings [same as gospel] unto the meek [sometimes translated poor]; he hath sent me to bind up [referring to wrapping wounds, thus similar to heal] the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty [same as preach deliverance] to the captives, and the opening of the prison [parallel to set at liberty] to them that are bound [instead of bruised]; to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord." Though this text leaves out entirely one phrase in the Savior's quote, "and recovering of sight to the blind," some translations include it instead of or in addition to "and the opening of the prison to them that are bound." The ancient Greek translation of the Hebrew Old Testament has the phrase. Remember that the text the Savior was reading from was much, much older than the texts from which the KJV was translated.

---
Notas:
[^1] H. Curtis Wright, A Thing of Naught—World Judgment and the Trial of Jesus Christ (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Extension Publications, 1960), 9; italics added.
