Gerald N. Lund, Jesus Christ, Key to the Plan of Salvation (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1991)

Chapter 4

"To This End Was I Born" (John 18:37)

In the judgment hall of the Antonia Fortress in Jerusalem, two men faced each other in the early hours of a spring morning—the one a man of the world, supreme political ruler of the province of Judea; the other, a Galilean accused of treason, sedition, and blasphemy, who should have been summarily dismissed and sent to the cross. Pilate had done that very thing numerous times before.

But this man—something in his bearing caused the procurator to pause. "Art thou a king then?" he demanded. And the man from Nazareth, facing death in a few hours, responded, "To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth." (John 18:37.)

We cannot possibly argue which portion of Christ's ministry is the most significant, for each aspect of his mission is an integral part of the whole design. It would be safe to say, however, that the events connected with the Last Supper, the Garden of Gethsemane, his arrest and trial, his crucifixion, and his resurrection were the culminating events of his ministry. From the day of his birth and through every step of his ministry, his face was set toward Jerusalem, the cross, and the empty tomb. The following sections are some random thoughts on the events of those last hours of the mortal life of the Master.

Exertion and Exhaustion

Talking about the physical pain and agony of the Crucifixion is a fairly common thing for us, but too often we overlook the fact that the last twenty-four hours of Christ's life must have been physically, emotionally, and mentally exhausting for him. Think back on a time when you had to go for an extended time without sleep. By the time twenty or so sleepless hours have passed, we tend to get mentally sluggish, emotionally irritable, and physically drained. By the time the Savior died on the cross, he had been without sleep for at least thirty-six hours, possibly more. The disciples had unsuccessfully fought off sleep part way into the night (see Matt. 26:40-45), but he went on through that night and all the next day.

Added to the exhaustion caused by lack of sleep was the physical exhaustion caused by pain. Most of us have had an experience with how a very minor pain, such as a toothache or headache, can drain the body's resources. Imagine the drain that accompanied the incomprehensible agony in the Garden, the physical abuse during the trial, and the scourging by the Romans that flayed strips of skin and flesh from his back.

Many of us have given blood to the Red Cross or to a hospital. Remember how physically drained we felt after that experience and of the cautions we were given for rest and nourishment? In the Garden of Gethsemane, Christ suffered so intensely that he bled at every pore. (See Luke 22:44; D&C 19:18.) What effect would that loss of blood have had in addition to the physical suffering it caused?

Furthermore, Jesus had to exert himself physically during those last twenty-four hours. He walked from the Upper Room, where he had held the Passover with his disciples, to the Garden of Gethsemane, where he was arrested and taken back to the Palace of Caiaphas. From there he was taken to the Antonia Fortress, then to Herod's Palace, then to the Antonia Fortress again, and finally to Golgotha. That represents nearly five miles of walking up and down some very hilly terrain, and all of it under extreme physical, mental, and emotional duress.

Yet in spite of all of this—no sleep, loss of blood, extensive walking, intense agony, physical abuse—Jesus never once lost his temper, never once lost control of himself or of the situation. In fact, no one could have been more fully composed or in control of himself than was the Master throughout the whole ordeal of his arrest, trial, and crucifixion.

Who Crucified Jesus?

As we review the events of the Savior's arrest, trial, and crucifixion, we should understand who was really responsible for the death of Jesus. Throughout the centuries, Christians have used the accounts of the Crucifixion as justification for their hatred and persecution of the Jews. On the other hand, in more recent times Jewish and Christian leaders who abhor what has happened in the past have tried to put the blame for the Crucifixion solely on the Romans.

A careful reading of the Gospel accounts makes it clear that the primary instigators of the plot to kill the Savior were the Jewish religious leaders. They were the ones the Master and his teachings most threatened, and they were the ones who engineered the arrest and the trial before the Sanhedrin and who finally badgered the weak and vacillating Pilate into pronouncing the death sentence. Though Roman hands held the whip and drove the nails, the Roman soldiers were only carrying out the will and careful planning of the Jewish leaders. The Jewish leaders, not the Jewish people as a whole, and not even all of the leaders, were the ones who plotted Jesus' death.

Peter was a Jew. James and John were Jews. Martha, Lazarus, and Zacchaeus—all of the first leaders and disciples of Christianity were Jews. Within a few months of the Crucifixion, over eight thousand people of the Jewish nation had become Christians, including "a great company of the priests." (See Acts 2:41; 4:4; 6:7.) If the Jews as a people are to be blamed for the Crucifixion, then the Jews must equally be given credit for establishing the early Christian church, for Jews as individuals were involved in both.

But doesn't the Book of Mormon prophesy that the Jews would suffer persecution because they crucified Jesus? Not exactly. Some of the Book of Mormon writers did prophesy that the Jews would suffer persecution. The reason for their persecution, however, was not the Crucifixion per se but an attitude of the heart. This distinction is an important one. Nephi said: "As for those who are at Jerusalem, saith the prophet, they shall be scourged by all people, because they crucify the God of Israel, and turn their hearts aside, rejecting signs and wonders, and the power and glory of the God of Israel. And because they turn their hearts aside, saith the prophet, and have despised the Holy One of Israel, they shall wander in the flesh, and perish, and become a hiss and a by-word, and be hated among all nations." (1 Ne. 19:13-14; italics added.)

It is hardness of heart in the Lord's covenant people that brings suffering upon them. It was true of the House of Israel in the Old Testament. It was true of the Nephites and Jaredites in the Book of Mormon. And it was true of some Latter-day Saints in this dispensation. (See, for example, D&C 97:25-27; 101:1-8.)

We believe that punishment for someone else's sin is unjust. (See A of F 2.) To suggest that Jews of the twentieth century are being punished by God for what their ancestors two millennia ago did is unthinkable when we understand God's nature. But those who have been called to be God's people are expected to serve him with all their hearts. (See Deut. 6:5.) When they do not, they bring sorrow and suffering upon themselves.

"None Other Nation . . . Would Crucify Their God"

Another important point has to do with the nature of the Jewish leaders and the conspiracy to kill Jesus. In the Upper Room after he had finished the washing of the feet, Jesus made a rather sobering prophecy—a prophecy that in his own case would be fulfilled in less than twenty-four hours. He said: "If the world hate you, ye know that it hated me before it hated you. If ye were of the world, the world would love his own: but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you." (John 15:18-19.) And then he added: "These things have I spoken unto you, that ye should not be offended. They shall put you out of the synagogues"—now here is the prophecy—"yea, the time cometh, that whosoever killeth you will think that he doeth God service." (John 16:1-2; italics added.)

The men who killed Jesus were evil men. Criminals killed him—but not criminals in the usual sense. They were criminals motivated by religious motives. H. Curtis Wright shared this important insight on the arrest and crucifixion of Jesus:

To begin with, the conspiracy against Jesus was inspired by the religious motives of pious public officials whose sense of virtue had been outraged. We must disagree violently with the bulk of Christian writers who have described the leaders of the Jews as hoodlums and outlaws, rascals and ruffians. . . . They were criminals all right, but of a vastly different piece. They had no use for the seamy side of crime, and they campaigned relentlessly against it. . . . They moved in the upper strata of Jewish high society and lived in the better sections of Jerusalem. . . . They inhabited the country club ionosphere of the city's ‘velvet alleys’ where they breathed the rarified air of religious piety and unimpeachable integrity. . . . They didn't have an arsenal where they stashed tommy guns and blackjacks and knives and rubber hoses. . . . And there were no handkerchiefs over their faces, no gloves to cover their fingerprints. They wore instead the robes of righteousness—the cloak of respectability and public trust, and the mantle of high official office. [^1]

That point is an important one to understand. The men who had Jesus put to death were the "spiritual leaders" of Judaism. The great irony—and the scriptural accounts have glimpses of this—is that these men used the law, the very law they claimed so scrupulously to obey, as the weapon to kill Jesus. Even while they swelled with righteous indignation and cried that they were protecting the law from this blasphemous man, they violated that law in a dozen ways.

For example, we know that by Sanhedrin law every trial had to be held in daytime, between the morning and the evening sacrifice. We know that by Sanhedrin law every trial also had to be held in a room of the temple. We know that contradictory testimony between two witnesses brought an automatic acquittal of the accused. We know that a man could not be condemned and executed on the same day. We know that a trial could not be held on the day before a Sabbath lest it not be concluded in one day and have to be carried over. We know that no person could be convicted on the basis of his own testimony. We know—and this is an interesting aspect of Jewish law—that a unanimous verdict of the judges automatically brought about an acquittal for the accused, because they felt he had no advocate in court. All of these aspects of the law were violated in the case of Jesus. [^2]

Over and over again the leaders of Judaism trampled the law under foot in order to achieve their objective. And yet, even as they did so, they were adhering to other parts of the law with meticulous exactness. Three references in particular give some insight into the character of the men who conspired to put their Savior to death.

Matthew 27. The arrest had been made, and Jesus had been taken to the palace of Caiaphas. Suddenly Judas realized the magnitude of what he had done, and so, Matthew recorded, Judas took back the betrayal money. "I have betrayed the innocent blood," he said. Their response was "What is that to us?" (Matt. 27:4.) In despair Judas cast the pieces of money at their feet, fled from the room, and committed suicide. (See Matt. 27:5.) The next verse even more fully reveals the hypocrisy of the Jewish religious leaders, these "pious criminals," as Wright called them: "The chief priests took the silver pieces, and said, It is not lawful for to put them into the treasury, because it is the price of blood." (Matt. 27:6.) They had no qualms about bribing a man to betray his master. They had no qualms about an illegal conspiracy to kill the Savior, but when they received money they viewed as spiritually tainted, they were horrified at the thought of putting it into the temple treasury, because it was blood money.

John 18. A second indication of the spiritual hardness and inconsistency of these men is found in the Gospel of John. The Sanhedrin knew that, after they had pronounced the judgment and decreed that Jesus must die, they could not crucify him without the help and permission of the Roman officers. So, John recorded, "then led they Jesus from Caiaphas unto the hall of judgment: and it was early; and they themselves went not into the judgment hall, lest they should be defiled; but that they might eat the passover." (John 18:28.) The rabbis believed that if a Jew associated with a Gentile, especially just before the Passover, he was defiled and had to go through a long and involved ritual cleansing. So again the irony strikes us. Riding roughshod over illegalities in the trial was all right. Manipulating the Roman procurator to do their dirty work was acceptable. Even killing their Messiah was of no concern. But to come in contact with a Gentile and risk defilement before the Passover? Perish the thought!

John 19. John gave us another insight into the character of the men who, in their observance of the law, maintained their obsession with the letter of it but totally lost its spirit. After the crucifixion of Jesus and the two thieves was done, "the Jews therefore, because it was the preparation, that the bodies should not remain upon the cross on the sabbath day, (for that sabbath day was an high day,) besought Pilate that their legs might be broken." (John 19:31.) The Mosaic law said that no dead person could be left on the cross on the Sabbath. (See Deut. 21:23.) Spitting in his face during a totally illegal trial was acceptable. Whipping the mob into the frenzied chant of "Crucify him! Crucify him!" was all right. And once on the cross, looking up into his agonized face and taunting him to come down were nothing. But to leave the body hanging on a holy day—God would surely be displeased by such irreverence. The body must come down!

When we understand that kind of hardness in the Jewish leaders, we can better appreciate what Jacob said: "Wherefore, as I said unto you, it must needs be expedient that Christ . . . should come among the Jews, among those who are the more wicked part of the world; and they shall crucify him—. . . and there is none other nation on earth that would crucify their God." (2 Ne. 10:3; italics added.) Had Zeus appeared to the Greeks, had Molech appeared to the Moabites, had Ra or Amun appeared to the Egyptians, the people would have danced in the streets to welcome him and sung hymns of joyous praise. No other people would have crucified their god. And the great irony is that the religious leaders did it, as Jesus had prophesied, thinking they had actually done God a service. (See John 16:2.)

"Knowest Thou the Condescension of God?"

When the angel asked Nephi what he saw in vision, he answered, "A virgin, most beautiful and fair above all other virgins." The angel then asked him an important question: "Knowest thou the condescension of God?" (1 Ne. 11:15-16.) That question has interesting implications concerning God the Father, but it also has implications for God the Son. We know this because a little later the angel said to Nephi, "Look and behold the condescension of God!" (1 Ne. 11:26.) Nephi then saw the ministry and death of the Savior. (See vv. 27-33.)

In Moses 1:32-33 we read: "By the word of my power, have I created them, which is mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth. And worlds without number have I created . . . and by the Son I created them." (Italics added.) Can you imagine what it must have meant for Jesus to be the creator of innumerable worlds, galaxies, perhaps even universes, and to leave that power and glory and majesty and take upon himself the body of an infant who was totally dependent upon others for nourishment, who could suffer pain, and who could be hungry? "Knowest thou the condescension of God?" We begin to sense why the angel asked that question.

Nephi made a significant point related to the idea of the condescension of the Son of God. In 1 Nephi 19:7 he talked about the people trampling under their feet the very God of Israel, and in verse nine he added, "The world, because of their iniquity, shall judge him to be a thing of naught." Think of the irony of that! That statement is incredible—the world would judge the Creator of all the universe to be something insignificant, a nothing. Nephi continued: "Wherefore they scourge him, and he suffereth it; and they smite him, and he suffereth it. Yea, they spit upon him, and he suffereth it, because of his loving kindness and his long-suffering towards the children of men." (1 Ne. 19:9.)

Think of the time when the men mocked him in the palace of Caiaphas where the trial took place. They put a blindfold on him. They slapped him across the face and said, "Prophesy unto us, thou Christ, Who is he that smote thee?" (Matt. 26:68.) All he had to do was raise one finger, and the entire city of Jerusalem could have been obliterated. When they stepped forward and spat in his face (see Matt. 26:67), all he had to do was to speak a word, and the entire solar system could have been annihilated. This is the Man they were dealing with: the Creator of the universe, a member of the Godhead. When the Roman soldiers jammed the crown of thorns onto his head and lashed his back, he stood patiently, and, as Nephi said, "he suffereth it." Yet he could have spoken but a word and destroyed them all.

Why? Why would he endure such degradation? Why suffer it all when he could so easily have stopped it? "Because of his loving kindness . . . towards the children of men." Surely this gives added meaning to the angel's question, "Knowest thou the condescension of God?"

Stunned Sorrow or Joyous Exultation?

Imagine for a moment the scene in Jerusalem immediately after the death of Jesus. Tear-stained cheeks, eyes red with grief, voices hushed and shocked, a numbing sense of unreality—what a pitiful, tragic three days that must have been for Jesus' followers. The Master, the worker of miracles, he who had raised Lazarus from death just a few days before, now lay in a borrowed tomb. It was too incredible to believe; yet they had seen the torn hands and feet, handled the cold body.

But a vision given to Joseph F. Smith in 1918 tells us that, at exactly that same time, a scene of vastly different tone was occurring elsewhere. (See D&C 138.) Even as one group of disciples was hastily preparing the body for burial, another group of disciples was gathered awaiting his arrival from the mortal world: "There were gathered together in one place an innumerable company. . . . I beheld that they were filled with joy and gladness, and were rejoicing together. . . . While this vast multitude waited and conversed, rejoicing . . . , the Son of God appeared. . . . And the saints rejoiced in their redemption. . . . Their countenances shone, and the radiance from the presence of the Lord rested upon them, and they sang praises unto his holy name." (D&C 138:12, 15, 18, 23-24; italics added.)

The assembly included such righteous people as Adam and Eve, Abel, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob—famous Old Testament prophets—and Book of Mormon prophets. (See vv. 38-49.) Prophets from this dispensation, such as Joseph Smith and Brigham Young, were also allowed to attend in their premortal state in preparation for their future roles in the work of the kingdom. (See vv. 53, 56.) Those in Jerusalem who, for those three days, could see only death sorrowed; yet those who were dead who saw life rejoiced.

"And He Saw, and Believed"

Finally we come to the Resurrection itself. In the twentieth chapter of his Gospel, John described how Mary came early and found the empty tomb. When she reported that to Peter and John, they both ran to see for themselves. "He [John] stooping down, and looking in, saw the linen clothes lying; yet went he not in. Then cometh Simon Peter following him, and went into the sepulchre, and seeth the linen clothes lie, and the napkin, that was about his head, not lying with the linen clothes, but wrapped together in a place by itself." (John 20:5-7; italics added.) Why did John take note of that? "Then went in also that other disciple, which came first to the sepulchre [John], and he saw, and believed." (John 20:8, italics added.) What did he see that caused him to believe the Resurrection had taken place?

In the quick preparation for burial, Joseph of Arimathaea and the women with him would have wrapped Jesus with long strips of linen in the manner of the Middle East. Finally they would have wrapped one strip around and around his face to cover it. It was that which John saw, "not lying with the linen clothes, but wrapped together in a place by itself." (V. 7). Who wrapped it and folded it and laid it aside? I believe that Jesus laid aside his own burial clothes; he folded them up and laid them aside.

I have been able to visit Jerusalem often. Every time I go into the Garden Tomb and see that empty tomb, I thrill again and understand, I think, what John meant when he said, "He saw, and believed." And the deepest thrill of all is to know that some day, because of what happened in the tomb that first Easter morning, we will come forth from the grave and lay aside and fold up our own burial clothes and know that we too will live forever and ever.

"Did Not Our Heart Burn?"

Luke told us something about the Resurrection that is not recorded in the other Gospels. After Christ has appeared to Peter and John and to the women at the sepulchre, "two of [the disciples] went that same day to a village called Emmaus, which was from Jerusalem about threescore furlongs. And they talked together of all these things which had happened. And it came to pass, that, while they communed together and reasoned, Jesus himself drew near, and went with them. But their eyes were holden that they should not know him. And he said unto them, What manner of communications are these?" (Luke 24:13-17.)

They were, I am sure, overflowing with the news of the day—what the women had said, what Peter had said, what John had said. It is not surprising then that "one of them, whose name was Cleopas, answering said unto him, Art thou only a stranger in Jerusalem, and hast not known the things which are come to pass there?" (Luke 24:18.) In other words, Cleopas seemed to say, "How can you be in Jerusalem and not know what has happened?" So they explained to him how Jesus of Nazareth had been delivered up and killed; and then they reported the startling things that had been told to them that very morning.

Jesus replied, "O fools, and slow of heart to believe all that the prophets have spoken: Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his glory?" (Luke 24:25-26.) And then, "beginning at Moses and all the prophets, he expounded unto them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself." (Luke 24:27.) Wouldn't you love to have been able to walk along behind the three of them and hear that conversation? I have often wondered to which scriptures he referred. To what things did he point their minds? From which writings of the prophets did he quote? There is no way to know, of course, but here are some possibilities.

He might have referred to Exodus 12, which describes the great Passover and how Israel was delivered from death and from bondage through the blood of the lamb. Would he have reminded them that this was the Passover season, that the true Lamb had just been offered, and that deliverance from spiritual bondage had been brought to pass?

Perhaps Psalm 22 was another scripture he cited. The opening lines are, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" (V. 1.) Had they been at the cross? Had they heard that last agonized cry? (See Matt. 27:46.) A few verses later in that same psalm we read, "All they that see me laugh me to scorn: they shoot out the lip [a Hebrew idiom meaning to mock and ridicule], they shake the head, saying, He trusted on the Lord that he would deliver him: let him deliver him, seeing he delighted in him." (Ps. 22:7-8.) Did the disguised Savior gently remind them how some at the cross had mocked him and challenged him to come down if he were truly the Son of God? (See Matt. 27:39-43.) And then in verse sixteen, we read: "For dogs have compassed me: the assembly of the wicked have inclosed me: they pierced my hands and my feet." And verse eighteen, "They part my garments among them, and cast lots upon my vesture." (See Matt. 27:35.) To anyone who had witnessed the Crucifixion, those prophecies would have been electrifying.

Perhaps he pointed their minds to Psalm 41:9: "Yea, mine own familiar friend, in whom I trusted, which did eat of my bread, hath lifted up his heel against me." Certainly these two men knew by now about Judas's betrayal of the Master.

Or perhaps Psalm 69 may have been another scripture he quoted. Verses twenty and twenty-one read, "Reproach hath broken my heart; and I am full of heaviness: and I looked for some to take pity, but there was none; and for comforters, but I found none. They gave me also gall for my meat; and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink." Would these men have seen or heard from other witnesses that a soldier gave Jesus vinegar to drink just before he died? (See John 19:29-30.) Did the disciples realize, as John apparently did, that the Savior died of a broken heart? [^3] (See John 19:34-35.) What remorse they must have felt as they thought how no one, not even themselves, had stayed through the ordeal to comfort the Master.

These and other Old Testament prophecies would have clearly showed that all was part of the grand design. We don't know how long he walked with them, and we don't know how long they talked, and we don't know which scriptures he cited, but we do know that when he left them, the two disciples recalled that teaching moment, saying, "Did not our heart burn within us . . . while he opened to us the scriptures?" (Luke 24:32.)

What Can We Ever Do?

Study of these special, sacred scriptures and meditation on all these things can fill us with an overwhelming sense of gratitude for what the Savior did. It can bring us to ask the burning question: "Why would he do this for me?" As the hymn says so beautifully:

I marvel that he would descend from his throne divine,

To rescue a soul so rebellious and proud as mine. [^4]

If we truly come to sense that he did all these things because of love for us, I hope we will have another question: "What could I ever do to repay him for what he has done for me?" Over the years, I have come across three things that I think have particular power in answering that second question.

The first is a parable by Elder James E. Talmage called "The Parable of the Grateful Cat." He told the story of a naturalist in the nineteenth century who had been called to a grand estate in Great Britain to be honored for his contributions in the world of science. He left his cottage early in the morning to go for a walk, and while he was out walking, he saw two boys by the lake. He also heard the frantic meowing of a cat; and so, curious, he walked over to see what was happening. When he arrived he saw the two boys with a mother cat and some kittens. The boys were taking each kitten, tying it up in a rag with a rock, and tossing it into the lake. As you can imagine, the mother cat was frantic watching her kittens being drowned. A little upset, the naturalist asked the boys what they were doing. They said that the mistress of the great estate had an old mother cat that she loved, but she didn't want any more cats around. Whenever the mother cat had a litter, the woman hired the two boys, who were children of some of the servants, to take the kittens to the lake and drown them.

The naturalist said that he would make sure the boys didn't get in trouble, and he took the remaining three kittens and cared for them. To the scientist's surprise, the mother cat behaved as if she understood exactly what was happening. As he walked back to his cottage with the kittens, she ran alongside him, rubbed his leg, and purred happily. He took the kittens into his cottage, gave them some milk, and put them in a warm box.

The next day, when all the company was gathered together in the great house to honor the scientist, suddenly the door pushed open. In came the mother cat with a large fat mouse in her mouth. She walked to the scientist and laid the mouse at his feet. In the words of Elder Talmage, here is the marvelous parable that he drew from this story:

What think you of the offering, and the purpose that prompted the act? A live mouse, fleshy and fat! Within the cat's power of possible estimation and judgment it was a superlative gift. To her limited understanding no rational creature could feel otherwise than pleased over the present of a meaty mouse. Every sensible cat would be ravenously joyful with such an offering. Beings unable to appreciate a mouse for a meal were unknown to the cat.

Are not our offerings to the Lord—our tithes and our other freewill gifts—as thoroughly unnecessary to His needs as was the mouse to the scientist? But remember that the grateful and sacrificing nature of the cat was enlarged, and in a measure sanctified, by her offering.

Thanks be to God that He gauges the offerings and sacrifices of His children by the standard of their physical ability and honest intent rather than by the gradation of His esteemed station. Verily He is God with us; and He both understands and accepts our motives and righteous desires. Our need to serve God is incalculably greater than His need for our service. [^5]

That is one answer to the question, What could I ever do to repay Him? The answer is nothing. Nothing I can do could merit what he did for me. But that is only a partial answer.

The second item is an article from a medical magazine about "belaying" in mountain climbing. The belay system is the way a mountain climber protects himself from falls. Someone climbs up first, gets in a firm, secure position, ties the rope tightly around his waist, and calls down to his partner, "You're on belay," which means, "I have you if you fall." The article reported about Alan Czenkusch, a man who ran a climbing school in Colorado for physicians:

Belaying has brought Czenkusch his best and worst moment in climbing. Czenkusch once fell from a high precipice, yanking out three mechanical supports and pulling his belayer off a ledge. He was stopped, upside down, ten feet from the ground when his spread-eagled belayer arrested the fall with the strength of his outstretched arms.

"Don saved my life," says Czenkusch. "How do you respond to a guy like that? Give him a used climbing rope for a Christmas present? No, you remember him. You always remember him." [^6]

What a profound analogy for us. Like the belayer, the Savior stops our traumatic fall toward spiritual destruction and offers us a safe line back to him. And what can we do to repay him? Always remember him. In fact, those very words are the words of the sacramental covenant. (See D&C 20:77, 79; 3 Nephi 18:7, 11.) Think what an effect always remembering the Savior and what he has done for us would have in our lives. So the fuller answer to the question, "What can I ever do to repay the Savior?" is both nothing, and everything.

The third item that comes to mind when I ask myself the question about repaying the Savior is a poem by an unknown author:

When Jesus came to Golgotha, they hanged him on a tree.

They drove great nails through hands and feet, they made—a calvary!

They crowned him with a crown of thorns, red were his wounds and deep;

For those were crude and cruel days, and human flesh was cheap.

When Jesus came to our town, they simply passed him by.

They never hurt a hair of him! They merely let him die.

For men had grown more tender; they would not give him pain!

They only passed on down the street, and left him standing in the rain. [^7]

Our task is to make a lie of that poem in our own lives. The final answer to the question is, The way I repay the Savior is to accept what he did and make it a reality in my life.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Eusebius, The Ecclesiastical History and the Martyrs of Palestine, tr. Hugh Lawlor and John Oulton, 2 vols. (London: S.P.C.K., 1954), 1:II.23.
[^2] Josephus, Antiquities, XX, ix, 1.
[^3] Eusebius, 1:III.10-11 and III.32.1-4.
[^4] William Smith, A Dictionary of the Bible (Grand Rapids: Zondervan Publishing House, 1967 rev. ed.), s.v. Simon; F. N. Peloubet, Peloubet's Bible Dictionary (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1971), s.v. Simon.
[^5] See Stephen and Shirley Smith Ricks, "Jewish Religious Education in the Meridian of Time," Ensign, October 1987, pp. 60-62.
[^6] Eric G. Anderson, "The Vertical Wilderness," Private Practice, November 1979, p. 17; italics added.
[^7] Cited in Wright, 35.
