Gerald N. Lund, Jesus Christ, Key to the Plan of Salvation (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1991)

Chapter 5

"Among His Own Kin, and in His Own House" (Mark 6:4)

Even a quick reading of the Gospels and Acts shows that the New Testament writers did not intend to give a comprehensive picture of the personal life or family of Jesus. Their purpose was to portray Jesus as the Christ and to convey the significance of that fact to the world. This intent partially explains why we have almost no information about the early years of Jesus and why references to his family life are scanty and usually incidental to the main narrative. Still, one naturally wonders about Jesus' family, who they were and what they did.

Brothers and Sisters of Jesus

We do know that Jesus had four brothers and more than one sister. The people of Nazareth objected to the divine calling of Jesus on the grounds that he was someone who had grown up in their midst. "Is not this the carpenter's son?" they asked in astonishment. "Is not his mother called Mary? and his brethren, James, and Joses, and Simon, and Judas? And his sisters, are they not all with us?" (Matt. 13:55-56.) This last verse and its parallel passage in Mark 6:3 contain the only references to the sisters of Jesus in the New Testament, and nothing is known of their involvement with the Church or their attitude toward the Savior.

The brothers of Jesus—or more correctly, the half-brothers of Jesus—receive more mention, however. John relates an interesting event concerning the brethren of Jesus telling us that they did not fully accept him as the Messiah while he was laboring among them: "Now the Jews' feast of tabernacles was at hand. His brethren therefore said unto him [their brother, Jesus], Depart hence, and go into Judaea, that thy disciples also may see the works that thou doest. For there is no man that doeth any thing in secret, and he himself seeketh to be known openly. If thou do these things, shew thyself to the world. For neither did his brethren believe in him." (John 7:2-5.)

The brothers knew something of Jesus' work and miracles and of his following, but they were doubtful themselves, or at least wished him to be more open about his mission. They did not believe in him, which may refer to the claims he made about being the Messiah and the Son of God. In fact, when the people of Nazareth rejected the Savior, he exclaimed, "A prophet is not without honour, but in his own country, and among his own kin, and in his own house." (Mark 6:4.) But evidently the brothers were converted shortly thereafter, for Luke records that immediately after Christ's ascension into heaven, the church met in "prayer and supplication, with the women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brethren." (Acts 1:14.) Also, Paul includes James in his list of those who had seen the resurrected Lord. (See 1 Cor. 15:7.)

James

More is known about James than any of the other brothers of Jesus. He is mentioned several times in Acts and in the epistles as playing a prominent role in church leadership. For instance, when Peter is imprisoned in Jerusalem and an angel frees him, Peter tells the first group he meets, "Go shew these things unto James, and to the brethren." (Acts 12:17.) James also takes a leading role in the great Jerusalem Council, which debated the issue of circumcision for Gentiles. (See Acts 15.) James was the one who suggested that a letter be drafted outlining the official Church position on this matter. (See Acts 15:13-21.) Some have erroneously assumed that this James was James, the son of Zebedee, who served in the presidency of the early church with Peter and John. That James, however, was killed by Herod in a wave of persecution against the church. (See Acts 12:1-2.) This occurred about A.D. 44, just before Peter's imprisonment and five or six years before the Jerusalem Council.

In his letter to the Galatian saints, Paul refers to James, the Lord's brother, as an apostle (see Gal. 1:19) and classes him, along with Peter and John, as "pillars" of the church (see Gal. 2:9). Some have conjectured from the latter comment of Paul that James, the brother of the Lord, not only became an apostle, but even filled the vacancy in the leadership of the Twelve caused by the martyrdom of James, the son of Zebedee. The fact that James declared the official policy of the church at the Jerusalem Council and that Paul reported to him after one mission (see Acts 21:17-19) would lend added support to that supposition. Of course, based on what we know, it remains conjecture.

James, the brother of Jesus, was also the one who wrote the epistle of James. Not only does this short letter contain some of the great teachings of gospel doctrine, but in it Joseph Smith found the words (see James 1:5-6) that sent him to the Sacred Grove in the spring of 1820. Note in that epistle that James does not refer to himself as the brother of the Lord but as his servant: "James, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ." (James 1:1.)

Ancient tradition, preserved for us by Eusebius, a Christian historian who lived about A.D. 300, states that James became bishop of the church at Jerusalem and was called James the Just, respected by Jews and Christians as being the most just man alive. It is said that he prayed so often and so long for the people that his knees became as hard as camel knees. [^1]

Josephus, a Jewish historian and general who lived during the lifetime of James, mentioned James's death. Ananus, a chief priest who was a Sadducee (the Sadducees violently opposed the resurrection), "assembled the sanhedrim of the judges, and brought before them the brother of Jesus, who was called Christ, whose name was James, and some others, . . . and when he had formed an accusation against them as breakers of the law, he delivered them to be stoned." Ananus soon lost his position as high priest because of this incident. [^2]

Jude and Simon

The writer of the epistle of Jude refers to himself this way: "Jude, the servant of Jesus Christ, and the brother of James." (Jude 1:1.) Most scholars assume that the name James refers to the Lord's brother, identifying the writer as the Judas who is another of the Lord's brothers. Though Jude does not call himself an apostle, the fact that his letter has been recognized and accepted from very early times as authoritative suggests that he too may have been an apostle.

Nothing more is recorded of Simon and Joses in the New Testament. Interestingly, another Simon, or Symeon, is mentioned by Eusebius. This Simon, according to tradition, was the son of Clopas, Joseph's brother, and Mary, whom Matthew called "the other Mary" (28:1) and who was one of the women at the cross and one of the first to see the resurrected Christ (see Matt. 27:55-56; 28:1-10; Mark 15:40). This Simon was thus Jesus' cousin. He succeeded James the Lord's brother as bishop of the church in Jerusalem and was finally crucified in the Roman persecutions under the emperor Trajan. [^3] The Bible scholars F. N. Peloubet and William Smith say that many have identified this Symeon with Simon the Lord's brother, though this argument is full of difficulties. [^4]

Joseph

We know quite a bit about Joseph, Jesus' stepfather, during the early years of his marriage. Matthew tells us that he was of the lineage of King David, that he was a just and considerate man, that in a dream an angel told him who Jesus would be, that he was obedient, and that he gave Jesus his name, which means savior. (See Matt. 1.) We know that he took Mary to Bethlehem, where Jesus was born. (See Luke 2:4-6.) Less than two years later, Joseph took his family into Egypt to escape Herod, after being warned in a dream. In Egypt, a dream again told him when to return, and another dream told him to go to Galilee. (See Matt. 2:13-15, 19-22.) Four dreams from God! Joseph must have been an exceptionally visionary and spiritually sensitive man.

Joseph and Mary also attended the Passover in Jerusalem faithfully every year. (See Luke 2:41.) One incident at the Passover, when Jesus was twelve (see Luke 2:42-49), suggests how well Joseph taught the scriptures to his children. Jewish tradition laid the primary emphasis for the education of children, which emphasized study of the Torah, on the father, though the mother could also teach her children the scriptures. [^5] So when Jesus was "in the temple, sitting in the midst of the doctors, both hearing them, and asking them questions," and "all that heard him were astonished at his understanding and answers" (vv. 46-47), his ability positively reflected on Joseph's (and also Mary's) understanding of the scriptures and the teaching Jesus had received. Joseph's knowledge that Jesus was Emmanuel (see Matt. 1:23) had undoubtedly lent urgency to Joseph's teaching.

Though the record is silent concerning the later life of Joseph, most scholars assume that he died sometime during the eighteen years between the family's visit to Jerusalem when Jesus was twelve and the beginning of Christ's formal ministry. If Joseph had been alive, he would likely have been mentioned as being at the marriage celebration in Cana (see John 2:1-11) and almost certainly Jesus would not have given John the charge to care for his mother (see John 19:25-27).

Mary

Aside from the reference to Mary meeting with the Church shortly after the ascension of her Son (see Acts 1:14), we have no record of her after the events of the crucifixion. Ancient traditions, which are not always reliable, tell us that Mary associated with the church in Jerusalem for many years, and finally accompanied John to Ephesus, where she eventually died.

But Mary's contribution to the church and to the work of Jesus Christ may be more lasting than most people realize. As mentioned earlier, she contributed to the training of her son Jesus. Her knowledge of the scriptures was thorough, as indicated by her spontaneous words of rejoicing when she met Elizabeth, words that echo numerous passages in the Old Testament. (See Luke 1:46-55.)

Furthermore, Luke frankly admits that he is writing his gospel from material he had gathered from eyewitnesses of Christ's life. (See Luke 1:1-4.) Many Bible scholars believe that Luke gathered these materials for his gospel while Paul was imprisoned in Caesarea for two years, before Paul was sent to Rome for trial before the emperor. (See Acts 24:26- 7.) Caesarea was only about fifty miles northwest of Jerusalem. If Mary was still in Jerusalem, what better source of information concerning the life of the Master could there be than his mother?

Some unique characteristics of Luke's gospel support the possibility that Mary was one of Luke's sources. First, only in Luke is there a detailed record of the story of the birth of Christ. Matthew records the visits of the angel Gabriel and of the later visit of the wise men, but we turn to Luke to read of the manger and the shepherds, the crowded inn and the swaddling clothes. Only in Luke do we find an account of Gabriel's words to the young Mary (see Luke 1:26-38) and of Mary's visit to Elisabeth (see Luke 1:39-56). Luke's Gospel is the only one that relates the nativity (see Luke 2:1-20), the circumcision of Jesus and the inspired declarations of Anna and Simeon in the temple (see Luke 2:21-38), and the teaching of the young Jesus in the temple at the age of twelve. And interestingly enough, Luke, who exhibits some of the most polished and refined Greek in the New Testament, uses a rough Greek filled with Hebraic style in the chapters that tell us of the infancy and childhood of Jesus. So markedly different is it from the rest of his work that it almost seems as if Luke were translating, a concept that would support the idea that Mary supplied the material.

The information about the family of Jesus that has survived the erasing effects of time is sketchy and incomplete. Yet the evidence we do have suggests strongly that the family of the Savior played active and prominent roles in the early development and history of the church of Jesus Christ.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Look for the interpretation of the symbol in the scriptures themselves. The leper. Leprosy in its various forms was a loathsome disease causing decay and putrefaction of the living body. It required the sufferer to be ostracized and cut off from any fellowship with the rest of the house of Israel. Because of these characteristics, leprosy was also an appropriate type or symbol of what happens to a man spiritually when he sins. Sin introduces decay and corruption into the spiritual realm, just as leprosy does into the physical. Also, a sinful person was cut off from fellowship with spiritual Israel and could not be part of the Lord's covenant people. So the leper himself provided a type or similitude of what King Benjamin called the "natural man." (See Mosiah 3:19.) A new beginning. The Lord indicated that Israel's calendar was to begin its cycle from this event, which was to be the beginning of the year. (See Ex. 12:2.) Symbolically speaking, the deliverance from the bondage of sin marks a new beginning, a new time, a new life, as it were. The high priest. The high priest had to go through meticulous preparation to be worthy to act as officiator for the rest of the house of Israel. He made sacrifices for himself and his house, as well as washing various objects in the tabernacle and purifying them through the sprinkling of sacrificial blood. Bondage to Egypt. The very situation itself that led to the Exodus is a type of the children of God. Israel, the Lord's chosen people, was in bondage to an evil power. Note how Egypt, like Babylon, is used as a symbol of the world or spiritual wickedness. (See Rev. 11:8.) Also note how frequently sin is compared to bondage and how consistently Satan's power is acknowledged. (See, for example, Rom. 6:12; 7:15; 2 Ne. 1:18; 2:29; 28:22-23; Alma 12:11; 34:35.) Joshua. The person who led Israel into the promised land was Joshua, whose Hebrew name is Yehoshua or Yeshua. When Greek became the dominant language of the Middle East, the name Yehoshua was transliterated into Hee-ay-sous, which in English became Jesus. But Jesus' Hebrew name was Yehoshua or Joshua, which interestingly enough means "God is help" or "Jehovah saves." Notice that twice in the New Testament the name Jesus is used when the speaker obviously means Joshua. (See Acts 7:45; Heb. 4:8.) So "Jesus" led Israel into the promised land. Bruce R. McConkie, The Promised Messiah: The First Coming of Christ (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1978), 453.
[^2] Look for Christ in the symbols and imagery of the scriptures. The priest. The priest served as the official representative of the Lord, authorized to pronounce the leper clean and bring him back into full fellowship. As we have seen earlier, the priest was also a type of Christ. The lamb. On the tenth day of the month, a lamb was chosen and, in the evening of the fourteenth day, was sacrificed. (See Ex. 12:3-6.) The lamb's typology of Jesus Christ's sacrifice is obvious. The animal had to be a male without any defects or blemishes. Each household in Israel was to take such a lamb, signifying that the coming deliverance from the angel of death applied to every household of the covenant. The goats. Two goats were chosen by lot. One was designated as the goat of the Lord, and one was designated as the scapegoat or, in Hebrew, the goat of Azazel. The goat of Jehovah was offered as a sin offering, and the high priest took its blood into the Holy of Holies of the tabernacle and sprinkled it on the lid of the ark of the covenant (called the "mercy seat"), thus making atonement for the sins of Israel. The parting of the Red Sea. At the command of the Lord, Moses stretched out his hand and the Red Sea parted, making a way for the Israelites to pass through the water and escape destruction. (See Ex. 14:15-31.) The only way a person can escape spiritual death and the bondage of sin is to demonstrate faith in Christ to the point of true repentance so that he can be "buried" in the waters of baptism and be born again by being drawn forth from those waters. (See Rom. 6:1-6; John 3:3-5; Mosiah 27:24-25.) Put to death. Anyone who rebelled against the leadership of Joshua and refused to cross over Jordan was to "be put to death." (Josh. 1:18.) Anyone who refuses to follow Jesus into the celestial kingdom will suffer some degree of spiritual death. That is, he will be separated from the presence of God. Andrew Jukes, The Law of the Offerings (Grand Rapids: Kregel, 1976 reprint ed.), 14-15.
[^3] Let the nature of the object used as a symbol contribute to your understanding of its spiritual meaning. The birds. The birds used in the ritual of cleansing symbolized the candidate. Because two truths were to be taught, two birds were required. The first bird was killed by the shedding of its blood, signifying that the leper (the natural man) had to give up his life. The second bird, after being bound together with other symbols, was released, signifying that the man had been freed from the bondage of sin. Blood applied by the hyssop. Moses specified that each householder must place the blood on the door frame using the herb hyssop, a symbol of purification, as a brush or dauber. (See Ex. 12:22.) These instructions suggest two things: since the doorway to the home is the entry to be guarded if enemies are to be kept out, not only did the blood of the lamb keep out the angel of death (see Ex. 12:13), but the blood on the lintels and sideposts also overshadowed every entrance and exit of an individual—every thought, word, and action. Is this not related to the modern commandment that all of our ingoings and outgoings should be in the name of the Lord? (See D&C 109:17-18.) The temple. The rituals of the Day of Atonement took place in the tabernacle and later the temple and culminated when the high priest entered the most sacred room, the Holy of Holies, which was entered but once a year, on this day. The true tabernacle (or temple, or house of the Lord) in which the priest officiated is in heaven, and the earthly tabernacle made by Moses was a "shadow" or type of the "heavenly" one. (See Heb. 8:2-5; 9:1-9.) A pillar of fire and smoke. In the Exodus, the angel of God went before the Israelites in the form of a pillar of fire and smoke that overshadowed them by night and day. (See Ex. 13:20-22; 14:19.) Being baptized of water is not sufficient to save a person; he must also receive the Holy Ghost, whose influence and presence are symbolized, among other things, by fire and burning. (See, for example, Acts 2:3-4; D&C 9:8-9.) Receiving the Holy Ghost after baptism is likened to being baptized by fire. (See Matt. 3:11; 2 Ne. 31:17.) As part of their deliverance from the slavery of Egypt, the Israelites were saved both by passing through water and by being overshadowed by fire. Sanctifying oneself. Joshua called upon the people to sanctify themselves so they would be worthy to go into the promised land. (See Josh. 3:5.) One must be sanctified, or cleansed from sin, in order to enter a new life with God. Jukes, 44-45.
[^4] Seek the reality behind the symbol. One author used this interesting analogy about reality and representing reality through symbols: The cedar wood. The cedar wood, along with the living bird, a piece of wool, and a branch of hyssop, were dipped in the blood of the sacrificed bird. Cedar wood is still used today because of its ability to resist decay and corruption. It signified that, once the man had been freed from sin through sacrifice, he ought to preserve himself from spiritual corruption. The meal. The family would then roast the entire lamb and consume it with unleavened bread and bitter herbs. Anything left of the lamb (the inedible parts, such as bones, feet, and so on) were to be burned with fire. (See Ex. 12:10; see also Elder McConkie's statement later on the significance of fire.) As the Lamb of God gave himself wholly to be sacrificed for the sins of the world, so must the paschal lamb (from pesach, the Hebrew word for passover) be wholly consumed. When food is eaten, it goes into the body and literally becomes part of us, sustaining life and giving us strength. So with the atoning sacrifice of the Savior: it must be partaken of and absorbed entirely so as to provide spiritual life and strength. Manna. In the wilderness, the Israelites were sustained by the manna God sent forth, specifically called "bread from heaven." (Ex. 16:4.) In the great "Bread of Life" sermon, Jesus pointedly taught that he was "the living bread which came down from heaven" (John 6:51); and John the Revelator promised certain faithful Saints that they could eat of "hidden manna" (Rev. 2:17). The ark of the covenant entering the promised land. The ark of the covenant, which symbolized the presence of Jehovah, went before the camp of Israel and led the way into the new land. (See Josh. 3:11.) Like passing through the Red Sea, Israel again passed through the midst of the waters to enter the promised land. (See Josh. 3:15-17.) The Lord specifically connected the two events by asking that a memorial be built. (See Josh. 4:20-24.) The crossing of Israel into the new land was also done on the first day of passover (see Josh. 4:19; Ex. 12:2-3), again invoking the typology of deliverance from bondage and death. For a more detailed discussion of the typology of Old Testament sacrifices and ordinances, see Richard D. Draper, "Sacrifice and Offerings: An Ordinance Given by Jehovah to Reveal Himself as the Christ," in A Symposium on the Old Testament (Salt Lake City: Corporation of the President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1979), 71-78.
[^5] The scarlet wool. The word scarlet in Leviticus 14:4 really means a piece of wool dyed bright red, a reminder of blood, which is the symbol of life and also of atonement. (See Lev. 17:11.) Eating with haste. The feast was to be eaten hastily, with loins girded, shoes on the feet (which was contrary to normal custom), and staff in hand. (See Ex. 12:11.) The typology here is quite obvious: when the Lord delivers us from the bondage of sin, there must be no tarrying, no delay. Rebellion or obedience. In the wilderness, God provided Israel with his law and instructed Moses to build a tabernacle, or portable temple, so that the Lord could dwell in their midst. (See Ex. 19-31.) But rebellious Israel demanded that Aaron make them false gods to worship. (See Ex. 32.) For this and repeated rebellions, many Israelites were destroyed, a law of carnal commandments was given, and they were denied the full power of the priesthood. (See D&C 84:24-27.) Later, for further lack of faith, all adults but two were denied access to the promised land and made to wander in the wilderness for forty years. (See Num. 14:30.) Clearly, these events teach us that deliverance from the bondage of sin through baptism and receiving the Holy Ghost is not enough. We must maintain faith in the Lord and hearken to his commandments or lose the promised blessings. As Nephi taught, baptism is only the gate to the straight and narrow path, and we must "press forward with a steadfastness in Christ" if we are to achieve eternal life. (2 Ne. 31:17-20.) Circumcision reinstituted. Once they entered into the promised land, Joshua was commanded to perform the ordinance of circumcision among the Israelites. (See Josh. 5:2-7.) While wandering in the wilderness, this token of the Abrahamic covenant had not been performed. Now that they had sanctified themselves and followed Jesus (seen in the types of Joshua and the ark of the covenant) into the promised land, they were once again the true covenant people, so therefore the token was reinstituted. See D. Kelly Ogden, "A Sampler of Biblical Plants," Ensign, August 1990, pp. 37-38.
