Gerald N. Lund, Jesus Christ, Key to the Plan of Salvation (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1991)

Chapter 6

"Types of Things to Come" (Mosiah 13:31)

Many in the world and even some in the Church think that the Old Testament reflects a pregospel culture centered around the Mosaic covenant, which was given in place of the gospel laws. Certainly the Israelites, when they rejected the higher law, were given a lesser law. But note what the Lord said about that: "The lesser priesthood continued, which priesthood holdeth the key of the ministering of angels and the preparatory gospel; which gospel is the gospel of repentance and of baptism, and the remission of sins, and the law of carnal commandments." (D&C 84:26-27; italics added.)

They did not receive the fulness of the gospel, but they did receive a preparatory gospel, dealing with the basic principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ. As Paul taught the Galatian Saints, this was done so that they could be brought to Christ: "Wherefore the law was our schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified by faith. But after that faith is come, we are no longer under a schoolmaster." (Gal. 3:24-25.)

In short, the Old Testament is not pregospel but primary gospel; and we can expect that the Old Testament, especially in its types and symbols, will richly reflect that gospel, the gospel of preparation for faith in Christ. It can be a preparation of value to every person, including those who have access to, though possibly not complete understanding of, the fulness of the gospel. Therefore, as Elder Bruce R. McConkie suggests, "It is wholesome and proper to look for similitudes of Christ everywhere and to use them repeatedly in keeping him and his laws uppermost in our minds." [^1]

The question comes to mind, then, When is an act or object recorded in scripture to be taken literally and when should it be interpreted figuratively? Symbols can be taken too literally, and their true meaning lost in a grotesque parody of reality. On the other hand, sometimes one can explain away the actual meaning of a passage by saying it is only figurative. The following guidelines may be helpful as one tries to decide how to interpret correctly the symbols used in the Old Testament:

The most perfect representation of a steam-engine to a South-sea savage would be wholly and hopelessly unintelligible to him, simply because the reality, the outline of which was presented to him, was something hitherto unknown. But let the same drawing be shewn to those who have seen the reality, such will have no difficulty in explaining the representation. And the greater the acquaintance with the reality, the greater will be the ability to explain the picture. The savage who had never seen the steam-engine would of course know nothing whatever about it. Those who had seen an engine but know nothing of its principles, though they might tell the general object of the drawing, could not explain the details. But the engineer, to whom every screw and bolt are familiar, to whom the use and the object of each part is thoroughly known, would not only point out where each of these was to be found in the picture, but would shew what others might overlook, how in different engines these might be made to differ. [^2]

The reality behind the Old Testament is Jesus Christ and his teachings of salvation. The better we understand him, the more clearly we will see the meaning of the symbols.

The preliminary exploration of Old Testament types and symbols that follows deals with different kinds of ordinances, festivals, and historical events. Of course, space does not permit more than a sampling of the full range of symbols available in the Mosaic covenant.

Ordinances

Sacrifices and Offerings. Sacrifices and offerings represent the very center of the Mosaic law. Though they varied in the manner of offering, the requirements, the item offered, and the time of offering, all of the sacrifices and offerings had three general things in common: an offerer, the offering, and the priesthood. Adam was taught that the law of sacrifice was instituted as "a similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father." (Moses 5:7.) The similitude of Christ's sacrifice carries through all three aspects. One author explained the typology of all three aspects in this manner:

What, then, is the offering? what the priest? what the offerer? Christ is the offering, Christ is the priest, Christ is the offerer. Such and so manifold are the relations in which Christ has stood for man and to man, that no one type or set of types can adequately represent the fulness of them. . . . As man under the law, our substitute, Christ stood for us towards God as offerer. . . . Thus His body was His offering: he willingly offered it; and then as priest He took the blood into the holiest. As offerer, we see Him man under the law, standing our substitute, for us to fulfil all righteousness. As priest, we have Him presented as the mediator, God's messenger between Himself and Israel. While as the offering He is seen the innocent victim, a sweet savour to God, yet bearing the sin and dying for it. [^3]

Nephi taught that we are to follow the example of the Son of God. (See 2 Ne. 31:10, 12-13, 16.) Jesus asked, "What manner of men ought ye to be?" and then answered his own question by saying, "Even as I am." (3 Ne. 27:27.) If Christ becomes our model for living, then in the three aspects of the law of the offerings, we too should be typified. In other words, just as all three objects and persons involved in the sacrifices were types of him, they should also serve as types of us.

Thus, the offering becomes a type or symbol of our lives, our acts, our works, our very being—our all—offered to God on the altar so that it becomes a sweet-smelling savor to him. The Saints are to become "kings and priests" (Rev. 1:6), or as Peter said, "a royal priesthood" (1 Pet. 2:9). Further, like Jesus they are to become the saviors of men by sharing with others the principles of his teachings and sacrifice. (See D&C 103:9-10.) In this manner they are typified by the priest. The offerer also typifies us as well as Christ, for, like him, we must willingly yield ourselves to come into the proper relationship with God. [^4]

Circumcision. Abraham was specifically commanded by the Lord to institute circumcision upon himself and all the males of his household as a token of the covenant made with God. (See Gen. 17:9-14.) In the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible of this passage, we learn that circumcision was instituted as a token of the covenant; but the token was given because the people were in a state of apostasy, had lost sight of the true meaning of the ordinance of baptism, and were washing their children and sprinkling them with blood so that they would be free from sin. Circumcision reminded the people that, while children were born in the covenant, they were not to be held accountable until they reached eight years of age. (See JST Gen. 17:4-11.)

Other scriptures provide additional clarification that it was not circumcision itself but what it stood for that gave it its greatest significance. In many places the Lord speaks of true circumcision as being circumcision of the heart or, in other words, loving God and being obedient to the Spirit. The "uncircumcised of heart" are the wicked, proud, and rebellious. (See Deut. 10:16; 30:6; Jer. 4:4; Ezek. 44:7; Acts 7:51; Rom. 2:25-29; Col. 2:11.) Though a person may be circumcised in the flesh, unless he is righteous the covenant is invalidated, and the circumcision becomes profitless. Thus, circumcision was only a sign or token of what needed to happen to the inward man. If the inward change had not taken place, then circumcision was virtually meaningless. Following the atonement of Christ, the token of circumcision was no longer required of God's covenant people since baptism, the symbol of Christ's own death and resurrection, replaced it. (See Jer. 9:25-26; Acts 15:22-29; 1 Cor. 7:19; Gal. 5:1-6; 6:12-15; Philip. 3:3-4.)

The Abrahamic covenant makes frequent reference to one's seed. (See, for example, Genesis 17:6-12.) The organ of the male body that produces seed and helps bring about physical birth is the very part of the body that bears the token of the covenant. However, the organ of spiritual rebirth is the heart. (See 3 Ne. 9:20.) Thus, when a person was circumcised it signified that he, like a child, was born into the covenant but need not be baptized until he became accountable before the Lord. But spiritual circumcision, or the circumcision of the heart, must take place once one becomes accountable; otherwise, one is not considered as truly belonging to Israel. As Paul said so aptly, "For he is not a Jew, which is one outwardly; neither is that circumcision, which is outward in the flesh: but he is a Jew, which is one inwardly; and circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter; whose praise is not of men, but of God." (Rom. 2:28-29.)

Cleansing of the Leper. In Leviticus 14 we have a detailed description of the ritual that was to take place when a person's leprosy had been healed. Because of the nature of the ritual, many people have seen it as a primitive, superstitious, and abhorrent rite, which demonstrates that the Israelites were scarcely more than barbaric. However, when we apply our guidelines for interpreting symbols, we find that the ritual is a beautiful representation of gospel truths. This case is worth examining in some detail in its twelve major features:

Feasts and Festivals

Special holidays and festivals were a common part of everyday life during biblical times, and many of them were mandated by the Mosaic law. Thus, unlike modern times, most of the feasts and festivals had religious significance and were an inseparable part of worship.

The Sabbath. Certainly the most frequent festival among the Hebrews was the weekly day of rest, instituted in similitude of what God had done during the creation of the earth when, we are told, the Lord sanctified the Sabbath and rested. (See Gen. 2:2-3.)

In Exodus 31:13 the Lord revealed the basic key to understanding the significance of the Sabbath: "Verily my sabbaths ye shall keep: for it is a sign between me and you throughout your generations; that ye may know that I am the Lord that doth sanctify you." (Italics added.) In other words, the Sabbath is the day that man ceases his labors so that God can work his own work—the work of sanctification—on man. The requirement of a sabbatical year, that the land be left untilled, required man to exercise tremendous faith in God's ability to sustain his people both temporally and spiritually. (See Lev. 25:1-7, 18-22.) The promises of abundance and closeness to the Lord for those who keep the Sabbath are beautifully outlined by Isaiah and in modern revelation. (See Isa. 58:13-14; D&C 59:9-24.)

The Feast of the Passover. Passover (which included the Feast of Unleavened Bread) was one of the festivals that most clearly offered typologies of Christ and his atoning sacrifice. It commemorated the night when Jehovah delivered Israel from bondage in Egypt. The actual events of that night of deliverance are recalled during the Feast of the Passover by the meal and the ritual the family performs before the meal.

In spite of the great power demonstrated by Moses, again and again Pharaoh had hardened his heart and refused to let Israel go. Finally, in the spring, the time when all nature seems to be coming to life again, the Lord revealed to Moses the final steps they must take to be delivered from bondage. This remarkable event involved numerous items, all of which have typological significance, especially when one remembers that Israel's state of slavery was itself a type of our bondage to sin and Satan.

The Jews saw the bitter herbs as a reminder of the bitterness of their bondage in Egypt. The unleavened bread has its own significance. Leaven, or yeast, is a symbol of corruption because of its tendency to spoil. Christ warned the disciples about the leaven of the Pharisees and the Sadducees, defining it as their false teachings and their hypocrisy. (See Matt. 16:6-12; Mark 8:15; Luke 12:1.) Following the actual Passover, the Israelites were commanded to observe the Feast of the Unleavened Bread, not only abstaining from any leaven for seven days, but also purging it out of their houses. (See Ex. 12:18-19.) Knowing that leaven is a type or symbol of corruption helps us see the beauty of this requirement. After deliverance from death and bondage by the blood of the Lamb, we are to purge all wickedness, pride, and hypocrisy from our lives. Paul also drew on the typology of leaven to teach about Christ. (See 1 Cor. 5:7-8.)

At midnight the angel of death smote all the first born of the land but "passed over" the houses of the children of Israel marked by the blood of the lamb. (See Ex. 12:29.) Our deliverance from the angel of spiritual death comes only when we have partaken of the "flesh and blood" of the Lamb of God and have metaphorically placed his blood on the doorposts of our lives so that it overshadows all we do. We note also that Pharaoh (a type of Satan) absolutely refused to let Israel go free. The only thing that changed his mind was the death of the firstborn son. (See Ex. 12:30-32.)

The Feast of Weeks. On the fiftieth day after Passover (a period of seven weeks of seven days, or a sabbath of weeks) a second major festival was held, though it lasted only one day. Christians are more familiar with this feast by its Greek title, Pentecost, which means "fiftieth." Elder McConkie explains in detail its important typology:

The Lord chose the Pentecost, which grew out of the final Passover, as the occasion to dramatize forever the fulfillment of all that was involved in the sacrificial fires of the past. Fire is a cleansing agent. Filth and disease die in its flames. The baptism of fire, which John promised Christ would bring, means that when men receive the actual companionship of the Holy Spirit, then evil and iniquity are burned out of their souls as though by fire. The sanctifying power of that member of the Godhead makes them clean. In similar imagery, all the fires on all the altars of the past, as they burned the flesh of animals, were signifying that spiritual purification would come by the Holy Ghost, whom the Father would send because of the Son. On the first Pentecost of the so-called Christian Era such fires would have performed their purifying symbolism if the old order had still prevailed. How fitting it was instead for the Lord to choose that very day to send living fire from heaven, as it were, fire that would dwell in the hearts of men and replace forever all the fires on all the altars of the past. And so it was that "when the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all with one accord in one place. And suddenly there came a sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they were sitting. And there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them. And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost." (Acts 2:1-4.) [^7]

The Day of Atonement. The most sacred and solemn of all Israelite festivals was the Day of Atonement, which took place each autumn. In it, the typology or symbolism of Christ's work for Israel fairly shines. A day of national fasting, it signified that the sins of Israel had been atoned for and that the nation and its people were restored to fellowship with God. The feast included the following major items as detailed in Leviticus 16:

The high priest put off the official robes he normally wore and clothed himself in simple, white linen garments, signifying "the righteousness of saints." (Rev. 19:8.) The apostle Paul in the book of Hebrews drew heavily on the typology of the Day of Atonement to teach the mission of Christ. In that epistle he pointed out that Christ is the great "High Priest" who, unlike the high priest of the Aaronic Priesthood, was holy and without spot and did not need to make atonement for his own sins before he could be worthy to officiate for Israel and enter the Holy of Holies. (See Heb. 3:1; 7:26-27.) His perfect life was the ultimate fulfillment of the symbol of wearing white garments.

The other goat, Azazel, was brought before the high priest, who laid his hands upon its head and symbolically transferred all of the sins of Israel to it. Then it was taken out into the wilderness and released where it would never be seen again. Commentators explain the significance of Azazel by saying that it represented "the devil himself, the head of the fallen angels, who was afterwards called Satan; for no subordinate evil spirit could have been placed in antithesis to Jehovah . . . , but only the ruler or head of the kingdom of demons." [^8]

Christ, as the lamb of Jehovah as well as High Priest, shed his own blood to enter the heavenly Holy of Holies where that blood ransomed from their sins those who would believe in him and obey his commandments. (See Heb. 9:11-14, 24-28; 10:11-22; D&C 45:3-5.)

The Feast of Tabernacles. The third of the national feasts requiring the attendance of all males was the Feast of Tabernacles (Hebrew Sukkoth), which took place five days after the Day of Atonement. It was a celebration of the completion of the harvest and was a time of great joy and thanksgiving. During the week of the festival, Israel was required to live in homemade tabernacles rather than in their homes, a reminder that they had dwelt in tents or tabernacles (King James translation uses the word booth) when the Lord brought them out of Egypt. (See Lev. 23:42-43.)

Elder McConkie points out that this will be the only Mosaic feast reinstituted in this gospel dispensation:

In the full sense, it is the Feast of Jehovah, the one Mosaic celebration which, as part of the restitution of all things, shall be restored when Jehovah comes to reign personally upon the earth for a thousand years. Even now we perform one of its chief rituals in our solemn assemblies, the giving of the Hosanna Shout, and the worshipers of Jehovah shall yet be privileged to exult in other of its sacred rituals. . . . The fact that it celebrated the completion of the full harvest symbolizes the gospel reality that it is the mission of the house of Israel to gather all nations to Jehovah, a process that is now going forward, but will not be completed until that millennial day when "the Lord shall be king over all the earth," and shall reign personally thereon. [^9]

Actual Historical Events

Nephi taught that "all things which have been given of God from the beginning of the world, unto man, are the typifying of [Christ]." (2 Ne. 11:4.) One cannot read far into the Old Testament without discovering that Nephi's phrase "all things" even includes actual historical events. We know that God raises up men for special purposes and uses nations to bring about his will. He calls Assyria "the rod of mine anger" (Isa. 10:5-7), Cyrus of Persia the "anointed" of the Lord (Isa. 45:1), and Nebuchadnezzar's kingdom a gift from "the God of heaven" (Dan. 2:37). But many people do not look beyond that kind of direct intervention in historical events to see that the Lord may also influence events in such a way that they take on symbolic significance. This does not, of course, suggest that the events did not happen as described. Rather, it means that in the reality of the events we also find the Lord's hand at work, giving history symbolical as well as historical significance.

The Testing Abraham. Most people immediately see in Abraham's test the symbolism of the divine Father offering his only Son, but many miss the precision of detail that God used to show what he himself would have to do in the future with his own Son. Abraham, for instance, was obviously a type or similitude of the Father. Interestingly enough, his name Abram means "exalted father," and Abraham means "father of a great multitude." (Gen. 17:5.)

Isaac was a type of the Son of God. (See Jacob 4:5.) Note that, like Jesus, he was the product of a miraculous birth. Though not the literal son of God, like Jesus, Isaac was conceived through the intervention of God. Paul called Isaac "his [Abraham's] only begotten son" when he referred to this event. (Heb. 11:17.)

Not only did the Lord ask Abraham to perform the act that would mirror the Redeemer's own future actions, but he also designated a specific place, Moriah—"upon one of the mountains which I will tell thee of." (Gen. 22:2.) Mount Moriah today is one of the three major hills or mounts of Jerusalem. The traditional site where Abraham offered Isaac is one occupied today by the Dome of the Rock, a beautiful Arab mosque. A few hundred yards to the north on that same ridge is another world-famous site known as Gordon's Calvary. Its Hebrew name was Golgotha. The specific location further strengthens the symbolism and emphasizes the similarities between the two sacrifices. In other words, not only did Abraham offer Isaac in similitude of the Father's sacrifice of his own Son, but also he did it in the very place where the later sacrifice would occur.

When they arrived at Moriah, the Genesis account says that Abraham "took the wood of the burnt offering, and laid it upon Isaac his son." (Gen. 22:6.) The Joseph Smith Translation is even more specific: "laid it upon his back." (JST Gen. 22:7.) Some have seen here a similarity to Christ's carrying of the cross upon his shoulders on the way to the crucifixion. [^10] Note also that both Christ and Isaac were "bound." (Gen. 22:9; Matt. 27:2.)

One important aspect often overlooked is Isaac's voluntary submission to Abraham. The Old Testament does not give us enough detail to determine exactly how old Isaac was at the time of this event, but it is very likely that he was an adult, since, immediately following the account of the sacrifice on Mount Moriah, we are told that Sarah died at the age of 127. (See Gen. 23:1.) That would have made Isaac thirty-seven at the time of her death. Even if this journey to Moriah had happened several years before her death, Isaac would have been in his thirties. But the exact age is not really important. What is significant is that Abraham was well over a hundred years old, and Isaac, almost certainly no child, could have put up a fierce resistance had he chosen to do so. Instead, he submitted willingly to his father, as the Savior willingly did to his Father.

Once the intended sacrifice had been accepted, Abraham named the place Jehovah-jireh, which the King James Version translates as "in the mount of the Lord it shall be seen." (Gen. 22:14.) Adam Clarke, citing other scholars, says the proper translation should be "on this mount the Lord shall be seen." Clarke then concludes:

From this it appears, that the sacrifice offered by Abraham was understood to be a representative one, and a tradition was kept up, that Jehovah should be seen in a sacrificial way on this mount. And this renders . . . more than probably . . . that Abraham offered Isaac on that very mountain, on which, in the fulness of time, Jesus suffered. [^11]

Two other scholars, C. F. Keil and F. Delitzsch, not only note the significance of the site for the sacrifice of Jesus himself, but also point out that it relates to the site of Solomon's temple: "The place of sacrifice points with peculiar clearness [to] Mount Moriah, upon which under the legal economy all the typical sacrifices were offered to Jehovah; . . . that by this one true sacrifice the shadows of the typical sacrifices might be rendered both real and true." [^12]

The Exodus. In addition to the Passover, the events of Israel's deliverance from Egypt and its eventual return to the promised land contain many great and significant types and similitudes. The Lord can influence history so that the events themselves take on the nature of a similitude and provide us with important symbols and types. Note the following events which became part of the Exodus experience:

Paul synthesized the events of the Exodus when he said, "Moreover, brethren, I would not that ye should be ignorant, how that all our fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the sea; and were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea; and did all eat the same spiritual meat; and did all drink the same spiritual drink: for they drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them: and that Rock was Christ." (1 Cor. 10:1-4; italics added.)

Entry into the Promised Land. The period when the children of Israel crossed over Jordan and entered the promised land is also full of typology. Obviously, the ultimate promise is the celestial kingdom, but one also enters a new land (or life) when he is born again through baptism. (See Alma 37:45.) With that in mind, notice the following interesting items associated with that event:

Thus we see that both the Exodus, including the Passover, and the entry into Canaan have great typological significance. In actuality the whole exodus from slavery to entry into the promised land provides a type or similitude of what must happen to each individual if he is to "[put] off the natural man and [become] a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord." (Mosiah 3:19.)

One does not go to a great museum like the Smithsonian in Washington, D. C., and fully explore its treasures in an hour or two. Similarly, one does not exhaust the typology of the Old Testament in so brief a presentation as this. Seeing how the Old Testament points to and anticipates Jesus Christ requires a lifetime of exploration and pondering. The Lord revealed to what extent he has filled the treasure house when he said, "All things have their likeness, and all things are created and made to bear record of me, both things which are temporal, and things which are spiritual; things which are in the heavens above, and things which are on the earth, and things which are in the earth, and things which are under the earth, both above and beneath: all things bear record of me." (Moses 6:63; italics added.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The Lord (1 Ne. 1:1) He who is the Prince of Life (Acts 3:15) and the source of all life (D&C 88:13) was born in the spring (D&C 20:1), when all life is renewed.
[^2] The Lord of Hosts (2 Ne. 8:15) He who is the New David (Jer. 23:5-6) and the Root of David (Rev. 5:5) was born in Bethlehem, which was the city of David (Luke 2:4).
[^3] The Lamb (John 1:29) He who is the Lion of the Tribe of Judah (Rev. 5:5) was born in Judea (Luke 2:4), ancestral homeland of the tribe of Judah.
[^4] The Light (John 1:7, 8) He who is the Bread of Life (John 6:48) was born in the city of Bethlehem (Luke 2:4), which in Hebrew means "the house of bread."
[^7] The Advocate (D&C 45:3-5) He who is the Good Shepherd (John 10:14) had his birth first announced to shepherds in the fields (Luke 2:8).
[^8] The Governor (Matt. 2:6) He who took upon himself the form of a Servant (Philip. 2:7) was born into the humblest of circumstances (Luke 2:7).
[^9] The King (Matt. 27:42) At the birth of him who is the Light of the World (John 8:12), darkness was banished as a sign of his birth (3 Ne. 1:15, 19).
[^10] The King of Glory (Ps. 24:7-8) At the birth of the Bright and Morning Star (Rev. 22:16), a new star appeared as a sign of his birth (Matt. 2:2, 9; 3 Ne. 1:21).
[^11] The Great Creator (2 Ne. 9:5-6) At the birth of the Savior (Acts 13:23), those who were facing death because they believed on his name, were saved (3 Ne. 1:4-18).
[^12] God with Us (Matt. 1:23) He who is called the King of Kings (Rev. 19:16) and the Governor that shall rule Israel (Matt. 2:6) was greeted by visiting magi and given gifts as though he were a king (Matt. 2:11).
