Gerald N. Lund, Jesus Christ, Key to the Plan of Salvation (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1991)

Chapter 7

"His Name Shall Be Called . . ." (Isaiah 9:6)

After Israel had been captive in Egypt for four hundred years, Jehovah called to Moses out of the burning bush and commanded him to deliver the children of Israel. Moses asked an intriguing question of the Lord: "When I come unto the children of Israel, and shall say unto them, The God of your fathers hath sent me unto you; and they shall say to me, What is his name? what shall I say unto them?" (Ex. 3:13.)

Perhaps after such long exposure to the idolatry and ways of the Egyptians, and after encountering the dozens of foreign gods of the cultures Egypt traded with, the memory of the true god and his name had become dim. Whatever the reason, when Moses mentioned the name of God, the Israelites would know that Moses did not represent one of the many gods they had heard of. In fact, the name of God would become a memorial to all generations that followed: "God said unto Moses, I AM THAT I AM: and he said, Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, I AM hath sent me unto you. . . . The Lord God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, hath sent me unto you: this is my name for ever, and this is my memorial unto all generations." (Ex. 3:14-15.)

The Bible, indeed, is consistent in using the names of God to identify God to the people and to bring him and some aspect of his godhood to remembrance. In his marvelous prophecy of the future Messiah, Isaiah was not content to just declare that he would be born, but he also told us what his name would be: "His name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty God, the everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace." (Isa. 9:6.) By these names, we would recognize the Messiah and know his greatness. Following are some of the names by which we should know Jesus Christ. Each reminds us of a facet of the godhood Jesus Possesses:

Symbolic Titles of Jesus Christ

Symbolic Titles Associated with the Events of the Savior's Birth
