Gerald N. Lund, Jesus Christ, Key to the Plan of Salvation (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1991)

Chapter 9

"Even So Ye Must Be Born Again" (Moses 6:59)

The scriptures often refer to "the doctrine of Christ" (2 Ne. 31:21), which the Savior clearly defined as follows: "The Father commandeth all men, everywhere, to repent and believe in me. And whoso believeth in me, and is baptized, the same shall be saved; and they are they who shall inherit the kingdom of God. And whoso believeth not in me, and is not baptized, shall be damned. Verily, verily, I say unto you, that this is my doctrine." (3 Ne. 11:32-35; italics added.)

The doctrine of Christ is taught in many places in the scriptures (see, for example, 2 Ne. 31:11-21; 32:1-6; 3 Ne. 11:31-40; D&C 10:63-69), but perhaps nowhere was it more fully and clearly taught than in the very beginning to Father Adam. In Moses 6:48-62, this fuller account ties the first principles and ordinances to the fall of Adam and the atoning sacrifice. In other words, it contains a full discussion of the Father's plan. This is why the closing verse clearly states: "And now, behold, I say unto you: This is the plan of salvation unto all men." (V. 62; italics added.)

The flow chart on pages 108-9 is an attempt to help you better conceptualize what is taught in those verses in the book of Moses. Without a careful prereading and constant referral back to the scriptural passages, the chart will not be fully understood. Additional references that help clarify the doctrine are given below some of the boxes on the chart.

It is important to remember that the scriptures, not the chart, contain the reality of these saving truths. The chart is only an instructional device to help you conceptualize those saving truths and doctrines. Only as you immerse yourself in the scriptural sources—carefully, thoughtfully, and prayerfully—will the chart become a meaningful instructional experience.

The analogy of rebirth needs a brief explanation. In Moses 6:59, the Lord indicates that we are born into this world through water, blood, and spirit. In other words, three elements are essential to our birth into mortality. For the first nine months of life, the unborn fetus is totally immersed in the amniotic fluid in the uterus. This watery environment protects the child and allows it to move freely inside the mother. When the "water breaks," the mother knows that birth is imminent. So water is the first essential element.

Blood is the second. The circulatory system develops early in the unborn child. Blood becomes the life-giving and life-sustaining fluid in the tiny new body. Blood has three primary functions: It brings oxygen and food to all parts of the body, it carries carbon dioxide and waste products away, and it protects and fights against infection and disease through the white blood cells.

The third element of our physical birth is the spirit. We are not told exactly when the spirit enters the body, but if the spirit is not present at birth, there will be no life. (See Alma 40:11; D&C 93:33-34.) Such a baby would be called a "stillborn" child.

The Lord, in simple but significant imagery, likens our spiritual rebirth to our birth into mortality. As it was with our first birth, so it is when we are "born again." Water, blood, and Spirit are again essential. In the water of the baptismal font, we are again totally immersed in a watery environment. In other words, the baptismal font is not only a symbol of the grave, where we bury the old sinful man, but also a symbol of the womb where the newborn spiritual person is given life. The atoning blood of Christ is also required, and like the blood in our bodies, the atoning blood nourishes, cleanses, and protects us from spiritual infection. And finally, the source of life for the reborn spiritual man is the Holy Spirit. If it were not so, the newborn spiritual man would be "stillborn."

One other thought: Does not this concept of rebirth give a wider and deeper dimension to the commandment that we "become as a little child" (3 Ne. 11:37-38; see also Mosiah 3:19) if we are to overcome the natural man and become "the children of Christ, his sons, and his daughters" (Mosiah 5:7)? This is the profound and beautiful imagery of being born again through the water, blood, and Spirit.

Footnotes
