Gerald N. Lund, Jesus Christ, Key to the Plan of Salvation (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1991)

Chapter 10

"Ye Are Still Indebted unto Him" (Mosiah 2:24)

In preparing to write about divine indebtedness and the atonement of Jesus Christ, I reread the magnificent closing sermon of the great and righteous King Benjamin. I pored over it, looking for relationships, outlining the major concepts, and watching for patterns in King Benjamin's thinking. Because of that experience, I have decided to follow a similar approach in this chapter. I intend to examine the message of the king, look at its antecedents, outline its structure, note relationships within that structure, watch for patterns in the words and phrases he chose to use, and explore some of the implications for us today of what he taught. I wish to let this great sermon speak for itself on the relationship between our debt to God and the atoning sacrifice of our Savior.

A Righteous King Bids Farewell to His People

In order to understand the full impact of King Benjamin's address, we must examine the setting that drew it forth. Mormon, writing some four centuries later, informed us about King Benjamin and the circumstances that led to his last great sermon. (See W of M 1:12-18; Mosiah 1:1-2:8.) Benjamin did not inherit a comfortable situation when he became the king of the Nephite peoples. It was a time of war, with armies of the Lamanites coming down against the Nephites. King Benjamin led his people in battle, wielding the sword of Laban with his own hand. Thousands were killed, and eventually the Lamanites were driven out of the land. (See W of M 1:13-14.)

But the external threat to the Nephite society was not the only problem. During the kingship before Benjamin's reign, the Nephites had incorporated the Mulekite people, whose language was different and whose knowledge of Jehovah and the Mosaic law had been corrupted. Teaching them a new language and a new religion and having that settle in would have been difficult and time-consuming. (See Omni 1:14-19.) Mormon said that, besides the wars with the Lamanites, there were "contentions among his [Benjamin's] own people." Mormon also explained that there were "false Christs," "false prophets," and "false preachers and teachers" among the people. "Many dissensions" also arose, and the people were described as stiffnecked. (W of M 1:12, 15-17.)

This was the society over which Benjamin ruled, and these were the people he led. Benjamin, however, was not content with that state of affairs. With the assistance of holy prophets, whom he sustained, and through his own personal righteousness, King Benjamin brought a complete turn-around among his people. In two sweeping sentences, Mormon summarized Benjamin's greatness: "King Benjamin, by laboring with all the might of his body and the faculty of his whole soul, . . . did once more establish peace in the land." (W of M 1:18.) "Now there was no more contention in all the land of Zarahemla, among all the people who belonged to king Benjamin, so that king Benjamin had continual peace all the remainder of his days." (Mosiah 1:1.) By "peace," Mormon almost certainly meant here far more than the mere absence of war.

Mormon did not tell us how many years King Benjamin's reign lasted, though it seems to have been a lengthy one (see, for example, Mosiah 2:12, 16, 19), but oh what a reign it must have been! When the people learned that the king was turning the kingdom over to his son, when they heard that this would be the last speech of their beloved king, a vast crowd gathered, as Mormon explained, to

give thanks to the Lord their God, who had brought them out of the land of Jerusalem, and who had delivered them out of the hands of their enemies, and had appointed just men to be their teachers, and also a just man to be their king, who had established peace in the land of Zarahemla, and who had taught them to keep the commandments of God, that they might rejoice and be filled with love towards God and all men. (Mosiah 2:4.)

There must have been a tremendous outpouring of love and gratitude toward the king. Even Benjamin seemed unprepared for the huge multitudes that responded to the proclamation to come and hear their king. When the multitude spilled out beyond the temple courtyard, a tower was built. But even that was not sufficient, and Benjamin had to have his words written and sent to those who could not hear his voice. (See Mosiah 2:7-8.)

Surely as the throngs came, Benjamin would have been inundated with people seeking to thank him for all that he had done. He must have had a constant stream of people grasping his hand, saying, "Thank you for what you are. Thank you for what you've done for us." Praise and thanks for his goodness and greatness must have rained upon him like a tropical downpour.

Many men might be tempted in the face of such praise to say in their hearts, "Yes, you are right. I have done well." But Benjamin would have none of that. He would not let the credit and praise rest with him. He epitomized the counsel of the apostle Paul to every man "not to think of himself more highly than he ought to think." (Rom. 12:3.) To God went the glory. These were his opening thoughts as he spoke to his people:

I have not commanded you to come up hither that ye should fear me, or that ye should think that I of myself am more than a mortal man. But I am like as yourselves, subject to all manner of infirmities in body and mind; yet I have been chosen by this people, and consecrated by my father, and was suffered by the hand of the Lord that I should be a ruler and a king over this people; and have been kept and preserved by his matchless power, to serve you with all the might, mind and strength which the Lord hath granted unto me. (Mosiah 2:10-11.)

Benjamin also undoubtedly felt an urgency to deliver a special message, one of great hope and deliverance that an angel had declared to him. The message, he stated, was another reason he had called his people together. Benjamin described this experience thus:

The things which I shall tell you are made known unto me by an angel from God. And he said unto me: Awake; and I awoke, and behold he stood before me. And he said unto me: . . . I am come to declare unto you the glad tidings of great joy. For the Lord hath heard thy prayers, and hath judged of thy righteousness, and hath sent me to declare unto thee that thou mayest rejoice; and that thou mayest declare unto thy people, that they may also be filled with joy. (Mosiah 3:2-4.)

This, then, is the context from which we must examine King Benjamin's last address to his people, asking ourselves why he would choose a theme of indebtedness to God.

Our Indebtedness to Our Heavenly King (Mosiah 2:18-26)

King Benjamin first gave what might be termed a brief "stewardship report" to the people whom he had served. And what a report that was! We learn that King Benjamin was a man of honor and justice. He had not suffered his people to be placed in prisons or to practice slavery. He had not allowed crime or any kind of wickedness. He had labored with his own hands so as not to lay burdensome taxes on his people, and he had not sought to enrich himself by taking from the people. (See Mosiah 2:12-14.)

How his people must have loved him! Peace, security, honesty, justice, prosperity, righteousness—these were the legacies that he left for them. The long and melancholy history of monarchies clearly testifies how few kings there have been who could give such a stewardship report as this at the end of their earthly reign.

Hastily, lest he be misunderstood, the king noted that this report was not an attempt to boast of his accomplishments, but only an acknowledgment that his service to his people had merely been an extension of his desire to serve God. (See Mosiah 2:16.) Then, in what is surely one of the finest, most beautiful, and most succinct lessons on Christian service ever given, he stated the pivotal lesson of his own righteous life. If ye would learn anything from me, he said, learn this one lesson: "When ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are only in the service of your God." (Mosiah 2:17.)

King Benjamin's stewardship report and the resulting lesson on service led him naturally to the concept of divine indebtedness. He had already noted that any success he had enjoyed came only through the grace and sustaining power of God. So their praise of him was misdirected. "If I, whom ye call your king," he pointed out, "do merit any thanks from you, O how you ought to thank your heavenly King!" (Mosiah 2:19.) This provided the basis for King Benjamin's concept of divine indebtedness. It is a lesson as applicable today as when given to the Nephites gathered in their tents in the Land of Zarahemla.

A careful look at Mosiah 2:20-25 reveals the structure of King Benjamin's primary thoughts about our indebtedness to God. It would go something like this capsulized into outline form:

I. OUR INDEBTEDNESS TO GOD. (Mosiah 2:20-25.)

A. God has done the following for Benjamin's people (v. 20):

B. He continues to:

C. So even if they should:

D. they would still be unprofitable servants.

E. But all he requires in return is to keep his commandments. (V. 22.)

F. If they do, he immediately blesses them. (V. 24.)

G. Conclusions.

a. he created us and grants us life. (V. 23.)

b. when we keep his commandments, he blesses us more, which only increases our indebtedness. (V. 24.)

Our Gratitude for Creation

King Benjamin initially stressed one aspect of God's graciousness, that God is responsible for our creation. By this, Benjamin seemed to have meant not just the making of our own bodies, but the whole of creation—the heavens, the earth, and all that in them are. That simple fact alone should be basis enough for our unending gratitude. When a man creates something through his own labor—a work of art, a building, a piece of furniture, great music—we say that it is his. In other words, we recognize that he has claim upon it, that he has stewardship over it, that he has the right to do with it as he wishes.

By that same principle, we should acknowledge that, because all that we see and know comes from the labor of God's hands, it is his. Therefore, whatever we have, or take, or use, or enjoy puts us automatically in his debt. In a revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith, the Lord clearly stated that this is indeed the case: "For it is expedient that I, the Lord, should make every man accountable, as a steward over earthly blessings, which I have made and prepared for my creatures. I, the Lord, stretched out the heavens, and built the earth, my very handiwork; and all things therein are mine." (D&C 104:13-14; italics added.) Note the possessive phrases used in those verses: "which I have made," "my very handiwork," "all things therein are mine." As the Psalmist said, "The earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof; the world, and they that dwell therein." (Ps. 24:1.)

Think for a moment how that simple concept would alter people's thinking if they would really accept it. We clutch things to our bosom and say, "These are mine." Individuals rob, cheat, and steal, or they manipulate and maneuver so they may be able to claim things as their own. Figuratively, the rich sit on their velvet thrones, drinking from golden goblets, and ignore the desperate sufferings of the poor because they think that what they have received belongs solely to them. Nations go to war over lands that they did nothing to create.

If we truly believed that God was the owner of all things, that man was only a user and a borrower, our approach to life would alter drastically. A classic illustration of that principle was the man Job. After facing devastating losses of family, property, and health, he stated simply: "Naked came I out of my mother's womb, and naked shall I return thither: the Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away; blessed be the name of the Lord." (Job 1:21.) Henry B. Eyring spoke of this natural human tendency to forget all that God has done for us: "We so easily forget that we came into life with nothing. Whatever we get soon seems our natural right, not a gift. And we forget the giver. Then our gaze shifts from what we have been given to what we don't have yet. . . . The remembrance urged upon us by King Benjamin can be ours. Remembrance is the seed of gratitude." [^1]

Because some miracles are so commonly seen, we accept them as commonplace—an infant's birth, the coming of spring, the glory of a forested mountain range, the silent and undirected healing process within the human body, the never-ending procession of glorious sunrises and sunsets, the infinite variety and minute beauty of something so simple as snowflakes showering upon the earth in countless billions.

Those who try to duplicate nature in the laboratory still feel awestruck when they compare their own marvelous inventions with those of nature itself. In a National Geographic article on the recent development of new high-tech materials, Thomas Canby discussed such mind-boggling advances as ceramic ball bearings so tough that they leave dimples on an anvil when hammered by a blacksmith, but they do not break; a metal that actually hardens as its temperature rises; cement sheets thin and light enough that they are used in hangglider fabric; plastics so flexible that they can be stretched as much as a thousand percent and grow stronger in the process! After quoting a scientist who said that his goal was to develop materials that respond as nature does, the author concludes: "[Their goal is to be] like nature. For materials scientists, the perfection of a tree, a bone, a spiderweb remain a distant goal." [^2]

Numerous passages in scripture clearly state our obligations of feeling gratitude and giving thanks to God for all he has given. In language similar to that of the Ten Commandments (Thou shalt not steal, thou shalt honor thy parents, and so on), the Lord says: "Thou shalt thank the Lord thy God in all things." (D&C 59:7.) A few verses later, he said, "In nothing doth man offend God, or against none is his wrath kindled, save those who confess not his hand in all things, and obey not his commandments." (D&C 59:21.)

In March of 1832, the Lord tied thankfulness to both spiritual and temporal results when he said: "He who receiveth all things with thankfulness shall be made glorious; and the things of this earth shall be added unto him, even an hundred fold, yea, more." (D&C 78:19.) When we consider the richness of creation, God's inestimable abundance given freely to man, his power that sustains life, and the continual outpouring of those blessings when we are obedient, we ought to have no difficulty understanding why King Benjamin chose the word indebtedness to describe our state.

Unprofitable Servants

Now we come to two statements in King Benjamin's address that many Latter-day Saints may find a little troublesome. Unlike Calvinism and some other Christian sects, we do not look upon man as inherently evil. A crucial concept in our theology is that we are literally children of our Heavenly Father. "I am a child of God," we sing, "and he has sent me here." [^3] We speak positively about the need for self-esteem and self-reliance. We speak of our potential to become Gods, a concept so daring as to cause many Christians to recoil at our boldness.

So how do we reconcile these ideas with King Benjamin's powerful "if" statements? He says that even if we should render all the praise and thanks our souls are capable of, and even if we should serve him with our whole souls, we would still be "unprofitable servants." (Mosiah 2:20-21.) Even more pointed (some might say more devastating) is his answer to his own rhetorical question: "Can ye say aught of yourselves?" Answer: "Ye cannot say that ye are even as much as the dust of the earth." (Mosiah 2:25; italics added.) Let's examine these two points one at a time, for they are pivotal in our understanding of the concept of divine indebtedness and the Atonement.

The Savior used the phrase "unprofitable servants" in a short parable he taught in response to the disciples' plea to him, "Increase our faith." (Luke 17:5.)

Which of you, having a servant plowing or feeding cattle, will say unto him by and by, when he is come from the field, Go and sit down to meat? And will not rather say unto him, Make ready wherewith I may sup, and gird thyself, and serve me, till I have eaten and drunken; and afterward thou shalt eat and drink? Doth he thank that servant because he did the things that were commanded him? I trow not. So likewise ye, when ye shall have done all those things which are commanded you, say, We are unprofitable servants: we have done that which was our duty to do. (Luke 17:7-10.)

In some ways, this parable is no less troublesome than King Benjamin's statement. However, focusing on the word profit will help us better understand the concept of unprofitable servants. The word implies personal gain or benefit. Profit means an increase in assets or status or benefits.

That is the crux of the concept of man being an unprofitable servant. God is perfect—in knowledge, power, influence, and attributes. He is the Creator of all things! What could any person—or all people together for that matter—do to bring profit, (that is, an increase in assets, status, or benefits) to God?

A nineteenth-century scholar, commenting on this parable, stated that concept eloquently, when he noted that no man

can work righteousness, in the smallest degree, beyond those powers which God has given them; and justice and equity require that they should exert those powers to the uttermost in the service of their Maker; and, after having acted thus, it may be justly said, They have done only what it was their duty to do. The nature of God is illimitable, and all the attributes of that nature are infinitely glorious: they cannot be lessened by the transgressions of his creatures, nor can they be increased by the uninterrupted, eternal obedience, and unceasing hallelujahs, of all the intelligent creatures that people the whole vortex of nature. When ages, beyond the power of arithmetic to sum up, have elapsed, it may be said of the most pure and perfect creatures, "ye are unprofitable servants." Ye have derived your being from the infinite fountain of life: ye are upheld by the continued energy of the Almighty: his glories are infinite and eternal, and your obedience and services, however excellent in themselves, and profitable to you, have added nothing, and can add nothing, to the absolute excellencies and glories of your God. [^4]

That we are his children and he loves us is undeniable, and that situation puts us in a status far above any of his other creations. But we must somehow disabuse ourselves of any notion that we can bring personal profit to God by our actions. That would make God indebted to men, which is unthinkable. So this explains King Benjamin's ringing "ifs." Even if we were to serve him with all the power of our souls, even if we should render thanks with that same power (which very few, if any, of us ever do), we would still be unprofitable servants.

Less Than the Dust of the Earth

The comment that we are even less than the dust of the earth may, on the surface, seem a little more difficult to resolve. Has man no worth at all, as that would imply? An experience Moses had has an interesting parallel to King Benjamin's thinking here. Benjamin concluded that man is less than the dust of the earth immediately after he noted that God is the creator and sustainer of men. About a thousand years earlier, the prophet Moses was caught up in heavenly vision and was shown the creation of "the world . . . and all the children of men." (Moses 1:8.) Then the heavenly power withdrew, and Moses was left to himself. When he recovered a little from the experience, his first words were "Now, for this cause I know that man is nothing, which thing I never had supposed." (Moses 1:10.)

Something about the majesty and infinite awesomeness of the creation reminded both King Benjamin and Moses of man's puny and finite nature. Even when we sense our smallness, however, are we really less than the dust? The "less than" concept is what particularly stings. Nothingness is one thing, worthlessness quite another. On the surface, however, that is exactly what King Benjamin's phrase "ye cannot say that ye are even as much as the dust of the earth" (Mosiah 2:25) seems to imply. Let us examine the phrase and its uses in the scriptures for clues that may aid our understanding.

To begin with, "dust of the earth" is a scriptural phrase implying far more than mere dirt particles. We are told that man was created from the dust of the earth. (See Gen. 2:7.) Perhaps another word that would come close to what is implied by dust would be "the elements of the earth." In Latter-day Saint theology, we certainly do not believe that God pulled together a pile of mud, formed it into the shape of a man, and breathed life into it. A more accurate statement would be to say that God created the human body from the elements of the earth. Benjamin said then, to paraphrase, that we are not even as much as those elements.

Interestingly, Mormon is the one who gives us the clues to help us better understand King Benjamin's statement. Benjamin's words, as well as the angel's message that the king delivered to his people, [^5] had such a powerful impact upon the people that they fell to the ground. Mormon commented significantly, "They had viewed themselves in their own carnal state, even less than the dust of the earth." (Mosiah 4:2; italics added.) What a significant clue! The carnal or natural man is what is less than the dust of the earth. King Benjamin apparently agreed. One of the first things he stated as he continued his address after his people had fallen to the ground was that his people had been awakened to a sense of "[their] nothingness, and [their] worthless and fallen state." (Mosiah 4:5.) Here again man's worthlessness is mentioned in the context of his fallen state.

Note that King Benjamin said that lack of humility (or not remembering our own nothingness) leads us to a state he called "the natural man," a state he also described as being "an enemy to God." (Mosiah 2:37; 3:19.) In a similar vein, President Ezra Taft Benson specifically defined pride as enmity against God. "The central feature of pride is enmity—enmity toward God and enmity toward our fellowmen. Enmity means 'hatred toward, hostility to, or a state of opposition.' It is the power by which Satan wishes to reign over us. Pride is essentially competitive in nature. We pit our will against God's." [^6]

This leads us to Mormon's later specific explanation of why man is less than the dust of the earth:

How quick [are men] to be lifted up in pride; yea, how quick to boast, and do all manner of that which is iniquity; and how slow are they to remember the Lord their God, and to give ear unto his counsels, yea, how slow to walk in wisdom's paths! Behold, they do not desire that the Lord their God, who hath created them, should rule and reign over them; notwithstanding his great goodness and his mercy towards them, they do set at naught his counsels, and they will not that he should be their guide.

O how great is the nothingness of the children of men; yea, even they are less than the dust of the earth. For behold, the dust of the earth moveth hither and thither, to the dividing asunder, at the command of our great and everlasting God. (Hel. 12:5-8.)

There is the key. Benjamin said that all God asks of us as payment on our indebtedness to him is that we obey his commandments. But the natural man or fallen man is disobedient. Even the elements of the earth respond to God's voice, but fallen man does not. He proceeds on his own sinful way, ignoring God's goodness to him and the indebtedness we owe to him. Therefore, man is even less than the dust of the earth.

King Benjamin made a second point in almost the same breath as his "less than" statement: "But behold, it belongeth to him who created you." (Mosiah 2:25.) This is a profound chain of reason: (1) God created all things including the dust (or elements) of the earth, (2) man is made of those elements, and (3) therefore even man's body belongs to God. This again is a reflection on our willful nature: the dust of the earth obeys God's voice, but we, who are God's as much as the dust is, do not listen or follow.

Indebtedness and Atonement (Mosiah 2:26-3:27)

Benjamin inextricably linked our indebtedness and the Atonement. By emphasizing the concept of man's nothingness, he made the two concepts dependent on one another. If that interdependency were outlined according to Benjamin's teachings, it would look something like this:

I. MAN BY HIMSELF IS NOTHING. (2:19-25.)

A. Therefore, we are indebted to God. (Vv. 19-21, 23-24.)

B. As payment, all that is required is obedience. (Vv. 22, 24.)

II. A WARNING AGAINST DISOBEDIENCE. (2:26-41.)

A. King Benjamin discharged his obligation to warn the people. (Vv. 26-30.)

B. He gave a charge to keep the commandments under the new king. (V. 31.)

C. All must take care that they don't obey evil spirits. (Vv. 32-35.)

D. If you knowingly transgress:

E. King Benjamin called on all to consider the two choices:

III. THE MESSAGE OF THE ANGEL. (3:1-27.)

A. Glad tidings of great joy. (Vv. 1-11.)

B. Wo to the rebellious (those who transgress knowingly). (Vv. 12-13.)

C. The Law of Moses and the Atonement. (Vv. 14-15.)

D. The Atonement. (Vv. 16-23.)

a. yields to the enticings of the Holy Spirit.

b. puts off the natural man.

c. becomes a saint through the Atonement.

d. becomes as a child.

E. When knowledge of the Atonement spreads, none will be blameless but children. (Vv. 20-21.)

F. Those who reject his words are damned, and their punishments just. (Vv. 23-27.)

With this outline we clearly see that, once Benjamin established the concept of divine indebtedness, he moved immediately to the ultimate proof of our ingratitude—our disobedience—and the consequences of it. From there, he turned naturally to the only cure for those consequences, namely, the Atonement. In fact, the previous concepts establish a natural foundation for the concept of grace, though Benjamin never uses the word itself. The definition of grace as found in the LDS Bible Dictionary states that it is the "divine means of help or strength given through the bounteous mercy and love of Jesus Christ. . . . This grace is an enabling power that allows men and women to lay hold on eternal life and exaltation after they have expended their own best efforts." [^7]

Note that last phrase. It is another way of saying exactly what King Benjamin was saying, namely that, even if we thank him with all our souls, even if we serve him our whole lives (another way to describe "best efforts"), we would still be unprofitable servants. Because of this awful state we are in, there must be a higher source of help, some "enabling power" that takes us in our utter helplessness and lifts us to the point where we can overcome our carnal and fallen natures and become the sons and daughters of God.

After establishing our indebtedness to God, King Benjamin then joyfully reported the glad tidings of great joy (the word gospel means good news or glad tidings) that the angel had given him and asked him to share with his people. In the visitation, as Benjamin related, the angel had shown him the Savior's ministry. A discourse on the inability of the Law of Moses to save (outside of the Atonement) immediately followed, and then the angel turned directly to the Atonement and its saving power. Without Christ and his saving power, individuals are damned; they are destined to remain in their fallen state as natural and carnal, as enemies to God. But through the grace, or enabling power, of Jesus Christ, they can put off the natural man and become saints, sanctified and holy, thus able to return to God's presence.

Indebtedness and atonement—the two are interwoven in King Benjamin's thinking. The Atonement is both another reason for our indebtedness and the means by which we escape from being servants of sin. According to Benjamin, there are four things that create our indebtedness:

Obtaining and Retaining a Remission of Sins (Mosiah 4:1-30)

The two concepts of indebtedness and atonement, as delivered by King Benjamin, had a tremendous impact on the people. They cried for mercy and asked that the atoning blood of Christ be applied in their behalf so their sins could be forgiven. (Mosiah 4:2.) The Lord granted their request, and Mormon wrote that they received a remission of their sins. (V. 3.)

King Benjamin, filled with joy at what had happened, returned to the exact same theme with which he began. He talked about how the people could retain the remission of sins they had just experienced. Here, as in the first part of his address, the concept of indebtedness still heavily flavored his thinking. In fact, his opening thought summarized the context of his previous words. Note his chain of reasoning:

A. The knowledge of God has awakened you to a sense of your nothingness and your fallen state. (V. 5.)

B. A knowledge of God's goodness and of the Atonement leads to trust in God, diligence in keeping the commandments, and continuing in faith to the end. (V. 6.)

C. These are what lead to salvation. (V. 7.)

D. There is no other way. (V. 8.)

E. We retain a remission of sins by remembering God's goodness and our own nothingness and unworthiness. (V. 11.)

F. This remembrance will influence all we do and lead us to eternal life. (Vv. 12-30.)

Thus the key to the whole process of salvation is remembering, and the primary focus of our remembrance is (1) God's goodness and greatness, (2) our own nothingness, and (3) God's greatest gift, that of his own Son to make us whole. President Ezra Taft Benson said:

The Prophet Joseph said at one time that one of the greatest sins of which the Latter-day Saints would be guilty of is the sin of ingratitude. I presume most of us have not thought of that as a great sin. There is a great tendency for us in our prayers and in our pleadings with the Lord to ask for additional blessings. But sometimes I feel we need to devote more of our prayers to expressions of gratitude and thanksgiving for blessing already received. We enjoy so much. Of course we need daily blessings of the Lord, but if we sin in the matter of prayer, I think it is in the lack of our expressions of thanksgiving, for blessings that we receive daily. [^8]

How simple a thing, this matter of gratitude. Perhaps that is why so many so easily overlook it. But in the matchless address of this humble, righteous monarch, we are taught the profound consequences that can result from gratitude or lack of it. Benjamin did not seek to invoke a sense of hopelessness when he noted that we are less than the dust of the earth. He sought instead to instill a sense of humility and, more especially, a sense of our utter and total dependence upon God for all that we have, all that we are, and all that we can be.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Smith, Lectures on Faith, 7:7.
[^2] Vaughn J. Featherstone, "As If They Would Ask Him to Tarry a Little Longer," in Speeches of the Year, 1975 (Provo: Brigham Young University Press, 1976), 375.
[^3] Smith, Lectures on Faith, 1:13-17.
[^4] Ibid., 3:2-5.
[^5] See Ibid., 6:7.
[^6] Ibid., 6:11.
[^7] LDS Bible Dictionary, s.v. Grace; italics added.
[^8] Ezra Taft Benson, God, Family, Country (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1974), 199.
