Gerald N. Lund, Jesus Christ, Key to the Plan of Salvation (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1991)

Chapter 12

"Then Is His Grace Sufficient for You" (Moroni 10:32)

When the Apostle Paul was imprisoned at Philippi, a distressed jailer asked him, "What must I do to be saved?" Without referring to obedience or repentance or good works, which he himself had so often spoken of, Paul simply answered, "Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved." (Acts 16:30-31.)

But in a church that also has many ancient and modern scriptural passages stressing works of righteousness and the importance of obedience to the laws and ordinances of the gospel, scriptural passages like Acts 16:31 often give rise to confusion. "As far as I'm concerned," one missionary said to his companion, "when somebody starts quoting Paul on salvation by grace, I just quote James on faith without works being dead [see James 2:17-26] and try to get off the subject as quickly as possible." Another time, a Sunday School teacher confessed to his class of teenagers, "Before I joined the Church, I quoted the words of Paul to everyone. Now I just kind of steer away from what he said. I know now how important good works are, so I put the emphasis there."

Paul's Defense of Salvation by Grace

Understanding these reactions isn't difficult. Paul's ringing defense of salvation by grace and his emphatic denunciation of justification through works of the law seem almost to run counter to our third Article of Faith: "We believe that through the Atonement of Christ, all mankind may be saved, by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the Gospel."

The problem in understanding Acts 16:31 isn't that Paul de-emphasized the atoning sacrifice of the Savior, but rather that he apparently de-emphasized the need for works. What missionary hasn't been confronted with Paul's statement to the saints in Rome: "If thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in thine heart that God hath raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved." (Rom. 10:9.) Furthermore, in both Galatians and Romans, he pointedly rejected any idea that justification comes through works of the old law: "Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the law: for by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified." (Gal. 2:16; see also Rom. 3:20, 28.)

Did Paul indeed reject the value of works for the disciple of Christ? Or was he simply reacting to the Jewish Christians who insisted that adherence to the law of Moses was necessary if one were to be saved? And, for us in the latter-days, does Paul's theological position coincide with that revealed in latter-day scripture?

Church members typically seek to synthesize Paul's teachings with Latter-day Saint theology in two different ways. The first suggests that by "the law" Paul meant only the law of Moses. Without a doubt, there is merit in this. Some Jewish Christians insisted that Christianity still required obedience to Mosaic principles like circumcision, the dietary laws, and the observance of certain festivals. Paul combatted that doctrine strongly, saying that no matter how strictly a person kept the law of Moses, it of itself would not bring salvation. The power of salvation comes only through Christ because of his atonement.

However, to limit Paul's meaning to the law of Moses alone would not be quite accurate. Paul rejected the adequacy of the Mosaic code in and of itself for salvation, but he made it broader than that too. For example, in warning the Ephesians about concluding that a man is saved by works, he makes no reference to the law: "For by grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of yourselves: it is the gift of God: not of works, lest any man should boast." (Eph. 2:8-9.) So while this explanation is somewhat correct, it does not go far enough.

The second typical explanation tries to divide the effects of the Atonement between physical death and spiritual death. According to this theory, the resurrection saves all from physical death—it is salvation by grace and is not dependent on anything we do. However, if we wish to overcome spiritual death and enter back into God's presence, we must be obedient to laws and principles. This is exaltation by works. Thus, according to this explanation, we are saved by grace and exalted by works.

This argument, however, has some fallacies, as discussed more fully in the section "Redemption Cometh in and through the Holy Messiah," chapter eight, pages 90-93. The most obvious fallacy is the assumption that salvation and exaltation mean different things. While the resurrection of the dead is certainly an integral part of the plan of salvation, and it is unconditional and independent of men's works, the term salvation, as used in the scriptures, does not mean physical resurrection alone. As Elder Bruce R. McConkie has pointed out, salvation is usually synonymous with exaltation: "Salvation in its true and full meaning is synonymous with exaltation or eternal life and consists in gaining an inheritance in the highest of the three heavens within the celestial kingdom. With few exceptions this is the salvation of which the scriptures speak. It is the salvation which the saints seek." [^1]

Those who are uncomfortable with Paul's statements about grace and salvation should bear in mind that the same teachings are found in other scripture as well. Nephi, for example, nearly echoes Paul's words to the Ephesians when he says, "For we know that it is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do." (2 Ne. 25:23.) And Lehi's explanation of the Atonement to Jacob is remarkably similar to Paul's explanation of justification by faith in Romans 3, even down to the phrase "by the law no flesh is justified." (2 Ne. 2:5.) Likewise, Doctrine and Covenants 20:30-31 points out that both justification and sanctification come by grace.

Sin, Transgression, and the Law of Justice

How, then, are the principles of grace and works to be understood in relationship to each other? To come to that understanding, we must first look at some related concepts: the concepts of sin and transgression, of justice, and of the Fall. The concept of sin, first of all, rests upon the concept of law. If there were no law, there could be no sin (see 2 Ne. 2:13; Alma 42:17), because "sin is the transgression of the law" (1 Jn. 3:4). However, for purposes of understanding the Atonement better, drawing a distinction between two important variations in how the law may be violated might be helpful.

A person may violate the law in spite of his knowledge of it; that is, he breaks the law deliberately. But others may violate the law because they are unaware of its existence (ignorance) or because they do not have sufficient maturity to understand the implications of disobedience (lack of accountability). For clarification, let us use two terms to delineate the important differences in breaking the law. Any violation of the law that is willful and knowing, we shall call "sin." But any violation that results either from ignorance or lack of accountability, we shall call "transgression." The scriptures do not distinguish between these two terms consistently, but such a distinction may help us understand some important points about the Atonement.

For example, it helps us understand why children under the age of accountability cannot sin. (See D&C 29:47.) Any parents who have observed their children's behavior know that they often violate laws of the gospel. They hit brothers and sisters, demonstrate extreme selfishness at times, and can be unmercifully cruel to playmates. But while these are "transgressions," they are not "sins," because as Mormon points out, children are "not capable of committing sin." (See Moro. 8:8.) Much the same is true of those who have reached adulthood but have had relatively little or no opportunity to learn the principles of righteousness. They also violate the laws of God, sometimes horribly so, as in the case of many primitive peoples, but they are of necessity judged differently because they do not "sin" in the sense of rebelling willingly and deliberately against God. [^2] (See Rom. 2:12; D&C 82:3.)

Standing alongside the concepts of sin and transgression is the law of justice, which implies consistency in reward and punishment. In other words, there would be no justice if one person could violate the law and escape its punishment while another was punished for the same act. Elder McConkie points out that "justice demands that a penalty be paid for every violation of the Lord's laws." [^3] The opposite, or positive side, of that idea is that there is a reward for keeping the Lord's laws. (See D&C 130:20-21.) If punishments and rewards were not consistent throughout the universe and in all of eternity, justice would be violated. Briefly stated, then, the law of justice is that every violation of a law entails a punishment (ultimately suffering and misery) and every obedience of a law entails a reward (ultimately joy and peace).

Also embodied in the concept of justice is the idea that men are punished only for those things they themselves are guilty of. This would make it unjust to punish one man for another's sin; likewise, if through ignorance or lack of accountability, there is no guilt, meting out punishment would be unjust.

Having discussed sin, transgression, and justice, we have enough groundwork to better understand some of the important aspects of the atoning sacrifice of the Savior. One important application of the Atonement is to the fall of Adam. We know that it would be unjust for a person to be punished for violations he did not commit. Thus, all mankind being punished for Adam and Eve's disobedience would be unjust—it would be contrary to the law of justice. So regardless of the kinds of lives individuals have led, the effects of the fall of Adam—physical and spiritual death (i.e., the separation from God's presence)—are overcome for all souls who come to earth. Because of the Atonement, everyone will be resurrected and overcome physical death; and through the power of Christ, all will be brought back into the presence of God for the period of judgment and the assignment of glory. (See 1 Cor. 15:22; 2 Ne. 9:38.) Thus both physical death and that spiritual death resulting from Adam's fall are therefore removed through Christ.

However, remaining in the presence of God is a different, though related, matter. First, there is the case of those who are guilty of transgression but not of sin (in the sense we defined these terms). Where there is no knowledge or accountability, meting out punishment would be unjust. Nevertheless, justice demands payment for every violation of the law, whether the violation be sin or transgression. So the atonement of Christ automatically redeems children who die before they reach the age of accountability, and they are brought back into the presence of God. (See D&C 137:10.) Also, Jesus suffered the penalties of the law for those who violated the law without knowing it: "Where there is no law given there is no punishment; and where there is no punishment there is no condemnation; and where there is no condemnation the mercies of the Holy One of Israel have claim upon them, because of the atonement; for they are delivered by the power of him. For the atonement satisfieth the demands of his justice upon all those who have not the law given to them." (2 Ne. 9:25-26.)

Second, there is the case of those who sin knowingly, which is the case for all who reach the age of accountability. (See Rom. 3:23.) Though the Atonement has removed the effects of Adam's fall, our own personal falls will create another form of spiritual death. This is separation from God because of our own uncleanness and not because of Adam's fall. In other words, when we sin we become alienated from God. Our separation in this case is the result of our own actions.

The Doctrine and Covenants clearly points out that we could enter back into God's presence in this life if we would but purify ourselves from sin. (See D&C 67:10; 88:68; 93:1; see also Ether 3:13.) This purification from sin strongly involves the role of faith and works: faith leading to works of repentance and obedience is indispensable to the achievement of such a high and holy privilege. Even so, is it really by our works that we are saved from spiritual death? Again, Paul and the other prophets indicate no. And to understand this, we must once again look at the law of justice.

Remembering that every violation of the law brings punishment or suffering, there are only two ways possible to meet the demands of the law of justice. Either one keeps the law perfectly and never gets in debt to the law, or else one must pay the debt of suffering. The law is very exact. Even if it is violated only once, the violator is in its debt and must suffer the consequences. perhaps this is why James wrote, "For whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all." (James 2:10.) We can see why both Paul and Lehi warned us that no one can be justified by the law: no one (with one exception) has ever kept the law perfectly. Every soul is in debt to the law, "for all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God." (Rom. 3:23.)

The Need for Grace

In Greek, the word translated as grace in the New Testament means "good-will, loving kindness, favor." It implies "the idea of kindness which bestows upon one what he has not deserved." [^4] In the scriptural sense of the term, for a man to be justified (brought back into a proper relationship with God) by his own works is impossible, because no one keeps the law perfectly.

This was the very mistake that the Pharisees fell into with regard to the Mosaic law. We sometimes smile at their tremendously careful attempts to define the law and what was acceptable to it; but if a person holds that individuals are brought into the proper relationship with God by their works alone, then that person's position is similar to the Pharisees' view. If the tiniest infraction of the law puts one's relationship to God in jeopardy, then one must be extremely careful about any violation. The early rabbis simply carried that idea to its extreme.

For example, the law said, "Keep the Sabbath day holy." Very well then, what does that mean in terms of my behavior? Well, for one thing, I mustn't do any work. All right, but what exactly could be considered as work? Gardening? Cleaning the house? Could I rearrange the furniture? What happens, for instance, if my house should catch fire on the Sabbath? Is it "work" to take things out and save them from destruction? Are these ridiculous questions? Not if you're seeking justification by the law. And so, with great precision, the rabbis enumerated what could and could not be saved if a person's house were endangered by fire on the Sabbath. They even defined how much food could be saved, depending on what time of day the fire occurred. If it broke out on Friday evening (the Jewish Sabbath went from sundown Friday to sundown Saturday), one could save enough for three meals; if Saturday morning, two meals; and if Saturday afternoon, only one. [^5] These are the kinds of logical conclusions we are forced to make if we seek justification by the works of the law alone.

To better see why such attempts are ineffective, let us analyze a parable given by Elder Boyd K. Packer, in which he refers to the spiritual jeopardy of all those who are born on this earth:

There once was a man who wanted something very much. It seemed more important than anything else in his life. In order for him to have his desire, he incurred a great debt.

He had been warned about going into that much debt, and particularly about his creditor. But it seemed so important for him to do what he wanted to do and to have what he wanted right now. He was sure he could pay for it later.

So he signed a contract. He would pay it off some time along the way. He didn't worry too much about it, for the due date seemed such a long time away. [^6]

Thus, having entered mortality in a state of innocence, people begin to sin and lose their perfect worthiness. They incur a debt (a burden of sin), which, unless paid in full, will extend into the eternities—"the spiritual death, which is separation from the presence of our Heavenly Father." [^7] Under these circumstances (disregarding the Atonement for the moment), even if they suddenly realized that they had cheated themselves of the opportunity to go back to God's presence and had stopped increasing their debts (that is, they stopped committing sin and became obedient), there is still no way that they could ever qualify to return to the Father. Even if they committed only one sin (which is unrealistic, of course, for we sin many times), they still could not get back.

Full payment is the condition for admittance, and no exceptions can exist—justice is perfectly exact. Ceasing to sin merely stops the increase in the burden of debt—it does not generate the means to repay. There is, of course, an advantage in keeping the burden of sin (the debt to the law) as small as possible; nevertheless, at the commission of the first sin, a person loses his ability to return to God. Elder Packer continues: "As it always does, the day came, and the contract fell due. The debt had not been fully paid. His creditor appeared and demanded payment in full." The debtor's dilemma was acute:

"I cannot pay you, for I have not the power to do so," he confessed.

"Then," said the creditor, "we will exercise the contract, take your possessions, and you shall go to prison. . . ."

"Can you not extend the time or forgive the debt?" the debtor begged. . . . "Will you not show mercy?"

The creditor replied, "Mercy is always so one-sided. It would serve only you. If I show mercy to you, it will leave me unpaid. . . . Mercy cannot rob justice."

There they were: One meting out justice, the other pleading for mercy. Neither could prevail except at the expense of the other. . . .

Both laws, it seemed, could not be served. They are two eternal ideals that appear to contradict one another. Is there no way for justice to be fully served, and mercy also?

There is a way! . . . But it takes someone else. And so it happened this time.

The debtor had a friend. He came to help. He knew the debtor well. . . . He wanted to help because he loved him. He stepped between them, faced the creditor, and made his offer.

"I will pay the debt. . . . You demanded justice. Though he cannot pay you, I will do so. You will have been justly dealt with and can ask no more. . . ."

And so it was that the creditor was paid in full. . . . The debtor, in turn, had been extended mercy. Both laws stood fulfilled. Because there was a mediator, justice had claimed its full share, and mercy was fully satisfied. [^8]

Once the debt was established, then, outside payment had to be introduced from somewhere or our debts would have stood forever. Thus it is that only in the sacrifice of the Only Begotten Son, who had no sin, could we be delivered from this sad state.

Christ—the Source of Unlimited Reserves

The Savior could effect our deliverance for two important reasons. First, he met the demands of the law of justice for himself because he kept the laws of God perfectly. In other words, Christ was justified by his works. He avoided the debt altogether and qualified himself to return to the Father—the only one of all mankind to do so. Second, he met the demands of the law for all of the rest of mankind. He himself owed no debt to the law, but he went before it and in essence said: "I am perfect and therefore owe you no suffering. However, I will pay the debt for all mankind. I will undergo suffering that I might pay the price for every transgression and sin ever committed by any man."

In the Garden of Gethsemane and on the cross, Christ paid the price by suffering for every sin as though he himself had committed them, satisfying fully the law of justice. Such suffering is beyond the power of any mortal man to endure. We can't understand how he did it, only that he did and that "through Him mercy can be fully extended to each of us without offending the eternal law of justice." [^9] In terms of Elder Packer's parable, he generated sufficient payment to satisfy the debt of every other man. He met the demands of the law for himself through obedience and for all others through suffering.

Alma told his son Corianton that mercy could not rob justice, or else "God would cease to be God." (Alma 42:25.) That is the case with the merciful love of the Father and the Son. In fact, mercy paid justice! Their Love said to Justice, by virtue of the price paid in the Garden, "Here is payment for the wrongs committed. You are paid in full. Now let the captives go free."

In one of the most beautiful images in all of scripture, we find the solution to that awful dilemma we all face as sinners. We are standing before the bar as defendants, facing the great judge, God the Father. Our "Advocate with the Father" steps forward, not to refute the charges or to hold up a record of our good works to counterbalance our guilt, but to plead our case in a different manner:

Listen to him who is the advocate with the Father, who is pleading your cause before him—saying: Father, behold the sufferings and death of him who did no sin, in whom thou wast well pleased; behold the blood of thy Son which was shed, the blood of him whom thou gavest that thyself might be glorified; wherefore, Father, spare these my brethren that believe on my name, that they may come unto me and have everlasting life. (D&C 45:3-5.)

Nothing man could do for himself could bring him past the judgment bar successfully without such an Advocate. That is why eternal life is always a gift, and those who receive it do so by "inheritance." It is interesting to note that the word inherit and its cognate words are used seventy-eight times in the Doctrine and Covenants, while the word earned and its related words are not used once.

What Must We Do?

The sacrifice that pays the debt and frees us from the results of our own spiritual death, though it comes to us through the grace and goodness of God, does not mean we do nothing. What, then, are we to do if Jesus Christ has done so much for us? Here are the steps: they are first, have faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, then repent, then be baptized for the remission of sins. If we truly move through those steps—mentally, spiritually, and physically—then we are prepared for the reception of the Holy Ghost. When we are given the gift (there's that word again) of the Holy Ghost, we have overcome spiritual death to a degree, for we have come into the presence of one member of the Godhead. The Holy Ghosts's role, of course, is to help purify, guide, teach, and strengthen us so that we can fully overcome spiritual death by coming back into the presence of the Father and the Son—another way of saying that his role is to help us endure to the end.

Now with all this in mind, remember that Paul said we are justified by faith (see Gal. 2:16; Rom. 3:28), which is the first principle of the gospel. In other words, faith is the principle that activates the power of the Atonement in our lives, and we are put back into a proper relationship with God (justification) as faith activates that power. There are marvelous implications in this concept, and perhaps another analogy can help us see more clearly the role faith and works have in relationship to salvation:

Each of us is like a powerhouse on a mighty river. The powerhouse has no power residing in itself; the potential power rests in the energy of the river. When that source of power flows through the generators of the power plant, power is transferred from the river to the power plant and sent out into the homes (lives) of others. The atonement of Christ is the power in the river. Faith is the generators that can harness that power. The power to achieve justification does not reside in us. We require the power of the atonement of Christ flowing into us. If no power is being generated, we do not—indeed, cannot—turn the generators by hand (justification by works); but rather, we make an effort to remove those things that have blocked the power from flowing into the generators (working righteousness as a result of faith).

With this analogy, we can more clearly understand why the scriptures stress that faith includes works. (See James 2:17-26.) Righteous works in themselves do not save us because none of us can work perfectly enough to earn salvation. The atoning power of God saves us. Obedience, commitment, and repentance—these are the works of faith that open up the channels so that the power of the atoning sacrifice of Christ can flow into us, redeem us from sin, and bring us back into the presence of God. Disobedience and wickedness dam those channels. (How literal is the word damnation!) Thus, each of us determines whether we will be able to seek the gift and power of the Atonement in our behalf.

There is no need to go to extraordinary lengths to apologize for Paul or try to explain away his statements on salvation by grace. We are saved by grace—saved by Christ's love from physical and spiritual death; saved by Christ's love from Adam's fall and our own; saved from sin and transgression by the grace or gifts of God. The atoning power of God unto salvation is a freely available gift from him—but our works of righteousness, welling up from fountains of faith, are essential to bring the gift into power in our lives. Sin brings alienation from God. The more we sin, the greater the alienation and the more difficult it becomes to effectively tap the power of God, which alone is sufficient to save us from our sins.

President Joseph Fielding Smith has summarized the relationship between grace and works as follows:

So Paul taught these people—who thought that they could be saved by some power that was within them, or by observing the law of Moses—he pointed out to them the fact that if it were not for the mission of Jesus Christ, if it were not for this great atoning sacrifice, they could not be redeemed. And therefore it was by the grace of God that they are saved, not by any work on their part, for they were absolutely helpless. Paul was absolutely right.

And on the other hand, James taught just as the Lord taught, just as Paul had taught in other scripture, that it is our duty, of necessity, to labor, to strive in diligence, and faith, keeping the commandments of the Lord, if we would obtain that inheritance which is promised to the faithful. . . .

So it is easy to understand that we must accept the mission of Jesus Christ. We must believe that it is through his grace that we are saved, that he performed for us that labor which we were unable to perform for ourselves, and did for us those things which were essential to our salvation, which were beyond our power; and also that we are under the commandment and the necessity of performing the labors that are required of us as set forth in the commandments known as the gospel of Jesus Christ. [^10]

Thus, we can with Paul fervently exclaim that "the wages of sin is death; but the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord." (Rom. 6:23.) We should continue to stress the importance of faith, of repentance, of obedience and strive with all our hearts to be full of faith and demonstrate good works in our lives. But we should never lose sight of the great overriding fact of the grace of our Lord and Savior and the wholly central part it plays in our atonement and salvation.

Moroni, in the closing words of the Book of Mormon, teaches the relationship between the grace of Christ and the need for our righteous efforts. Note how he keeps distinctly clear what it is that perfects us, and yet what must happen in our lives to bring that about.

Come unto Christ, and be perfected in him, and deny yourselves of all ungodliness; and if ye shall deny yourselves of all ungodliness, and love God with all your might, mind and strength, then is his grace sufficient for you, that by his grace ye may be perfect in Christ; and if by the grace of God ye are perfect in Christ, ye can in nowise deny the power of God.

And again, if ye by the grace of God are perfect in Christ, and deny not his power, then are ye sanctified in Christ by the grace of God, through the shedding of the blood of Christ, which is in the covenant of the Father unto the remission of your sins, that ye become holy, without spot. (Moro. 10:32-33.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Remember that one of Satan's strategies, especially with good people, is to whisper in their ears: "If you are not perfect, you are failing." This is one of his most effective deceptions, for it contains some elements of truth. But it is deception nonetheless. While we should never be completely satisfied until we are perfect, we should recognize that God is pleased with every effort we make—no matter how faltering—to better ourselves. One of the most commonly listed attributes of God is that he is long-suffering and quick to show mercy. He wants us to strive for perfection, but the fact that we have not yet achieved it does not mean we are failing. See Smith, Lectures on Faith, 4:1-19.
[^2] Feelings of failure are natural and common to most people. Elder Neal A. Maxwell put it this way: Smith, Teachings of Joseph Smith, 348; italics added.
[^3] The Lord himself has warned us about being unrealistic in our expectations. To a young prophet, deeply contrite over losing 116 pages of sacred manuscript, the Lord said: "Do not run faster or labor more than you have strength." (D&C 10:4.) And after a lengthy and powerful call to repentance, King Benjamin gave this counsel: "See that all these things are done in wisdom and order; for it is not requisite that a man should run faster than he has strength. And again, it is expedient that he should be diligent, that thereby he might win the prize; therefore, all things must be done in order." (Mosiah 4:27.) Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine, 5th ed. (Salt Lake City, Deseret Book Co., 1939), 132; italics added.
[^4] Remember that the scriptures are replete with examples of great men and women who moved toward perfection through missteps, in spite of failings, and having to overcome their weaknesses. For example, the author of the second Gospel is the same Mark who earlier had left his missionary service, deserting Paul and Barnabus. (See Acts 12:25; 13:13; 15:37-38.) The same Corianton who was severely chastized for being immoral on his mission (see Alma 39:3-5, 11) was later listed among the faithful who helped bring peace to the Nephites (see Alma 49:30). Finally, the people of Melchizedek at one point had "waxed strong in iniquity and abomination; yea, they had all gone astray; they were full of all manner of wickedness." But "they did repent" and went to join the city of Enoch. (Alma 13:17-18; see JST Gen. 14:34.) Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 2:18; italics added.
[^5] The Lord not only looks at our works, he also takes into account the desires of our hearts. (See Alma 41:3; D&C 88:109; 137:9.) This means that even if we don't always perfectly translate our good desires into action, these desires will be included in our final evaluation. Elder Bruce R. McConkie described what it takes to be saved: Neal A. Maxwell, "Notwithstanding My Weakness," Ensign, November 1976, p. 12.
[^6] "Hanging in there," in modern vernacular, is one of the most important keys to becoming perfected. This is what the scriptures mean by enduring to the end. Some people live out years of righteousness and then, when life takes a downward turn or becomes boring, tedious, and monotonous, they become discouraged and decide that striving for perfection is no longer worth their effort. After a remarkable life of faith and commitment, King David lost his exaltation because he did not continue in his set course. Bruce R. McConkie, "The Seven Deadly Heresies," in Speeches of the Year, 1980 (Provo: Brigham Young University, 1981), 78-79; italics added.
[^7] To overcome the discouragement we feel as we see our failings and imperfections, we should remember that we learn and progress in spiritual things much the same way we learn and progress in physical things. Parents are not disappointed when their baby first learns to crawl before he walks. It is the natural order of things. Likewise, no one expects a student to understand calculus until he has first learned the numbers, then the laws of addition and subtraction, and then the mysteries of algebra and trigonometry. President Spencer W. Kimball noted that "working toward perfection is not a one-time decision but a process to be pursued throughout one's lifetime." [^8] So why is it that we demand instant perfection? Why should we expect to run spiritual four-minute miles until we have jogged hundreds upon hundreds of times around the spiritual tracks of our lives? Why do we expect to work spiritual calculus before we have mastered the spiritual multiplication tables? And why should we be disappointed when we cannot play spiritual symphonies if we have not yet taught ourselves to play the spiritual scales? Gordon B. Hinckley, Address Given to Religious Educators, September 1978, p. 4.
[^8] Finally and most important, perfection is not left up to us alone. Along the way, the Lord has given us innumerable helps: the ordinances of salvation, the organizations of the Church, the priesthood, the guidance and gifts of the Holy Ghost, repentance and forgiveness, temples, scriptures, home teaching and visiting teaching. The list goes on and on and includes everything the gospel and the Church have to offer. Spencer W. Kimball, "Hold Fast to the Iron Rod," Ensign, November 1978, p. 6.
[^9] Ibid., p. 56.
[^10] Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 2:310-11.
