Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants and the Future ( 1954)

Preface

Ancient prophets predicted the restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ and the ushering in of the last and greatest dispensation of all times. It was known to them that in this dispensation "all things would be gathered together in one." Men and women living in this period are richly blessed in the greater knowledge and opportunities available for them to see the fulfilment of what the Lord has told His holy prophets would come to pass. Very much of what these prophets predicted has already been fulfilled in the restoration of the gospel. This points up the magnitude of the work established by Joseph Smith under divine guidance.

Yet, notwithstanding this fact, the revelations given to the Prophet Joseph Smith, as contained in the Doctrine and Covenants, have not been given the attention they should receive by members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

The importance of the Doctrine and Covenants cannot be over-emphasized in its message to Latter-day Saints and to the world. The title of this volume, The Doctrine and Covenants and the Future, emphasizes one of the significant purposes for which the Lord established His work on the earth in this culminating period of time.

The fact that the Lord put so much stress in the modern revelations about the times in which we live and the future has, in part, prompted me to write this book. In my opinion, this area of study—the immediate future and what is called life after death—constitutes one of the great contributions of these revelations and the teachings of the Presidents of the Church.

It is necessary that we know that these are the last days. Evidence presented in this book supports that revealed truth.

It also testifies to the divine mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith.

A greater knowledge of and evidence for life after death is possessed by Latter-day Saints. This is one of the rich blessings of this people. Increased knowledge and confirmation of one's faith brings closer adherence to the principles of the gospel. An awareness of this truth has also motivated me to write this book. To every Latter-day Saint the Lord has promised as the work of righteousness "peace in this world and eternal life in the life to come." (Doc. & Cov. 59:23.)

Encouragement to write this book has been given to me by my co-workers on the general board of the MIA, especially Ted Bushman and Pearl Bridge Johnson.

ROY W. DOXEY
