Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants and the Future ( 1954)

Chapter One

The Setting

The Doctrine and Covenants, as to scripture, constitutes the doctrinal and organizational foundation of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in our period, because it contains God's message to this generation. It is a product of the restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ, after that gospel had been lost for centuries to the inhabitants of the world.

A Unique Book

The Doctrine and Covenants is a unique book among all the books in the world. This is so because its author is Jesus Christ, with Joseph Smith as the mortal instrument in its production. It is not infrequent to read an expression with this meaning: "Listen to the voice of Jesus Christ, your Lord, your God, and your Redeemer." In the main other books of scripture are about man's experiences with God and His works.

The second fact which makes a unique book of the Doctrine and Covenants is its being a modern book of scripture. It is written to and for people who are living today. This book testifies to the truth that the Lord speaks today about present-day needs as much as other ancient books of scripture were written for the people of their day.

The Prophet Joseph Smith recorded that the conference of November, 1831, accepted the revelations as "the foundation of the Church in these last days, and a benefit to the world . . . therefore the conference voted that they prize the revelations to be worth to the Church the riches of the whole earth, speaking temporally. [^1]

Sources of Information

This series of chapters is confined, in the main, to the Doctrine and Covenants. Insofar as advisable, all reference material in these chapters will be taken from this book of revelations. Sometimes subject matter is drawn from other books of scripture and also from the writings of modern prophets, another rich source of inspiration. Occasionally confirmatory references to other sources are provided on certain points, but this is the exception rather than the rule.

The Scriptures and the Future

Ancient and modern prophets have considered the scriptures as guideposts to living. One important phase of this is what the scriptures say of the future. President Brigham Young believed that the scriptures "are of great worth to a person wandering in darkness. They are like a lighthouse in the ocean, or a fingerpost which points out the road we should travel. Where do they point? To the Fountain of light." [^2] In a similar way the prophetic scriptures are believed to be a "light that shineth in a dark place." [^3]

Not only should the scriptures be a guidepost, but when divine prophecies are fulfilled they serve as an aid to faith. It is apparent that Jesus had this in mind when He said to His disciples:

And now I have told you before it came to pass, that, when it is come to pass, ye might believe. (John 14:29.)

Principal Messages

In this book reference to and elaboration upon the principal purposes of the Doctrine and Covenants will be given. The very important objective and purpose, not stated below, of setting forth in plainness how man may receive salvation, although not neglected is not elaborated upon. We may consider that these messages are three:

I A warning to the world.

II The events of the future and man's destiny.

III Evidence of the reality of the life beyond the grave.

The Lord's Preface

Introductory to a series where the Doctrine and Covenants is relied upon primarily for subject matter and in accord with message one, a brief analysis of Section One, known as the "Lord's Preface," is necessary. This revelation, given in November, 1831, constitutes the Lord's explanation of the object of His work in the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times.

When a series of revelations had been brought together in a volume to be known as a Book of Commandments, consisting of 65 chapters, the Lord gave what He called "my preface unto the book of my commandments, which I have given them (my servants) to publish unto you, O inhabitants of the earth." [^4] Since that day this revelation has been Section One in all editions of the Doctrine and Covenants.

In the verse just quoted it should be noted that this message is to go to the inhabitants of the earth:

For verily the voice of the Lord is unto all men, and there is none to escape; and there is no eye that shall not see; neither ear that shall not hear, neither heart that shall not be penetrated.

And the rebellious shall be pierced with much sorrow; for their iniquities shall be spoken upon the housetops, and their secret acts shall be revealed.

And the voice of warning shall be unto all people, by the mouths of my disciples, whom I have chosen in these last days.

And they shall go forth and none shall stay them, for I the Lord have commanded them. (Doc. & Cov. 1:2-5.)

The Preface Proper

With this introduction, the Lord proceeds to set forth the message or purpose of His revealed will in these last days. [^5] For the purpose of understanding the contents of this preface, the following series of questions and answers is given:

What power will be given to those who carry the message of this dispensation? (vs. 8-10.)

a. To seal both on earth and in heaven the believer and the unbeliever unto the day of judgment.

b. The Lord will come to recompense to all according to their works.

Why is the Lord's message directed to this generation? (vs. 11-16.)

a. In preparation for the second coming of Christ.

b. Apostate condition of the world.

c. Men have set up their own gods.

Through whom is the Lord's message to go to the world and what can result from it? (vs. 17-23.)

a. Joseph Smith was called of God.

b. The message is given that:

What purposes have the revelations served in the lives of the men called into the Lord's service? (vs. 24-28.)

a. That they might come to an understanding; that their errors might be corrected; that when they sought wisdom it was given; that if they sinned they might be chastened; and they might be made strong in their humility.

What powers have been received by His servants for the benefit of the world? (vs. 29-30.)

a. The power to translate the Book of Mormon.

b. The power to receive revelations and commandments.

c. Power to bring forth "the only true and living Church upon the face of the whole earth."

Why is it necessary to obey the commandments? (vs. 30-33.)

a. As individual members of the Church there is much to be desired in keeping the commandments, but as a group the Lord is pleased.

b. Sin is not condoned.

c. The sinner receives forgiveness by his repentance, but if he repents not the Spirit of the Lord is withdrawn.

Since the Lord has said that His message will go to all men, what final message does He want them to know? (vs. 34-36.)

a. The Lord is no respecter of persons.

b. Peace is to be taken from the earth.

c. Judgments await the world.

d. The Savior will surely come to reign.

Section One, or the Lord's Preface, is concluded with the definite assurance that what has been given will all be fulfilled and that the Spirit of God bears witness that "the record is true." (vs. 37-39.)

This "voice of warning" to the world is detailed in many of the revelations. Chapters Two, Three, and Four are about message one—a warning to the world. One can readily recognize from the revelation already printed that this message is of great importance to every Latter-day Saint. The Lord intended that His people should know of judgments to come and that the world might also have His warning message.

By the way of information about the remaining chapters in this series, covering the other two principal messages of the Doctrine and Covenants, the following by President Joseph F. Smith is pertinent:

I say to my brethren that the book of Doctrine and Covenants contains some of the most glorious principles ever revealed to the world, some that have been revealed in greater fulness than they were ever revealed before to the world; and this, in fulfillment of the promise of the ancient prophets that in the latter times the Lord would reveal things to the world that had been kept hidden from the foundation thereof; and the Lord has revealed them through the Prophet Joseph Smith. (Gospel Doctrine, p. 45.)

The clarity with which this modern book of scripture confirms ancient truths and gives more enlightenment about the events of the future emphasizes its value to this generation. For one who is curious about future events, the Doctrine and Covenants will satisfy curiosity. But for the sincere truth-seeker about the future there are, of course, much greater rewards. In the last analysis, it is he who believes that receives most. [^6]

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Doc. & Cov. 84:97.
[^2] Joseph Fielding Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 160.
[^3] Revelation 6:12-17.
[^4] A. Eustace Haydon (Editor), Modern Trends in World Religion, p. 27.
[^5] Ibid., p. 30.
[^6] Henry C. Link, The Way to Security, p. 213.
