Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants and the Future ( 1954)

Chapter Three

This Is a Day of Warning

(Doc. & Cov. 63:58)

The coming of the Son of Man never will be—never can be till the judgments spoken of for his hour are poured out: which judgments are commenced. (Joseph Fielding Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 286.)

The hour spoken of was prophesied by John the Revelator as "the hour of his (God's) judgment." [^1]

Of the nearness of the Lord's coming, the Prophet Joseph Smith wrote:

I will prophesy that the signs of the coming of the Son of Man are already commenced. One pestilence will desolate after another. We shall soon have war and bloodshed. The moon will be turned into blood. I testify of these things, and that the coming of the Son of Man is nigh, even at your doors. (Ibid., p. 160.)

When Joseph Smith uttered these words, he was discharging his divine responsibility as a prophet in calling upon the world to repent. The introductory chapter in this series has provided the reader with a background of material on what the Lord has said about the Prophet Joseph Smith's divine calling and the purpose of the message of this dispensation. In addition, tutorship by angelic personages prepared him for this great calling.

A message of warning was reiterated again and again that the missionaries and members of the Church would understand the need to warn their fellow men. [^2] The Lord's servants were sent out under this commission.

Lift up your voices and spare not. Call upon the nations to repent, both old and young, both bond and free, saying: Prepare yourselves for the great day of the Lord. (Doc. & Cov, 43:20; also 133:8-10.)

But the warning message by His servants will be rejected, [^3] although accompanied by famine, pestilences, and other judgments. [^4] The instruments of destruction will be poured out, "after your testimony," [^5] "when the cup of their (the nations) iniquity is full." [^6] In these words the Lord has given us to understand that we are living in that generation:

Behold the day has come, when the cup of the wrath of mine indignation is full.

Behold, verily I say unto you, that these are the words of the Lord your God.

Wherefore, labor ye, labor ye in my vineyard for the last time—for the last time call upon the inhabitants of the earth.

For in mine own due time will I come upon the earth in judgment, and my people shall be redeemed and shall reign with me on earth. (Ibid., 43:26-29.)

War as a Sign

One of the signs of the last days which has already demonstrated the divine calling of Joseph Smith as a prophet of God is that of war. This sign is one which, in the opinion of the writer, gives more concrete evidence that we are in the last days than the other signs indicated in the last chapter. This is believed because when war exists it is known by all. Rumors of wars mentioned as another sign of this period are given wide publicity. The terribleness of war, and today its possible involvement of the entire world, have made it number one reading matter.

Within a year after organization of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the Lord informed his prophet that although reports of disturbance and wars in far countries were prevalent, "ye know not the hearts of men in your own land." [^7] Shortly thereafter, the first indication of the coming of Civil War in the United States was given in these words:

Ye hear of wars in foreign lands; but, behold I say unto you, they are nigh, even at your doors, and not many years hence ye shall hear of wars in your own lands. (Ibid., 45:63.)

The fact that war was to be even more frequent and universal than confined to a few trouble spots in the world and in the United States, the Lord spoke emphatically. Given in 1831 in a revelation which is the "voice of warning" to the world, the divine mission of Joseph Smith, and the purpose and effect of the gospel for the relatively few who would accept it, one finds this significant statement:

And again, verily I say unto you, O inhabitants of the earth: I the Lord am willing to make these things known unto all flesh;

For I am no respecter of persons, and will that all men shall know that the day speedily cometh; the hour is not yet, but is nigh at hand, when peace shall be taken from the earth, and the devil shall have power over his own dominion.

And also the Lord shall have power over his saints and shall reign in their midst, and shall come down in judgment upon Idumea or the world. (Ibid., 1:34-36. Italics author's.)

Although expressed in the future tense, it is clear that peace is to be taken from the earth in this dispensation. Has the time arrived when it can be said that peace has been taken from the earth?

Beginning of War in the Last Days

In 1832 the Lord revealed specific information about the conflict between the Southern States and the Northern States, presumably by "a voice," [^8] which is one means of divine communication. But the revelation was not about the Civil War alone, for:

Verily, thus saith the Lord concerning the wars that will shortly come to pass, beginning at the rebellion of South Carolina, which will eventually terminate in the death and misery of many souls;

And the time will come that war will be poured out upon all nations, beginning at this place. (Ibid., 87:1, 2. Italics author's.)

When Great Britain was to "call upon other nations in order to defend themselves against other nations" we have, in prophecy, a description of World War I, for "then war shall be poured out upon all nations." [^9]

Events Future

In preserving the order of events given in the remainder of this prophecy, one might well believe that the events are yet future. This would, however, allow for the partial fulfilment of some of these events in the past, as for example, "slaves shall rise up against their masters who shall be marshaled and disciplined for war." [^10] as Negro soldiers were during the Civil War. But are there not slaves in the world today (people in bondage without the freedom to act because of unrighteous leaders) who may yet rise up against their masters? The "remnants who are left of the land will marshal themselves" [^11] may not only be the American Indians in the Indian wars, but also the many millions of natives on this continent who may yet "vex the Gentiles with a sore vexation":

And thus, with the sword and by bloodshed the inhabitants of the earth shall mourn; and with famine, and plague, and earthquake, and the thunder of heaven, and the fierce and vivid lightning also, shall the inhabitants of the earth be made to feel the wrath, and indignation, and chastening hand of an Almighty God, until the consumption decreed hath made a full end of all nations. (Ibid., 87:6.)

From this great revelation on wars, is there not further confirmation that there will be a time when peace is taken from the earth and Satan shall have power over his own dominion? [^12] That time is to be in this dispensation of the gospel as we draw nearer to the second coming of Christ, when the judgments will have prepared the way for "a full end of all nations." This will allow for the removal of wickedness from the earth and the reign of Jesus Christ as King of kings and Lord of lords.

Every Latter-day Saint should ask himself this question, "Has peace been taken from the earth?"

Wheat and the Tares

Because of the importance of the parable known as the wheat and the tares [^13] as it applies to the last days, the Master has given further information about it in our dispensation. Aside from slight differences from the New Testament version, as given in verses 1-3 of Section 86 of the Doctrine and Covenants, the following is most pertinent:

But behold, in the last days, even now while the Lord is beginning to bring forth the word, and the blade is springing up and is yet tender—

Behold, verily I say unto you, the angels are crying unto the Lord day and night, who are ready and waiting to be sent forth to reap down the fields;

But the Lord saith unto them, pluck not up the tares while the blade is yet tender (for verily your faith is weak), lest you destroy the wheat also.

Therefore, let the wheat and the tares grow together until the harvest is fully ripe; then ye shall first gather out the wheat from among the tares and after the gathering of the wheat, behold and lo, the tares are bound in bundles, and the field remaineth to be burned. (Ibid, 86:4-7.)

By vision, President Wilford Woodruff was permitted to see the judgments of the last days. At a testimony meeting of Salt Lake temple workers in Brigham City, Utah, June 24, 1894, he gave this inspired instruction. His remarks were given under "the power and influence of the Holy Ghost on this occasion, so much so that it not only thrilled his own voice, but shook the hearts of his hearers." Note the reference to "the angels of destruction" and the "wheat and the tares."

I want to ask this congregation a question: When I have the vision of the night opened continually before my eyes, and can see the mighty judgments that are about to be poured out upon this world, when I know these things are true, and are at the door of Jew and Gentile; while I know I am holding this position before God and this world, can I withhold my voice from lifting up a warning to this people and to the nations of the earth? I may never meet with this people again; I cannot tell how that may be. But while I live and see these things continually before my eyes I shall raise my warning voice. Now the question I wanted to ask you is this: We have fourteen million people [^14] on this earth, and over them all there hangs a cloud of darkness almost entirely upon their shoulders. Can you tell me where the people are who will be shielded and protected from these great calamities and judgments which are even now at our doors? I'll tell you. The priesthood of God who honor their priesthood, and who are worthy of their blessings, are the only ones who shall have this safety and protection. They are the only mortal beings. No other people have the right to be shielded from these judgments. They are at our very doors; not even this people will escape them entirely. They will come down like the judgments of Sodom and Gomorrah. And none but the priesthood will be safe from their fury. God has held the angels of destruction for many years, lest they should reap down the wheat with the tares. But I want to tell you now, that those angels have left the portals of heaven, and they stand over this people and this nation now, and are hovering over the earth waiting to pour out the judgments. And from this very day they shall be poured out. Calamities and troubles are increasing in the earth, and there is a meaning to these things. Remember this, and reflect upon these matters. If you do your duty, and I do my duty, we'll have protection, and shall pass through the afflictions in peace and safety. Read the scriptures and the revelations. They will tell you about all these things. Great changes are at our doors. The next twenty years will see mighty changes among the nations of the earth. You will live to see these things, whether I do or not. I have felt oppressed with the weight of these matters, and I felt I must speak of them here. It's by the power of the gospel that we shall escape. (The Young Woman's Journal, Vol. 5, pp. 512-513.)

The prophetic element in these words has already been verified in the fact that twenty years later (1914) World War I broke out in fury upon the nations. The area covered, destruction wrought, and lives lost had never before been equaled in modern history.

Has War Ceased?

Has actual warfare ceased in the world since the beginning of the first world war? From 1918 to the beginning of World War II in 1939, when Germany invaded Poland, war has not ceased in the world. In an Associated Press dispatch reporting the ten best news items during the year 1945, this comment was made under the title "Postwar Upheavals Again, 1946 Preview":

When the armistice was signed on Nov. 11, 1918, bringing to a conclusion the first world conflict, the peace was hailed everywhere as the end of wars forever. A statistician later made a check and came to the conclusion that some conflict or other was in progress some place in the world right down to the outbreak of World War II. The story is much the same today. There are still sore spots in Europe; Java is in revolt, the situation in Indo-China is obscure. China is in ferment, India is unsatisfied, and the Arab world is astir over Palestine. The picture is clouded. (The Evening Bulletin, Philadelphia, Pa., December 28 (AP), 1945.)

The condition of continuous unrest and warfare had done something to the people of the world during the 1918-1939 period. This is well stated by the historian Thomas A. Bailey of Stanford University, who, in contrasting the war that came in 1914 with the one begun in 1939, wrote:

By 1939, the world was calloused to an all-out war. The Shanghai shambles of 1932 and 1937, the Ethiopian massacres in 1936, the Barcelonian butcheries of 1938 had all conditioned public opinion. The wiping out of civilian centers had come to be recognized as a new development in the art of "civilized" warfare. Otherwise, the American people, shocked into a defense of outraged humanity, might have entered the war much sooner than they did. (A Diplomatic History of the American People, 3d ed., p. 756.)

The magnitude of the second world war far eclipsed in area covered, and lives lost, that of the war begun in 1914. The atomic bomb and other recent instruments of warfare outpowered in destructiveness other wars.

What about the upheavals of World War II enumerated in the newspaper items of 1945? Has war ceased? Relying on memory alone, each one of us could answer this question in the negative. Sore spots in the world have inflamed into war. Despite peace efforts (1953), the world is drawn into two camps, and preparation for another and even more destructive world war goes on. The invasion of South Korea by North Korea in June, 1950, under Communist leadership which brought the United States directly into the war, has called this forcibly to the attention of Americans.

Just two months before the Korean War, President George Albert Smith, in general conference, said this:

It will not be long until calamities will overtake the human family unless there is speedy repentance. It will not be long before those who are scattered over the face of the earth by millions will die like flies because of what will come. (Conference Report, 120th Annual Conference, April, 1950, p. 169.)

Peace Has Been Taken from the Earth

The Lord has said by His modern Prophets that war and other judgments would be poured out upon the nations and that these are at our doors. In 1831 He revealed that "peace shall be taken from the earth" in this dispensation. For 40 years there has been "some conflict or other" in progress some place in the world. This includes two world wars. In view of these things, is there a Latter-day Saint who cannot agree with this statement: Peace has been taken from the earth? In the next chapter we shall say something of war predicted to occur in the future.

Rewards of Living the Gospel

In this and the last chapter, our attention has been directed to signs of the last days. These constitute a warning message to the world that the way of escape from the predicted judgments is by repentance. President George Albert Smith warned the world that "the price of peace is righteousness." To members of the Church the rewards of living the gospel were stated over a hundred years ago:

But learn that he who doeth the works of righteousness shall receive his reward, even peace in this world and eternal life in the world to come. (Doc. & Cov. 59:23.)

The purpose of the signs of the times for members of the Church is to assist them to live worthily, that these blessings may come to them. We should ask ourselves this question: Do we love the Lord sufficiently that we will keep His commandments, even to the point of "looking forth for the signs of his coming?" [^15] On the other hand, shall we place ourselves in the position of the early members of the Church about whom the Lord said that in the day of their peace they esteemed lightly His counsel, and therefore in the time of their trouble He was slow to hearken unto their prayers? [^16]

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Matt. 24:36; Luke 21:25-27.
[^2] Doc. & Cov. 88:93.
[^3] The Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 280.
[^4] Matt 25:1-13.
[^5] For full explanation consult James E. Talmage, Jesus the Christ, pp. 576-580.
[^6] Doc. & Cov. 76:62; 88:17-20.
[^7] Matt. 24:40; Doc. & Cov. 49:7.
[^8] Matt 24:41-53; Doc. & Cov. 61:38.
[^9] Ibid., 45:26.
[^10] History of the Church, 4:610.
[^11] Micah 4:1, 2; Doc. & Cov. 133:12, 13.
[^12] Doc. & Cov. 84:2, 3; Ether 13:4-6.
[^13] Ibid., 84:4, 5.
[^14] Ibid., 115:6
[^15] Ibid., 45:66.
[^16] Ibid., 45:67-71.
