Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants and the Future ( 1954)

Chapter Six

The Spirit World

The standard works of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints give considerable information about the intermediate state between death and the resurrection of the body, but the emphasis upon man's third stage of existence, the spirit world, is secondary to some of the other stages of his existence. Especially is this true of the discussion given on this subject in the Doctrine and Covenants. The references there are generally expressed as a part of some other thought and not as a discussion on the spirit world itself. Generally the association is made with the subject of the resurrection of the body. The reasons for this may be as follows: the spirit world for the hosts of mankind is only temporary. On the other hand, the resurrection of the body is the final and permanent stage of man's eternal existence. The whole gospel plan is designed to bring about the resurrection of man where a fulness of joy is possible. [^1]

One of the best statements to be found on how a Latter-day Saint feels about the reality of spirit-consciousness at death was expressed by President Wilford Woodruff in his last will and testament:

If the laws and customs of the spirit world will permit, I should wish to attend my funeral myself, but I shall be governed by the counsel I receive in the spirit world. (M. F. Cowley, Wilford Woodruff, p. 622.)

For us who live in mortality, death of the body and life in the spirit world await us unless we shall be alive when the Savior comes and we are found worthy to be caught up to meet him. Death is one of the realities of which we are all so very well aware. As Latter-day Saints, we may, by the testimony of the Spirit, have an assurance of the reality of the life immediately following the death of the body.

The Spirit of Man

When a Latter-day Saint speaks of the spirit of man, what does he think of? The Lord has revealed that "the spirit of man (is) in the likeness of his person." [^2] Yet the spirit is not flesh and bones as the resurrected being, [^3] but it is matter that "is more fine or pure, and can only be discerned by purer eyes." [^4] The spirit of man was begotten in the heavens before the earth was formed. [^5] In that sphere of existence it was in form as man is today, with the ability to walk, talk, think, and act very much as we do today. With birth into mortality the spirit is clothed with grosser matter and gives life to the body. At death of the mortal body the spirit, which is eternal or everlasting, continues its conscious existence as an entity or being with the same form it had in the pre-existent life.

Reality of Evil Spirits

There are evil spirits who are just as real as the spirits of all men who are tabernacled in the flesh. These are the followers of Satan who rebelled with him in the pre-mortal world and are today "seeking to destroy the souls of men." [^6] The Prophet Joseph Smith received a revelation in which a key was given whereby we might know how to distinguish between evil and good spirits. [^7] This key involves the simple procedure of shaking hands with the visitor from the other side of the veil because of the apparent obsession to deceive on the part of evil spirits. Though of material substance, the hand of the spirit cannot be felt by the mortal.

What has come to be a classic example of the reality of the evil forces and their opposition to the work of the Lord in this dispensation is the experience of Elders Isaac Russell, Willard Richards, Orson Hyde, and Heber C. Kimball upon opening the British Mission in 1837. In the words of Elder Kimball:

I then arose and sat up on the bed, when a vision was opened to our minds, and we could distinctly see the evil spirits, who foamed and gnashed their teeth at us. We gazed upon them about an hour and a half (by Willard's watch). We were not looking towards the window, but towards the wall. Space appeared before us, and we saw devils coming in legions, with their leaders, who came within a few feet of us. They came towards us like armies rushing to battle. They appeared to be men of full stature, possessing every form and feature of men in the flesh, who were angry and desperate; and I shall never forget the vindictive malignity depicted on their countenances as they looked me in the eye; and any attempt to paint the scene which then presented itself, or portray their malice and enmity, would be vain. I perspired exceedingly, my clothes becoming as wet as if I had been taken out of the river. I felt excessive pain, and was in the greatest distress for some time. I cannot even look back on the scene without feelings of horror; yet, by it I learned the power of the adversary, his enmity against the servants of God, and got some understanding of the invisible world. We distinctly heard those spirits talk and express their wrath and hellish design against us. However, the Lord delivered us from them and blessed us exceedingly that day. (Orson F. Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball, 2nd edition, pp. 130-181.)

Many other witnesses have testified to the reality of the spirit as a conscious being, whether unembodied or disembodied.

Distinction of Terms

It is well to keep in mind that in the scriptures terms are used which sometimes may confuse the reader unless he keeps before him certain distinctions concerning the spirit world and its inhabitants. Those who were faithful in the preexistence and are therefore entitled to an earth life—but yet unborn in mortality— live in the presence of our Eternal Father. We do not include these spirits as inhabitants of the spirit world reserved for those who have lived in mortality and passed on into that stage of existence. There is also the class known as unembodied spirits, already mentioned as the devil and his angels, whose influence is felt by the unforgivable disembodied in the spirit world, but who shall eventually partake of hell with the sons of perdition forever. [^8] The devil and his angels are in the spirit state forever, while all other spirit beings will be resurrected. Therefore, the spirit world, or the intermediate state between death and the resurrection will have given up all of its dead when the purposes of God for this earth are accomplished.

The Spirit World—Where?

Where is the spirit world about which this chapter is written?

At the funeral of Patriarch James Adams, the Prophet Joseph Smith said that since this good man was now one of the spirits of the just men made perfect, he, "if revealed now, must be revealed in fire," and that:

The spirits of the just are exalted to a greater and more glorious work: hence they are blessed in their departure to the world of spirits. Enveloped in flaming fire, they are not far from us, and know and understand our thoughts, feelings, and emotions, and are often pained therewith. (History of the Church, 6:52. Italics author's.)

Brigham Young, Parley P. Pratt and others who knew the Prophet have also stated that the spirit world is on or near the earth.

Spirit World Not Heaven

All who pass through the change of death go immediately into the spirit world. This was true of Jesus and the penitent thief who expired on the cross also. [^9] Latter-day Saints know that the spirit world is not heaven, but the latter term has reference as to the future, to a condition and place following the resurrection. Because of misunderstanding in the world concerning this truth and because of misapplication of the words of Jesus to the penitent thief on the cross, the Prophet Joseph Smith clarified New Testament terms used to describe the spirit world, especially "paradise." Concerning Jesus' words, "Today shalt thou be with me in paradise," [^10] he said that paradise means "the world of spirits" where "the righteous and the wicked all go to the same world of spirits until the resurrection." [^11]

Separation of Righteous and Wicked?

Is it correct to assume that because all the dead go into the same world of spirits, there is not a separation of the just and the unjust?

President Joseph F. Smith taught that in the world of spirits there is a separation of the righteous and the wicked.

The spirits of all men, as soon as they depart from this mortal body, whether they are good or evil, we are told in the Book of Mormon, are taken home to that God who gave them life, where there is a separation, a partial judgment, and the spirits of those who are righteous are received into a state of happiness which is called paradise, a state of rest, a state of peace, where they expand in wisdom, where they have respite from all their troubles, and where care and sorrow do not annoy. The wicked, on the contrary, have no part nor portion in the Spirit of the Lord, and they are cast into outer darkness, being led captive, because of their own iniquity, by the evil one. And in this space between death and the resurrection of the body, the two classes of souls remain in happiness or in misery, until the time which is appointed of God that the dead shall come forth and be reunited both spirit and body, and be brought to stand before God, and be judged according to their works. (Gospel Doctrine, 6th ed., p. 448.)

If one studies carefully the Book of Mormon reference upon which the above quotation is based, he will perceive the same truth enunciated by President Smith. [^12] The partial judgment received by all men at death is not the final judgment which comes after the resurrection, but its purpose is to bring about the separation of the obedient and the disobedient. [^13] An example of judgment and separation is found in the parable of Lazarus and the rich man related by the Savior. [^14] In this parable, "Abraham's bosom" is used to denote the place of the righteous dead. The gulf between Lazarus and the rich man which would not permit passage from the prison or hell and the paradise of the spirit world was bridged by the preaching of the missionaries sent by Jesus, who initiated this work of salvation in the interim between his death and resurrection. The gospel was not preached to the dead before this. [^15]

Prison and Paradise

In discussing the beneficent results of the resurrection of the body, the Book of Mormon prophet Jacob indicates that there are localities in the spirit world which are designated "prison" and" paradise."

And the death of which I have spoken, which is the spiritual death, shall deliver up its dead; which spiritual death is hell; wherefore, death and hell must deliver up their dead, and hell must deliver up its captive spirits, and the grave must deliver up its captive bodies, and the bodies and the spirits of men will be restored one to the other; and it is by the power of the resurrection of the Holy One of Israel.

O how great the plan of our God! For on the other hand the paradise of God must deliver up the spirits of the righteous, and the grave deliver up the body of the righteous; and the spirit and the body is restored to itself again, and all men become incorruptible, and immortal, and they are living souls . . . (II Nephi 9:12-18.)

President Brigham Young is credited with teaching that both the righteous and the disobedient go to prison at death. Upon this point the revisers of the revised edition of the Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, who are members of the Council of the Twelve, offer the comment: that "if the word 'prison' is used as a synonym for hades, the statement is perfectly correct, for hades is understood to be the domain of all the dead. But the righteous and the unrighteous are, of course, not in the same locality in that domain. President Young also explains that the wicked, after death, are unhappy, while the righteous dead have passed beyond the reach of the adversary and are resting in peace until the morning of the resurrection, and this makes it clear that he did not mean to say that all the departed spirits are in the same place or the same condition." (P. 463.)

Heber C. Kimball, counselor in the First Presidency to President Brigham Young, taught the same doctrine:

Can those persons who pursue a course of carelessness, neglect of duty and disobedience, when they depart from this life, expect that their spirits will associate with the spirits of the righteous in the spirit world? I do no expect it, and when you depart from this state of existence, you will find it out for yourselves. (Journal of Discourses, 2:150.)

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Doc. & Cov. 50:17-24; II Nephi 33:1.
[^2] Moses 3:5-7; Doc. & Cov. 77:2.
[^3] Doc. & Cov. 45:17.
[^4] Doc. & Cov. 124:33, 40, 41; Isaiah 42:7, 24:17-22; John 5:25, 28.
[^5] Gospel Doctrine, p. 461.
[^6] Ibid., p. 476.
[^7] Doc. & Cov. 19:15-19; Alma 40:13, 14.
[^8] Doc. & Cov. 84:49-53.
[^9] Orson F. Whitney, Saturday Night Thoughts, p. 307; Doc. & Cov. 132:8, 18.
[^10] Moroni 10:34.
[^11] History of the Church, 5:424-425.
[^12] Alma 40:11-14.
[^13] Gospel Doctrine, 6th ed., p, 449.
[^14] Luke 16:19-31.
[^15] I Peter 3:18-20; 4:6; Joseph Fielding Smith, The Way to Perfection, p. 315-317.
