Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants and the Future ( 1954)

Chapter Seven

The Spirit World—Continued

As a Latter-day Saint, what do you expect to see in the spirit world? Is your conception of that world very much different from this state of existence? What conditions, physical and social, exist there?

In the last chapter, consideration was given to the reality of the spirit state, the types of spirits, the location of the spirit world, and the fact that there is a separation of righteous and the wicked. Because much of what we know about that stage of existence is found in the writings of the modern prophets, and their ideas are in the main found in the scriptures, reliance will be put upon this source of information in this chapter.

A Visit into the Spirit World

At the funeral of Jedediah M. Grant, counselor to President Brigham Young, Brother Heber C. Kimball related what Brother Grant had told him about his visit into the spirit world two nights in succession. In this account one will find confirmation of several of the points sustained by the scriptures as they were pointed out in the last chapter. There will also be found a number of additional thoughts pertaining to some of the questions raised at the beginning of this chapter. President Heber C. Kimball said:

I went to see Brother Grant one day last week, and he reached out his hand and shook hands with me. He said to me, "Brother Heber, I have been into the spirit world two nights in succession, and of all the dreads that ever came across me, the worst was to have to again return to my body, though I had to do it. But "O," says he, "the order and government that were there! When in the spirit world, I saw and beheld them organized in their several grades, and there appeared to be no obstruction to my vision; I could see every man and woman in their grade and order. I looked to see whether there was any disorder there, but there was none, neither could I see any death nor any darkness, disorder or confusion." He said that the people he there saw were organized in family capacities; and when he looked at them he saw grade after grade, and all were organized and in perfect harmony. He would mention one item after another and say, "Why, it is just as Brother Brigham says it is; it is just as he has told us many a time."

That is a testimony as to the truth of what Brother Brigham teaches us, and I know it is true from what little light I have.

He saw the righteous gathered together in the spirit world, and there were no wicked spirits among them. He saw his wife; she was the first person that came to him. He saw many that he knew, but did not have conversation with any except his wife, Caroline. She came to him, and he said that she looked beautiful and had their little child, that died on the plains, in her arms, and said, "Mr. Grant, here is little Margaret; you know that the wolves ate her up, but it did not hurt her; here she is all right."

"To my astonishment," Brother Grant said, "when I looked at families there was a deficiency in some, there was a lack, for I saw families that would not be permitted to come and dwell together, because they had not honored their calling here."

He asked his wife, Caroline, where Joseph and Hyrum and Father Smith and others were; she replied they had gone away ahead, to perform and transact business for us. The same as when Brother Brigham and his brethren left Winter Quarters and came here to search out a home; they came to find a location for their brethren.

He also spoke of the buildings he saw there, remarking that the Lord gave Solomon wisdom and poured gold and silver into his hands that he might display his skill and ability, and said that the temple erected by Solomon was much inferior to the most ordinary buildings he saw in the spirit world.

"In regard to gardens," says Brother Grant, "I have seen good gardens on this earth, but I never saw any to compare with those that were there; I saw flowers growing upon one stalk." We have many kinds of flowers on the earth, and I suppose those very articles came from heaven, or they would not be here.

After mentioning the things he had seen, he spoke of how much he disliked to return and resume his body, after having seen the beauty and glory of the spirit world, where the righteous spirits are gathered together. (Journal of Discourses, 4:135-136.)

Can Latter-day Saints believe that this is a genuine experience? As in all such experiences there are certain questions which, if answered in the affirmative, verify that accuracy and the reality of the account. These are: (a) Is it in accord with the teachings of the standard works? (b) Does it agree with what the modern prophets have taught? (c) Is it given by persons of responsibility and honesty? (d) Does the spirit bear witness of it in edification and not darkness? [^1]

In this experience it is related that Brother Grant saw in vision his deceased wife and child. This may appear to be inconsistent with the known fact that the spirit of man is an adult when it comes into mortality, and although the mortal body may die in infancy, the spirit is still in size as an adult. President Joseph F. Smith has given us the solution to this problem of the childlike size of the spirit mentioned in the above account.

The spirits of our children are immortal before they come to us, and their spirits, after bodily death, are like they were before they came. They are as they would have appeared if they had lived in the flesh, to grow to maturity, or to develop their physical bodies to the full stature of their spirits. If you see one of your children that has passed away it may appear to you in the form in which you would recognize it, the form of childhood; but if it came to you as a messenger bearing some important truth, it would perhaps come as the spirit of Bishop Edward Hunter's son (who died when a little child) came to him, in the stature of full-grown manhood, and revealed himself to his father, and said: "I am your son."

Bishop Hunter did not understand it. He went to my father and said: "Hyrum, what does that mean?

I buried my son when he was only a little boy, but he has come to me as a full-grown man—a noble, glorious young man—and declared himself my son. What does it mean?"

Father (Hyrum Smith, the patriarch) told him that the Spirit of Jesus Christ was full-grown before he was born into the world; and so our children were full-grown and possessed their full stature in the spirit, before they entered mortality, the same stature that they will possess after they have passed away from mortality, and as they will also appear after the resurrection, when they shall have completed their mission. (Gospel Doctrine, 6th ed., p. 455.)

What the Spirit World is Like

As to the physical environment, the spirit world is very much like the earth upon which we dwell. The Lord has revealed that vegetation and animal life were created spiritually first, for "all things were before created, but spiritually were they created and made according to my word." [^2] Brother Grant saw flowers beyond his ability to describe, and he also saw buildings which were superior to the buildings he had seen on the earth.

In preaching at the funeral of Elder Thomas Williams (July 19, 1874), President Brigham Young said that in the spirit world we labor and enjoy there many of the same attributes we have here.

When we contemplate the condition of man here upon the earth and understand that we are brought forth for the express purpose of preparing ourselves through our faithfulness to merit eternal life, we ask ourselves where we are going, what will be our condition, what will be the nature of our pursuits in a state of being in which we shall possess more vigor and a higher degree of intelligence than we possess here? Shall we have labor? Shall we have enjoyment in our labor? Shall we have any object of pursuit, or shall we sit and sing ourselves away to everlasting bliss? These are questions that arise in the minds of people, and they many times feel anxious to know something about the hereafter. . . . I would like to say to you, my friends and brethren, if we could see things as they are, and as we shall see and understand them, this dark shadow and valley is so trifling that we shall turn around and look upon it and think, when we have crossed it, why this is the greatest advantage of my whole existence, for I have passed from a state of sorrow, grief, mourning, woe, misery, pain, anguish and disappointment into a state of existence where I can enjoy life to the fullest extent as far as that can be done without a body. My spirit is set free, I thirst no more, I want to sleep no more, I hunger no more, I tire no more, I run, I walk, I labor, I go, I come, I do this, do that, whatever is required of me, nothing like pain or weariness, I am full of life, full of vigor, and I enjoy the presence of my Heavenly Father, by the power of His Spirit. (Journal of Discourses 17:14.)

There are doubtless some things which we do here that may not be possible in that sphere. Even the deceased members of the Church of Jesus Christ "have looked upon the long absence of your (their) spirits from your (their) bodies to be a bondage." [^3] Why is this? Because there are things which they might not do without the body in the attainment of the exaltation.

Death Does Not Change One's Character

Does the transition by death from mortality into the spirit world change one's thinking about the plan of salvation?

It is very evident from the scriptures and the writings of the latter-day prophets that this transition does not change one's attitude and that eventually each person will have to make the necessary changes by the same process which he does here. Amulek, the Book of Mormon prophet, testified to this fact:

For behold, this life is the time for men to prepare to meet God; yea, behold the day of this life is the day for men to perform their labors.

And now, as I said unto you before, as ye have had so many witnesses, therefore, I beseech of you that ye do not procrastinate the day of your repentance until the end; for after this day of life, which is given us to prepare for eternity, behold, if we do not improve our time while in this life, then cometh the night of darkness wherein there can be no labor performed.

Ye cannot say, when ye are brought to that awful crisis, that I will repent, that I will return to my God. Nay, ye cannot say this; for that same spirit which doth possess your bodies at the time that ye go out of this life, that same spirit will have power to possess your body in that eternal world. (Alma 34:32-34.)

The same spirit of indifference, selfishness, doubt, unteachableness, shiftlessness, and so forth, will possess our spirit bodies in the spirit world, if we have these attitudes when we go out of this life. On the other hand, the virtues which bring joy and happiness will continue with those who have possessed them here. With this doctrine, President Brigham Young was in full accord:

Suppose, then, that a man is evil in his heart—wholly given up to wickedness, and in that condition dies, his spirit will enter the spirit world intent upon evil. On the other hand, if we are striving with all the powers and faculties God has given us to improve upon our talents, to prepare ourselves to dwell in eternal life, and the grave receives our bodies while we are thus engaged, with what disposition will our spirits enter their next state? They will be still striving to do the things of God, only in a much greater degree—learning, increasing, growing in grace and in the knowledge of the truth. (Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 580-581.)

Purpose of Spirit World

We may say, then, that the spirit world, as to the salvation of mankind, is the place where all of the spirits of men continue to prepare themselves for their reward according to their works. May it not then be thought of as a place of education, of training in the principles of truth which bring happiness and joy? But in this educative process more time is required for some than for others. Consequently, there shall be some who will not be prepared for the resurrection of the body until at least the thousand years of the millennium have passed away, because they did not prepare themselves while in mortality. It is also evident that these persons are still subject to the evil influence of Satan. On the other hand, the righteous are not in this condition insofar as they have gained the victory over Lucifer here.

The wicked spirits that leave here and go into the spirit world, are they wicked there? Yes. No matter where they have lived on the face of the earth, all men and women who have died without the keys and powers of the priesthood, though they might have been honest and sincere and have done everything they could, are under the influence of the devil, more or less. Are they as much so as others? No. Take those who were wicked designedly, who knowingly lived without the gospel when it was within their reach, they are given up to the devil; they become tools to the devil and spirits of the devil. Go to the time when the gospel came to the earth in the time of Joseph, take the wicked that have opposed this people and persecuted them to the death, and they are sent to hell. Where are they? They are in the spirit world, and are just as busy as they possibly can be to do everything they can against the prophet and the apostles, against Jesus and his kingdom. They are just as wicked and malicious in their actions against the cause of truth as they were while on the earth. (Brigham Young in Journal of Discourses, 3:369-370.)

Thus we see that there are degrees to which a person may be subject to the influence of Satan's hosts. It is also apparent that the eternal principle of free agency is operative in the spirit world.

The freedom to believe and the carrying of traditions and either false or true ideas with one into that life suggests that there can be meetings and gatherings of other religious organizations as there are here today. Eventually, however, all shall come to receive the principles which will give to them an inheritance in one of the kingdoms provided for the resurrected soul. This will, of course, require time and considerable effort. This idea suggests the principal work of the righteous in the spirit world.

Work in the Spirit World

The preaching of the gospel in that sphere lies at the basis of the Latter-day Saints' concept of salvation for the dead. The spirit world is the place where those who have not had the opportunity to hear and receive the gospel will be accorded this privilege in keeping with what God has promised since the world began. [^4]

The Lord gave a revelation to President Joseph F. Smith, known as the "Vision of the Redemption of the Dead," in which he saw the paradise of the spirit world at the time the Savior organized a missionary corps to preach the gospel to the dead. In this informative revelation, President Smith said:

I beheld that the faithful elders of this dispensation, when they depart from mortal life, continue their labors in the preaching of the gospel of repentance and redemption, through the sacrifice of the Only Begotten Son of God, among those who are in darkness and under the bondage of sin in the great world of the spirits of the dead. (Gospel Doctrine, p. 476.)

On another occasion, President Smith said that the good, faithful sisters of this dispensation will also participate in the missionary cause. [^5]

Another significant thought was given by President Smith in the "Vision of the Redemption of the Dead" when he recorded that "the dead who repent will be redeemed, through obedience to the ordinances of the house of God, and after they have paid the penalty of their transgressions, and are washed clean, shall receive a reward according to their works, for they are heirs of salvation." [^6] In the educative process of redeeming mankind there is the element of punishment because of willful disobedience to known laws of God. [^7] The Prophet Joseph Smith defined this punishment:

There is no pain so awful as that of suspense. This is the punishment of the wicked; their doubt, anxiety and suspense Cause weeping, wailing and gnashing of teeth. (History of the Church, 5:340.)

The great misery of departed spirits in the world of spirits, where they go after death, is to know that they come short of the glory that others enjoy and that they might have enjoyed themselves, and they are their own accusers. (Ibid., 5:425.)

Since there is a separation of righteous and wicked in the spirit world, do the repentant dead enjoy the blessings of paradise? President Joseph F. Smith has answered this question in this manner:

In relation to the deliverance of spirits from their prison house, of course, we believe that can only be done after the gospel has been preached to them in the spirit, and they have accepted the same, and the work necessary to their redemption by the living be done for them. . . . It stands to reason that, while the gospel may be preached unto all, the good and the bad, or rather to those who would repent and to those who would not repent in the spirit world, the same as it is here, redemption will only come to those who repent and obey. (Ibid., p. 438.)

Brother Jedediah M. Grant visited paradise or the abode of the righteous spirits, those who had accepted the gospel of Jesus Christ. [^8] He saw only loveliness and beauty, happiness and joy, where the Saints of God mingled together in the accomplishment of the Lord's purposes. It would appear consistent with what we know of the great work for the dead that in the spirit world there will be a continuation of the task of gathering genealogical data. No greater opportunity would be available than in that life to preach the gospel to one's progenitors and do genealogical research. Is it not also reasonable that those who will engage in the labor of salvation there will be those who have been interested in the salvation of the souls of men here? This is in accord with what has already been presented herein—the same desires, attitudes, etc., which we possess here will bring the blessings of opportunity of further labors with their resultant joy and happiness.

Do the Dead Return?

"God's house is a house of order, and the spirit world is a room in that house." [^9] In the "paradise of God," [^10], Brother Grant saw order and government, people organized in their several grades and families were organized and in perfect harmony.

The principle of order operates in connection with the return of the departed to loved ones on the earth. In the annals of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints it is not uncommon that experiences of this kind are found, attesting to the reality of spirit-consciousness, the perpetuity of life beyond the grave. In a funeral sermon over the remains of Elizabeth H. Cannon (January 29, 1882), President Joseph F. Smith, speaking to the fact that Jesus had a mission after death, said:

In like manner our fathers and mothers, brothers, sisters and friends who have passed away from this earth, having been faithful, and worthy to enjoy these rights and privileges, may have a mission given them to visit their relatives and friends upon the earth again, bringing from the divine Presence messages of love, of warning, of reproof and instruction, to those whom they had learned to love in the flesh. And so it is with Sister Cannon. She can return and visit her friends, provided it be in accordance with the wisdom of the Almighty. There are laws to which they who are in the paradise of God must be subject, as well as laws to which we are subject. (Gospel Doctrine, p. 436.)

Of such an experience, Parley P. Pratt recorded the appearance of his deceased wife to him as he lay in a Missouri dungeon with but one absorbing thought. "Shall I ever, at any time, however distant it may be, or whatever I may suffer first; shall I ever be free again in this life?" The answer came in this manner:

After some days of prayer and fasting, and seeking the Lord on the subject, I retired to my bed in my lonely chamber at an early hour, and while the other prisoners and the guard were chatting and beguiling the lonesome hours in the upper apartment of the prison, I lay in silence, seeking and expecting an answer to my prayer, when suddenly I seemed carried away in the spirit, and no longer sensible to outward objects with which I was surrounded. A heaven of peace and calmness pervaded my bosom; a personage from the world of spirits stood before me with a smile of compassion in every look, and pity mingled with the tenderest love and sympathy in every expression of the countenance. A soft hand seemed placed within my own, and a glowing cheek was laid in tenderness and warmth upon mine. A well-known voice saluted me, which I readily recognized as that of the wife of my youth, who had for one or two years been sweetly sleeping where the wicked cease from troubling and the weary are at rest. I was made to realize that she was sent to commune with me, and answer my question.

Knowing this, I said to her in a most eager and inquiring tone: Shall I ever be at liberty again in this life and enjoy the society of my family and the Saints, and preach the gospel as I have done? She answered definitely and unhesitatingly: "YES!" I then recollected that I had agreed to be satisfied with the knowledge of that one fact, but now I wanted more.

Said I: Can you tell how, or by what means, or where I shall escape? She replied: "THAT THING IS NOT MADE KNOWN TO ME YET." I instantly felt that I had gone beyond my agreement and my faith in asking this last question, and that I must be contented at present with the answer to the first.

Her gentle spirit then saluted me and withdrew. I came to myself. The doleful noise of the guards, and the wrangling and angry words of the old apostate again grated on my ears, but heaven and hope were in my soul.

Next morning I related the whole circumstance of my vision to my two fellow prisoners, who rejoiced exceedingly. This may seem to some like an idle dream, or a romance of the imagination; but to me it was, and always will be, a reality, both as it regards what I then experienced and the fulfillment afterwards. (Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, p. 261, 262.)

Attitude Toward Death

The doctrine of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints gives hope, comfort, and assurance of meeting again with loved ones in the spirit world, where further progress on the way to perfection is available to the faithful. The death of the body, therefore, should hold no permanent sorrow for the Latter-day Saint. This was well expressed by President Brigham Young at the funeral of his sister, Fanny Young:

I do not mourn for Sister Fanny: I rejoice. She has lived upwards of three score years and ten, and exhibited the retention of sound sense to her last days with us here. She said to her sister, Nancy, a short time ago, "If you hear of my being dead before you come to see me again, let the first thing you say be 'Hallelujah!' " That remark, to me, evidences the retention of sound judgment. It also appears to me that very many of the Latter-day Saints are as far from good, wholesome ideas and principles, touching their heavenly privileges, as the east is from the west. They covet the riches of the world, craving to serve themselves, to satisfy the sordid disposition within them. Had they the sense of an angel, and were they in possession of mountains of gold, heaped up higher and deeper, broader and longer than these mountains on the east and west of us, they would say, "That vast amount of gold is as nothing when compared with the privilege of even living in this day and age of the world, when the gospel is preached." (Journal of Discourses, 7:172.)

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Jesus the Christ, p. 699.
[^2] I Cor. 15:8.
[^3] Ibid., 15:3-9; Acts 2:32; 3:15; 10:41.
[^4] Matthew 27:52, 53.
[^5] Elders Journal, Far West, Mo., July, 1838.
[^6] Doc. & Cov. 2:1-3, and introductory note; 27:5, P. of G. P. Joseph Smith 2:30-60.
[^7] Doc. & Cov., Sec. 13, and introductory note; 27:7, 8, 133:55.
[^8] Ibid., Sec. 7.
[^9] Ibid., 27:12, 13; 128:20.
[^10] Ibid., 110:11; 133:55.
