Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants and the Future ( 1954)

Chapter Eight

If a Man Die, Shall He Live Again?

(Job 14:14)

In the two chapters just considered we should have come more forcibly to recognize that we were dealing with a real world, not one of fancy or imagination. The reality of that existence of which we shall all partake, is attested by the revelations of God as given to His prophets, ancient and modern, and the real waking experiences of men of honesty and responsibility. As you reflect upon that material can you not "feel" the truth of the message given of the realness of the spirit world?

It is the belief of the author that everyone who reads with a sincere desire to know may also receive the same "feeling" about the subject we are to explore in this and the next chapter. The evidence for the resurrection of the body as the Lord has given it to the Latter-day Saints is far beyond the limits of what is known in the world on this important subject. For this, all members of the Church should be profoundly grateful. In the true knowledge of the future life and especially of its reality there is a genuine sense of security which can be a real power for good in one's life.

The lack of faith in revealed knowledge of the future life is apparent in the world. The spirit of materialism, together with the influence of apostate Christian teachings, has taken from the majority of the people the means by which they could more fully understand and have security in the knowledge of the future life.

Belief in Immortality

Attention has already been directed to some surveys of religious belief in the United States and their meaning in Chapter Two. Some of these surveys have indicated that many professed Christians do not have faith in the immortality of the individual at death. In a summary of these surveys published in This Week Magazine, March 30, 1952, the following answer to the question "Do most people believe in immortality?" was given: "Yes. Nationwide surveys, again covering all creeds, show that more than three people out of four believe in life hereafter. Eleven percent are uncertain, and 18 per cent believe that when you die you're dead, and that's all there is to it. It is interesting to note that though 94 per cent of the people believe in God, only 76 per cent believe in immortality." Again, we might raise the question as to what extent a person's belief in God (and consequently in the immortality of the individual) influences a person's daily behavior. (See Chapter Two.) In the article just quoted an answer to this question may be found in a survey of men and women in 18 different colleges and universities over the country. It was found that in this group, 61 per cent of the students felt very definitely that their daily conduct was strongly influenced by their belief in God, but the other 39 per cent felt that it made little or no difference. [^1] Most of these 39 per cent professed a strong belief in God, however.

What the World Needs

Whatever reservation one may have concerning surveys of public opinion in giving a completely accurate picture, it is evident that a great many professing believers in Deity do not believe in the immortality of the individual, nor does religious belief necessarily influence one's daily behavior. It should, therefore, be apparent that what the world needs is a new witness for God and revelation from Him to give mankind a basis for belief in immortality. [^2] This has been the message of Joseph Smith and his successors to the world for over a century now, but approximately only two million people have received it.

What evidence is there that the resurrection is a reality?

Inasmuch as Latter-day Saints have superior grounds for belief in the immortality of man, it might be profitable to divide the answer to this question into two parts: the evidence which is common to every Christian, and that which is known only to Latter-day Saints.

Common Evidence of the Resurrection

As to the first, we may suggest the testimony of witnesses to the resurrection of Jesus Christ, for upon Jesus' resurrection rests the eventual resurrection of all mankind. The Savior arose from the dead and appeared to many. Over a period of forty days, he communed with his chosen apostles and others, being seen and heard. Elder James E. Talmage listed eleven recorded appearances of Christ between his resurrection and ascension. There were from two to five hundred witnesses of these appearances, except in the cases of the appearance to Mary Magdalene in the garden, to Peter in or near Jerusalem, and to James. [^3] Subsequent to the Lord's ascension into heaven, the most notable witness is Paul, who testified that, "last of all he was seen of me." [^4] Both Paul and Peter did not declare themselves as witnesses alone, but almost invariably they declared that the evidence rested upon the testimony of all the apostles. [^5]

Many have suggested that the zeal with which the apostles of the Lord undertook their divine calling as special witnesses of the Savior following his resurrection is an evidence which cannot be discounted as a verification that something very vital came into their lives. The fact that these men went to martyr's graves for the knowledge that Jesus lives as a tangible, resurrected being, is strong evidence for this argument.

In addition to the foregoing evidence for the resurrection, Latter-day Saints have superior basis for knowing that the immortality of the body through the atonement of Jesus is an assured fact. Many in the world disbelieve the actual resurrection of Christ, and others [^6] because the record of those events is of such antiquity and the literal resurrection is something which requires considerable faith to accept. On the other hand, Latter-day Saints need not be concerned with either one of these problems.

L.D.S. Evidence of Jesus' Existence

One of the purposes of the Doctrine and Covenants is to give evidence of the reality of the future life. This is done in two ways. First, by the testimonies of men who have seen the resurrected Christ. Three persons testify to a sight-knowledge of the Savior. Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery beheld the glorified Lord in the Kirtland Temple, on April 3, 1836. This is their account of that event:

The veil was taken from our minds, and the eyes of our understanding were opened.

We saw the Lord standing upon the breastwork of the pulpit, before us; and under his feet was a paved work of pure gold, in color like amber.

His eyes were as a flame of fire; the hair of his head was white like the pure snow; his countenance shone above the brightness of the sun, and his voice was as the sound of the rushing of great waters, even the voice of Jehovah, saying:

I am the first and the last; I am he who liveth, I am he who was slain; I am your advocate with the Father. (Doc. & Cov. 110:1-4.)

When Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon saw the celestial world, it was their privilege to see Jesus and to hear the voice of God the Father declare Him to be His Only Begotten Son:

And while we meditated upon these things, the Lord touched the eyes of our understandings and they were opened, and the glory of the Lord shone round about.

And we beheld the glory of the Son, on the right hand of the Father, and received of his fulness;

And saw the holy angels, and them who were sanctified before his throne, worshipping God, and the Lamb, who worship him forever and ever.

And now, after the many testimonies which have been given of him, this is the testimony, last of all, which we give of him: That he lives!

For we saw him, even on the right hand of God; and we heard the voice bearing record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father—

That by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God. (Ibid., 76:19-24.)

Appearance of Resurrected Beings

The second way in which the Doctrine and Covenants evidences the truth of the future life is by testifying to the reality of the resurrection. This is done in two ways: by giving considerable knowledge about the resurrection (to be given in the next chapter) and by giving specific information concerning the appearance of resurrected beings in our day. Some of these messengers from the heavens conversed with Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in the conferring of keys of authority necessary for the work of the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times.

Moroni, the ancient American prophet, "being dead, and raised again therefrom, appeared unto me," said Joseph Smith. [^7] Upon numerous occasions, Moroni conversed with him about his part in the restitution of all things, and delivered the gold plates into his hands. [^8]

John the Baptist, forerunner of Jesus in the Meridian of Time, conferred the Aaronic Priesthood upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery. [^9]

Peter and James, as resurrected beings, with John, a translated being, [^10] appeared to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery and conferred the Melchizedek Priesthood. [^11]

Moses, the great law-giver of ancient Israel, restored the keys of the gathering of Israel and the restoration of the ten tribes from the land of the north to Joseph and Oliver. [^12]

Elias, a prophet who apparently lived in the days of Abraham, delivered the keys of the gospel of Abraham. [^13]

Elijah, the prophet who was carried into heaven without tasting of death but who later underwent a change to the resurrected state at the time of Jesus' resurrection, [^14] committed the keys of the sealing power of the priesthood. [^15]

These were resurrected personages (except for the Apostle John, who had a translated body), bringing great blessings for mankind and at the same time attesting to the literalness of the resurrection and the reality of the immortality of the body.

Visitation of Angels

Joseph Smith mentions other holy messengers who may have been resurrected or as just men made perfect in the spirit state ministering in accordance with their rights and privileges.

And again, the voice of God in the chamber of old Father Whitmer, in Fayette, Seneca county, and at sundry times, and in divers places through all the travels and tribulations of this Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints! And the voice of Michael, the archangel; the voice of Gabriel, and of Raphael, and of divers angels, from Michael or Adam down to the present time, all declaring their dispensation, their rights, their keys, their honors, their majesty and glory, and the power of the priesthood; giving line upon line, precept upon precept; here a little, and there a little; giving us consolation by holding forth that which is to come, confirming our hope! (Ibid., 128:21.)

In bearing testimony to the divine mission of Joseph Smith as a prophet, President John Taylor spoke of his greatness in the pre-mortal world and that God had selected him as the prophet of the last dispensation of the gospel. Then President Taylor gave this significant statement:

I know of what I speak, for I was very well acquainted with him and was with him a great deal during his life, and was with him when he died. The principles which he had, placed him in communication with the Lord, and not only with the Lord, but with the ancient apostles and prophets; such men, for instance, as Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Noah, Adam, Seth, Enoch, and Jesus and the Father, and the apostles that lived on this continent as well as those who lived on the Asiatic continent. He seemed to be as familiar with these people as we are with one another. Why? Because he had to introduce a Dispensation of the Fulness of Times, and it was known as such by the ancient servants of God. (Journal of Discourses, 21:94.)

The Book of Mormon as a Witness

In addition to the purpose of the Doctrine and Covenants as a testifier of the reality of the resurrection, new revelation in the form of an ancient book comes to man as a new witness that God is mindful of his children in other parts of the world than where the Bible was produced. The principal purpose of the Book of Mormon is to verify the divinity of Jesus Christ as the Son of God and Savior of Mankind. This is done in several ways, among which is the historical fact that Jesus Christ was actually raised from the dead and appeared to the faithful people upon this continent in the first Christian century. The dramatic appearance of the Savior to the Nephites as recorded in the eleventh chapter of III Nephi is a marvelous testimony of the truth of the Book of Mormon. As the multitude looked upward "they saw a Man descending out of heaven; and he was clothed in a white robe," whereupon he introduced himself as the Lord Jesus Christ. [^16] The resurrected Lord spoke unto them saying: " . . . thrust your hands into my side, and also that ye may feel the prints of the nails in my hands and in my feet, that ye may know that I am the God of Israel, and the God of the whole earth, and have been slain for the sins of the world." One by one the multitude "did see with their eyes and did feel with their hands, and did know of a surety and did bear record, that it was he, of whom it was written by the prophets, that should come." [^17]

Moroni, last mortal custodian of the Book of Mormon plates, was an eyewitness of the resurrected Jesus about 400 years later. In bidding farewell to the future readers of the Book of Mormon, he referred to the time when all should meet before the judgment seat of Christ, "And then shall ye know that I have seen Jesus, and that he hath talked with me face to face, and that he told me in plain humility, even as a man telleth another in mine own language, concerning these things." [^18]

In the area of personal manifestations evidencing the reality of the resurrection and of the future life, aside from specific teachings about immortality, Latter-day Saints have a further witness in Joseph Smith's First Vision. Joseph Smith saw God! Jesus Christ is a resurrected personage, separate and distinct from the Father. That He who once was dead now lives is a message of the First Vision! [^19]

Do you feel as a Latter-day Saint that we have superior reasons for faith in the existence of God? Do you have faith in the Savior as a resurrected Personage, and feel that the resurrection is not a figment of the imagination? Is this "feeling," belief, or faith sufficiently strong to make of you a genuine follower of the Master in daily conduct, in contrast to the many who profess belief but do not genuinely follow?

Final Evidence

The final evidence which a Latter-day Saint has of the reality of the future life is the positive knowledge which comes from the Holy Ghost. This is superior knowledge given to the faithful members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The Prophet Joseph Smith encouraged us to:

Search the scriptures—search the revelations which we publish and ask your Heavenly Father, in the name of His Son Jesus Christ, to manifest the truth unto you, and if you do it with an eye single to His glory, nothing doubting, He will answer you by the power of His Holy Spirit. You will then know for yourselves and not for another. You will not then be dependent on man for the knowledge of God; nor will there be any room for speculation. (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 11, 12.)

The means by which this is possible are available to Latter-day Saints. Each member has had hands laid on his head for the reception of the Holy Ghost. The Prophet said that "no man can receive the Holy Ghost without receiving revelations. The Holy Ghost is a revelator." [^20] The usual form in which the member receives revelation is testimony—"even hidden treasures." [^21]

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Job 19:25-27.
[^2] Ezekiel 37:1-14.
[^3] Daniel 12:2.
[^4] Mosiah 16:7-10.
[^5] Alma 11:41-44.
[^6] II Nephi 9:6-8, 1-13.
[^7] Alma 40:21-23.
[^8] Helaman 14:15, 16.
[^9] I Cor. 15:20.
[^10] Rev. 1:5.
[^11] Colossians 1:15.
[^12] Acts 26:23.
[^13] John 20:1-18.
[^14] I Kings 17:17-24.
[^15] II Kings 4:31-37.
[^16] John 11:1-46.
[^17] Luke 7:11-17.
[^18] Mark 5:22-24, 35-43.
[^19] Jesus the Christ, pp. 316, 495-496.
[^20] Luke 24:39.
[^21] John 20:27, 28.
