Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants and the Future ( 1954)

Chapter Ten

The Future Kingdoms

The Lord has revealed that every person who has lived upon the earth will receive a resurrection. This means both the "just and unjust," [^1] "death and hell delivered up the dead which were in them," [^2] "all shall be made alive." [^3] By reason of the transgression of Adam death entered the world, and through the atonement of Jesus Christ all mankind will be redeemed from this temporal death. There is no exception. [^4]

Many Resurrections

The general scriptural pronouncement is that there is a time for the righteous and a time for the unrighteous to be raised from the grave. [^5] The resurrection of all mankind is in general put into two classifications—the first or of the "just" and the second or of the "unjust." A modern revelation, however, teaches us that these general classifications should be separated into two parts each. [^6] Each one of these resurrections, four in number, is known in this revelation by the sounding of an angel's trump.

The first trump at the Savior's coming:

And they who have slept in their graves shall come forth, for their graves shall be opened; and they also shall be caught up to meet him in the midst of the pillar of heaven—

They are Christ's, the first fruits, they who shall descend with him first, and they who are on earth and in their graves, who are first caught up to meet him; and all this by the voice of the soundings of the trump of the angel of God. (Doc. & Cov. 88:97-98.)

The second trump is sounded after the resurrection of the Saints. The length of time between these two events is not revealed. Jesus' coming marks the beginning of the millennium, therefore, the resurrection of terrestrial beings occurs after the millennium begins:

And after this another angel shall sound, which is the second trump; and then cometh the redemption of those who are Christ's at his coming; who have received their part in that prison which is prepared for them, that they might receive the gospel, and be judged according to men in the flesh. (Doc. & Cov. 88:99.)

Thus ends the first general resurrection, except as that resurrection will continue into the millennium until all the worthy or honorable dead have received this blessing. At the end of the thousand years of peace and righteousness, the second general resurrection will begin with telestial beings rising from their graves:

And again, another trump shall sound, which is the third trump; and then come the spirits of men who are to be judged, and are found under condemnation;

And these are the rest of the dead; and they live not again until the thousand years are ended, neither again, until the end of the earth. (Ibid., 88:100-101.)

Without the time interval being indicated, the last part of the last or second resurrection, that of the sons of perdition, is described as follows:

And another trump shall sound, which is the fourth trump, saying: There are found among those who are to remain until that great and last day, even the end, who shall remain filthy still. (Ibid., 88:102.)

Visions of the Resurrection

There are still some items concerning the resurrection of the body which will be considered in later chapters. Further evidence for and information about these general resurrections have been made known by vision to two prophets of this dispensation.

The Prophet Joseph Smith's account is as follows:

Would you think it strange if I relate what I have seen in vision in relation to this interesting theme? Those who have died in Jesus Christ may expect to enter into all that fruition of joy when they come forth, which they possessed or anticipated here.

So plain was the vision, that I actually saw men, before they had ascended from the tomb, as though they were getting up slowly. They took each other by the hand and said to each other, "My father, my son, my mother, my daughter, my brother, my sister." And when the voice calls for the dead to arise, suppose I am laid by the side of my father, what would be the first joy of my heart? To meet my father, my mother, my brother, my sister; and when they are by my side, I embrace them and they me.

All your losses will be made up to you in the resurrection provided you continue faithful. By the vision of the Almighty I have seen it.

More painful to me are the thoughts of annihilation than death. If I have no expectation of seeing my father, mother, brothers, sisters and friends again, my heart would burst in a moment, and I should go down to my grave.

The expectation of seeing my friends in the morning of the resurrection cheers my soul and makes me bear up against the evils of life. It is like their taking a long journey, and on their return we meet them with increased joy.

God has revealed His Son from the heavens and the doctrine of the resurrection also; and we have a knowledge that those we bury here God will bring up again, clothed upon and quickened by the Spirit of the great God; and what mattereth it whether we lay them down, or we lie down with them when we can keep them no longer? Let these truths sink down in our hearts, that we may even here begin to enjoy that which shall be in full hereafter. (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 295-296.)

As President of the Church, Wilford Woodruff related a vision of the resurrection given to him while laboring as a missionary in the state of Tennessee during the lifetime of Joseph Smith. Note that in this vision, President Woodruff describes the second general resurrection, the first having already occurred.

After laboring in that part (Memphis, Tennessee) for a length of time, I received a letter from Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, in which they requested me to stay in that country and take charge of the churches that we had built up there. The Prophet promised me many things, and said I would lose no blessings by tarrying in that country and doing as he wished me, and letting the other brethren go and get their endowments. I was then at the house of Brother Abraham O. Smoot's mother. I received this about sundown. I went into a little room where there was a sofa, to pray alone. I felt full of joy and rejoicing at the promises God had made to me through the Prophet. While I was upon my knees praying, my room was filled with light. I looked and a messenger stood by my side. I arose, and this personage told me he had come to instruct me. He presented before me a panorama. He told me he wanted me to see with my eyes and understand with my mind what was coming to pass in the earth before the coming of the Son of Man. He commenced with what the revelations say about the sun being turned to darkness, the moon to blood, and the stars falling from heaven. Those things were all presented to me one after another, as they will be, I suppose, when they are manifest before the coming of the Son of Man. Then he showed me the resurrection of the dead—what is termed the first and second resurrection. In the first resurrection I saw no graves nor anyone raised from the grave. I saw legions of celestial beings, men and women who had received the gospel all clothed in white robes. In the form they were presented to me, they had already been raised from the grave. After this he showed me what is termed the second resurrection. Vast fields of graves were before me, and the Spirit of God rested upon the earth like a shower of gentle rain, and when that fell upon the graves, they were opened, and an immense host of human beings came forth. They were just as diversified in their dress as we are here, or as they were laid down. This personage taught me with regard to these things. . .

I refer to this as one of the visitations that was given me in my boyhood, so to speak, in the gospel. I was a priest at the time. Of course, there was a motive in this personage visiting me and teaching me these principles. He knew a great deal better than I did what lay before me in life. It was doubtless sent me for the purpose of strengthening me and giving me encouragement in my labors. (The Deseret Weekly, Vol. 53, No. 21, November 7, 1896, p. 642.)

Eternal Man and His Opportunities

These visions of the resurrection emphasize the fact expressed so often in the scriptures that the human personality persists beyond the grave. The further fact that there are differences between individuals is clearly marked in the revealed word of God. These differences existed in the premortal life; they are here in mortality; and they will continue into the hereafter. Because of this, one finds varying degrees of obedience to gospel principles and laws. The various stages through which man travels—pre-existence, earth life, spirit world—are intended to prepare man for the resurrected life, where he receives his reward in accordance with eternal laws. Because of a reign of law in the universe, man enjoys security. If he lives the law, blessings follow. [^7] On the other hand, if man persists in wrongdoing, he suffers the penalty of the broken law:

And again, verily I say unto you, that which is governed by law is also preserved by law and perfected and sanctified by the same.

That which breaketh a law, and abideth not by law, but seeketh to become a law unto itself, and willeth to abide in sin, and altogether abideth in sin, cannot be sanctified by law, neither by mercy, justice nor judgment. Therefore, they must remain filthy still. (Doc. & Cov. 88:34-35.)

Through suffering, man is cleansed and by his repentance the benefits of the atonement for individual salvation, varying as it does between persons, are made available to him. [^8] It has already been pointed out (Chapter Seven) that the spirit world is the place where men continue to work out their salvation in accordance with their opportunities in mortality. Whatever man does not do here in this educative process, he must do in that sphere of action. Consequently, the prophets, ancient and modern, have counseled that now is the day of salvation, and "do not procrastinate the day of your repentance until the end," for the change of death does not alter one's character. [^9] Heber C. Kimball expressed this thought as follows:

Have I not told you often that the separation of the body and spirit makes no difference in the moral and intellectual condition of the spirit? . . . The spirit has not changed one single particle of itself by leaving the body. (Orson F. Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball, p. 462.)

Doctrine of Overcoming

This principle has given rise to what might be termed the doctrine of "overcoming." It is given by Brother Kimball in these words:

If you do not cultivate yourselves, and cultivate your spirits in this state of existence, it is just as true as there is a God that liveth you will have to go into another state of existence, and bring your spirits into subjection there. Now you may reflect upon it, you will never obtain your resurrected bodies, until you bring your spirits into subjection. I am not talking to this earthly house of mine, neither am I talking to your bodies, but I am speaking to your spirits. I am not talking as to people who are not in the house. Are your spirits in the house? Are not your bodies your houses, your tabernacles or temples, and places for your spirits? Look at it; reflect upon it. If you keep your spirits trained according to the wisdom and fear of God, you will attain to the salvation of both body and spirit. I ask, then, if it is your spirits that must be brought into subjection? It is, and if you do not do that in those bodies, you will have to go into another estate to do it. You have got to train yourselves according to the law of God, or you will never obtain your resurrected bodies. (Ibid., p. 459.)

President Brigham Young said that everyone must undergo preparation for his final destiny:

No spirit of Saint or sinner of the Prophet or him that kills the Prophet, is prepared for their final state; all pass through the veil from this state and go into the world of spirits; and there they dwell waiting for their final destiny.(Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 576.)

All men will be made "vessels unto honor," except the sons of perdition, but on the basis of principles to which they could have subjected themselves while in mortality, given the opportunity. Of the willful sinner, Brother Kimball expresses this fact:

The spirits of the Saints will be gathered in one, that is, of all who are worthy; and those who are not just, will be left where they will be scourged, tormented and afflicted, until they can bring their spirits into subjection and be like clay in the hands of the potter, that the potter may have power to mould and fashion them into any kind of vessel, as he is directed by the Master Potter. (Life of Heber C. Kimball, p. 464.)

Salvation Defined

In the final analysis, this doctrine of "overcoming" is what Joseph Smith defined as salvation:

Salvation is nothing more nor less than to triumph over all our enemies and put them under our feet. And when we have power to put our enemies under our feet in this world, and a knowledge to triumph over all evil spirits in the world to come, then we are saved, as in the case of Jesus, who was to reign until He had put all enemies under His feet, and the last enemy was death. (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 297.)

As to individual salvation, then, we are not saved in this life, but we, by obedience to the plan of life and salvation, are on the way to perfection or to one of the great kingdoms of the future. The "unsaved" are spoken of as being "in bondage," [^10] while the "saved" have "overcome" and are "free." [^11]

By the resurrection, man has reached a point where he has power over the devil and his angels who have not received bodies of flesh and bones.

The spirits in the eternal world are like the spirits in this world. When those have come into this world and received tabernacles, then died and again have risen and received glorified bodies they will have an ascendancy over the spirits who have received no bodies, or kept not their first estate, like the devil. The punishment of the devil was that he should not have a habitation like men. The devil's retaliation is, he comes into this world, binds up men's bodies, and occupies them himself. When the authorities come along, they eject him from a stolen habitation. (History of the Church, 5:403.)

Summary

In recapitulation: Man, a child of God, is an eternal being who enjoys free agency. Our Father in heaven places him in various stages of progression whereby he may "work out his salvation" in accordance with laws which give happiness if lived, but remorse if not lived. The spirit world is the last stage of final preparation. Each person will have to subject himself to laws of righteousness in order to receive the resurrection. (Sons of perdition are the exception.) Resurrected men will have power over unembodied evil spirits.

The Greatness of God's Plan

The creeds of men, developed over the centuries without revelation from heaven, have pictured God as banishing the sinner forever into a hell where punishment is endured eternally. This doom is believed to be incurred by the vast majority of mankind. The notion that there was only "heaven" and "hell," without an intermediate state of preparation for immortality or resurrection, gave rise to a doctrine of salvation incompatible with the teachings of the gospel of Jesus Christ. The saved were wafted into heaven, while the sinner went to hell, lost forever.

In contradiction to this erroneous and unjust concept of God's justice, the message of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints proclaims the doctrine that our Father in heaven is solicitous for all of His children and has provided the means whereby they may receive, if not all, a measure of His glory. This, however, comes only by their placing themselves in accord with divine laws either in mortality or in the spirit world. In the words of a modern revelation, we learn:

And this is the gospel, the glad tidings, which the voice out of the heaven bore record unto us—

That he came into the world, even Jesus, to be crucified for the world, and to bear the sins of the world, and to sanctify the world and to cleanse it from all unrighteousness;

That through him all might be saved whom the Father had put into his power and made by him;

Who glorifies the Father, and saves all the works of his hands, except those sons of perdition who deny the Son after the Father has revealed him.

Wherefore, he saves all except them. . . . (Doc. & Cov., 76:40-44.)

Sons of Perdition

The few, known as sons of perdition, constitute an infinitesimal number of all of our Father's children. The number has not been revealed, but there will be "many apostates of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints who will receive this condemnation." [^12] The sin which brings this condemnation of everlasting punishment where they dwell with Satan and his angels forever, [^13] is called the sin against the Holy Ghost. [^14] Perhaps the most explicit statement concerning this group was given by the Prophet:

All sins shall be forgiven, except the sin against the Holy Ghost; for Jesus will save all except the sons of perdition. What must a man do to commit the unpardonable sin? He must receive the Holy Ghost, have the heavens opened unto him, and know God, and then sin against Him. After a man has sinned against the Holy Ghost, there is no repentance for him. He has got to say that the sun does not shine while he sees it; he has got to deny Jesus Christ when the heavens have been opened unto him, and to deny the plan of salvation with his eyes open to the truth of it, and from that time he begins to be an enemy. This is the case with many apostates of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.(Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 358; cf. Doc. & Cov. 76:31-35; 132:27.)

For these and the unembodied followers of Satan, the Prophet had this to say concerning their fate:

Say to the brothers Hulet and to all others, that the Lord never authorized them to say that the devil, his angels, or the sons of perdition, should ever be restored; for their state of destiny was not revealed to man, is not revealed, nor ever shall be revealed, save to those who are made partakers thereof: consequently those who teach this doctrine have not received it of the Spirit of the Lord. (Ibid., p. 24; cf. Doc. & Cov. 76:45-48.)

The sons of perdition will be resurrected to "abide a kingdom which is not a kingdom of glory." [^15] where they suffer the second death, or "as to things pertaining unto righteousness" but as resurrected beings "they cannot die, seeing there is no more corruption." [^16]

Although Lucifer and his angels are called sons of perdition, the spirit who has come to earth life for a body and then, by death of the body, enters into the spirit world, "cannot commit the unpardonable sin." It is a sin, as to mortals, which is possible while in the mortal tabernacle. [^17]

Work for the Dead

Provision is made that every soul shall have an opportunity to receive the fulness of the gospel, if not in mortality, then in the spirit world. In Chapter Seven, consideration was given briefly to the work of preaching the gospel to the departed dead. Temples of the Lord are constructed in order that our kindred dead might receive the beneficial ordinances of the celestial kingdom. It was pointed out, however, that man's free agency is preserved in every stage of his eternal journey and therefore many will not avail themselves of these saving principles and ordinances.

Hell Is Real

Notwithstanding what is given herein concerning the broad, liberal ideas of man's salvation when contrasted with the general notion of limited salvation to a few while the vast host of mankind are doomed to hell forever, one must never lose sight of the fact that there is a real hell for the unrepentant. This does not refer to the hell mentioned in the scriptures for the sons of perdition. The wicked of the earth shall be in the prison house of the spirit world—"thrust down to hell . . . not to be redeemed from the devil until the last resurrection." [^18]

Gradations Taught in Bible

The magnanimity of the gospel of Jesus Christ as revealed in our generation far transcends the uninspired conceptions of men. This is well illustrated in what has been presented with reference to the salvation of all men upon which more will be given in the next chapter. That there are gradations in "heaven" was taught by Jesus [^19] and by his disciples, one of which was Paul, who received a vision of the kingdoms of glory for resurrected man:

There are also celestial bodies, and bodies terrestrial; but the glory of the celestial is one, and the glory of the terrestrial is another.

There is one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars: for one star differeth from another star in glory. (I Cor. 15:40-41.)

The principle of reward and punishment is given in this New Testament scripture: "He which soweth sparingly shall reap also sparingly; and he which soweth bountifully shall reap also bountifully." [^20]

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Doc. & Cov. 76:112.
[^2] Ibid., 93:26-28.
[^3] Ibid., 88:20-24.
[^4] Ibid., 76:99-106, 81-85.
[^5] Ibid., 76:89.
[^6] Ibid., 76:88, 86.
[^7] Ibid., 76:91, 92, 96-98, 71.
[^8] Ibid., 76:72-75.
[^9] Ibid., 76:69.
[^10] Ibid., 76:86.
[^11] Ibid., 1:30.
[^12] Ibid., 84:39.
[^13] Moses 1:39.
[^14] Doc. & Cov. 131:4
[^15] Ibid., 132:17-19, 22.
[^16] Ibid., 132:25.
[^17] Ibid., 132:17.
[^18] Doc. & Cov. 132:28-33; 93:26-28; 130:20, 21.
[^19] Ibid., 68:25-28; 29:46, 47; 74:7.
[^20] Matt. 18:1-6.
