Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants and the Future ( 1954)

Chapter Twelve

It Is Finished

(Doc. & Cov. 88:106)

In this dispensation the Lord has renewed the promise made known to earlier prophets [^1] that righteousness shall triumph over evil and the faithful sons and daughters of God will receive an everlasting inheritance.

And by hearkening to observe all the words which I, the Lord their God, shall speak unto them, they shall never cease to prevail until the kingdoms of the world are subdued under my feet, and the earth is given unto the saints, to possess it forever and ever. (Doc. & Cov. 103:7.)

. . . it is decreed that the poor and the meek of the earth shall inherit it. (Ibid., 88:17.)

The "end of the earth" will come as the final stage of the Lord's work for the salvation of man. [^2] This end, however, is not a destruction of the earth that it will be no more, but because it "filleth the measure of its creation, and transgresseth not the law" it shall be sanctified and "the righteous shall inherit it." [^3] No other people will reside on the glorified earth except celestial beings. Those of other kingdoms must abide other places than the earth, the whereabouts of which the Lord has not revealed.

At that time the earth will be celestialized and in its perfected form will serve as a means whereby its inhabitants will learn of the hidden mysteries of the Lord's kingdom which will be revealed unto them, "even the wonders of eternity shall they know, and things to come will I show them, even the things of many generations." [^4] The earth will be as a "sea of glass" [^5] to reveal things of a lower kingdom than the celestial.

This earth, in its sanctified and immortal state, will be made like unto crystal and will be a Urim and Thummim to the inhabitants who dwell thereon, whereby all things pertaining to an inferior kingdom, or all kingdoms of a lower order, will be manifest to those who dwell on it; and this earth will be Christ's. (Doc. & Cov., 130:9.)

But of the celestial kingdom knowledge will come through the medium of a white stone:

Then the white stone mentioned in Revelation 2:17, will become a Urim and Thummim to each individual who receives one, and whereby things pertaining to a higher order of kingdoms will be made known;

And a white stone is given to each of those who come into the celestial kingdom, whereon is a new name written, which no man knoweth save he that receiveth it. The new name is the key word. (Doc. & Cov. 130:10-11.)

Before the celestialization of the earth and as the millennium draws to an end, Lucifer, who has been bound during the thousand years of peace and righteousness on the earth, will gather together his forces for the final conflict. Numbered among his armies will be those on the earth who will "deny their God." [^6] And Michael (Adam), [^7] the seventh angel, even the archangel, shall gather together his armies, even the hosts of heaven." [^8] Satan and his armies, the hosts of hell, will come up to battle against Michael and his armies.

And then cometh the battle of the great God; and the devil and his armies shall be cast away into their own place, that they shall not have power over the saints any more at all.

For Michael shall fight their battles, and shall overcome him who seeketh the throne of him who sitteth upon the throne, even the Lamb. (Ibid., 88:114-115.)

With the final defeat of the devil and his followers, they will be cast into hell which was prepared for them from the beginning. [^9]

As the end draws near, the final resurrection will occur, as indicated by various angels' trumps discussed in Chapter Ten. The last to be resurrected are the sons of perdition, upon the sounding of the fourth trump. These shall remain "until that great and last day, even the end, who shall remain filthy still." [^10]

In succession, without the time interval between the events given, the following series of trumps are sounded: [^11]

Fifth trump: Moroni, who delivered the gold plates to Joseph Smith, will deliver this message to all people in heaven and on the earth: "Fear God, and give glory to him who sitteth upon the throne, forever and ever; for the hour of his judgment is come.

Sixth trump: The proclamation is given that error and untruth led the nations to destruction.

Seventh trump: The glorious message is given that Jesus the Lamb of God has overcome, and therefore it is finished, it is finished. With this announcement the angel shall "be crowned with the glory of his might, and the saints shall be filled with his glory, and receive their inheritance and be made equal with him."

In the introductory chapter, three principal messages of the Doctrine and Covenants were stated. In this concluding chapter it is proposed that consideration be given to a summary of these messages as they have been developed in this book.

Message One—A Warning to the World

We are living in a wonderful age. Significant changes in man's material well-being have been made by science. A noted theoretical physicist has pointed out some of these changes.

Advances in the study of man and other living forms have extended our life span by decades. Discoveries in physical science have immeasurably lightened our toil, and enriched our lives. They have given leisure to an ever-widening group of men. They have made a reasonable education not a special privilege, but a common right. They have made the world in its physical dimensions, a small place, and established the means by which people in remote parts of the earth can communicate with each other, can get to know each other, and can learn to work together. They have put at the disposal of everyone the resources of physical power, of ease, and of knowledge that were in the past reserved for the few. ("Encouragement of Science," Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, January, 1951, p. 6.)

Latter-day Saints recognize in this progress the fulfilment of what Joel, the Old Testament prophet, said would occur in the latter days—the Lord would pour out His "spirit upon all flesh." [^12] This would be one of the signs of the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times, which began with the restoration of visions as a form of revelation.

It is apparent from the complete text that this prophecy would be fulfilled in the latter days, although God would give His spirit in the dispensation following Joel's time. Joel's prophecy of our dispensation is:

And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions:

And also upon the servants and upon the handmaids in those days will I pour out my spirit.

And I will shew wonders in the heavens and in the earth, blood, and fire, and pillars of smoke.

The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great and the terrible day of the Lord come.

And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be delivered: for in Mount Zion and in Jerusalem shall be deliverance, as the Lord has said, and in the remnant whom the Lord shall call. (Joel 2:28-32.)

The Angel Moroni quoted these verses to Joseph Smith the night of his first visit to him and said "that this was not yet fulfilled, but was soon to be." [^13] It should be observed that a number of the signs prophesied by the Savior (see Chapter Two) are included in this prophecy. It appears that Moroni wanted to impress upon Joseph Smith's mind that this was the beginning of the last days and that the world would have a "voice of warning" in the form of various signs. [^14]

The reference in Joel to deliverance from these judgments was discussed in Chapter Five, with particular regard to the Latter-day Saints. In Chapter Four consideration was also given to the places of gathering as well as information about the Jewish remnant.

The Lord has definitely said that these are the last days and that terrible judgments await the world if repentance is not accepted. The influence of the great apostasy, the deception by Lucifer [^15] have brought a spirit of unbelief with its attendant evils. (See Chapter One.) A profession of belief in God, but obedience to his laws is lacking. The great advances made by science, as indicated above, have made many put their trust in the arm of flesh, man, to the exclusion of God, as a real influence in their lives. (Chapter Two.)

The material advancement that man has made in the decades past has also brought forth a flood of articles and predictions about the future of our civilization.

In retrospect the editor of the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, writing five years after the first issue of this magazine appeared, writes as follows:

The first issue of the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists appeared on December 15, 1945. It was born of a combination of gloom and hope. Standing around the first nuclear fire lit under the West Stands of the Athletic Field of the University of Chicago in December, 1942, and two and a half years later, in July, 1945, watching the flash of the first atomic bomb explosion at Alamogordo, the scientists had a vision of terrible clarity: They saw the cities of the world, including their own, falling into dust and going up in flames. They saw that human history had but to remain true to the pattern it has followed for thousands of years— a sequence of wars interrupted by brief interludes of peace—for our civilization, which we had heretofore believed to be the first stage of an ultimate and universal civilization of mankind (different—we thought—from the local civilizations of the past, that rose and became stagnant and disintegrated), to end in chaos and destruction, the like of which had not been seen on earth. In the summer of 1945, some of us walked the streets of Chicago vividly imagining the sky suddenly lit by a giant fireball, the steel skeletons of skyscrapers bending into grotesque shapes and their masonry raining into the streets below, until a great cloud of dust rose and settled over the crumbling city. (January, 1951, p. 3.)

It was hoped that "the fate of Hiroshima and Nagasaki would cause man to turn a new leaf." The publication of this bulletin was a part of these efforts to persuade him to do so. However, "the patient is steadily getting worse." A world's armament race is still in progress in which more destructive ways of killing man are being sought. "What then have we to show for five years of effort, except the relief of having 'spoken and saved our souls'—and the doubtful satisfaction of having been right in our gloomy predictions?" [^16]

Although "the great and terrible day of the Lord"—for those who are not prepared (Chapters Three and Four)—will come, and the wicked shall not stand, the Latter-day Saint, trusting in the promises of the Lord, looks forward to a future filled with hope (Chapter Five). If this is not realized in mortality, the blessings of happiness and eternal advancement are possible in the hereafter.

Message Two—(A) The Events of the Future

The signs of the times are to prepare those who will heed them for the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ in power and glory. This preparation should be going on now in the lives of the members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. This Church is fulfilling its divine mission by having the gospel preached to as many as will listen. The work of redeeming the dead by providing temples for faithful members to officiate in behalf of their deceased relatives continues. Large expenditures of funds is being made to collect genealogical data for this purpose. The third objective of the Church is also being carried forward—the provision through Church service and other opportunities to help the members perfect their lives. The inspired leadership in the Church continues to admonish, guide, and counsel the members in their duties and responsibilities. They show us wherein we may correct our lives and make necessary preparation for our temporal as well as spiritual salvation.

In addition to the events of the future in the form of signs still to be fulfilled (Chapters Two, Three and Four), the second coming of Christ is the greatest event of which the prophets have spoken. The revelations of our dispensation have all suggested the nearness of the event. It is apparent that Jesus will make three appearances, one to his people, a second to the besieged Jews, and the last to the world in great power and glory.

The millennium as a period of promise for the honorable of the earth, including the heathen nations, has already been mentioned. The end of the world occurring at the second coming of Christ means the end of moral wickedness on the earth, but life continues on the earth. Many wonderful privileges and opportunities await the faithful mortals during this era. The gathering of His Saints will be by appointment to designated areas just before "the arm of the Lord fall(s) upon the nations." [^17] All Saints should look continuously to the leadership of the Church for guidance and instruction. (Chapter Five.)

As indicated in this chapter, Satan will be loosed for a short season toward the end of the millennium, and the last great battle between the forces of good and evil will result. Satan and his followers will be cast into outer darkness to remain forever. The earth will then become celestialized as the habitat of celestial beings, while other resurrected persons will reside on some other world.

Message Two—(B) Man's Destiny

When man's body dies, his spirit enters the world of spirits to continue his education in the plan of life and salvation. There will be opportunities for further advancement on the way to perfection for those who have prepared themselves while in mortality. Happiness will be theirs in the contemplation of success thus far attained and the joy of continuing to serve in behalf of God's children in whom they were interested during mortality.

Every person will learn that what he desired while on the earth will still be his desire in the spirit world. No one's life will be changed by some magical process, but by effort of the same kind that he could have expended in mortality and won a crown of righteousness. The transition of death will not change one's character, but change we must in order to obtain the blessings of one of the kingdoms of glory as resurrected beings. This is the doctrine of "overcoming." (Chapters Seven and Ten.)

The final destiny of man following the resurrection of the body (Chapters Nine and Ten) is assignment into one of four kingdoms: Perdition (no glory) and kingdoms of glory—telestial, terrestrial, or celestial. This will be done only after an opportunity is afforded all to inherit the highest kingdom of which they are capable. The gospel of Jesus Christ saves all men who will obey, either in this life or in the future, except those (sons of perdition) who cannot repent. (Chapters Ten and Eleven.)

The faithful of God's children will have the privilege of becoming the sons of God, even gods by obedience to the higher laws and ordinances of the gospel. The powers of God are bestowed upon these only. (Chapter Eleven.)

As concerning salvation, the gospel of Jesus Christ is neither narrow nor intolerant, for all shall be saved in accordance with the laws which are lived.

Message Three—Evidences of Life Hereafter

One of the principal messages of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the fact that there is a consciousness of the spirit at death of the body, and that the resurrection of the body is an assured fact. The Doctrine and Covenants as a principal book of scripture testifies to a large part of that message.

Some of the major items of evidence, at least representative types, have been cited in this series of chapters. For purpose of convenience the chapter number and the evidence given in these chapters are shown below:

The existence of evil spirits (Chapter Six.)

Testimonies of ancient prophets concerning the spirit world (Chapter Six) and the resurrection (Chapter Nine.)

Visitation to the spirit world by Jedediah M. Grant (Chapter Seven.)

Visit of departed dead to Parley P. Pratt while in mortality (Chapter Seven.)

Vision of the Savior's sojourn in the spirit world by Joseph F. Smith (Chapter Seven.)

Visions of the resurrection by Joseph Smith and Wilford Woodruff (Chapter Ten.)

Sight-knowledge of God and Jesus. (Chapter Eight.)

Appearances of resurrected beings. (Chapter Eight.)

Acquaintanceship with angels. (Chapter Eight.)

Book of Mormon as a witness. (Chapter Eight.)

In addition, the unreasonableness of rejecting the resurrection because the knowledge of how a resurrection occurs (when there are so many things about us which cannot be explained) is pointed out by example. (Chapter Nine.)

A Testimony

Above all else, as indicated in Chapter Eight, the greatest evidence to any individual is the personal witness by the Holy Ghost. When this spirit speaks to one's soul there is no mistaking either the source of the revelation or the reality of the experience. On matters relating to the future life, every fibre of one's being is aware of its reality. Doubt and uncertainty flee and in their place are assurance and "peace in this world," with a hope of "eternal life in the world to come." [^18]

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Daniel 7:27, Matt. 5:5.
[^2] Doc. & Cov. 29:22-25, 43:31.
[^3] Ibid., 88:25.
[^4] Ibid., 76:5-10.
[^5] Ibid., 77:1.
[^6] Doc. & Cov. 29:22.
[^7] Ibid., 27:11.
[^8] Ibid., 88:112.
[^9] Ibid., 29:38; 76:44.
[^10] Ibid., 88:102.
[^11] Ibid., 88:103-107.
[^12] Joel 2:28.
[^13] P. of G. P., Joseph Smith 2:41.
[^14] Doc. & Cov. 88:88-91.
[^15] Ibid., 10:24-27.
[^16] Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, January, 1951, p. 5.
[^17] Doc. & Cov. 45:47.
[^18] Doc. & Cov. 59:23.
