Alexander B. Morrison, Visions of Zion (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1993)

Chapter One

"Zion, That Goodly Land of Promise"

The dream of a better world is as old as mankind. From time immemorial, men and women of faith and hope have dreamed of a Holy City, whose king is the Lord God Omnipotent; a place of refuge for the righteous fleeing the storms of a wicked world; an abode where peace is in every heart, where there is no fear nor want and all people are brothers and sisters, where faith and purity shine in every face. That place, in Judeo-Christian parlance, is called Zion.

Saints in our day as in other eras look forward to the establishment of Zion. "We will sing of Zion, kingdom of our God./Zion is the pure in heart,/Those who seek the Savior's part./Zion soon in all the world will rise to meet her God." (Hymns, no. 47.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith, for whom the vision of Zion was always near, stated that "the building up of Zion is a cause that has interested the people of God in every age; it is a theme upon which prophets, priests, and kings have dwelt with a peculiar delight." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1976], p. 231; hereinafter referred to as TPJS.)

Earthly Zions

A city called Zion existed long ago, in a day when "the Lord came and dwelt with his people, and they dwelt in righteousness." (Moses 7:16.) Enoch, their great prophet-leader, "built a city that was called the City of Holiness, even Zion. . . . And the Lord called his people Zion, because they were of one heart and one mind, and dwelt in righteousness; and there was no poor among them." (Moses 7:19, 18.)

Though Zion was blessed, the residue of the people were cursed by God because of iniquity. (See Moses 7:20.) Since Zion cannot abide with Babylon, in time the City of Enoch "was taken up into heaven. . . . For God received it [and its inhabitants] up into his own bosom; and from thence went forth the saying, Zion Is Fled." (Moses 7:21, 69.)

Though the City of Enoch is no more on earth, the dream of a Holy City lives on in the hearts of the righteous. "The Lord loveth the gates [i.e., the cities] of Zion more than all the dwellings of Jacob," sang the psalmist (Psalm 87:2), and the great Isaiah intoned, "In the last days . . . the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow unto it. And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for out of Zion shall go forth the law." (Isaiah 2:2-3.) Of that day the prophet declared, "They shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruninghooks: nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more." (V. 4.)

Though the righteous long for Zion, the concept of a Holy City, in impure hands, can and has been used for less than holy purposes. Aurelius Augustinus, the Catholic St. Augustine, devoted thirteen years of his life to writing his masterwork, De Civitate Dei (The City of God), "the first great work to shape and define the medieval mind." Augustine divided all mankind into two camps: Civitas dei (the City of God) and Civitas Terrena (the City of the World). Where one chose to abide, said Augustine, would determine his or her ultimate destiny. "Mankind is divided into two sorts: such as live according to man, and such as live according to God. These we mystically call the 'two cities' or societies, the one predestined to reign eternally with God, the other condemned to perpetual torment with Satan." Theological details aside, Augustine clearly identified the church of his day with "the City of God," implying that the state, symbolized by Civitas Terrena, would be subordinate to the ecclesiastical power. We contend that the church of Augustine's day, the late fourth and early fifth centuries a.d., had already lost divine authority and was an apostate organization. No matter; for centuries Augustine's reasoning was used by ecclesiastical leaders, good and bad, to grapple for power with kings and emperors. (See William Manchester, A World Lit Only by Fire [Boston: Little, Brown, and Company, 1992], pp. 9-10.)

Over the centuries, all attempts by uninspired clerics and others to establish a "Holy City" have ended in abject failure. For example, radical Anabaptists tried to set up the New Jerusalem in the Westfalian city of Munster in 1534-35. Armed force was used, and a deluded character named Jan Bockelson went so far as to declare himself king over "the Kingdom of Zion." Troops of the local Catholic bishop stormed the city and, in a frenzy of blood and butchery, killed thousands, including Bockelson and the mayor of Munster. Many other Anabaptists in Germany suffered similar fates. (See Lewis W. Spitz, The Protestant Reformation 1517-1559 [New York: Harper and Row, 1985], pp. 171-72.)

The lesson is clear: Zion can be established only with God's approval. Save His hand be in the work, it will fail. "Except the Lord build the house, they labour in vain that build it: except the Lord keep the city, the watchman waketh but in vain." (Psalm 127:1.)

The machinations of men aside, in addition to the Zion of Enoch's day, the dream of a "Zion Society" was fulfilled on one other occasion in human history. It occurred on the American continent in the aftermath of the visit of the resurrected Christ to the faithful Nephite remnant. So mighty were His teachings, so sublime His loving presence in their midst, that all the people, both Nephites and Lamanites, were converted unto the Lord, "and there were no contentions and disputations among them, and every man did deal justly one with another. And they had all things common among them; therefore there were not rich and poor, bond and free, but they were all made free, and partakers of the heavenly gift. And . . . there was no contention in the land, because of the love of God which did dwell in the hearts of the people. And there were no envyings, nor strifes, nor tumults, nor whoredoms, nor lyings, nor murders, nor any manner of lasciviousness; and surely there could not be a happier people among all the people who had been created by the hand of God. There were no robbers, nor murderers, neither were there Lamanites, nor any manner of -ites; but they were in one, the children of Christ, and heirs to the kingdom of God. And how blessed were they!" (4 Nephi 1:2-3, 5-18.)

Sadly, after two centuries the American Zion was destroyed. Divisions, evils, false churches, pride, and persecutions arose; and the Nephite civilization tore itself apart in a paroxysm of blood and horror.

Although it didn't last long, one other society, following the mortal ministry of Christ, had some of the characteristics of a Zion Society. This fledgling society is referred to in conjunction with the day of Pentecost, when the Spirit was poured out in abundance. On that occasion, Peter "with many . . . words did . . . testify and exhort, saying, Save yourselves from this untoward generation. Then they that gladly received his word were baptized: and the same day there were added unto them about three thousand souls. . . . And all that believed were together, and had all things common; and sold their possessions and goods, and parted them to all men, as every man had need. And they, continuing daily with one accord in the temple, and breaking bread from house to house, did eat their meat with gladness and singleness of heart." (Acts 2:40-41, 44-47.)

What Is Zion?

Is Zion, then, a place, a geographic entity? In a sense, yes. It is Enoch's "City of Holiness," to be sure; but the term refers also to other places wherein congregations of the righteous forsake the world and seek perfection in Christ and His gospel. The Prophet Joseph Smith declared, "The whole of America is Zion itself from north to south, and is described by the Prophets, who declare that it is the Zion where the mountain of the Lord should be, and that it should be in the center of the land." (TPJS, p. 362.)

During the Millennium, Zion will have two great centers of strength, two Zion cities: Jerusalem, the Holy City of the Jews, and a "New Jerusalem" to be built at a time when the Lord wills it, in Jackson County, Missouri. It, too, will be Zion. There will not, however, be an opportunity for all the righteous to live in the Zion city called the "New Jerusalem." Of them, the Lord, who is no respecter of persons, has said, "I have other places which I will appoint unto them, and they shall be called stakes, for the curtains or the strength of Zion." (D&C 101:21.)

Thus, Zion may be thought of in symbolic terms as a great tent with a canopy that covers the earth, supported by poles and cords and stakes. Isaiah spoke of the need to "enlarge the place of thy [Zion's] tent, and let them stretch forth the curtains of thine habitations: spare not, lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy stakes." (Isaiah 54:2.) As such, Zion serves as a refuge from the wickedness of the world, a place where the righteous Saints of God may be sheltered from "wrath when it shall be poured out without mixture upon the whole earth." (D&C 115:6.) In a broad sense, Zion thus refers to the Church and kingdom of God "scattered upon all the face of the earth, and also among all nations." (1 Nephi 22:3.) As groups of the Saints in various locations grow in numbers and in their level of spiritual maturity, there comes the day when a new stake of Zion is established by priesthood authority. To that new part of Zion the righteous gather, and thus, steadily and surely, as the people become purified, "Zion . . . increase[s] in beauty, and in holiness; her borders . . . [are] enlarged; her stakes . . . [are] strengthened; yea, verily . . . Zion . . . arise[s] and put[s] on her beautiful garments." (D&C 82:14.)

This process of building and strengthening the great tent of Zion will continue until the dawning of the millennial day, when the King of kings will return in power and glory to dwell upon the earth. Then will the saints of God "break forth [in] joy" (Mosiah 15:30) as the scattered sheep of Israel gather to Zion and fulfill the marvelous millennial promises so long foretold by the scriptures. The New Jerusalem in America will have been built before that glorious Second Coming of Christ. To that Holy City will come Enoch of old and all his city. "And the Lord said unto Enoch: Then [that is, after Christ's Second Coming] shalt thou and all thy city meet them there [that is, in Zion, the New Jerusalem], and we will receive them into our bosom, and they shall see us; and we will fall upon their necks, and they shall fall upon our necks, and we will kiss each other; And there shall be mine abode, and it shall be Zion, . . . and for the space of a thousand years the earth shall rest." (Moses 7:63-64.)

Early Attempts to Build a Latter-day Zion

Early in this dispensation, the Saints tried on several occasions to build Zion in America. The first attempt to live the law of consecration and stewardship occurred in 1831 at Kirtland, Ohio. This was almost immediately abandoned, however; and those involved were sent to help build up the "City of Zion" in Jackson County, Missouri. Intense persecution drove the Saints out of Missouri in the late 1830s.

When the Saints migrated to the Great Basin following the martyrdom of the Prophet Joseph, attempts were again made to invoke the law of consecration in the 1850s and to set up the United Order in the 1870s. Human problems and frailties with which the Saints struggled as they attempted to live the United Order are illustrated by experiences at Orderville, established in 1874-75 in southeastern Utah. Many of the people in the Orderville United Order of Zion had come from the Muddy River Mission in southeastern Nevada, where they had nearly starved trying to raise cotton. Tempered in hardship, they had developed the camaraderie and sense of unity that come from the sharing of adversity together. At Orderville they laid out farms and built houses, a school, a communal dining hall and kitchen, a bakery, barns and sheds, and shops for carpenters, coopers, blacksmiths, shoemakers, and so on. Grains, cotton, fruits, and vegetables were raised and processed along with cattle, sheep, and poultry. A woolen factory was established. The group attained almost complete self-sufficiency. The Order prospered for several years before it began to unravel.

Some of the reasons for the ultimate failure of Orderville and of other attempts to set up Zion are illustrated by the following stories:

A certain young man of Orderville felt the need for a new pair of trousers. Unfortunately for him, his application for a new pair was denied; the ones he had were still serviceable. There was a big lamb crop that spring. The ingenious young fellow surreptitiously sheared the wool from the docked lambs' tails and when next assigned to take a load of wool to Nephi, took the lambs' tail wool with his load and exchanged it for a pair of store pants. His entrance at the next dance, garbed in his newly acquired sartorial splendor, reportedly caused a sensation!

The president of the Order demanded an explanation, which the young man truthfully gave. It was pointed out to the young man that the pants belonged to the Order and not to him. They would be taken, he was told, unseamed, and used as a pattern for all pants made in the future. He would have the first pair.

The tailoring department was soon swamped with orders for pants. Strangely, many boys reported that their old-style pants, produced in the Order's shop using coarse home-spun cloth, were wearing out, particularly on the seat. Some of the elders became suspicious. They noticed that the boys seemed to spend a lot of time in the shed where the grindstone was housed. Investigations showed that the boys were wearing out their pants on the grindstone! The elders protested but finally capitulated. A load of wool was dispatched to trade for commercially manufactured cloth. The tailor shop was soon a busy place. The pants rebellion was over; materialism, albeit on a minor scale, had won.

A certain sister of the Order washed and ironed clothes for miners at the nearby Silver Reef mines. Instead of turning the money she received over to the Order, she spent it on her children. A complaint was made to the bishop, but as she had always been a faithful worker, she was forgiven and told "go [to work] and sin no more." The lesson is plain: Zion cannot be built up by a people whose vision extends no further than me and mine. (See Mark A. Pendleton, "The Orderville United Order of Zion," Utah State Historical Quarterly, October 1939, pp. 141-59. For a detailed discussion of various attempts to build up Zion, including the Orderville experience, see L. W. Arrington, F. Y. Fox, and D. L. May, Building the City of God: Community and Cooperation among the Mormons [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1976]).

Although persecution of the Church, both in Missouri and Utah, certainly did not favor successful implementation of the various attempts to build up Zion, it must be said that the Saints were not yet prepared to live a celestial law. Consequently, all the attempts failed, or at least fell short of their objectives. Though there were many individual exceptions, collectively speaking the hearts of the people were not pure; "they did not hearken altogether unto the precepts and commandments which [God] gave unto them." (D&C 103:4.) Because "they esteemed lightly [His] counsel" (D&C 101:8), the Saints suffered great afflictions at the hands of their enemies. The redemption of Zion has had necessarily to be delayed until the Saints, through chastening, learn obedience and are worthy to dwell in the perfect society that characterizes Zion. Oh, that we might have learned what Joseph Smith taught so clearly: "We ought to have the building up of Zion as our greatest object." (TPJS, p. 160.) Then would we honor the covenants given to prepare us for Zion!

Behold, I say unto you, were it not for the transgressions of my people, speaking concerning the church and not individuals, they might have been redeemed even now.

But behold, they have not learned to be obedient to the things which I required at their hands, but are full of all manner of evil, and do not impart of their substance, as becometh saints, to the poor and afflicted among them; and are not united according to the union required by the law of the celestial kingdom; and Zion cannot be built up unless it is by the principles of the law of the celestial kingdom; otherwise I cannot receive her unto myself.

And my people must needs be chastened until they learn obedience, if it must needs be, by the things which they suffer. . . .

Therefore, in consequence of the transgressions of my people, it is expedient in me that mine elders should wait for a little season for the redemption of Zion—that they themselves may be prepared, and that my people may be taught more perfectly, and have experience, and know more perfectly concerning their duty, and the things which I require at their hands.

And this cannot be brought to pass until mine elders are endowed with power from on high.

For behold, I have prepared a great endowment and blessing to be poured out upon them, inasmuch as they are faithful and continue in humility before me.

Therefore it is expedient in me that mine elders should wait for a little season, for the redemption of Zion. (D&C 105:2-6, 9-13.)

Though the Saints failed in early attempts to establish Zion, it is well to keep their efforts in perspective. Although Orderville, for example, ultimately failed, many of its members looked back upon their experiences together as a time when they nearly realized the perfect Christian fellowship envisioned by the prophets. Historian Andrew Jensen, who visited Orderville in 1892, after its dissolution, wrote that the good Saints of Orderville gained an experience "that will never be forgotten by those who passed through it; and I was assured by several of the brethren who stuck to it till the last that they never felt happier in their lives than they did when the Order was in complete running order and they were devoting their entire time, talent, and strength for the common good. . . . Good feelings, brotherly love, and unselfish motives . . . characterized most of those who were members . . . until the last." (Deseret News, March 23, 1892, p. 4.)

Why did the Saints of the nineteenth century fail to establish Zion? Why did they fail to heed this divine commandment: "Thou art called to labor in my vineyard, and to build up my church, and to bring forth Zion, that it may rejoice upon the hills and flourish"? (D&C 39:13.) Why did they stop up their ears against this prophetic warning: "If Zion will not purify herself, so as to be approved of in all things, in His sight, He will seek another people; for His work will go on until Israel is gathered, and they who will not hear His voice must expect to feel His wrath." (TPJS, p. 18.) What were the abiding sins of our brethren and sisters that denied them promised blessings? Can we in our day learn from their shortcomings? Are their weaknesses our own?

It is fair to say that early attempts in this dispensation to redeem Zion failed primarily because of three abiding problems or weaknesses that sadly persist in our day. The Saints could not bring themselves to give up the things of this world; they were not united; and they were not willing to live the laws and commandments of the gospel. Since those who do not learn the lessons of history are condemned to relive it, it is instructive to consider, at least briefly, some aspects of those faults that continue to block the redemption of Zion.

First, there is a persistent hunger for the things of this world with its attendant selfishness and envying, against which the prophets have always spoken out in boldness. As his society turned from a righteous to a wicked nation in just a few years, Nephi wrote: "There began to be some disputings among the people; and some were lifted up unto pride and boastings because of their exceedingly great riches, yea, even unto great persecutions. . . . And the people began to be distinguished by ranks. . . . And thus there became a great inequality in all the land. . . . Now the cause of this iniquity of the people was this—Satan had great power, unto the stirring up of the people to do all manner of iniquity, and to the puffing them up with pride, tempting them to seek for power, and authority, and riches, and the vain things of the world." (3 Nephi 6:10-15.)

Lest we falsely believe that those circumstances applied uniquely to the Nephite church, it is well to keep in mind these somber words of Moroni, speaking to our generation and time:

"Behold, I speak unto you as if ye were present, and yet ye are not. But behold, Jesus Christ hath shown you unto me, and I know your doing.

"And I know that ye do walk in the pride of your hearts; and there are none save a few only who do not lift themselves up in the pride of their hearts, unto the wearing of very fine apparel, unto envying, and strifes, and malice, and persecutions, and all manner of iniquities; and your churches, yea, even every one, have become polluted because of the pride of your hearts.

"For behold, ye do love money, and your substance, and your fine apparel, and the adorning of your churches, more than ye love the poor and the needy, the sick and the afflicted." (Mormon 8:35-37.)

As have his fellow prophets, Brigham Young sorrowed often over the weaknesses of the Saints. Even as Johnston's Army approached in 1857, Brigham said: "I am more afraid of covetousness in our elders than I am of the hordes of hell. Have we men out now of that class? I believe so. I am afraid of such spirits; for they are more powerful and injurious to this people than all hell outside of our borders. All our enemies . . . and all hell with them marshalled against us, could not do us the injury that covetousness in the hearts of this people could do." (Journal of Discourses, 5:350.)

Many other quotations could be given illustrating Brigham Young's concern about the spiritual malingering of some of the Saints. One additional comment will suffice. In President Young's last sermon, he said: "The devils in hell [are] looking at this people . . . and trying to overthrow us, and the people are still shaking hands with the servants of the devil, instead of sanctifying themselves and calling upon the Lord and doing the work which he has commanded us and put into our hands to do." (Journal of Discourses, 18:304.)

Secondly, Zion was not redeemed earlier in this dispensation because the Saints were not united, nor can it be until we practice the strength found in unity. "Let the Saints of the Most High ever cultivate this principle, and the most glorious blessings must result, not only to them individually, but to the whole church—the order of the kingdom will be maintained, its officers respected, and its requirements readily and cheerfully obeyed." (TPJS, p. 174.)

Unity is one of the central themes of the gospel. In His great intercessory prayer, Jesus asked for His apostles "that they all may be one; as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us: that the world may believe that thou hast sent me." (John 17:21.) The people of Enoch were of one heart and one mind as were those in the golden days of the Nephite church. "If ye are not one ye are not mine." (D&C 38:27.) "And all things shall be done by common consent in the church." (D&C 26:2.)

It is self-evident that the third reason for failure to redeem Zion falls upon those who do not keep the commandments of God and who thus cannot be pure in heart. At a time when the Saints who had gathered in Missouri were suffering great persecution, the Lord revealed through the Prophet Joseph that their afflictions had come upon them "in consequence of their transgressions. . . . There were jarrings, and contentions, and envyings, and strifes, and lustful and covetous desires among them; therefore by these things they polluted their inheritances." (D&C 101:2, 6.) The Lord must have a pure people to do His work. "It takes a Zion people to make a Zion society," as President Benson has reminded us. (Ensign, May 1986, p. 4.)

Though the gulf between the Church and the world is wide, and becoming wider, it is well to remember this is the great day of Satan's power. He seduces many, even of the elect, lulling "them away into carnal security," and thus he "cheateth their souls, and leadeth them . . . carefully down to hell." (2 Nephi 28:21.) We lose too many to the adversary. Too many of our members are part-time disciples, trying to live with one foot in the world and the other in the kingdom. Others cringe in shame before the mocking crowds in the "great and spacious building" (1 Nephi 11:36) of the world, careless and casual in their commitment, and, like the seed that fell upon stony ground (see Matthew 13), soon wither away and are lost. Too many deny Christ as they disregard and hold up for contempt the sacred covenants made in God's holy temples.

Harsh words? Perhaps, but listen to President Spencer W. Kimball's somber warning given in an inspired message on the occasion of the bicentennial of the United States: "Carnal man has tended to transfer his trust in God to material things. . . . When men have fallen under the power of Satan, and lost the faith, they have put in its place a hope in the 'arm of flesh' and in 'gods of silver, and gold, of brass'—that is, in idols. . . . Many people spend most of their time working the service of a self-image that includes sufficient money, stocks, bonds, investment portfolios, property, credit cards, furnishings, automobiles, and the like to guarantee carnal security throughout, it is hoped, a long and happy life. . . . We must leave off theworship of modern-day idols and a reliance on the 'arm of flesh,' for the Lord has said to all the world in our day, 'I will not spare any that remain in Babylon.' . . . When I review the performance of this people [those in America] in comparison with what is expected, I am appalled and frightened."

Then, speaking directly to the Saints, President Kimball continued: "The Brethren constantly cry out against that which is intolerable in the sight of the Lord: against pollution of mind, body, and our surroundings; against vulgarity, stealing, lying, pride, and blasphemy; against fornication, adultery, homosexuality, and all other abuses of the sacred power to create; against murder and all that is like unto it; against all manner of desecration.

"That such a cry should be necessary among a people so blessed is amazing to me. And that such things should be found even among the Saints to some degree is scarcely believable, for these are a people who are in possession of many gifts of the Spirit, who have knowledge that puts the eternities into perspective, who have been shown the way to eternal life.

"Sadly, however, we find that to be shown the way is not necessarily to walk in it, and many have not been able to continue in faith. These have submitted themselves in one degree or another to the enticings of Satan and his servants and joined with those of 'the world' in lives of ever-deepening idolatry." (Ensign, June 1976, pp. 4, 6.)

President Kimball was right, of course. There is no way around it. We must do better if we are to establish Zion! President Harold B. Lee also made this point very clear: "I have had great difficulty understanding how a people who are not able to sacrifice to a point where they can pay a tenth of their interest annually . . . are more than 10% ready for the United Order." (Conference Report, October 1941, p. 113.)

In light of our shortcomings as individuals and as a people, how thankful I am for God's loving mercy: "Verily I say unto you, notwithstanding their [the Saints'] sins, my bowels are filled with compassion towards them. I will not utterly cast them off; and in the day of wrath I will remember mercy." (D&C 101:9.)

The Pure In Heart

Though Zion is a place and a people, perhaps the definition that best describes it is "the pure in heart." (D&C 97:21.) In that connection it must be noted that Zion itself is by its very nature perfect, flawless, constant in its purity and beauty, totally clean before God, without imperfections of any kind. Although the members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints who live in stakes and wards are already gathered, in a sense, to a prototypical, pre-millennial Zion, that of which we are now a part is intended to prepare us for the perfect Zion to come. We are being schooled and trained for better things. We are as children learning sums before proceeding to a study of calculus, playing with blocks before building a great edifice.

An important principle of this training program is that the institution is not what makes people good; rather, it is goodness that permits the institution to be established. Zion cannot be established with impure people who have not completely consecrated their lives to Christ. Zion will be established only when the Saints are pure! When we are pure, Zion will come.

The Dream of Zion

In its complete sense, then, Zion remains for us the golden, flawless ideal, the dream of what we may become if we are worthy, the goal toward which we must labor, the paradise which though now lost may yet be regained. The dream of establishing Zion thus is a dream of perfection that deals with the conquest of the heart rather than with constructing buildings or paving streets with gold. It calls us to subdue and purify our passions, to overcome the carnality of the natural man; and to become "as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon [us], even as a child doth submit to his father." (Mosiah 3:19.) To do so is a daunting task. Like every great journey, it commences with a single step.

Remember the journey of Zion's Camp? Various brethren were called to march from Ohio to come to the aid of Zion (Jackson County, Missouri), to bring military relief to the persecuted Saints there. But when the several hundred men who had marched from Ohio neared their intended destination, the Prophet Joseph disbanded them. Was the expedition a failure? Perhaps yes, in one sense; but from a broader point of view, a glorious victory was achieved. It was not a military victory, of course, but one of the spirit, as men learned to purify and sanctify themselves in Zion's cause. Of that march Elder Dallin H. Oaks has said: "Most of the men who were to lead the Church for the next half-century, including those who would take the Saints across the plains and colonize the Intermountain West, came to know the Prophet Joseph and received their formative leadership training in the march of Zion's Camp." (Ensign, November 1985, p. 62.) Elder Orson F. Whitney said of Zion's Camp: "The redemption of Zion is more than the purchase or recovery of lands, the building of cities, or even the founding of nations." (Life of Heber C. Kimball, 2nd ed. [Salt Lake City: Stevens and Wallis, Inc., 1945], p. 65.) At its center, the redemption of Zion is the purification of souls.

But is the establishment of Zion only a golden dream, forever unobtainable, ever receding before us like an illusion? To the Latter-day Saints, who believe in the eventual perfectibility of mankind, there can be a Zion on earth, as there has been already, albeit only twice, and that but briefly. We are thus under sacred obligation to awake, arise, and get to work; to make its attainment "our greatest object"; to "push many people to Zion with songs of everlasting joy upon their heads." (D&C 66:11.) There must be no sense of undue haste; the order of the kingdom must be maintained and the work done "in the Lord's way." But delay is inexcusable. As always, the greatest and most difficult task will be to change ourselves. "Go ye out from Babylon. Be ye clean. . . . Go ye out from among the nations, even from Babylon, from the midst of wickedness, which is spiritual Babylon." (D&C 133:5, 14.) Our greatest task, as a people and as individual Saints, is to purify ourselves, to give away all of our sins to know Christ (see Alma 22:18), to live all of Christ's commandments. That is the measure of our devotion, of our commitment to Him. In what may well be the greatest verse in all of Holy Writ, Jesus explained: "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me: and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself to him." (John 14:21.)

Thus, "let everyone labour to prepare himself for the vineyard, sparing a little time to comfort the mourners; to bind up the broken hearted; to reclaim the backslider; to bring back the wanderer; to reinvite into the Kingdom such as have been cut off. . . . To work righteousness, and with one heart and one mind prepare to help redeem Zion, that goodly land of promise where the willing and obedient shall be blessed." (History of the Church, 2:229.)
