Alexander B. Morrison, Visions of Zion (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1993)

Chapter Two

Becoming Pure in Heart

Defining and describing Zion, while undoubtedly important and interesting, are not sufficient. If we accept the Prophet Joseph's dictum that building up Zion is our greatest task, then much more is required. Zion can be established only by those who are pure in heart and whose focus is on the kingdom of God rather than upon Babylon: "No man can serve two masters: for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon," said Jesus. (Matthew 6:24.) Nephi echoed that theme: "The laborer in Zion shall labor for Zion; for if they labor for money they shall perish." (2 Nephi 26:31.) Any weakening of focus or attention, any vacillating in purpose or energy, will only delay the redemption of Zion. Clean hands, pure hearts, and an eye single to the glory of God are required.

Those whose hearts are pure do the right things for the right reasons. Their motives are pure and unsullied by self-interest, ambition, pride, or malice. Hearts that are pure are broken and contrite, humble and devoid of guile. Consistent and concerted daily effort is needed to attain and maintain such Christ-like behavior. "When ye shall do your alms," said Jesus to the Nephites, "do not sound a trumpet before you, as will hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, that they may have glory of men. Verily I say unto you, they have their reward." (3 Nephi 13:2.)

The great struggle of life is to overcome the natural man, with his carnality and selfishness, and to become a Saint of God through the Atonement of Christ. It is not a struggle once won forever finished, but a battle that must be engaged every day that we live. As Nephi said, "If ye shall press forward, feasting upon the word of Christ, and endure to the end, behold, thus saith the Father: Ye shall have eternal life." (2 Nephi 31:20; italics added.)

Whatever our age or status, we must never lower our guard or slacken our efforts. In his great valedictory sermon, King Benjamin warned, "If ye do not watch yourselves, and your thoughts, and your words, and your deeds, and observe the commandments of God, and continue in the faith of what ye have heard . . . even unto the end of your lives, ye must perish." (Mosiah 4:30.)

President John Taylor, who knew more than most about trials and tribulations, had this to say about the Latter-day Saints: "The only fear I have for the Latter-day Saints is that they will not live their religion. And I call upon you here to-day to lay aside your covetousness, your greed and your avarice, and act honorably and justly one with another as your brethren, humble yourselves before God and seek unto him for his guidance, and he will help you, he will bless and sustain you, and he will deliver you." (Journal of Discourses, 21:6.)

Knowing something of the amazing capacity of the human race to rationalize, to temporize, to vacillate, those who struggle to be pure in heart will constantly reexamine and critique their own motives and actions. They will wake each morning with a godly discontent in their hearts and commit themselves to action, no matter what the cost in toil and sacrifice. "Woe . . . unto him that is at ease in Zion!" (2 Nephi 28:24.)

The great prophet Alma knew the importance of self-examination: "Can ye look up to God . . . with a pure heart and clean hands . . . having the image of God engraven upon your countenances? . . . If ye have experienced a change of heart, and if ye have felt to sing the song of redeeming love, . . . can ye feel so now? Have ye walked, keeping yourselves blameless before God? Could ye say, if ye were called to die at this time, . . . that ye have been sufficiently humble? . . . Are ye stripped of pride? . . . Is there one among you who is not stripped of envy? . . . Is there one among you that doth make a mock of his brother, or that heapeth upon him persecutions?" (Alma 5:19, 26-30.) Our answers to those and similar questions tell much about our motives and the desires of our hearts.

Come unto Christ

Those who are pure in heart focus their lives on the Father and Son. They have an eye single to the glory of God. They seek to "come unto Christ, . . . and partake of his salvation, and the power of his redemption." They strive to "offer [their] whole souls as an offering unto him." (Omni 1:26.)

What does it mean to come unto Christ? How does it change our lives? The answers are both simple and profound. They include the following:

No mortal being fully lives the celestial life. Each falls short of fully and perfectly keeping all of the commandments. Perfection in every aspect of life eludes us. How easy it is to get discouraged, to say, "I know the gospel's true; I just can't live it. I'm just not strong enough." The glory of the Atonement is that Jesus makes up the deficit in our performance if we truly repent. He asks that we do our very best, holding nothing back, doing all that we can. Unfortunately, we do not always do so. That is where He steps in. His perfection and grace will save the repentant sinner from the imperfection that is part of the human condition. Joseph Smith saw in vision those in the celestial kingdom: "Just [souls] made perfect through Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, who wrought out this perfect atonement through the shedding of his own blood." (D&C 76:69.)

Elder Bruce R. McConkie's paean of praise to the Christ whom he loved reads in part: "I believe in Christ, he ransoms me./From Satan's grasp he sets me free, . . . /And while I strive through grief and pain,/His voice is heard: 'ye shall obtain.'" (Hymns, no. 134.) Faithful trust in Christ's redeeming love and grace, while going forward , "in grief and pain" if need be, will move us toward our celestial goal.

We often seem unwilling to take Christ at His word, to really, in our heart of hearts, believe Him when He says, "Come unto me." We hold back, embarrassed by our own imperfections, convinced we just can't do what is needed, filled with guilt, self-doubt, and even perhaps despair. To such Jesus says, from the fullness and perfection of His love: "Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light." (Matthew 11:28-30.) His love is sufficient to sustain us in our weakness. He stands ready to "encircle [us] in the arms of [His] safety." (Alma 34:16.) Oh, how He longs to come into our lives if we will but let Him do so!

In John's revelation we hear the gentle pleading of the Savior: "Behold, I stand at the door, and knock: if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me." (Revelation 3:20.) Note the need for more than good intentions on our part; action also is required. Coming to Christ requires that we move.

If Christ be our Lord and Master, and we His servant children, our greatest wish will be to be obedient to His commandments. It is an obedience born of love, not fear, not given begrudgingly or half-heartedly but freely, voluntarily. A beloved old Mormon hymn, author unknown, reminds us that although God will plead and persuade , He will not force us to heaven. (See Hymns, no. 240.) His very nature forbids it. A war was fought in heaven to uphold that principle. As we accept Christ as Lord and Master, "we talk of [Him], we rejoice in [Him], we preach of [Him], we prophesy of [Him], and we write according to our prophecies, that our children may know to what source they may look for a remission of their sins." (2 Nephi 25:26.)

These words by the great English hymn writer Isaac Watts express well the feelings of humble gratitude and renewed resolution that flood our souls as we contemplate the true place of Christ in our lives and acknowledge Him as the fount of all blessings:

When I survey the wondrous cross, On which the Prince of glory died, My richest gain I count but loss, And pour contempt on all my pride. Were the whole realm of nature mine, That were a present far too small; Love so amazing, so divine, Demands my soul, my life, my all. (Westminster Choir College Library [Bryn Mawr, Penn.: Theodore Presser Co., 1970].)

Jesus spoke out against the rich who will not give their substance to the poor as well as against the poor whose hearts are not broken, and He found fault with both. (See D&C 56:16-17.) The poor who are "pure in heart," however, "whose hearts are broken, and whose spirits are contrite, . . . shall see the kingdom of God coming in power and great glory unto their deliverance; for the fatness of the earth shall be theirs." (D&C 56:18.)

Racism—the abominable doctrine that claims superiority of one person over another by reason of race, ethnicity, or cultural background—remains as one of the abiding tragedies of societies the world over. The cause of much of the strife and conflict in the world, it is an offense against God and a tool in the devil's hands. Jesus always acted toward others in ways that underlined their worth as human beings, regardless of background or past actions. He received sinners and ate with them, reminding the self-righteous that there is more joy in heaven over "one sinner that repenteth . . . than over ninety and nine just persons, which need no repentance." (Luke 15:7.) God's modern-day prophets have spoken out on the subject of prejudice and bigotry in plain and unmistakable language: "We repudiate efforts to deny to any person his or her inalienable dignity and rights on the abhorrent and tragic theory of the superiority of one race or color over another." (Statement of the First Presidency, December 3, 1987.)

To come to Christ is to be "color-blind," to see all men and women everywhere as one's brothers and sisters. Little children have that ability, as the following sweet letter received from a young African-American girl living in the Birmingham Alabama 3rd Ward attests:

For my birthday I had a sleep-over party. I invited two good friends of mine from class, Nicole who is black and Cameron who is white. Nicole asked me why I invited Cameron and I told her that Cameron is one of my best friends and I wanted her to be there for my birthday. But Nicole said black and white shouldn't mix if they don't have to.

That night I told Mommy what Nicole said and she said to me that if we can't learn to get along, and live together, how can we expect to return to live with Heavenly Father? And I told Nicole that the next day, but I didn't know if she would come to my party. She did, and we all had a good time. It was a great party. I remember learning in Primary that we are all children of God, and we should act that way. I have a testimony that I am a child of God. In the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.

Zandra Stovall, September 22, 1991

Joy is more profound than is pleasure. Ammon, the great Nephite missionary, was so "swallowed up in the joy of his God" that he fell exhausted to the earth. (See Alma 27:17.) Unlike pleasure, joy is not self-centered. Alma's joy was "more full because of the success of [his] brethren," and when he thought of their success, his soul was "carried away, even to the separation of it from the body, as it were, so great [was his] joy." (Alma 29:14, 16.)

Christ's redeeming sacrifice provides for us the ultimate joy, that of coming to a world of spiritual testing and moral agency, with the promise that if we are true and faithful, enduring to the end, we may return to dwell evermore in the presence of the Father and Son. Thus, the faithful who look forward to Christ's coming, who suffer "all manner of afflictions, for [His] sake," are "filled with great joy because of the resurrection of the dead, according to the will and power and deliverance of Jesus Christ from the bands of death." (Alma 4:3-14.)

Indeed, Christ is the way, the truth, the life, and the light. To come to Him in faith and joy, leaving behind the sins and prejudices of this world and of the natural man, His avowed enemy, should be our goal. Those who do so pray they might be found worthy, after this mortal probation comes to a close, to inherit the mansions prepared for them in our Father's kingdom.

Provide Service

For many, Christ is found through righteous service to others. Service is the key that unlocks the doors to celestial halls.

What is there about service that purifies hearts and brings souls to Christ? There is no single answer but rather several. Service drives out selfishness, the great enemy of spirituality. The "natural man," carnal, sensual, and devilish, is deeply selfish, caring not for the unfortunate, not interested in helping to meet the needs of others. He sees them only as creatures to be used to gratify his wants and then to be thrown away. His ears are stopped up against the pleas of the oppressed, the poor, those in pain. Their cries of suffering are of no consequence or interest to him.

Service helps us develop compassion, that most Christ-like of virtues. Compassion is more than sympathy. It involves empathy—an ability to feel deeply the pain of others as though we were one with them. "Are we not all beggars?" asked compassionate King Benjamin. "Do we not all depend upon the same Being, even God, for all the substance which we have, for both food and raiment, and for gold, and for silver, and for all the riches which we have of every kind?" (Mosiah 4:19.) Compassion goes beyond empathy to action, impelling us to bind up the wounds, "succor the weak, lift up the hands which hang down, and strengthen the feeble knees" (D&C 81:5) of those less fortunate than ourselves. It was of the compassionate that Christ spoke when He said, "Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world: for I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in: naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison, and ye came unto me.

"Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an hungered, and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink? When saw we thee a stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and clothed thee? Or when saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came unto thee?

"And the King shall answer and say unto them, Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me." (Matthew 25:34-40.)

As we develop compassion, the scales of indifference, self-righteousness, and selfishness fall from our eyes. We see and feel—perhaps for the first time—the suffering of others. We weep with them and for them. We weep, too, for our own weaknesses and imperfections. We reach out to help the less fortunate as best we can. We think less of ourselves and more of others. We set different priorities, eschewing the tawdry materialism that has claimed so much of our attention heretofore. We set aside "our consuming selfishness," our "love for comfort and ease" (see President Gordon B. Hinckley, Ensign, November 1991, p. 52) and seek to aid those less fortunate than ourselves.

There is so much of suffering in the world, so much of selfishness and indifference, too few tears for those whose burdens are heavy, too little heartfelt concern for others. How easy it is to switch off the television set rather than be haunted by the faces of hollow-eyed children in Africa or of frightened refugees in a dozen places with strange-sounding names. Their sorrow and want make us uneasy. They prick our hearts and arouse our slumbering consciences, and too often we tune them out rather than bear their sorrows. They remind us of neglected responsibilities. Perhaps our response may be, "The man has brought upon himself his misery; therefore I will stay my hand, and will not give unto him of my food, nor impart unto him of my substance that he may not suffer, for his punishments are just." Unto such comes this inspired reply: "Whosoever doeth this . . . hath great cause to repent; and except he repenteth of that which he hath done he perisheth forever, and hath no interest in the kingdom of God. . . . For the sake of retaining a remission of your sins from day to day, that ye may walk guiltless before God—I would that ye should impart of your substance to the poor, every man according to that which he hath." (Mosiah 4:17-18, 26.)

We lighten Christ's yoke as we accept some of the burdens of others, as we help them to have hope rather than dark despair, as we apply a healing balm of Gilead to their scarified, suffering souls.

A recent issue of the Wall Street Journal (November 13, 1992, pp. A1, A16) recounted a heartwarming tale of suffering, compassion, and Christ-like service. Some fifteen years ago, Dr. Ian Jackson, a world-famous craniofacial surgeon, was on a charity mission from his native Scotland to Peru. There he met David Lopez, a tiny Indian boy, just two years old, who had virtually no face at all. A gaping hole covered the areas where his mouth and nose should have been. There were no upper teeth or upper jaw. To drink, David simply tilted back his head and poured the liquid straight down. His lower teeth could actually touch his forehead. Most of David's face had literally been eaten away by a terrible parasitic disease called leishmaniasis.

Relief workers begged Dr. Jackson to help. He was leaving for Scotland the next day but agreed to try to rebuild David's face if the boy could come to Scotland. Eventually, a way was found, and the Jacksons went to Glasgow Airport to pick up David. As he walked down the ramp, they saw a tiny boy wearing scuffed white boots and a hand-knit poncho. A woolen cap was pulled so low on his head that only his big brown eyes and the round hole beneath them werevisible.

The Jacksons took David into their home and into their hearts. There followed long years of surgery—more than eighty operations in all—as Dr. Jackson attempted to give David a new face. All of the doctor's services were donated. Each summer, as other children played, David was in the hospital, his head swathed in bandages.

The painstaking, pioneering surgical efforts to rebuild David's face have gone on for fifteen years. Today, David looks like a young man who has been in a serious automobile accident, but he is well-adjusted and fully functional. He used to be teased and tormented about his looks, but over the years that has died away.

The Jacksons now live in the United States, where Dr. Jackson continues to be one of the leading craniofacial surgeons in the world. In 1982, Mrs. Jackson flew to Peru to try to find David's parents. After a long journey down-river from a remote Catholic mission, David's father was found. He explained that the boy had been born healthy but when he developed leishmaniasis after having been bitten by an infected sandfly, he was taken to the mission to seek treatment. The father gave permission to the Jacksons—who had developed a deep love for David—to adopt him as their own. Since 1984, David Lopez has been David Jackson. Now in his senior year of high school in Michigan, David is a top soccer player and competes on the school wrestling team, though his mother cringes every time his reconstructed face slams into the mat.

I don't know whether Dr. Jackson is a Christian or not, but I do know he is doing God's work. "When ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are only in the service of your God." (Mosiah 2:17.) "If I had a hero," David says, "it would be my dad."

As we lose our lives in compassionate service to others, we develop a deeper understanding of our dependence on God. I return again to the wisdom of King Benjamin: "And now, if God, who has created you, on whom you are dependent for your lives and for all that ye have and are, doth grant unto you whatsoever ye ask that is right, in faith, believing that ye shall receive, O then, how ye ought to impart of the substance that ye have one to another." (Mosiah 4:21.) Said faithful Nephi, "I know in whom I have trusted. My God hath been my support; he hath led me through afflictions in the wilderness; and he hath preserved me upon the waters of the great deep. He hath filled me with his love, even unto the consuming of my flesh. He hath heard my cry by day, and he hath given me knowledge by visions in the nighttime. And upon the wings of his Spirit hath my body been carried away. . . . I will trust in him forever." (2 Nephi 4:19-25, 34.)

A decision to serve God through serving others leads faithful priesthood bearers to bless the sick. As the faith of those who bless unites with that of the recipient of the blessing, great miracles can and do occur. That principle is well illustrated by an event of great importance in the history of the Church in eastern North Carolina as described by Joel Grant Hancock in Strengthened by the Storm: The Coming of the Mormons to Harkers Island, North Carolina, 1897-1909 (Morehead City, North Carolina: Campbell and Campbell, 1988).

In the late 1890s, Joseph Wallace Willis, his wife Margaret, and their numerous children lived in a little community called Diamond City, located on one of the Outer Banks of North Carolina. The people of Diamond City, most of them fishermen and on-shore whalers, were poor and humble but full of faith. One of the Willis children was a twelve-year-old girl named Bertha. She was chronically ill with rheumatoid arthritis, bedridden for days at a time, her only diversion reading from the large family Bible. "Because her hands were swollen shut by the crippling disease, she would resort to opening the book with her elbows and would then read it at whatever point it might fall open." (P. 42.) On January 8, 1898, as Bertha struggled to read the scriptures, the book fell open to James 5:14-15: "Is any sick among you? let him call for the elders of the church; and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord: And the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up."

From her bedroom window Bertha had watched two visitors to her little community. They were Mormon elders—the first in the area—Elders John Witt Telford of Bountiful, Utah, and William Hansen of Logan, Utah. Bertha had heard these two young men referred to as "elders" and knew of no others who answered to that title. "Perhaps," she thought, "they are the men referred to in the Bible." With the faith of a child, she spoke to her mother about it. "Mama," she said, "I believe those Mormon elders could heal me."

"I guess they could, if you have the faith," her mother replied. (Ibid.)

Soon the missionaries were sent for, and they gave Bertha a priesthood blessing. Several hours later, after they had gone, Bertha called to her mother in the adjoining room. "Mama, Mama, come look," she exclaimed. "My fingers, they are limber! I can open and shut my hands." The next morning her parents "were awakened by the sound of their daughter preparing breakfast in the kitchen. Itwas the first time she had walked unassisted for months." (Ibid., p. 43.)

The entire family of Joseph Wallace Willis eventually joined the Church, most on Harkers Island, a few miles from Shackleford Banks, on which Diamond City was located. At a family reunion in 1986, more than 250 direct descendants of Joseph Willis were counted as members of the Church.

Bertha, the girl healed through the administration of Elders Telford and Hansen, has a grandson, Joel Grant Hancock, a counselor in the Kinston North Carolina stake presidency (as of May 1992), who wrote the book from which this account was taken.

Human history is full of inspiring examples of the willingness of some to serve others, often at great personal danger. The following story illustrates the principle.

On December 11-13, 1862, a great Union army, commanded by General Ambrose Burnside, first bombarded and then temporarily occupied the town of Fredericksburg, Virginia. The attack was seen rather fancifully by Union generals as a prelude to a hoped-for victorious march toward Richmond, the Confederate capital. After fierce house-to-house fighting and heavy losses, the Federals were finally able to occupy the ruined town.

They then turned their attention to Marye's Heights, a large hill overlooking the town, where 6,000 Rebels awaited them under the superb command of a military genius, Robert E. Lee. The ensuing battle proved to be one of Lee's greatest military triumphs. The Southern troops were in secure defensive positions behind a stone wall that meandered along the foot of the hill. In addition, they stood four deep on a sunken road behind the wall, out of sight of Union forces.

The Union troops—more than 40,000 strong—launched a series of suicidal attacks across open ground, which stretched steadily upward for more than half a mile from the Rappahannock River toward Marye's Heights. They were met by withering blasts of musket fire from the Confederate positions, and by deadly artillery fire from guns on Marye's Heights. Mowed down by a scythe of shot, none got closer than forty yards from the stone wall.

Soon the ground in front of the Confederate positions was littered with hundreds—then thousands—of blue uniforms, more than twelve thousand before sunset on Saturday, December 13. Crying for help, the wounded lay in the bitter cold throughout that terrible night. Hundreds died from their wounds and from exposure.

The next day, a Sunday, dawned cold and foggy. As the morning fog lifted, the agonized cries of the wounded could still be heard. Finally, a young Confederate soldier, a nineteen-year-old sergeant from G Company, Second South Carolina Regiment, had taken all he could stand. The young man's name was Richard Rowland Kirkland. To his commanding officer, Kirkland exclaimed, "All night and all day I have heard those poor people crying for water, and I can stand it no longer. I . . . ask permission to go and give them water." His request was initially denied on the grounds that it was too dangerous. Finally, however, permission was granted, and thousands of amazed men on both sides saw the young soldier, with several canteens draped around his neck, climb over the wall and walk to the nearest wounded Union soldier. He raised the stricken man's head, gently gave him a drink, and covered him with his own overcoat. Then he moved to the next of the wounded and the next and the next. As Kirkland's purpose became clear, fresh cries of "Water, water, for God's sake, water" arose all over the field.

The Federal soldiers were at first too surprised to shoot. Soon they began to cheer the young Southerner as they saw what he was doing. For more than an hour and a half, Sergeant Kirkland continued his work of mercy.

Tragically, Richard Kirkland was himself killed a few months later at the battle of Chicamauga. His last words to his companions were, "Save yourselves and tell my Pa I died right."

Kirkland's Christ-like compassion made his name synonymous with mercy for a post-Civil War generation, both North and South. He became known by soldiers on both sides of the conflict as "the angel of Marye's Heights." His loving errand of mercy is commemorated by a bronze monument that stands today in front of the stone wall at Fredericksburg. It was crafted by Felix De Weldon, who also sculpted the Iwo Jima monument, in Washington, D.C. The statue depicts Sergeant Kirkland lifting the head of a wounded Union soldier to give him a drink of refreshing water. A tablet hangs in Kirkland's honor in the Episcopal church in Gettysburg. With simple eloquence it captures the essence of the young soldier's Christ-like mission of mercy. It reads, "A hero of benevolence, at the risk of his own life, he gave his enemy drink at Fredericksburg." (See The Battle of Fredericksburg [Philadelphia: Eastern Acorn Press, 1990]; "He Gave His Enemy Drink," CWT Illustrated, October 1962, pp. 38-39; information on Richard Kirkland provided by the staff of the Fredericksburg and Spotsylvania National Military Park, National Park Service, U.S. Department of the Interior.)

Sergeant Kirkland's act of mercy touches all hearts. It reminds us, in dramatic fashion, of the heights to which the human spirit can soar. What a strange creature is man! Capable of the most grievous sins, of cruelty and evil almost unbelievable in their horror, he also rises to heights of sublime love and compassion for others. The forces of evil struggle with those of good in every human breast, yet even in the midst of the blood and horror of war there remain some whose hearts are touched by the Spirit of Christ, who refuse to become "without affection . . . [hating] their own blood." (See Moses 7:33.)

So it was in the last days of the Nephites, when nearly "every heart was hardened, so that they delighted in the shedding of blood continually." (Mormon 4:11.) Though he knew that the judgments of the Lord would fall upon his people, the great prophet-soldier Mormon led them in battle, "notwithstanding their wickedness," because he "loved them, according to the love of God which was in [him], with all [his] heart." (Mormon 3:12.) In every major human conflict there are those who rise above blood and horror to the broad sunny uplands of compassion and benevolence. Mormon was such a man, but so, too, in his own way, was Richard Kirkland, a young soldier from rural South Carolina.

Work Together in Harmony and Unity

Among the Saints in Zion, if hearts are to be purified, there must be unanimity in decisions and unity in actions. The Lord pled with the Saints to "let every man esteem his brother as himself" (D&C 38:24) and concluded his instructions on unity with these words: "If ye are not one ye are not mine" (D&C 38:27). In Zion there is no bickering, no backbiting, but rather a spirit of oneness and cooperation, of working together for a great common cause. The Prophet Joseph explained: "The greatest temporal and spiritual blessings which always come from faithfulness and concerted effort, never attended individual exertion or enterprise. The history of all past ages abundantly attests this fact." (TPJS, p. 183.)

Though we have admittedly fallen short of a celestial ideal, the Saints have accomplished much through cooperative effort. Perhaps the essential value of cooperation is nowhere better illustrated than in the story of the Hole-in-the Rock expedition of 1879-1880. No pioneer company ever built a wagon road through wilder, rougher, more inhospitable country than did those intrepid men, women, and children who were called to colonize San Juan County in southeastern Utah.

The main obstacle in the two-hundred-mile trek was the Colorado River and the incredibly broken-up, almost impassable country to the east of it—country that was "nothing in the world but rock and holes, hills and hollows." (David E. Miller, Hole in the Rock: An Epic in the Colonization of the Great American West [Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1966,] p. 119.)

Preliminary scouting reports mentioned a narrow slit in the canyon wall west of the river and suggested that a passable road could be built from that "Hole-in-the-Rock" down to the Colorado. By the time more extensive reconnaissance had been carried out, the pioneer company—some two hundred fifty men, women, and children; eighty wagons; and hundreds of loose cattle and horses—was well on its way. Although the detailed scouting reports convinced most that the proposed route was impassable, it was too late to turn back.

It took six weeks of prodigious, united effort to construct three-quarters of a mile of what passed for a road from the plateau west of the Colorado down to the river through the Hole-in-the-Rock. The work of getting the wagons down through the narrow defile was especially arduous. It required courage, daring, and total unity of effort. Each wagon, with the hind wheels rough-locked, was driven down the narrow defile with horses or oxen hitched to the front, a driver in the wagon, and as many men as could find footing hanging on to ropes or chains attached to the rear axle to help slow the wagon as it plummeted down the abyss. Sometimes a horse or mule was hitched behind to slow the wagon's descent, but the unfortunate animal usually lost its footing and was dragged down the steep, bumpy grade. The steepest part of the incline dropped 50 feet for every 100 feet forward. It is a wonder that anyone, man or beast, survived; but miraculously all did. One who took the trip recorded the event as follows:

The first forty feet down the wagons stood so straight in the air it was no desirable place to ride and the channel was so narrow the barrels had to be removed from the sides of the wagon in order to let the wagon pass through. It had to be rough locked on both hind wheels and then a heavy rope attached behind to which about eight men held back as hard as they could to keep the wagon from making a dash down the forty feet. The women and children took hold of hands and slid down this forty feet as they couldn't walk." (Ibid., p. 116.)

Recent events have shown that the Saints still possess and practice a high degree of cooperation and united effort. Early on Monday morning, August 24, 1992, Hurricane Andrew reached landfall on the South Florida coast approximately twenty-five miles south of Miami. The storm is reported to have been the single greatest natural disaster ever to occur in the history of the United States, with damages from its passage projected to reach $30 billion. Eighty thousand homes were destroyed. One in every twelve families in Dade County lost its home, and more than a hundred fifty thousand people were left homeless. Miraculously, and through Divine Providence, not one Church member's life was lost.

As the winds died down, the Saints promptly went to work. The first relief and repair crews were sent out within hours of the hurricane's passage. By Thursday, August 27, all 178 salvageable mem bers' homes damaged by Hurricane Andrew had been temporarily repaired by volunteer work crews of local members. The Saints then expanded their efforts to help the entire community. On Saturday, August 29, more than eighteen hundred Mormon volunteers from all over the South arrived in South Florida to assist hurricane victims. The following weekend, a three-day national holiday weekend, more than fifty-one hundred LDS volunteers, working closely with units of the U.S. Army, continued to repair damaged homes, schools, and churches and to provide other community assistance. Approximately three thousand nonmembers' homes received temporary roofs, and fourteen semi-trailer loads of food, water, and medical supplies were distributed. More than twenty-one hundred dump-truck loads of debris were removed.

Many spiritually uplifting stories resulted from the heroic efforts of the clean-up volunteers. Sister Madsen, wife of Michael Madsen, president of the South Miami Florida Stake, sent the following story in a letter:

Her name was Mrs. Greenberg, I don't know her first name. The workers went to her home. This was Saturday night, the 5th of September. There were 1800 volunteer workers. They went out from the Kendall chapel. I had a crew of about 40 workers. I was sort of their guide. They roofed about 7 homes in my area. To find more work they went across the street. I had gone up to the church to get some more supplies. When I got back, they had started to clear some debris, from about 107 St. I introduced myself to a lady standing out in front, Mrs. Greenberg. I asked her if the Mormon Elders could help her out, by clearing away some of her debris and patching her roof.

She literally broke down and cried. She said this is the first time that anyone had shown that they cared. That she didn't know what to do. The men had heavy plastic and some plywood. By the time they left, it began to look like a home again. When they were through, she got her checkbook out and wanted to pay them. They told her, this was their way of showing their gratitude. That they were representing the Latter-day Saint Church. She broke down and cried again.

Later, my husband and I went to visit her, and see how she was getting along. She said her home was liveable now. She praised the Mormon elders, and expressed her gratitude.

A brother from St. Anthony, Idaho, and other leaders from his area saw the television reports of the terrible devastation suffered by the people of South Florida. They felt a compelling need to do something to help those who had been stricken. A decision was soon made to send an eighteen-wheeler filled with Idaho potatoes to Florida. The truck was loaded with boxes and sacks of potatoes and moved swiftly across the country to the site of the disaster.

The potatoes arrived at the Kendall Chapel in the South Miami Stake in excellent condition. There was some concern that the heat and humidity would cause the potatoes to spoil. However, these fears were soon dispelled. It was amazing how welcome the potatoes were to the people of South Florida. They were so tired of eating fast foods that the potatoes were almost like a dessert.

In less than three days, all of the potatoes were distributed to needy members and nonmembers alike, as well as being made available to a local homeless shelter.

As one of the work crews was repairing a member's home, they seemed very happy and vigorous in their approach to the work. A neighbor came over and asked the member how much this crew was costing her. The member sister said: "Oh, nothing! These are members of our Mormon Church who have come here to help me. They are doing this free." The neighbor woman exclaimed, "I have two men working on my roof who are charging me $400 an hour!" The sister responded: "I think our brethren would be willing to repair your roof. Let me ask them and see." She asked the leader of the work crew if they would assist the neighbor, and the response was, "Of course, we'd be glad to help." The neighbor immediately fired the two fellows working on her roof, and it was repaired by our work crew at no expense to her. What great good was done through just a passing conversation over the fence!

"Be Ye Clean"

Wise King Benjamin proclaimed, "I cannot tell you all the things whereby ye may commit sin; for there are divers ways and means, even so many that I cannot number them." (Mosiah 4:29.) In that spirit, I make no attempt, under the general rubric of "Be ye clean" (see Isaiah 52:11), to present a full edition of the long, lamentable catalog of human vice. I wish, however, to mention one of the most pervasive sins that blocks progress toward becoming pure in heart. It is the sin of sexual impurity, which stains and corrodes our society and blights and destroys the lives of millions.

In a momentous general conference address, President Ezra Taft Benson stated, "The plaguing sin of this generation is sexual immorality." (Ensign, May 1986, p. 4.) He noted that the Prophet Joseph said sexual impurity would be the source of more temptations, more buffetings, and more difficulties for the elders of Israel than any other." (Journal of Discourses, 8:55.) And so it is!

In his time, each of the prophets has thundered against the stain of sexual impurity. From Sinai these words rang out: "Thou shalt not commit adultery." (Exodus 20:14.) Alma said to his wayward son Corianton, "I would that ye should repent and forsake your sins, and go no more after the lusts of your eyes . . . for except ye do this ye can in nowise inherit the kingdom of God." (Alma 39:9.) President Joseph F. Smith testified, "There are at least three dangers that threaten the Church within, and the authorities need to awaken to the fact that the people should be warned unceasingly against them. As I see these, they are flattery of prominent men in the world, false educational ideas, and sexual impurity. But the third subject mentioned—personal purity, is perhaps of greater importance than either of the other two. If purity of life is neglected, all other dangers set in upon us like the rivers of waters when the flood gates are opened." (Gospel Doctrine [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1986], pp. 312-13.) I shudder to think of what President Smith would think of our sex-sodden society of the late twentieth century, which knows no standards and portrays every sexual sin not only as natural but as desirable. Ours is a society that mocks at sexual purity and feeds on vice. The electronic media, with its immense ability to influence human behavior, is perhaps particularly to blame. President Thomas S. Monson noted recently that society sends adolescents a mixed message: "Advertisements and the mass media convey very heavy messages that sexual activity is acceptable and expected, inducements that sometimes drown out the warnings of experts and the pleas of parents. The Lord cuts through all the media messages with clear and precise language when He declares to us, 'Be . . . clean' (3 Nephi 20:41)." (Ensign, November 1990, p. 47.)

The motives behind much of the Satan-inspired plague of sexual immorality that swirls around us are clear. Those who produce and purvey smut are driven, in large part at least, by greed for money. Paul's prescient words come to mind: "The love of money is the root of all evil." (1 Timothy 6:10.) Pornography in its various forms, and I include material seen by millions on national television, yields untold millions of dollars in profit. President Gordon B. Hinckley spoke a few years ago about those who, "through the medium of [so-called] entertainment, influence or perhaps seduce millions to accept standards which are diametrically opposed to the standards of the gospel. (See Ensign, November 1983, pp. 45-46.) He quoted a column written by the religion editor for the Los Angeles Times, which reads in part as follows:

A survey of influential television writers and executives in Hollywood has shown that they are far less religious than the general public and diverge sharply from traditional values on such issues as abortion, homosexual rights and extramarital sex. . . . While nearly all of the 104 Hollywood professionals interviewed had a religious background, 45 percent now say they have no religion, and of the other 55 percent only 7 percent say they attend a religious service as much as once a month.

This group has had a major role in shaping the shows whose themes and stars have become staples in our popular culture. . . .

Eighty percent of the respondents said they did not regard homosexual relations as wrong, and 51 percent did not deem adultery as wrong. Of the 49 percent who called extramarital affairs wrong, only 17 percent felt that way strongly, the study said. Nearly all—97 percent—favored the right of a woman to choose an abortion, 91 percent holding that view strongly.

By contrast, other surveys have indicated that 85 percent of Americans consider adultery wrong, 71 percent regard homosexual activity wrong, and nearly three-fourths of the public wants abortion limited to certain hard cases or banned altogether. (Los Angeles Times, February 19, 1983, part 2, p. 5.)

History teaches that societies that do not learn to bank and control the fires of sexual force will soon be destroyed. Ours is well on the way! Ours are the days when men call "evil good, and good evil" (Isaiah 5:20), the days when Satan "flattereth [others] away, and telleth them there is no hell; and he saith unto them: I am no devil, for there is none—and thus he whispereth in their ears, until he grasps them with his awful chains" (2 Nephi 28:22).

Those who long for a pure heart and are appalled by the "gross darkness [which covereth] the minds of the people" (D&C 112:23) clutch to their bosoms these words of Isaiah: "Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from thence, touch no unclean thing; go ye out of the midst of her; be ye clean, that bear the vessels of the Lord" (Isaiah 52:11).

Seek to Bring the Church Out of Obscurityand Out of Darkness

In my office, sitting on a finely made stand, is a large copy of Webster's New International Dictionary, made the more valuable to me by reason of the inscription on the flyleaf: "From President Lee's office to President Romney's office." I had occasion recently to consult the dictionary for a definition of the word obscurity, which I noted is "the quality or state of being obscure." Not very helpful, that. Undeterred, I then looked up the meaning of the adjective obscure. Of the four definitions given, three refer directly to darkness, and the fourth says, "Not noticeable, inconspicuous." Those definitions help us better understand this well-known verse from section 1 of the Doctrine & Covenants, the Lord's preface to that volume of sacred scripture: "And also those to whom these commandments were given, might have power to lay the foundation of this church, and to bring it forth out of obscurity and out of darkness, the only true and living church upon the face of the whole earth." (V. 30.)

Within the context of becoming pure in heart, it is instructive to consider in some detail each of the dictionary definitions of obscurity. First, obscurity in the sense of being inconspicuous, little noticed, unknown by many. Is it possible, more than one hundred sixty years after it was founded, that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, "the only true and living church upon the face of the whole earth" (D&C 1:30), remains largely unknown by great numbers of people? Is it possible that might be true even here in America, the nation where the Church was founded? Despite our magnificent missionary program; despite the fact that news about the Church is avidly snatched up by the news media; despite the best efforts of our professional detractors, who do all they can to depict us as rogues and rascals, the facts seem clear.

Large numbers of Americans know almost nothing about the Church, and much of what they think they know is wrong. Bringing the Church forth out of obscurity is a task not yet completed. Indeed, it has hardly begun!

Joseph Smith, the great prophet of the Restoration, was told by the Savior, "The ends of the earth shall inquire after thy name, and fools shall have thee in derision, and hell shall rage against thee; while the pure in heart, and the wise, and the noble, and the virtuous, shall seek counsel, and authority, and blessings constantly from under thy hand." (D&C 122:1-2.)

Given Joseph's central role in establishing the Church and the still-prevailing widespread ignorance of Latter-day Saint beliefs and practices, it appears that full accomplishment of at least the second portion of that prophecy lies still in the future. Jesus counseled Joseph, "Be patient in afflictions, for thou shalt have many." (D&C 24:8.) Although persecution and opposition were Joseph's daily lot from the very moment he first spoke of the wondrous vision that ushered in the last dispensation, it is interesting to note that some of the honorable people of the world are beginning to accord to the Prophet the prestige and acclaim that are rightfully his. Some of the misinformation about Joseph is beginning to give way to more enlightened views about his accomplishments. One who appreciates the prophet is Professor Harold Bloom, an immensely learned Jewish intellectual who is Sterling Professor of Humanities at Yale University and Berg Professor of English at New York University. In a strikingly bold and important book entitled The American Religion: The Emergence of the Post Christian Nation (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1992), Professor Bloom has this to say, among other things, about Joseph Smith.

Smith was an authentic religious genius, unique in our national history. (P. 82.)

I . . . do not find it possible to doubt that Joseph Smith was an authentic prophet. Where in all of American history can we find his match? . . . In proportion to his importance and his complexity, he remains the least-studied personage, of an undiminished vitality, in our entire national saga. (P. 95.)

There is no other figure remotely like him in our entire national history and it is unlikely that anyone like him ever can come again. . . . So rich and varied a personality, so vital a spark of divinity, is almost beyond the limits of the human, as normally we construe those limits. To one who does not believe in him, but who has studied him intensely, Smith becomes almost a mythology in himself. . . . I end as I began, with wonder. We do not know Joseph Smith, as he prophesied that even his own could never . . . know him. He requires strong poets, major novelists, accomplished dramatists to tell his history, and they have not yet come to him. He is as enigmatic as Abraham Lincoln, his contemporary, but even if we do not know Lincoln, we at least keep learning what it is that we cannot quite understand. But with Joseph Smith, we cannot be certain precisely what baffles us most. (Pp. 126-27.)

I marvel at Professor Blooms's deep, though somewhat flawed, insights into Joseph Smith's unique genius, in spite of his inability to discern the source of that genius. Truly, the "foolishness of God is wiser than men; and the weakness of God is stronger than men.. . . God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise; and God hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound the things which are mighty . . . that no flesh should glory in his presence." (1 Corinthians 1:25-29.)

In his ode to the Prophet Joseph, Clinton F. Larson attributes these words about Joseph to his mother, Lucy Mack Smith:

He came to me from the fields, The gold of the grain in his eye, And soon he was beyond me, Having seen the white sea of light Where angels are. (The Prophet [Provo, Utah: Eugene H. Chapman, 1971], p. 33.)

Though Joseph truly is far beyond us, those who look upon his life and accomplishments with the eyes of faith and love know the source of his power: he was and is a mighty prophet of the living God. We must do more—much more—to proclaim to the world the wondrous truths Joseph and his successors have pronounced. Only when Joseph's message has penetrated every continent and sounded in every ear, as men and women everywhere learn of the Restoration, will the Church be raised up from obscurity. We know that once they hear our message, many will join with us. Many will aid in the redemption of Zion. "For there are many yet on the earth among all sects, parties, and denominations, who are blinded by the subtle craftiness of men, whereby they lie in wait to deceive, and who are only kept from the truth because they know not where to find it." (D&C 123:12.)

That sacred work of gathering people to the truth of God has only just begun. We must redouble our efforts and then double them again.

I return to the other definitions of obscurity, which connote darkness. In that context, to raise the Church up out of darkness is to separate it from the spiritual darkness of the world, as a beam of light penetrates and splits asunder the gloom of night. The Savior's words to Thomas B. Marsh come to mind: "Darkness covereth the earth, and gross darkness the minds of the people, and all flesh has become corrupt before my face. Behold, vengeance cometh speedily upon the inhabitants of the earth." (D&C 112:23-24.)

In no aspect of our national life is that darkness more manifest than in the appalling tragedy besetting American children. In a recent special report entitled Children in Crisis, the editors of Fortune magazine dealt at length with what is happening to our kids. I quote from an article by Louis S. Richman (Fortune, August 10, 1992, pp. 34-36):

If the well-being of its children is the proper measure of the health of civilization, the United States is in grave danger. Of the 65 million Americans under 18, fully 20% live in poverty, 22% live in single-parent homes, and almost 3% live with no parent at all. Violence among the young is so rampant that the American Academy of Pediatrics calls it a public health emergency.

The loss of childhood innocence is a recent phenomenon, affecting all income levels and all ethnic groups. Playground fights that used to end in bloody noses now end in death. Schools that once considered talking in class a capital offense are routinely frisking kids for weapons, questioning them about drugs. AIDS has turned youthful experimentation with sex into Russian roulette. A good public education, safe streets, and family dinners—with both mother and father present—seem like quaint memories of a far distant past. The bipartisan National Commission on Children wrote in "Beyond Rhetoric," its 1991 report, that addressing the unmet needs of American youngsters "is a national imperative as compelling as an armed attack or a natural disaster."

These facts, presented by Mr. Richman, underline the nature and extent of the problem::

Every day, more than 25% of women giving birth, 2,900 in all, will have received no prenatal care in the first trimester of their pregnancies. And 25% of that group will have had late care or none at all. Their babies are far more likely to be under normal weight, to have learning disabilities, and to die in their first year of life than children who have had prenatal care.

Children under 16 make up the largest group of Americans without medical insurance. And 56% of kids without health insurance live in households with incomes above the poverty line. The U.S. infant mortality rate, 9.8 per 1,000 live births, is higher than that of 19 other industrialized nations, including Spain and Singapore. The proportion of U.S. nonwhite 1-year-olds immunized against polio, measles, and other preventable illnesses lags behind that of 55 other nations, including Iraq and Libya.

The parents of nearly 2,750 children separate or divorce each day. More than half of all white kids and three-quarters of African American children under 18 will spend some part of their childhood in a single-parent household.

Every day more than three children die of injuries inflicted by abusive parents. Nearly 90 kids a day are taken from their parents' custody and added to the overburdened foster care system.

Mothers of children under 6, the fastest growing segment of new entrants to the labor force in the 1980's, struggle to find child care solutions for their 11 million children. Some 1.3 million latchkey kids ages 5 to 14 are left to fend for themselves for much of the day.

The typical 14-year old watches three hours of television daily but does just one hour of homework. During the average school day, more than 2,200 kids drop out. These kids are 3 1/2 times more likely to be arrested and six times more likely to become unmarried parents than those who graduate.

Every day over 500 children ages 10 to 14 begin using illegal drugs, and over 1,000 start drinking alcohol. Nearly half of all middle-schoolers abuse drugs or alcohol, or engage in unprotected sex, or live in poverty.

Over 1,400 teenage girls a day—two thirds of them unmarried—become mothers. Only 60% of these teen moms will earn a high school diploma or its equivalent.

Among 15-19-year-olds, homicide by firearms is the third-leading cause of death for whites, and the leading cause of death for blacks.

Forty-one percent of boys and 24% of girls are able to get a gun on a whim, a national survey found.

The Church, with its divine emphasis on the family, can do much to help solve the crisis in family life that is creating such terrible havoc among our children and threatening the loss of a whole generation. We can help part the curtains of darkness that cover much of the world and let the light of the restored gospel shine into homes and hearts. Our message, that God intended families to be forever, that no society can long survive without strong families, and that no other success can compensate for failure in the home, must sound and resound in every ear in America and every other nation.

The Latter-day Saints, above all others, should know and must proclaim to the world that families are ordained by God as the fundamental unit of society and of the Church. Of all social organizations, only the family extends into the eternities. Families were created to enable the members thereof to work together and connect with each other, regardless of family size or composition. Many families nowadays are not "traditional" two-parent families, but all families are intended to be precious instruments in the Lord's hands in helping move His children toward celestial goals. Families want to have and use the skills needed to work and connect with each other, but many lack the know-how to do so. We can provide the needed help.

Latter-day Saint families can share their parenting and family-strengthening skills with non-Mormon families in non-threatening, loving ways without appearing to be self-righteous or smug.

The reader may ask, "This is all well and good, but what does all this have to do with building up Zion?" My answer: A great deal. If we are to become a Zion people, we must demonstrate, in our daily family relationships, that we truly are a covenant people, striving to live God's commandments. We must flee from the wickedness engulfing our world, strengthen our families, and become men and women of Christ. (See Helaman 3:29-30.) We must accept a personal responsibility to assist in the fulfillment of the mission of the Church: "To bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.) In so doing, we not only grow in personal purity, experiencing the mighty change that sanctifies and exalts the soul, but we also help others, through our example, to leave Babylon and come to Zion. We must become a great light to the nations, a shining beacon that will lead them out of the darkness and obscurity of the world. As the Savior said: "Ye are the light of the world. A city that is set on an hill cannot be hid. Neither do men light a candle, and put it under a bushel, but on a candlestick; and it giveth light unto all that are in the house. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven." (Matthew 5:14-16.)

The redemption of Zion, then, requires a people whose goodness shines in their faces and is confirmed by their actions. If we, the Latter-day Saints, who live in general so far below our potential, truly had the light of the gospel in our faces, had we "his image in [our] countenances" (Alma 5:14), the good and righteous from all nations would flock to join us. We have far to go before we reach that ideal.

Where much is given, much is expected (see Luke 12:48), and God will hold us responsible for the choices we make regarding the gifts He has given us, personally and as a people. As President Spencer W. Kimball proclaimed, if we are to become pure in heart, we must "forsake the things of the world as ends in themselves; . . . leave off idolatry and press forward in faith; [and] carry the gospel to our enemies, that they might no longer be our enemies." (Ensign, June 1976, pp. 3-6.) God expects even more from us; we must con
