Alexander B. Morrison, Visions of Zion (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1993)

Chapter Three

Preach Pure Principles

Zion, the pure in heart, can be built up only through the teaching and application of pure principles. Anything less must lead inevitably to results that fall short of the celestial ideal. As the ancient alchemists failed in their misguided attempts to transmute baser elements into gold, so, too, will attempts to build up Zion fail unless the builders teach and practice pure principles. Gold cannot come from lead!

God has given to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints a unique responsibility to bring His truths to the world—to preach the pure principles that underlie and overarch a Zion society. As we long for the day when Zion will be established, we must ever hold dear our sacred responsibility to preach pure principles.

The Strength of Our Position

The impression weighs heavily upon me that some of us perhaps do not yet fully understand our own strength as a church and kingdom. In the midst of confusion and commotion, ours is the certain trumpet. In a world of waning conviction, ours is the clarion call of clear testimony. Our message speaks to the deepest longings of the human heart in a way that no other can. To people everywhere who long for the truth but know not where to find it, our words go forth in purity and power: "Come unto Christ . . . and partake of the power of his redemption. Yea, come unto him, and offer your whole souls as an offering unto him, . . . and as the Lord liveth ye will be saved." (Omni 1:26.)

What is the source of the world's confusion and uncertainty, and of our strength? In briefly recounting some aspects of the gulf that separates us from other Christians, I take no pleasure from the discomfiture and loss of direction being experienced by many of our Christian brethren. For all its faults and shortcomings, the Christian church has blessed the lives of countless millions for untold generations, giving them faith and hope for the future. In every age, good and humble people of all classes have worshiped God as best they knew Him, sought spiritual reassurance, and practiced charity toward others. Much of the world's great art, literature, and architecture owes its existence to the Christian church, which kept the lamp of civilization lit for centuries. All Christian churches have some measure of the truth. Our missionaries find their work much easier in Christian countries where the people, though their knowledge of Christ is at best incomplete, at least acknowledge Him as the Son of God.

Sadly, I think, there is a growing sense among many thoughtful observers that we are witnessing the demise or at least the rendering irrelevant of large portions of so-called mainline Christianity. A poignant example underlines my point: A friend who is deeply involved with interfaith activities talked recently with a prominent Protestant clergyman. The clergyman spoke with regret of what he considered to be the deplorable state of affairs in his church. Membership nationally has decreased steadily over the past decade, and the church is riven by internal dissension over doctrine, social policy, and governance. The shortage of funds needed to carry out various aspects of the church's ministry has reached crisis proportions. A commission has been appointed to study the matter and make recommendations. "I know," said the clergyman, "that we could learn much from the Mormon example of paying tithes and from the way in which the Mormon Church is governed. But rather than do so there are many among us who would rather see our church disappear."

What separates us so firmly and fully from our Christian brothers and sisters and at the same time provides us with such great strength of position? Simply put, our doctrines, the principles we preach, differ from those of others in ways that cannot be reconciled. Both views cannot be correct. Time permits discussion of only some of the many differences between the principles taught by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and the philosophies of men, mingled with scripture, that comprise the creeds of the world.

Much of the Protestant world no longer has a great deal to say about authority. At the most, vague reference may be made to a universal priesthood of all believers. Roman Catholics believe that Protestants departed from the true faith, but many who know even a little about the excesses of the Renaissance popes (among many others) find it hard to accept as valid the claims of the Catholic Church that it is Christ's church and that the pope is "Christ's Vicar." From roughly 1470 to 1530, six popes, from Sixtus IV to Clement VII, carried the papacy to "an excess of venality, amorality, avarice, and spectacularly calamitous power politics. Their governance dismayed the faithful, brought the Holy See into disrepute, left unanswered the cry for reform . . . and ended by breaking apart the unity of Christendom." (Barbara Tuchman, The March of Folly [New York: Ballantine Books, 1984], p. 52; for further detail, see pp. 53-126. See also William Manchester, A World Lit Only By Fire [Boston: Little, Brown, and Co., 1992], pp. 74-86.)

The erosion of ecumenicism has taken its toll in the Protestant world. If doctrinal diversity is tolerated between churches, usually by refusing to address the major doctrinal differences that do indeed exist between denominations, then it becomes an embarrassment to dwell on authority. If doctrinal differences are ignored or papered over, if all equally devalue authority and its importance, then to speak of differences is simply to raise awkward questions. We—The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints—are bold in our assertions about the need for authority. Our fifth Article of Faith puts the issue clearly: "We believe that a man must be called of God, by prophecy, and by the laying on of hands by those who are in authority, to preach the Gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof." Not only do we assert that valid authority is required, that God insists on more than good intentions in the conduct of His work—but we go even further. In claiming that we have the authority to act validly for God, we reject similar claims by all other religious groups. We state unequivocally, quoting Jehovah Himself, that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is "the only true and living church upon the face of the whole earth, with which [the Lord is] well pleased, speaking unto the church collectively and not individually." (D&C 1:30.)

Furthermore, we believe, and boldly state, that traditional Christianity lost its authority after the death of the New Testament apostles. Christ promised Peter keys and authority, it is true (Matthew 16:19); but, in our view, those keys were apostolic in nature and could be exercised validly and in a binding fashion only by those who bore the holy apostleship. In the years after the death of the apostles, the church suffered a loss of divine authority. It changed as philosophers and theologians mixed the simple prin-ciples of the gospel with pagan philosophical systems, such as gnosticism, which taught (among other heresies) that the physical world is evil and therefore that Christ could not have soiled himself by existing in a physical body.

The Apostle Paul is an early witness of the forces that were eroding the foundations of the church within less than two decades after the death and resurrection of Christ. In nearly every letter of Paul, we read of his deep concerns for the future of the church. Examples include the following:

To the Galatians: "I marvel that ye are so soon removed from him that called you into the grace of Christ unto another gospel." (Galatians 1:6.) "But there be some that trouble you, and would pervert the Gospel of Christ." (Galatians 1:7.)

To the Corinthians: "Now I beseech you, brethren, . . . that there be no divisions among you." (1 Corinthians 1:10.) "I hear that there be divisions among you." (1 Corinthians 11:18.) "For such are false apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the apostles of Christ." (2 Corinthians 11:13.)

To the Ephesians: "Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness." (Ephesians 5:11.)

To the Philippians: "Beware of dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of the concision." (Philippians 3:2.) (Concision means "cutting into pieces, separating.")

To the Colossians: "Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, . . . and not after Christ." (Colossians 2:8.)

To the Thessalonians: "For the mystery of iniquity doth already work." (2 Thessalonians 2:7; see also verses 2-4.)

To Timothy: "In the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils." (1 Timothy 4:1-3.) "In the last days perilous times shall come." (2 Timothy 3:1.) "For the time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine; . . . and they shall turn away their ears from the truth." (2 Timothy 4:3-4.)

To Titus: "For there are many unruly and vain talkers and deceivers . . . whose mouths must be stopped, who subvert whole houses, teaching things which they ought not, for filthy lucre's sake." (Titus 1:10-11.)

To the Hebrews: "Therefore we ought to give the more earnest heed to the things which we have heard, lest at any time we should let them slip." (Hebrews 2:1.)

A generation ago Latter-day Saints spoke and taught and preached often about "the Great Apostasy." We don't do that as much nowadays. Perhaps we should say more about this vital matter. Our claim that the Church is a revelatory restoration requires that there have been an apostasy, a falling away from the truth. There can be no restoration unless something has been lost. In his first vision, Joseph Smith was told by Christ that all existing churches lacked the fullness of the gospel. All had drifted from the truth in their teachings and practices; though they had "a form of godliness," they denied "the power thereof" and taught "for doctrines the commandments of men." (Joseph Smith-History 1:19.) Thus, for the Church to have validity in God's sight, it was necessary that a restoration take place.

Our blunt assertion that the Christian church, bereft of its apostolic leadership, drifted from its moorings and became something radically different from the church established by Jesus raises hackles in the Christian world. Many theologians and clergy still persist in ignoring history! Perhaps that is beginning to change. As Bruce Hafen noted at the 1992 Sperry Symposium at Brigham Young University, it is interesting that the prestigious Harvard Theological Review recently published an article by a BYU scholar, David Paulsen, that sets forth the belief of the early Christian church that God has a body. Perhaps there is some hope that evidence for a Great Apostasy may yet become academically acceptable! The Protestant reformers of the sixteenth century also implicitly accepted the reality of an apostasy, rejecting the authority of the Roman church, calling it "the true Babylon" and identifying the papacy as a pestilence on Christianity. (See Manchester, A World Lit Only by Fire, pp. 124-25, 146, 149.)

Most Christians, of course, know little about the schisms and bitter wrangling that divided the medieval church and led to Catholics killing Protestants and vice versa as well as widespread internecine warfare between rival Protestant groups. Befuddled by the anesthetic haze of ecumenicism and enamored by the siren song of a social gospel that increasingly emphasizes love of neighbor to the exclusion of love and worship of God, they prefer to largely ignore their deep doctrinal differences. Some, perhaps, are unwilling to probe too deeply into the subject, fearing that what they discover may shake their faith.

Blunt talk about the historical reality of the apostasy, the need for a restoration, and the importance of authority if our works and sacraments are to be recognized as valid by God may indeed ruffle some feelings. Yet the facts speak for themselves; they are not of our making. In boldly proclaiming our position, we recognize, of course, that although the Christian church for nearly two millennia did not enjoy divine authority, the Light of Christ, which lighteth every man who is born into the world (see John 1:9, Moroni 7:18-19, D&C 93:2), continued to shine in people's hearts during the long, dark night of the Apostasy. In every generation were men and women of faith who wore out their lives doing good and following Christ insofar as they knew Him. Brigham Young emphasized that before the Restoration, good people had "the spirit of revelation." (Journal of Discourses, 7:5.) He also noted that John Wesley, the great religious reformer and evangelist of the eighteenth century, was as good a man "as ever walked on this earth." (Ibid.)

Though we should always be kind and nonjudgmental in speaking with those not of our faith of the need for authority, we must, I submit, be bold in our assertion that there was a Great Apostasy from the truth, that the fullness of the gospel was restored at the hands of the Prophet Joseph Smith, and that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, alone among all other religious groups, has the authority to preach the gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof; to bind on earth and have that binding ratified in the heavens.

"It is the first principle of the gospel," said the Prophet Joseph Smith, "to know for a certainty the character of God." (TPJS, p. 345.) Knowledge of the nature and character of God was destroyed, we assert, during the long night of the Apostasy. It was restored by two Personages in a pillar of light and these words spoken to the boy Joseph Smith: "This is My Beloved Son. Hear Him!" (Joseph Smith-History 1:17.) More was learned about the character of God in the few minutes of the First Vision than in all the church councils ever called! The creeds of the world were finally canonized only in the fourth and fifth centuries, following long and sterile debates about the nature of the Godhead. The diverse views held today by much of Christendom have gradually evolved from those unenlightened speculations.

Doctrinal confusion about the mission of Christ and His relationship to the Father began within a few years of the Savior's death and resurrection. By the fourth century this confusion had resulted in deep doctrinal schisms within the church. The Emperor Constantine, fearing that the controversy threatened his secular power, particularly in the eastern parts of the Roman Empire, convened the Council of Nicaea in a.d. 325 to try to settle the issue. At its heart, the dispute centered on the nature of Christ. Was He, as some argued, "co-substantial and co-eternal" with the Father? Or was He, as Arius, a prominent churchman from Alexandria in North Africa, claimed, a creation of the Father who "once was not" and was hence intrinsically inferior to His celestial parent? Of the bishops present, many at first sought a vague pronouncement that would commit them to neither side. Eventually, however, the Council condemned Arius and, with reluctance on the part of some participants (who were removed from office and sent into exile by the Emperor Constantine), incorporated the word "homoousios" (one of substance) into the Nicene Creed to signify the equality of the Father and the Son.

A modern English translation of the Greek text of the Nicene Creed contains the following:

We believe in one God, the Father, the Almighty, maker of heaven and earth, of all that is seen and unseen.

We believe in one Lord, Jesus Christ, the only Son of God, eternally begotten of the Father, God from God, Light from Light, true God from true God, begotten, not made, one in Being with the Father. Through him all things are made. For us men and for our salvation he came down from heaven: by the power of the Holy Spirit he was born of the Virgin Mary, and became man. . . .

We believe in the Holy Spirit, the Lord, the giver of life, who proceeds from the Father and the Son. With the Father and the Son he is worshipped and glorified. He has spoken through the prophets. (Encyclopedia Britannica, 15th ed., 8:678.)

This creed is accepted as authoritative by Roman Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, Anglican, and major Protestant churches. Without wishing to offend others, I submit that the Creed raises more questions than it answers. It is in reality a mass of confusion that doeslittle to remove the spiritual stumbling blocks that impede true understanding of the nature of the Godhead.

The trinitarian doctrine of the Nicene Creed represents a major departure from the teachings of Jesus and of the early church. Scholars admit that "the . . . doctrine of the Trinity as defined by the great church councils of the fourth and fifth centuries is not to be found in the NT [New Testament]." (Harper's Bible Dictionary [New York: Harper and Row, 1985], p. 1099.) Eastern and Western orthodoxies still disagree over the precise nature of God. "Beginning in the eighth century and officially since the eleventh century, Roman Catholics [and later Protestants] have added the Latin phrase Filioque (and from the Son) to the original text of the 'Nicene Creed' at the point in which that document says that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father." (Stephen E. Robinson, Are Mormons Christian? [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1991], p. 78.) The Eastern and Western churches split over this issue in the eleventh century—a.d. 1054.

The god of the creeds and councils is the god of the philosophers—abstract; unknowable; incapable of emotion; without body, parts, or passions. Then how could Christ, a God, suffer on the cross as a man would suffer? The Council of Chalcedon (a.d. 451) declared that Christ must have two natures—one human, which suffered on the cross, and the other divine, which felt nothing. Most modern Christians are unaware of this pernicious and evil doctrine. It took two hundred years for the post-Apostolic church to swallow this nonsense about two natures in Christ, and even then the Egyptian, Abyssinian, Syrian, and Armenian churches couldn't accept it and went their own ways. (Ibid., pp. 82-86.)

Most "ordinary" Christians, unfamiliar with the philosophical theology of the councils, intuitively believe that God is an actual father who really lives in heaven and really loves us. They long for the day, when this life is over, when they can be welcomed into the arms of loved ones and of God Himself. In a survey conducted by Gallup in 1986, 84 percent of Americans asked believed in a personal God who can be reached by prayers. Only 5 percent understood God abstractly as an idea, and 2 percent said He is an impersonal creator. (George Gallup, Jr., and Sarah Jones, 100 Questions & Answers: Religion in America [Princeton Religion Research Center, 1989], pp. 4-5.) Most Christians do not know the inconsistencies inherent in the official positions of their churches, which offer no serious response to these deeply felt yearnings of heart and soul.

Our knowledge of the character of God stands in stark contrast to the uninspired verbiage of the creeds and councils. God, we assert, is the Father of our spirits. We are His spirit children, created in His image and likeness. We lived with Him before our mortal birth. Elohim, our Father, is an exalted man, a Man of Holiness. (See Moses 6:57.) The Prophet Joseph Smith explained the Father thus: "God himself was once as we are now, and is an exalted man, and sits enthroned in yonder heavens! That is the great secret. If the veil were rent today, the great God who holds this world in its orbit, and who upholds all worlds and all things by his power, was to make himself visible,—I say, if you were to see him today, you would see him like a man in form—like yourselves in all the person, image, and very form as a man." (TPJS, p. 345.)

Christ, the only begotten of the Father in the flesh, is our Savior and Redeemer. Through His atoning sacrifice, all things that pertain to life and immortality, to salvation or any rewards hereafter—all these things are given full force and efficacy. The Prophet Joseph, who knew that the Atonement is the central essence of the gospel, said that "all other things [pertaining] to our religion are only appendages to it." (TPJS, p. 121.)

We reject the solemn nonsense of the Nicene Creed, with its uninspired notion that the Holy Ghost proceeds forth "from the Father and from the Son." The Holy Ghost, as the scriptures attest and we assert, is a personage of spirit, separate and distinct from the Father and from the Son. He is not one substance with them, though He is perfectly united with them in their work and glory. His special role is to serve as comforter and testator. His companionship is one of the greatest gifts that mortals can enjoy.

And what about those longings of the heart, those impressions of the Spirit felt by so many, that deep desire to be known of and loved by God, to be welcomed into heaven by His loving arms? The God of the creeds and councils, the God of the mainline Christian churches, cannot provide that tender assurance of His love. Their God is inscrutable; unknowable; without body, parts, and passions. Many of their theologians have little faith that heaven exists at all.

For all of our history, Latter-day Saint beliefs on the nature and character of God have been dismissed with contempt by other churches. Mormons, they say, are ignoramuses, know-nothings, whose views on God and our relationship to Him are not worthy of respect and are certainly not Christian. If to be Christian requires acceptance of the God of the creeds and councils, I agree; we don't qualify. But the real question is who is in error, the Latter-day Saints or other Christians? To us there is and can be no question; we reject the unknown and unknowable God of the philosophers but wet with our tears the feet of the loving Father who spoke to the Prophet Joseph.

The misguided views of other churches that Mormon beliefs about God are not worthy of respect may be changing. A year ago this last summer I was asked by senior representatives of a major Protestant denomination if we—that is, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints—would enter into dialogue with them on the nature of God. It says much about the good and honorable people who made the offer that, by their own admission, they have been so preoccupied with internal troubles that they have not been able to follow up on their proposal.

Significantly, it is the latter-day scriptures that tell us most clearly of God's loving arms outstretched to welcome us home. Two examples will make the point: From D&C 6:20: "Be faithful . . . and I will encircle thee in the arms of my love." And Lehi's words from 2 Nephi 1:15: "The Lord hath redeemed my soul . . . ; I am encircled about eternally in the arms of his love."

Being clasped in the arms of the Savior symbolizes the fulfillment of His atonement in our lives. Through the Atonement we belong to Him: "Inasmuch as ye have received me, ye are in me and I in you." (D&C 50:43.)

The saving and exalting ordinances of the gospel are inextricably intertwined with the sacred covenants. No covenant is given unless it is associated with an ordinance, and vice versa. If a covenant is a sacred promise, an ordinance is a sacred act, carried out (if it is to be effective) by one who has divine authority to do so. In the absence of the proper authority, the actions involved in performing an ordinance become at best a solemn charade, form without substance, pageantry without purpose. Unless divinely sanctioned, changes in the sacred ordinances result in men and women being led into dreadful error that imperils their immortal souls. So important are the ordinances that the devil works hard to have people change them, trivialize them, and make them seem less important. He knows that if he can make people think of the ordinances as largely meaningless ritual, he will weaken commitment to the sacred covenants associated with them. Alternatively, he may elect to have the ordinances associated with such pomp and pageantry that they take on a life of their own; then people do not look beyond them to the covenants they symbolize.

The importance of the ordinances is underlined by Isaiah's solemn reminder of cause and effect in human affairs. In describing the latter-days, he said, "The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof; because they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant." (Isaiah 24:5.) In a "voice of warning . . . unto all people," Jehovah Himself declared, "The anger of the Lord is kindled, and his sword is bathed in heaven, and it shall fall upon the inhabitants of the earth. And the arm of the Lord shall be revealed; and the day cometh that they who will not hear the voice of the Lord, neither the voice of his servants, neither give heed to the words of the prophets and apostles, shall be cut off from among the people; for they have strayed from mine ordinances, and have broken mine everlasting covenant; they seek not the Lord to establish his righteousness, but every man walketh in his own way, and after the image of his own god." (D&C 1:13-16.) Woe be unto those who tamper with the sacred ordinances, for great shall be their fall! Yet tampering is just what has happened.

Baptism, A Case Study in Tampering

The baptism of Jesus by John the Baptist (see Mark 1:9-11) set the divinely approved pattern for the future administration of this sacred ordinance. In the early Church, candidates were baptized on their acceptance of the gospel message. (See Acts 8:35-39.) By the beginning of the third century, however, formal instruction, sometimes lasting up to three years, was required. The period for preparing candidates for baptism before Easter became formalized into the forty days of Lent. By that time baptism, though still by immersion, required the candidate to confess faith in each member of the Trinity, with immersion after each confession. Gregory the Great, Bishop of Rome from 590-604, approved a single immersion, but some Eastern churches have preserved the practice of immersing the candidate for baptism three times.

The precedent of Jewish washings (see Leviticus 14-15), circumstantial accounts of baptism in the early Christian literature, and the symbolism of baptism as burial and resurrection (Romans 6:1-11) suggest strongly that, in the early church, baptism involved complete immersion, or dipping of the entire person. However, by the second century, the Didache, a manual of church life included among the works of the Apostolic Fathers, permitted pouring water three times on the head instead of complete immersion.

The earliest extant reference to infant baptism is from about the year 200; infant baptism seems at that time to have been a relatively new practice. By the fifth century, infant baptism was common; it received great impetus from the doctrine of original sin propounded by Augustine and was made compulsory by the Emperor Justinian in the sixth century. Early Christian documents, in contrast, contain frequent references to the sinlessness of children. Furthermore, the word of the Lord on the matter, given to the Prophet Mormon, is as follows: "I came into the world not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance; the whole need no physician, but they that are sick; wherefore, little children are whole, for they are not capable of committing sin; wherefore the curse of Adam is taken from them in me, that it hath no power over them; and the law of circumcision is done away in me." (Moroni 8:8.)

Speaking further on the baptism of children, Mormon explained:

After this manner did the Holy Ghost manifest the word of God unto me; wherefore, my beloved son, I know that it is solemn mockery before God, that ye should baptize little children.

Behold I say unto you that this thing shall ye teach—repentance and baptism unto those who are accountable and capable of committing sin; yea, teach parents that they must repent and be baptized, and humble themselves as their little children, and they shall all be saved with their little children.

And their little children need no repentance, neither baptism. Behold, baptism is unto repentance to the fulfilling the commandments unto the remission of sins. But little children are alive in Christ, even from the foundation of the world; if not so, God is a partial God, and also a changeable God, and a respecter to persons; for how many little children have died without baptism!

Wherefore, if little children could not be saved without baptism, these must have gone to an endless hell.

Behold I say unto you, that he that supposeth that little children need baptism is in the gall of bitterness and in the bonds of iniquity; for he hath neither faith, hope, nor charity; wherefore, should he be cut off while in the thought, he must go down to hell.

For awful is the wickedness to suppose that God saveth one child because of baptism, and the other must perish because he hath no baptism.

Woe be unto them that shall pervert the ways of the Lord after this manner, for they shall perish except they repent. Behold, I speak with boldness, having authority from God; and I fear not what man can do; for perfect love casteth out all fear." (Moroni 8:9-16.)

Information on baptism in the early Christian church is found in The Eerdmans Bible Dictionary, Allen C. Myers, ed. (Grand Rapids, Michigan: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1987), pp. 123-24, and extensively in Encyclopedia of Early Christianity, Everett Ferguson, ed. (New York: Garland Publishing, 1990), pp. 131-34.

Ordinances of the Temple

The ordinances of the temple are unique to the Latter-day Saints. Other religious groups have nothing like them; they simply do not understand why we build and use temples. Yet the Prophet Joseph Smith explained, "The main object [of gathering the people of God in any age of the world] was to build unto the Lord a house whereby he could reveal unto his people the ordinances of his house and the glories of his kingdom, and teach the people the way of salvation; for there are certain ordinances and principles that, when they are taught and practiced, must be done in a place or house built for that purpose." (TPJS p. 308.)

Only in the temple do we receive and are we blessed by the fullness of the holy priesthood. "If a man gets a fullness of the priesthood of God," the Prophet explained, "he has to get it in the same way that Jesus Christ obtained it, and that was by keeping all the commandments and obeying all the ordinances of the house of the Lord." (Ibid.)

In the temple we receive the sacred, redeeming ordinances essential for the building up of a Zion people. There we enter into covenants to consecrate our lives to the furthering of the Lord's work upon the earth and to the development and righteous use of talents that He has given us. The Lord Himself has explained that the purpose of building temples is to reveal the ordinances: "Let this house be built unto my name, that I may reveal mine ordinances therein unto my people." (D&C 124:40.) Through the sacred ordinances "the power of godliness is manifest." (D&C 84:20.) In the temple the sealing power of the priesthood is exercised. Celestial marriage—the sealing together of man and woman for time and all eternity—with its promise not only of continuance but of eternal increase, is the crowning gospel ordinance, administered only in the holy temple.

Our Christian friends in other denominations believe that the canon of scripture is closed, the heavens are sealed, and revelation has ceased. The "Westminster Confession of Faith" (6.006, Book of Confessions, Presbyterian Church, USA) states, "The whole counsel of God, concerning all things necessary for his own glory, man's salvation, faith, life, is either expressly set down in scripture, or by good and necessary consequence, may be deduced from scripture: unto which nothing at any time is to be added, whether by new revelation of the spirit, or traditions of men." Nearly every other Protestant denomination has a similar confession of faith, and the Roman Catholic encyclicals on the matter use similar language. I doubt that most "ordinary" Christians even know that their church teaches that God no longer speaks to his children.

It hardly needs mentioning that if the heavens are closed, if God speaks no more, there is no need for a prophet to serve as God's mouthpiece to the world. No revelation, no prophet; the conclusion is inevitable.

Is God then dead, as prominent Protestant theologians have suggested, or does He no longer care for us? It was of such a false God that the Prophet Elijah spoke when he mocked the priests of Baal: "Either [Baal] is talking, or he is pursuing, or he is in a journey, or peradventure he sleepeth, and must be awaked." (1 Kings 18:27.) An absentee God will never meet the needs of His children.

In contrast to the sterile confessions of faith accepted by other Christian churches, we proclaim boldly that God lives, that His love for His children has not grown cold, that He continues to reveal His will through His holy prophets. We are one with Amos, the Old Testament prophet: "Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets." (Amos 3:7.) We profess to believe "all that God has revealed, all that He does now reveal, and we believe that He will yet reveal many great and important things pertaining to the Kingdom of God." (Article of Faith 9.)

To us it is not logical that God would speak to a series of prophets, from Adam onwards and then, suddenly, capriciously, simply cease further communications forever. His message to Abraham did not suffice for Moses. Nor did His whisperings to Moses suffice for Isaiah, or Jeremiah, or all others who lived after Moses. Each prophet brings to the world the instructions and encouragement needed for his time. Our world of the late twentieth century, with problems never dreamed of by the ancients, needs modern revelation, delivered through living prophets.

The need for modern revelation is succinctly summarized in these words of President Joseph F. Smith:

Are we to understand, then, that God does not, and will notfurther make known his will to men; that what he has said suffices? His will to Moses and Isaiah and John is abundant for modern followers of Christ? The Latter-day Saints take issue with this doctrine, and pronounce it illogical, inconsistent, and untrue, and bear testimony to all the world that God lives and that he reveals his will to men who believe in him and who obey his commandments, as much in our day as at any time in the history of nations. The canon of scripture is not full. God has never revealed at any time that he would cease to speak forever to men. If we are permitted to believe that he has spoken, we must and do believe that he continues to speak, because he is unchangeable. (Gospel Doctrine, pp. 36-37.)

In their canons of scripture, our Christian friends do not, of course, include the Book of Mormon or the other Restoration scriptures. They speak only of the Bible, conveniently omitting to mention that disputes still remain as to which books should be included in that holy work. Historically, there has not been one Christian canon but many. A copy of the list of books then accepted as canonical by the church in Rome, written about a.d. 200, was discovered by Lodovico Muratori in the year 1740 in the Ambrosian Library in Milan. The list is called The Muratorian Canon. It indicates that the Roman church of the late second century did not consider the books of Hebrews, James, 1 Peter, or 2 Peter to be scripture. Two of the letters of John were accepted, although scholars are not sure which; and two works now not included in the New Testament, the Apocalypse of Peter and the Wisdom of Solomon, were then considered scripture, by people who everyone would agree were Christians. (Encyclopedia of Early Christianity, Everett Ferguson, ed. [New York: Garland Publishing, 1990], p. 628.)

Despite what other Christians may think, the prophets have reminded us often that the Book of Mormon will bring men and women to God with a power unequaled by any other portion of Holy Writ. It holds a special place in the hearts of Latter-day Saints as the "keystone of our religion" and as "Another Testament of Jesus Christ."

We also teach and preach that the Holy Bible is the word of God insofar as it has been correctly translated. Why the concern about biblical translations?

Wise Nephi, who understood so well the importance of pure principles, foresaw that numerous "plain and precious things" would be taken from the Bible, causing many who read it to stumble in spiritual gloom. (See 1 Nephi 13.) Some truths were lost through malignant tampering, others through uninspired textual alterations during transcribing or translation. Although the process clearly was incremental in nature, it appears that most of the doctrinal damage occurred during the hundred years from about the second half of the first century to the middle of the second century as the church, increasingly bereft of apostolic leadership and authority, compromised its beliefs to become more attractive to the world. (See Stephen E. Robinson, "Warring Against the Saints of God," Ensign, January 1988, pp. 38-39.)

The adversary, who knows the scriptures well, puts his major emphasis on corrupting and perverting the principles that are of greatest importance to the spiritual well-being of mankind. He knows that he will win if he can excise the foundation principles from the scriptures or so pervert and corrupt them that they lose spiritual power and validity. The more important the principle, the more assiduous his efforts to remove it. Failing that, he will try to discredit the principle, to make of it an object of derision, or to substitute his own clever counterfeit version and thus lead the children of God astray.

So universal is this attempt by Satan to corrode and pervert the fundamental truths that one test of what constitutes a fundamental principle may well be the evidence that significant change has occurred in the understanding of it over time. In some instances so many "plain and precious" truths have been lost that the world's understanding of the principle is either nonexistent or seriously corrupted. It follows, too, that greater fullness of exposition and clarity of explanation of each of the foundation principles will be found in the Restoration scriptures and words of the living prophets than in the Holy Bible.

A Word of Caution

God has given us the awesome responsibility to bring the fullness of His revealed gospel to all the world. I hope as we do so we will ever remember that the message we bring resolves Christianity's "doctrinal dilemmas" and restores to the world precious truths lost or taken away during darker days. Our message, as Bruce Hafen said recently, is "the last and best and only hope of Christianity and of all mankind." (Church News, October 3, 1992, p. 7.) It answers the deepest yearnings of the human heart. It provides the answers for which millions of the elect seek but which cannot be found elsewhere.

At the same time, as we go forth in boldness, secure in the knowledge that we are the Lord's agents, on His errand, let us pray daily for humility. We have no monopoly on goodness. Perhaps of all people, we live far below our privileges. There are so many good people not of our faith—both clergy and laity—who put us to shame by their Christian charity, their desire to follow Christ, and their noble examples.

Nor should we be judgmental about the Great Apostasy and the falling away that occurred. Let us view it with sadness, reminding ourselves that we, too, are fallible, foolish mortals, that none is immune from the wiles of the devil. Above all, let us consider all men and women everywhere as our brothers and sisters. May we remind ourselves often that God "hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth." (Acts 17:26.) There is much more that should bring us together as sons and daughters of God than ought to drive us apart. Let us, then, do good to all and see and pay tribute to the good in all, remembering always who we are and what God expects of us as keepers of a sacred trust.

In the spirit of charity—the pure love of Christ—let us practice and preach respect and tolerance for others. The Prophet Joseph Smith gave a great lesson for all in the theory and practice of respect when he said the following at Nauvoo in 1843:

The Saints can testify whether I am willing to lay down my life for my brethren. If it has been demonstrated that I have been willing to die for a "Mormon," I am bold to declare before Heaven that I am just as ready to die in defending the rights of a Presbyterian, a Baptist, or a good man of any other denomination; for the same principle which would trample upon the rights of the Latter-day Saints would trample upon the rights of the Roman Catholics, or of any other denomination who may be unpopular and too weak to defend themselves. (History of the Church, 5:498.)

But, some may say, if we are to be charitable toward others, surely we must avoid criticizing their actions. To the contrary, if we truly love others we are under solemn obligation to warn them, lovingly and with sensitivity, of the danger they are in if they persist in ways that depart grievously from the truth. An article in Times and Seasons puts it this way:

Charity in the full sense of the word is the love of God shed abroad in the hearts of the people of God; love towards your neighbors; assistance and friendship in the time of distress and danger. For instance we see a person in danger, and he ignorant of it, it would not be charity in us to flatter him in his dangerous condition, and thus expose him to more danger, or in other words, if any person is deceived, and is in a dangerous condition, and we know his condition to be an awful one; it is charity in us, not only that, but it is our duty to warn him of his danger and entreat him to forsake the evil way, instead of acknowledging his delusion to be good, and thus flatter him in wickedness. (Times and Seasons, December 15, 1841, p. 628.)

The author continues:

Now if Christ and the apostles had the same kind of charity that the people want us to have, they would have said to the Pharisees, Sadducees, Scribes, Alexandrians, Syrenians, etc., go on, you are doing well; this difference of opinion is only of minor consequence. And if they had thus flattered them, what would have been the consequence? Would it not have involved them deeper in sin and iniquity, and caused them to drink a greater draft of the intoxicating spirit of delusion, and encouraged them in their works of darkness? Let the reader answer this question for himself. It certainly was pure charity that inspired Christ and his apostles to reprove the world for their sins, and corruptions; and why should it be considered an uncharitable act in the Latter-day Saints to do the same, providing the world are in similar circumstances? (Ibid., p. 629.)

Let us then go forward boldly to proclaim our message—in power, purity, and personal humility—to the world. Our doctrines, the principles we espouse, differ substantially from those of other Christian churches. We do neither ourselves nor others a favor by papering over those differences, pretending they don't exist or are of no account. At the same time, however, let us be governed in our words and actions by pure charity, showing unfeigned tolerance and respect toward all of God's children. A mark of the Zion people of God is their willingness and eagerness to love those who oppose them.
