Alexander B. Morrison, Visions of Zion (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1993)

Chapter Four

Stewards over Earthly Blessings

In a revelation concerning the United Order given to the Prophet Joseph Smith in April 1834, the Lord reminded His Church that every man (and assuredly every woman also) is accountable as a "steward over earthly blessings" that He has made and prepared for His creatures. (D&C 104:13.) The importance and priority of that sacred stewardship are indicated by the fact that our accountability will be given to Christ Himself: "That every man may give an account unto me of the stewardship which is appointed unto him." (D&C 104:12.) When He interviews us, I feel certain that one of His questions will, in essence, be the following: "What have you done with the earth which my Father and I gave you as a home? Have you cherished and protected it? Have you dressed it and kept it, as your father Adam was commanded to do? Or have you laid waste to it, defiled its waters, destroyed its fertile lands, befouled its life-giving air?" To those questions, I fear there are many, even among those who aspire to become a Zion people, who will hang their heads in shame. The earth groans under the insults inflicted upon it.

This is not the place to recount in detail the extent of the environmental damage that in every country poses a major challenge to the future of the world as we know it. Most readers are familiar with at least the daily newspaper headlines, which disturb and perhaps even frighten us but to which we become first accustomed and then calloused. Many others, reacting to the uncertainties inherent in science and the exaggerated claims on one side of environmental issues or another, grow cynical and believe nothing that is written or said on the matter. There is, however, a broad consensus among scientists: details aside, our current way of life is simply environmentally unsustainable. The immensely complex and still not fully understood systems that sustain life on earth are being destroyed by human activities. Consider the following:

Â Desertification, the impoverishment and degradation of the land through over-grazing, over-cultivation, deforestation, and faulty irrigation practices, claims an estimated 15 million acres worldwide each year. This represents an area the size of West Virginia lost beyond practical hope of reclamation from its desert-like state, at least in the short-term. An additional 50 million acres annually become too degraded and impoverished to support profitable farming or grazing. West African farmers lament Kasar mu, ta gaji, in the Hausa language, "The land is tired." In the African country of Mauritania, there were reportedly 43 sandstorms during the 1960s, but "in 1983 alone a record 240 sandstorms darkened the nation's skies." (World Watch Reader on Global Environmental Issues [New York: W. W. Norton and Co., 1991], p. 28.) According to the United Nations, "11 billion acres—35% of the earth's land surface—are threatened by desertification," and with them fully 20 percent of humanity. (Ibid., p. 27.) Man is both the victim and the agent of this unbalanced relationship between people and the land.

Â The United States National Research Council estimates that 21 million barrels of oil enter the oceans annually from "street runoff, ships flushing their tanks, and effluent from industrial facilities." (Ibid., p. 46.) More than 600,000 barrels are accidentally spilled each year, on average. In January 1993, the tanker Braer, carrying nearly 25 million gallons of Norwegian oil to Canada, went aground on one of the Shetland Islands, north of Scotland, spilling her cargo into the sea. As little as "one part of oil for every ten million parts of water has serious effects on the reproduction and growth of fish, crustaceans, and plankton." (Ibid., p. 47.) Every day, merchant ships dump up to an estimated half million plastic containers into theseas. In the northern Pacific until very recently, "more than 700 Japanese, South Korean, and Taiwanese fishing boats equipped with 20-to-40-mile-long drift nets [swept] an area the size of Ohio each night," catching fish, mammals, and birds relatively indiscriminately. (Ibid., p. 53.)

Â As a result of the use of industrial chemicals known as chlorofluorocarbons, depletion of the ozone shield, which protects the earth from harmful solar ultraviolet radiation, is occurring far more rapidly and is more widespread than anticipated. Already existing degradation of the ozone layer will permit 8 to 12 percent more radiation to reach the earth, with possible serious effects not only on human health but also on the planet's food chains, both on land and in the oceans. The same chemicals that deplete the ozone layer also prevent infrared radiation from escaping it and thus participate in the global warming (the "greenhouse" effect) that many scientists believe has already started. "Six of the seven warmest years since 1850 have . . . occurred since 1980." (Ibid., p. 80.) Some scientists believe that by the year 2030, global average temperatures will be between two and eight Fahrenheit degrees higher than they averaged between 1950 and 1980, with possible catastrophic effects on coastal cities, crop production, and perhaps human life itself.

Â United Nations statistics show that more than one billion people live in areas where air quality has been seriously compromised. In Mexico City, for example, buildings and other landmarks are routinely almost obscured from view by an oily brown haze of pollution arising from millions of people, millions of automobiles, and thousands of industrial activities. Government standards for maximum permitted ozone levels are exceeded in Mexico City more than 300 days per year. And in the United States, factories reported 1.3 million tons of hazardous emissions in 1987.

Â "One third of the world's original tropical rain forests are gone, and with them . . . tens of thousands of species" of flora and fauna. (Ibid., p. 170.) The rest are going fast. In 1987 alone, some "20 million acres of virgin Brazilian forest, an area the size of Maine, went up in smoke," according to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the Brazilian National Space Research Institute. (Ibid., p. 171.)

Â Widespread contamination of soil and water exists in the former East Germany, resulting from industrial practices associated with cold war activities. Near Oberrothenbach, for example, is a lake that served as a dump for a nearby uranium processing factory. The lake water kills unfortunate animals drinking there, and no wonder: it "contains an estimated 22,500 tons of arsenic—enough to kill everyone in Europe—plus huge amounts of lead, iron, cadmium, sulfuric acid, low-level radioactive materials, and other poisons. And the lake is just a small part of the environmental assault" imposed on that portion of Germany. Some "500 million tons of chemical and low-level radioactive waste are spread over 1200 square kilometers." (Science, January 22, 1993, p. 448.)

The above information, taken largely from the respected World Watch Reader on Global Environmental Issues, indicates clearly that the concept of trusteeship over the earth has not received sufficient attention from many. A combination of avarice and ignorance has put our earthly home in danger. President Spencer W. Kimball's somber words come to mind: "I have traveled much in various assignments over the years, and when I pass through the lovely countryside or fly over the vast and beautiful expanses of our globe, I compare these beauties with many of the dark, miserable practices of man, and I have the feeling that the good earth can hardly bear our presence upon it. I recall the occasion when Enoch heard the earth mourn, saying, 'Wo, wo is me, the mother of men; I am pained, I am weary, because of the wickedness of my children. When shall I rest, and be cleansed from the filthiness which is gone forth out of me?'" (Ensign, June 1976, p. 4; see Moses 7:48.)

The Prophets Speak

The views of the prophets are clear on the responsibilities shared by all humankind to protect and watch over the earth, to dress and keep it. Brigham Young, who had a strong commitment to preservation of the environment and the wise use of natural resources, counseled the Saints thus: "There is a great work for the Saints to do. Progress, and improve upon, and make beautiful everything around you. Cultivate the earth and cultivate your minds. Build cities, adorn your habitations, make gardens, orchards, and vineyards, and render the earth so pleasant that when you look upon your labours you may do so with pleasure, and that angels may delight to come and visit your beautiful locations." (Journal of Discourses, 8:83.)

The concept of stewardship, of being a trustee over earthly blessings, was never far from President Young's mind. "The blessings of the Lord are great upon this people. . . . The earthly means which we have been enabled to gather around us is not ours, it is the Lord's, and he has placed it in our hands for the building up of his kingdom and to extend our ability and resources for reaching after the poor in other lands." (Ibid., 10:222.) Truly, "the earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof" (Psalm 24:1); we are but tenants with a steward's responsibility to look after the earthly blessings with which the Lord has entrusted us, and to pass them on undamaged to our children and grandchildren.

In a thoughtful and sensitive address given at general conference in 1978, President Kimball deplored the unnecessary shedding of blood and destruction of animal life so common in our society, describing the capricious killing of birds and animals as "not only wicked" but also "a shame." (Ensign, November 1978, p. 45.) He quoted the Prophet Joseph Smith on this matter as follows:

We crossed the Embarras river and encamped on a small branch of the same about one mile west. In pitching my tent we found three massasaugas or prairie rattlesnakes, which the brethren were about to kill, but I said, "Let them alone—don't hurt them! How will the serpent ever lose his venom, while the servants of God possess the same disposition and continue to make war upon it? Men must become harmless, before the brute creation; and when men lose their vicious dispositions and cease to destroy the animal race, the lion and the lamb can dwell together, and the sucking child can play with the serpent in safety." The brethren took the serpents carefully on sticks and carried them across the creek. I exhorted the brethren not to kill a serpent, bird, or an animal of any kind during our journey unless it became necessary in order to preserve ourselves from hunger. (History of the Church, 2:71-72.)

Note how Joseph differentiates between the justifiable killing of animals for necessary food and their wanton slaughter for pleasure.

How commendable, how wise and far-seeing is the admonition of the prophets that we care for all life, holding it in sacred reverence and dealing with it wisely and with affectionate respect. The importance of doing so was noted several years ago by President Ezra Taft Benson, who concluded that at their core, environmental problems are caused by spiritual deficiencies. As you may recall, President Benson is no stranger to environmental issues, having served with great distinction as Secretary of Agriculture in the United States Government during the Eisenhower administration. He said, "One dimension of spiritual law . . . is that one's self-regard and his esteem for his fellow men are intertwined. If there is a disregard for one's self, there is bound to be some disregard for one's neighbor. If there isn't a reverence for life itself, there is apt to be little reverence for the resources God has placed here on which we must call. The outward expressions of irreverence for God, for life, and for our fellowmen take the form of things like littering, heedless strip-mining, heedless pollution of water and air. But these are, after all, outward expressions of the inner man." ("Problems Affecting the Domestic Tranquility of Citizens of the United States," Vital Speeches, February 1, 1976, 42:240.)

There are, I believe, two additional (and interrelated) deficiencies in "the inner man," or perhaps more accurately in the natural man, that contribute mightily to the environmental problems that besmirch and befoul this beautiful earthly home the Lord has given us and, at the same time, impede the development of Zion. They are selfishness and idolatry.

Selfishness, with its associates greed and avarice, puts individual gain over the common good. That attitude places short-term profit over long-term damage to the environment. It takes no thought of tomorrow; it has no concern for those who will inherit the wreckage of today. Those who subscribe to this "slash and burn" attitude will destroy in a year what it took nature a thousand years to build up. Many examples come to mind:

Â Commercial logging operations in West Africa that just a few years ago involved the destruction of several acres of rain forest to obtain a handful of large mahogany or other trees that could be sold for large sums of money.

Â Strip-mining operations that leave the earth scarred and useless.

Â Cities that pour millions of gallons of raw sewage into lakes, streams, and marine bodies of water.

Laws preventing such callous, wanton disregard for the earth are in place in most developed Western countries. Sadly, it is in the poor, developing countries of the world, where there are neither the laws nor the means to enforce them, that the worst destruction now goes on. "They seek not the Lord to establish his righteousness, but every man walketh in his own way, and after the image of his own God, whose image is in the likeness of the world." (D&C 1:16.) "If we insist on spending all our time and resources building up for ourselves a worldly kingdom," President Kimball reminded us, "that is exactly what we will inherit." (Ensign, June 1976, p. 6.) Indeed, the devil offers that deal—worldly success in exchange for eternal life—to all who will listen to his lies and deceit. He offered it even to Jesus. (See Matthew 4:3-10.) Those who make such a pact with Satan always lose, of course. "The devil will not support his children at the last day, but doth speedily drag them down to hell." (Alma 30:60.)

Closely allied with selfishness, and often co-existent with it, is the sin of idolatry. Those who worship their possessions, the "gods of silver, and gold, of brass, iron, wood, and stone, which see not, nor hear, nor know" (Daniel 5:23), are unlikely to have much reverence for the earth or the creatures and creations thereon. Trusting in "the arm of flesh," impatient to grasp and gain, they pay little heed to the long-term consequences of their actions.

I well recall being asked several years ago by the then Minister of National Health in Canada to travel to Newfoundland to investigate the cause of massive fish kills in a place called Long Harbor. Fish by the thousands were flinging themselves onto the beaches, writhing and dying in what seemed to be agony, their bodies covered with pin-point ("petechial") hemorrhages. Further investigations showed that the waters of the harbor sheltered essentially no animal life at all. Dead fish were stacked up, like corn in a crib, for depths of thirty to forty feet out in the harbor, and even the lobsters that normally crawled over the seabed were dead, every one of them.

The cause of all this senseless slaughter was not hard to find. A huge facility manufacturing elemental phosphorus from phosphate rock had recently been set up on Long Harbor. After several months of "running-in," the plant was now fully operational. Hundreds of tons of phosphorus were pumped each week out to waiting tankers, to be shipped to England and elsewhere for use in preparing various commodities, notably detergents.

"Tailings" from the manufacturing operation were simply dumped out of a pipe into the sea, fifty feet or so from the end of the dock, which extended five hundred feet or more into the water of the harbor. A great yellow "boil" of elemental phosphorus, twenty feet across, continually bubbled up to the surface of the water. The fish and other creatures dying by the tens of thousands suffered from the classical symptoms of phosphorous poisoning.

When I brought this sorry state of affairs to the attention of the chief engineer at the phosphorous plant, he shrugged his shoulders. "Interesting," he said, "but I couldn't care less; my job is to get this plant 'on line' and to produce 75,000 tons of phosphorus a year. Why should I care about some fish?" His god was technology and the profits it promised; his life, whether he knew it or not, was one of idolatry. (Incidentally, the Canadian government promptly shut down the phosphorous plant until the operators figured out how to run it properly, without endangering all life in the harbor.)

Frankly, I faulted the engineers less than those at the top of the operation who were driven by only one motive: profit. They really didn't care what effect their operations had on the environment so long as the golden idol was fed.

Dominion over the Earth

There are some who try to use scriptural arguments to justify disregard for and violation of the earth. "After all," they say, "God gave man 'dominion . . . over all the earth' and commanded Adam and Eve (and hence their descendants) to 'replenish the earth, and subdue it.' [See Genesis 1:26, 28.] Surely those bequeathals provide the necessary authority to do whatever we wish. After all, God gave the world to us, to do with as we please!" How shallow an argument!

Humankind has a clear and certain obligation, in implementing the awesome powers with which God has entrusted us, to act responsibly, as trusted stewards, attempting insofar as is possible to act as our Father would do were He here personally. We are His agents, assigned and required to act in His name. Our attitudes toward the earth should mirror those of the psalmist:

"O Lord my God, thou art very great; . . . Who coverest thyself with light as with a garment: who stretchest out the heavens like a curtain: Who layeth the beams of his chambers in the waters: who maketh the clouds his chariot: who walketh upon the wings of the wind: . . .

Who laid the foundations of the earth, that it should not be removed for ever. Thou coveredst it with the deep as with a garment: the waters stood above the mountains. At thy rebuke they fled; at the voice of thy thunder they hasted away. . . .

Thou hast set a bound that they may not pass over; that they turn not again to cover the earth. He sendeth the springs into the valleys, which run among the hills. They give drink to every beast of the field: . . . By them shall the fowls of the heaven have their habitation. . . . He watereth the hills from his chambers: the earth is satisfied with the fruit of thy works. He causeth the grass to grow for the cattle, and herb for the service of man: that he may bring forth food out of the earth; . . .

O Lord, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom hast thou made them all: the earth is full of thy riches. So is this great and wide sea, wherein are things creeping innumerable, both small and great beasts. . . . There is that leviathan, whom thou hast made to play therein. These wait all upon thee; . . .

Thou hidest thy face, they are troubled: thou takest away their breath, they die, and return to their dust. Thou sendest forth thy spirit, they are created: and thou renewest the face of the earth. The glory of the Lord shall endure for ever: the Lord shall rejoice in his works. (Psalm 104:1-3, 6-14, 24-27, 29-31.)

God's love for and reverence for all life, which must be the pattern for our behavior, is clearly indicated by His personal statement:

And God said, Let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving creature that hath life, and fowl that may fly above the earth in the open firmament of heaven. . . .

And God said, Behold, I have given you every herb bearing seed, which is upon the face of all the earth, and every tree, in the which is the fruit of a tree yielding seed; to you it shall be for meat.

And to every beast of the earth, and to every fowl of the air, and to every thing that creepeth upon the earth, wherein there is life, I have given every green herb for meat: and it was so.

And God saw every thing that he had made, and, behold, it was very good. (Genesis 1:20, 29-31; italics added.)

The dominion over the earth that God gave to humanity is part of the testing program that is a major purpose of our earthly existence. Our Father wishes to determine if we are able to use God-like powers righteously. It is a necessary test, given our divine potential. If we fail it, how can the Father trust us with creations of our own?

In a word, then, humanity's dominion is a call to stewardship, not a license to pillage.

A variation of the "I-can-do-as-I-please" school of thought is the notion that it doesn't matter how badly we treat the earth because Jesus will return soon anyway and make everything right. That, too, is a spurious and specious argument. First of all, the scriptures make it clear that no one knows the time of the Second Coming. Why should we live in a sewer while awaiting Christ's return? Second, does a child have the right to burn down the family home just because his parents possess the ability to rebuild it?

What, then, in practical terms, are we to make of mankind's "dominion over all the earth?" Is it best expressed by leaving the earth as pristine wilderness, untouched by the hand of man? Although there will inevitably be less and less wilderness as the world's population increases, we would do well to preserve as much of it as we can for two important reasons. First, the wilderness is the great producer of the plant and animal species needed to maintain essential biological diversity on the earth. It serves also as the great natural reservoir of renewable resources of materials, pharmaceuticals, energy, and so on.

Second, I believe that humankind, for the sake of its own sanity, needs to maintain a sense of continuity with the past, with its own roots, and with all the rest of God's creations. To do so requires periodic contact with the primeval. Thus, I for one would not wish to live in a world without wilderness. That is not to say, however, that the earth-as-wilderness model comes even close to meeting the entire needs of the human race. The world's peoples need to be fed, clothed, housed, and provided with essential materials and other things that come from the earth. Granted the need to maintain appropriate wilderness areas, the model that best expresses the desirable relationship between mankind and the earth is that spoken of in the following quotations:

For the Lord shall comfort Zion: he will comfort all her waste places; and he will make her wilderness like Eden, and her desert like the garden of the Lord; joy and gladness shall be found therein, thanksgiving, and the voice of melody." (Isaiah 51:3; italics added.)

The designs of God . . . have been to promote the universal good of the universal world; to establish peace and good will among men; to promote the principles of eternal truth; to bring about a state of things that shall unite man to his fellow man; cause the world to "beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruning hooks," make the nations of the earth dwell in peace, and to bring about the millennial glory, when "the earth shall yield her increase," resume its [paradisiacal] glory, and become as the garden of the Lord." (TPJS, pp. 248-49; italics added.)

With the above-mentioned caveat, that if we value the future we must maintain essential wilderness areas, humanity's dominion over all the earth is best expressed if we think of the earth as a garden and treat it accordingly. What are the characteristics of a garden that lend themselves to such a line of thought? There are at least five that commend themselves to us, as follows:

Humanity's dominion over the earth would be exalted if all people thought of the earth as a garden and, in their dealings and interaction with it, strove to collaborate with nature, increase productivity, sustain and renew the earth's production capacity, and feed the soul with the beauties and wonder of living things. Truly we could then say that our dwelling place is like Zion.

Every part of the world has lands that have been treated as a garden for very long periods of time, with the desired results mentioned above having been achieved for centuries. China and parts of Europe, for example, have maintained fertile soils and sustained food production for thousands of years through careful management of resources.

Success has been achieved in many regions of the earth not highly favored by nature. I think of the terraced vineyards that rise on steep slopes hundreds of feet above the north end of Lake Geneva in Switzerland. Grapes have been grown there continuously for over 2,000 years. Israel, the biblical land of milk and honey, became largely desert over time as successive generations abused the land and degraded its natural abilities to renew itself. Skillful ecological management, including irrigation and reforestation, now again is causing the desert to "rejoice, and blossom as the rose." (Isaiah 35:1.)

Few places on earth are more pleasing to the eye than is the English countryside, with its hedgerows, meadows, fields, and trees. This admirable landscape is, in effect, a large garden, far different from what it was in the state of wilderness, that has been progressively shaped from the primeval marsh and forest by centuries of effective human intervention. Roadsides and riverbanks have been trimmed and verged with grass; there is a balance between trees and open spaces and between foregrounds and backgrounds. With that aesthetically pleasing balance, achieved through centuries of toil, there has been created a great diversity of ecologic systems. They appear natural to us but in reality owe their origin to human intervention. The hedgerows, for example, with their associated fields, drainage ditches, and lines of trees, date largely from the Enclosure Acts of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. (See Asa Briggs, A Social History of England, 2nd ed. [London: Pelican Books, 1987], pp. 204-5.) As open fields were enclosed, woodlands and wastes disappeared, and a new pattern of hedges, walls, fences, and rocks took shape. The new plantings and arrangements matured over time and took on the pleasing features so characteristic of today's English countryside. It all looks so natural that it is easy to forget its largely human origin.

The English hedgerows, ditchbanks, and woods harbor an immense variety of plants, insects, songbirds, rodents, and larger mammals, existing together in a pleasing and highly diversified ecosystem, in symbiotic relationship with the humans who dwell there.

In the United States, one of the best examples of treating the earth like a garden is found at Monticello, Thomas Jefferson's Virginia home. "No occupation is so delightful to me as the culture of the earth," wrote Jefferson, "and no culture comparable to that of the garden. . . . But though an old man, I am but a young gardener." The grounds around Monticello became, in Jefferson's hands, a "kind of living laboratory for the study of useful and ornamental plants from around the world."

When Jefferson mentioned his "garden," he was usually referring to his vegetable garden, which "resembled a terraced shelf eighty feet wide and a thousand feet long, cut into the hillside and supported by a stone wall." There, Jefferson grew more than 250 varieties of vegetables and herbs, including sesame, sea kale, tomatoes (then relatively unknown), and "nearly twenty varieties of . . . peas, believed to be his favorite vegetable." ("Thomas Jefferson's Monticello," pamphlet published by the Thomas Jefferson Memorial Foundation, Charlottesville, Virginia.)

It is apparent from the above that the earth is to be seen "neither as an ecosystem to be preserved unchanged nor as a quarry to be exploited for selfish and short-range economic reasons, but as a garden to be cultivated for the development of its own potentialities.. . . The goal of this relationship is not the maintenance of the status quo, but the emergence of new phenomena and new values." (RenÃ© Dubois, "Symbiosis Between the Earth and Humankind," Science, 193:459-62.)

This view is fully compatible with God's instructions to Adam to replenish the earth, to dress it and keep it. It presupposes the need for work to accomplish the associated stewardship ("In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread" [Genesis 3:19]) and suggests that man, in keeping with his assigned dominion over every living thing, has both the right and the obligation to manage the resources of the earth in ways that will benefit both it and humankind. At the same time, it rejects the "loot and burn" philosophy that has characterized much human interaction with the earth and other living creatures.

Responsibilities of a Zion People

If we are, then, to become a Zion people, we must learn well and practice effectively our responsibilities to act as stewards over earthly blessings. Most of us, perhaps, can do little directly about the Brazilian rain forest or global warming. We can, however, do much to control our own micro-environments, acting as good citizens and wise stewards. To do so may be as simple as looking after our own properties in a responsible manner. "We are concerned," said President Kimball, "when we see numerous front and side and back yards that have gone to weeds, when ditch banks are cluttered and trash and refuse accumulate. It grieves us when we see broken fences, falling barns, leaning and unpainted sheds, hanging gates, and unpainted property. And we ask our people again to take stock of their own dwellings and properties.

"There is a story that President Brigham Young, having urged the people of certain communities to properly clear and clean their premises, refused to go back to them to preach to them, saying something like this: 'You didn't listen to me when I urged you to fix up your premises. The same doors are off their hinges; the same barns are still unpainted; the same fences are partly fallen.'" (Ensign, May 1975, p. 5.)

"We look forward," concluded President Kimball, "to the day when in all of our communities, urban and rural, there would be a universal, continued movement to clean and repair and paint barns and sheds, build sidewalks, clean ditch banks, and make our properties a thing of beauty to behold." (Ensign, November 1974, p. 4.)

As I have traveled in many lands, at home and abroad, I have often thought of President Kimball's wise advice. We must do more! The conclusion seems inescapable: Zion, the pure in heart, is also Zion the clean, Zion the protector of the environment, Zion the faithful steward over earthly blessings.
