Alexander B. Morrison, Visions of Zion (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1993)

Chapter Five

"And There Was No Poor among Them"

The scriptures are replete with references to our responsibility to care for the poor and needy and the blessings that will be ours if we do so. "Blessed is he that considereth the poor," sang the Psalmist. "The Lord will deliver him in time of trouble." (Psalm 41:1.) God's interest in the poor and in our attitudes and actions toward them is revealed in this verse from Proverbs: "Whoso mocketh the poor reproacheth his Maker." (Proverbs 17:5.)

Jesus, whose heart was full of compassion for the poor and oppressed, was asked by a young man what was necessary to obtain eternal life. The Savior's reply tells much: "If thou wilt be perfect, go and sell that thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and come and follow me." (Matthew 19:21.) Matthew records that the young man went away sorrowing, "for he had great possessions." Not for the first (nor, sadly, the last) time, riches had triumphed over righteousness.

The Nephite prophets spoke out boldly against those who "persist in turning [their] backs upon the poor, and the needy, and in withholding [their] substance from them" (Alma 5:55), who "love money, and . . . substance, and . . . fine apparel, and the adorning of . . . churches, more than [they] love the poor and the needy" (Mormon 8:37), and committed all such to damnation "except they speedily repent" (Alma 5:56).

The responsibility to care for the poor has repeatedly been emphasized by God's latter-day prophets as well. "And now, I give unto the church . . . a commandment, that certain men . . . shall be appointed, . . . and they shall look to the poor and the needy, and administer to their relief that they shall not suffer." (D&C 38:34-35.) In the early days of this dispensation, Bishop Newel K. Whitney was instructed to "travel round about and among all the churches, searching after the poor to administer to their wants." (D&C 84:112.)

Joseph Smith encouraged each member of the Church to serve others liberally regardless of the receiver's beliefs or church affiliation. The Prophet said: "He [the Church member] is to feed the hungry, to clothe the naked, to provide for the widow, to dry up the tear of the orphan, to comfort the afflicted, whether in this Church, in any other, or in no church at all, wherever he finds them." (Times and Seasons, March 15, 1842.) Caring for the poor and needy through Welfare Services, as President Spencer W. Kimball has indicated, "is not a program, but the essence of the gospel. It is the gospel in action. It is the crowning principle of a Christian life." (Ensign, November 1977, p. 77.)

In light of these inspired words, is it any wonder that in the City of Enoch, where "the Lord called His people Zion, because they were of one heart and one mind, and dwelt in righteousness; . . . there was no poor among them"? (Moses 7:18; italics added.) If the Latter-day Saints are to become a Zion people, we must fully and completely follow the Lord's admonition to care for the poor. "It is folly for the Saints to neglect their duties and still think, while doing so," said President George Q. Cannon, "that within some given period Zion will be redeemed. Zion will be redeemed, and it may be within the period estimated by them; but they will not be in a position to be benefited by it if they are neglectful and dilatory in seeking for and acquiring that knowledge of the truth which their position and relationship to God and His work admits of their obtaining." (Gospel Truth [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1987], p. 35.)

Why are we obligated to care for the poor? It is easy to dismiss this question by simply replying, "Because God has so commanded us." While such a reply obviously is true, we may find it instructive to consider briefly some of the reasons why God has placed such heavy emphasis on caring for the poor. They include the following, not in any particular order of priority or importance:

Concern for our brothers and sisters must go beyond sympathy, or even empathy, to action. "If a brother or sister be naked, and destitute of daily food, and one of you say unto them, Depart in peace, be ye warmed and filled; notwithstanding ye give them not those things which are needful to the body; what doth it profit?" (James 2:15-16.) "The Latter-day Saints have got to learn . . . ," said Brigham Young, "that the interest of their brethren is their own interest, or they never can be saved in the celestial kingdom of God." (Journal of Discourses, 3:331.) Prayer and action are inseparable. Faith must lead to works, if it is to become living faith and thus have real meaning in people's lives.

How can caring for the poor, being "rich in good works," help us in "retaining a remission of [our] sins from day to day" and assist us to "lay hold on eternal life"? The answers, I think, lie in the following scriptures:

"When ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are only in the service of your God." (Mosiah 2:17.)

"Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve." (Luke 4:8.)

"Ye have entered into a covenant with him [i.e., the Lord], that ye will serve him and keep his commandments, that he may pour out his Spirit more abundantly upon you." (Mosiah 18:10.)

"There was a time granted unto man to repent, yea, a probationary time, a time to repent and serve God." (Alma 42:4.)

"If thou lovest me thou shalt serve me and keep all my commandments." (D&C 42:29.)

"And remember in all things the poor and the needy, the sick and the afflicted, for he that doth not these things, the same is not my disciple." (D&C 52:40.)

The meaning is clear: We show our love for God, our obedience to Him, our willingness to become a disciple of Christ, as we serve others. A condition for the remission of our sins is that we serve others. In a sense, we are forgiven of our sins to the extent that we care for others and help to ease their burdens. Service is the very essence of godhood; it is synonymous with keeping the commandments of God; it is the offspring of others and thank God for the privilege of being able to do so.

As we recognize that all are beggars, ourselves included, our sense of awareness about the human condition increases. We feel in our hearts the pain and suffering of others, and we weep with them wherever they are. Barriers of geography, language, and culture fall away. Our feelings of gratitude for blessings increases, while at the same time we reach out to help others whom we see, perhaps for the first time, as truly our brothers and sisters. To Cain's cynical and dismissive question "Am I my brother's keeper?" (Genesis 4:9), we reply, "No, but I am his brother, and thus I share in his sorrows and must do all I can to help alleviate them."

Poverty is a relative thing and difficult to define precisely. It means something different in Nigeria than in the United States. Yet there is a state of want and misery below which no one should be asked to descend so long as others live in plenty. Those of us with many blessings must learn to live simply so that others may simply live. Remember, "a religion that has not the power to save people temporally . . . cannot be depended upon to save them spiritually." (President Joseph F. Smith, quoted in Albert E. Bowen, The Church Welfare Plan, Sunday School Gospel Doctrine Course, 1946, p. 36.)

Men, women, and children simply cannot develop their spiritual faculties if the material conditions for their existence reduce them to the level of animal survival. It is said that for many people there is no morality below 900 calories of food energy per day. Under such conditions of want and deprivation, many will do whatever is necessary to survive, even if that means breaking God's commandments. It does little good to speak of spiritual things to one whose children are dying from hunger. While counseling those who would welcome the survivors of the Willie and Martin handcart companies to the Salt Lake Valley, Brigham Young said: "You know that I would give more for a dish of pudding and milk, or a baked potato and salt, were I in the situation of those persons who have just come in, than I would for all your prayers, though you were to stay here all the afternoon and pray. Prayer is good, but when baked potatoes and pudding and milk are needed, prayer will not supply their place." (Deseret News Weekly, 6 [December 10, 1856]: 320.)

"I want to say to you," said President Harold B. Lee, "that we might just as well throw our hats in the air and scream as to hope to convert spiritually an individual family or an individual man or an individual nation whose existence has been reduced to the instincts of animal survival. . . . We must take care of their material needs and give them a taste of the kind of salvation that they do not have to die to get before we can lift their thinking to a higher plane." (General Welfare Meeting, April 4, 1959.)

In other words, needy people may require material assistance as a prerequisite to teaching them the higher spiritual truths. The spiritual and temporal parts of our existence cannot be separated.

The Extent of Poverty in the World

Poverty exists in every nation and in every community. In its extreme manifestations, it is a form of bondage and the root cause of many social ills. Disease, malnutrition, crime, and illiteracy are in a general sense at much higher levels among those who live in countries with low gross national products than in those where the gross national product is significantly higher.

The following data, produced by the World Bank, illustrate some of the relationships involved for selected low-, middle-, and high-income countries.

VITAL STATISTICS IN 18 SELECTED COUNTRIES

CountryG.N.P * $ per capita 1989Life expectancy Years 1989%Adult Illiteracy 1985Infant mortality 1000 live births 1989

Low Income Countries

Mozambique804962137Somalia1704888128Nigeria2505158100Haiti360556294Ghana390554086

Middle Income Countries

Bolivia6205426106Philippines7106414420Dom. Rep.790672361Colombia1,200691238Mexico2,010691040

High Income Countries

Spain9,3307768Australia1436077Neg.8U.K.1461076Neg.8Canada1903077Neg.7United States2091076Neg.10

* = Gross National Product

** = Negligible—i.e. less than 5%

(World Development Report, 1991, The World Bank, Oxford University Press, Tables 1 and 28.)

Average income levels, as measured by gross national product per capita, vary widely—from less than 100 U.S. dollars per year to over 20,000 U.S. dollars per year. Indeed, there are thirty-two countries with G.N.P.'s per capita of less than 500 U.S. dollars per year, twenty-three of them in Africa. Life expectancy in low-income countries such as Somalia or Nigeria is more than twenty-five years less than in high-income countries such as Canada or the United States. Adult illiteracy rates are ten to fifteen times higher in low-income countries than in high-income, developed Western countries. The figures shown are for both men and women. In every instance, illiteracy rates are higher for adult women than for adult men. In fact, fewer than 15 percent of women in Black Africa are literate. In the absence of literacy, it is difficult to raise health, nutritional, and sanitary standards. Illiterate people have a difficult time improving their living standards, reading the sacred scriptures, and understanding and acting on their options, truly using their moral agency.

Infant mortality rates in low-income countries are fifteen to twenty times higher than in developed countries. It is noteworthy that U.S. rates (10 per 1,000 live births) are considerably higher than those in other developed countries such as Canada (7) or Sweden (6).

The Irish Potato Famine

The effects of poverty and its consequences on a population are well illustrated by the sad story of the potato famine that decimated Ireland in the nineteenth century. In the early 1840s, Ireland had a population of more than eight million, twice what it has today. The Irish peasantry lived in abject poverty. Said the Duke of Wellington, himself an Irishman, "There never was a country in which poverty existed to the extent it exists in Ireland." "Housing conditions were wretched beyond words. . . . Nearly half of the families of the rural population [were] living [in] windowless mud cabins of a single room. . . . Furniture was a luxury; the inhabitants of Tullahobagly, County Donegal, numbering about 9,000, had in 1837 only 10 beds, 93 chairs and 243 stools between them." (The Great Hunger, Cecil Woodham-Smith [New York: Harper & Row, 1962], p. 20.)

The diet of most Irish people consisted almost entirely of potatoes; a staggering average of fourteen pounds per person were consumed each day. Disaster struck in August of 1845 when initial reports began to appear of disease in the potato crop. Within a few weeks, most of the crop was infected and destroyed. In 1846 and again in 1848, the crop failed completely. Even potatoes that seemed healthy when dug began to rot in storage and soon were unfit to eat.

There was no other locally produced food to which the people could turn for sustenance, and almost nobody had any money to pay for anything anyway. Despair and foreboding hung like a dark cloud over the island. Such grain as was grown was used largely to pay rents, almost always to absentee landlords in England. Unlike their English counterparts, Irish farmers had no rights of tenancy secured by law. Any improvements they made on the land only put Irishmen at risk of increased rents or even eviction.

By October of 1845, famine was beginning to appear, and disaster loomed. A young English medical officer sent to Ireland wrote, "Famine must be looked forward to and there will follow, as a natural consequence, as in former years, typhus fever or some other malignant pestilence." His gloomy prophecy was soon proven correct. (Richard M. Krause, The Restless Tide [Washington, D.C.: National Foundation for Infectious Diseases, 1981], p. 52.)

The British government, committed to the principles of laissez-faire economics which forbade any interference with market forces, refused to intervene. The Irish would just have to feed themselves with their own resources. During 1846 and 1847, there was no government relief, no government buying of food; and the costs of public works, the only form of relief, had to be borne entirely from local taxes. That in itself ensured that little was done.

The Irish economy simply could not respond effectively. Even in good times Ireland imported almost nothing. There were few roads, especially in the remote western parts of the island; and only rudimentary systems of food distribution existed. On top of that, as already noted, the Irish peasantry were the poorest and most ignorant in all of Europe.

People by the millions soon were reduced to living on nettles, roots, seaweed, even grass. It was not long before they began to die from malnutrition and the infectious diseases that invariably follow it, primarily typhus and relapsing fever. In February 1847, a Royal Navy captain who visited Schull, a seaboard village in County Cork, reported that it "was half derelict, and most of the people were in the last stages of starvation. Some were like living skeletons"; others had "bodies swollen to twice their normal size," their skins blotched and blackened by scurvy. "Here and there corpses lay on the ground." (Heaven's Command, James Morris [London: Penguin Books, 1973], pp. 152-53.) The horror of Schull was repeated throughout the whole of Ireland.

The total of those who died will never be known, although a figure of between 1 and 1.5 million is commonly used. Probably ten times as many died from disease as from malnutrition.

By 1848, the British government, acting against all its avowed principles, decided finally to make some relief available. A soup of sorts was provided to feed the poor. Scarcely more nutritious than hot water, the recipe intended to feed 100 men consisted of 1/4 pound of beef leg, 2 ounces of dripping, 2 onions, 1/2 pound of flour, 1/2 pound of pearl barley, 3 ounces of salt, and 1/2 ounce of brown sugar, in two gallons of water. (Ibid., p. 166)

But it was too little too late; Ireland was ruined, its people broken in body and spirit. By the hundreds of thousands the desperate survivors fled, most to the United States via Canada. Those coming to Canada arrived weak, sick, and dying at the quarantine station of Grosse Isle on the Saint Lawrence River below Quebec City. Many failed in their desperate diaspora and are buried on Grosse Isle; a monument there commemorates their misery. "In this secluded spot," it reads, "lie the mortal remains of 5,424 persons who flying from pestilence and famine in Ireland in the year 1847 found in America but a grave." (Ibid., p. 174.)

The story of the Irish potato famine is a classic case study of poverty, disease, indifference, and ignorance—a tragic example of how not to care for the poor. (For additional details on the Irish potato famine, see Heaven's Command, the first volume of James Morris's magnificent trilogy on the British Empire [London: Penguin Books, 1973], pp. 152-74; Eyewitness to History, John Carey ed. [New York: Avon Books, 1987], p. 320; and Cecil Woodham-Smith, The Great Hunger [New York: Harper & Row, 1962].)

Caring for the Poor in the Lord's Way

How, then, are we to care for the poor in ways that will best help them? Frankly, we cannot look to worldly models for an example of what should be done (though they tell us much about what should not be done) but must look elsewhere. The Lord has made it clear that "it is [His] purpose to provide for [His] Saints" (D&C 104:15), but He adds, "It must needs be done in mine own way; and behold this is the way that I, the Lord, have decreed to provide for my saints, that the poor shall be exalted, in that the rich are made low" (D&C 104:16).

What does it mean to exalt the poor and make the rich low? The rich are made low as they humble themselves, giving freely of that which they have to those in need, recognizing that all earthly blessings come from God. The poor are exalted as they receive help with gratitude, with hearts that are pure and broken and spirits that are contrite. The help they receive releases them from the bondage under which they labor and enables them to rise to their full potential temporally and spiritually by becoming self-reliant. Then they are able and willing to reach out to help others. As the rich are humbled and the poor exalted, both are sanctified, or made holy, taking on the characteristics of a Zion people.

Caring for the poor in the Lord's way is not an easy thing to do; achieving the necessary balance between giving too much and giving too little is one of the most difficult tasks priesthood leaders and others have to carry out. Each situation is different, requiring its own solution. All the poor are not the same. Brigham Young, with perhaps unintentional wry humor, noted that there are three classes of the poor: "the Lord's poor, the devil's poor, and the poor devils." (Journal of Discourses, 12:57.) Some are poor in economic terms; others are poor in spirit, depressed, disheartened, burdened with cares and sorrow, perhaps disabled. Among them are the aged, the widow, the single mother. All need compassion; all merit our concern.

Unless tempered by good judgment, however, compassion may lead to failure unless basic principles associated with success are followed. These principles include the following:

Love. No program, system, or process of caring for the poor will succeed unless it is based upon love. The love of God and of His children are inseparably connected: "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great commandment. And the second is like unto it, thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself." (Matthew 22:37-39.) John goes to the heart of the matter with this question: "But whoso hath this world's good, and seeth his brother have need, and shutteth up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwelleth the love of God in him?" (1 John 3:17.) Love lies at the root of God's plan for caring for the poor.

Although nothing could have been done to prevent the occurrence of potato blight in Ireland a century and a half ago, the response to the ensuing crisis was conditioned by attitudes in England toward the Irish people. The quarrels and misunderstandings between the two countries were, even in the nineteenth century, seven hundred years old. No love was lost on either side. Little wonder, then, that efforts to reduce the burden of famine on the people were marked by indifference and misunderstanding.

Work. "Thou shalt not be idle," the Lord has said, "for he that is idle shall not eat the bread nor wear the garments of the laborer." (D&C 42:42.) To our father Adam, He proclaimed, "In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread." (Genesis 3:19.) Work is the prerequisite for self-respect and self-reliance. It does away with the curse of idleness and the evils of the dole. "The aim of the Church," said the First Presidency in 1936, "is to help the people to help themselves. Work is to be re-enthroned as the ruling principle of the lives of our Church membership." (Conference Report, October 1936, p. 3.) Those who, out of a misguided compassion, provide for others without giving them an opportunity to work for what they get will in the long run produce a soul-threatening dependence. "It is not an unkind or an unfeeling bishop who requires a member to work to the fullest extent he can for what he receives from Church welfare," Elder Boyd K. Packer pointed out in a stirring General Conference address a few years ago. (Ensign, May 1978, p. 91.)

"My experience has taught me," said Brigham Young, "and it has become a principle with me, that it is never any benefit to give, out and out, to man or woman, money, food, clothing, or anything else, if they are able-bodied, and can work and earn what they need, when there is anything on the earth for them to do. This is my principle, and I try to act upon it. To pursue a contrary course would ruin any community in the world and make them idlers." (Journal of Discourses, 11:297.) "Set the poor to work—setting out orchards, splitting rails, digging ditches, making fences, or anything useful, and so enable them to buy meal and flour and the necessaries of life." (Journal of Discourses, 12:61.)

During the Irish potato famine, with some laudable exceptions, little was done by the authorities to provide work to those in want. Indeed, by the beginning of 1848, nearly half a million men in Ireland had no work at all! As already indicated, to be without work is a great curse, not a blessing. It destroys men and women, crushing the self-respect out of them. I recall a song of my youth called "The Big Rock Candy Mountain." It told of a place where no effort was needed, where anything one wanted could be picked up from the ground or off the trees, where "the bulldogs all have rubber teeth and the hens lay soft-boiled eggs." In the Big Rock Candy Mountain "you don't need any money." To a small boy the line "In the Big Rock Candy Mountain, you never change your socks" seemed particularly alluring! I now realize that the Big Rock Candy Mountain of song and legend is not a desirable place to be. Without work, without sweat and effort, there can be no happiness and no spiritual progression.

A pamphlet relative to the Church Welfare Program, "Helping Others to Help Themselves," first published about 1945, points out the trials that come to those who have no work:

A man out of work is of special moment to the Church because, deprived of his inheritance, he is on trial as Job was on trial—for his integrity.

As days lengthen into weeks and months and even years of adversity, the hurt grows deeper, and he is sorely tempted to "curse God and die."

Continued economic dependence breaks him, it humiliates him if he is strong, spoils him if he is weak. Sensitive or calloused, despondent or indifferent, rebellious or resigned—either way, he is threatened with spiritual ruin, for the dole is an evil and idleness a curse.

He soon becomes the seedbed of discontent, wrong thinking, alien beliefs. The Church cannot hope to save a man on Sunday if during the week it is a complacent witness to the crucifixion of his soul.

Self-Reliance. "No amount of philosophizing, excuses, or rationalizing will ever change the fundamental need for self-reliance," said President Spencer W. Kimball (Ensign, May 1978, p. 79). Indeed, from the beginning of time, mortals have been counseled by God and His prophets to be self-reliant, to earn their own way, to be independent, and to avoid temporal or spiritual bondage. Such bondage may range from an attitude that "the world owes me a living" to drug or alcohol dependency, unwise debt, or the spiritual bondage of sin. Bondage may arise from excessive dependency on others, including ecclesiastical leaders. Those who are so bound expect others to make moral and spiritual decisions for them. Sometimes, as Elder Boyd K. Packer has wisely pointed out, bishops and other leaders become unwitting accomplices in establishing and maintaining that dependency. He said:

Bishops, keep constantly in mind that fathers are responsible to preside over their families.

Sometimes, with all good intentions, we require so much of both the children and the father that he is not able to do so.

If my boy needs counseling, bishop, it should be my responsibility first, and yours second.

If my boy needs recreation, bishop, I should provide it first, and you second.

If my boy needs correction, that should be my responsibility first, and yours second.

If I am failing as a father, help me first, and my children second.

Do not be too quick to take over from me the job of raising my children.

Do not be too quick to counsel them and solve all of the problems. Get me involved. It is my ministry. (Ensign, May 1978, p. 93.)

Why is it that God places such emphasis on the principle of self-reliance? The answer becomes clear when we understand that self-reliance is closely tied to freedom.

The scriptures are clear in telling us that freedom is a God-given principle of life. Samuel the Lamanite proclaimed: "Behold, ye are free; ye are permitted to act for yourselves; for behold, God hath given unto you a knowledge and he hath made you free." (Helaman 14:30.) We cannot be free if we are not self-reliant. Put another way, self-reliance is a prerequisite for freedom, and dependence is the enemy of freedom. The scriptures (D&C 29:24-35) tell us that man is intended by God to be "an agent unto himself." He cannot do so unless he is self-reliant. Independence and self-reliance thus are critical keys to spiritual growth. Whenever we are in a situation that threatens self-reliance, we will find that freedom is threatened too.

Although self-reliance and freedom are tied together, there is nothing spiritual, in and of itself, in being self-reliant. In our laudable strivings to attain self-reliance, we must be careful not to rely too much on the arm of flesh and to remember that we are wholly reliant upon God for all of life's blessings, including life itself. One could be self-reliant—completely independent—and lack every other desirable attribute of character. I think of a man who was one of the most wealthy men in the world, an American oil baron. He is dead now, but while he lived, a more miserable soul would have been hard to find. Grasping, conniving, greedy, incapable of giving, concerned only with getting, his wealth had cankered his soul. His self-reliance did him no good. Self-reliant does not mean self-centered!

Self-reliance, then, is not an end but a means to an end. Self-reliance becomes a factor in spiritual growth only as we use the freedom it brings to make the right choices. In particular, those who are self-reliant are free to serve others. The Nephite prophet Jacob said, "Think of your brethren like unto yourselves, and be familiar with all and free with your substance, that they may be rich like unto you. But before ye seek for riches, seek ye for the kingdom of God. And after ye have obtained a hope in Christ ye shall obtain riches, if ye seek them; and ye will seek them for the intent to do good—to clothe the naked, and to feed the hungry, and to liberate the captive, and administer relief to the sick and the afflicted." (Jacob 2:17-19.) In other words, we are to use earthly resources to serve others.

Service is linked to sacrifice. It is through sacrifice that we become sanctified and purified. I think of a family in the Liverpool England Stake, in whose home I visited a few years ago. A child in the home had been born with a rare metabolic disease that prevented her from growing and developing normally. Though she was eight years old when I saw her, the poor little thing weighed only about twenty pounds. Bedridden, still an infant, she cried in pain every few minutes. Her devoted mother tenderly cared for the youngster day and night and had not enjoyed an uninterrupted night's sleep since the child's birth. The mother was always there, easing her child's pain, whatever the hour. In the process of sharing and enduring suffering, that good woman had become sanctified. Her face was that of an angel of mercy. The purity of her soul was apparent to all. She had become a handmaiden of the Lord, united with Him in her work of mercy and love.

Unity. President J. Reuben Clark preached often upon the theme of unity, using as his scriptural basis the following verse: "I say unto you, be one; and if ye are not one ye are not mine." (D&C 38:27.) Unity is indeed one of the central themes of the gospel, expressed in its perfection in the unity between Jesus and his apostles at the Last Supper. (See John 17:20-21.) Significantly, the people of Enoch were of "one heart and one mind" (Moses 7:18), and in the Nephite Zion there were no contentions among the people. (See 4 Nephi 1:13.)

Brigham Young spoke often about the importance of unity. "We have come here to build up Zion," he said. "How shall we do it? . . . .I have told you a great many times. There is one thing I will say in regard to it. We have got to be united in our efforts. We should go to work with a united faith like the heart of one man; and whatever we do should be performed in the name of the Lord, and we will then be blessed and prospered in all we do." (Journal of Discourses, 13:155.)

Significantly, as the time of dedication of the Salt Lake Temple drew near, the First Presidency (Wilford Woodruff, George Q. Cannon, and Joseph F. Smith) sent the following message to the Saints:

We feel now that a time for reconciliation has come; that before entering into the Temple to present ourselves before the Lord in solemn assembly, we shall divest ourselves of every harsh and unkind feeling against each other; that not only our bickerings shall cease, but that the cause of them shall be removed, and every sentiment that prompted and maintained them shall be dispelled; that we shall confess our sins one to another, and ask forgiveness one of another; that we shall plead with the Lord for the spirit of repentance, and having obtained it, follow its promptings; so that in humbling ourselves before Him and seeking forgiveness from each other, we shall yield that charity and generosity to those who crave our forgiveness that we ask for and expect from Heaven.

Thus may we come up into the holy place with our hearts free from guile and our souls prepared for the edification that is promised! Thus shall our supplications, undisturbed by a thought of discord, unitedly mount into the ears of Jehovah and draw down the choice blessings of the God of Heaven! (Messages of the First Presidency [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966], 3:243.)

Other American pioneers also understood the importance of unity. In 1630, John Winthrop, later the first governor of Massachusetts, read the following message to fellow Puritans aboard the Arabella on their voyage to what has evolved into the United States of America: "We must be knit together in this work as one. . . . We must delight in each other; make others' conditions our own; rejoice together, mourn together, labor and suffer together . . . as members of the same body." (Robert C. Winthrop, Life and Letters of John Winthrop, 3rd ed. [Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1895], 2:18-19.)

In the building up of Zion, unity comes from following the light from above, in learning the will of the Lord and then doing it. The power of the Church to do good depends upon that principle. We can accomplish all that God asks of us if we are united. Then will we become one with Him; then will all of our labor be consecrated to the salvation of His children and the establishment of the kingdom of God upon the earth. Those who are unified are repentant and humble. Their hearts are full of forgiveness, charity, and generosity toward others.

Caring for the poor and needy "in the Lord's way" can come about only if we "make others' conditions our own" and labor, endure, and suffer together. Givers then will be united with receivers, and the efforts of the givers will be magnified because they are united to each other. What a glorious principle is unity! It is a hallmark of the Zion people of God.

Sanctification. Caring for the poor and needy through selfless service to others produces sanctification, the process by which sin is purged from the soul and one loses "every desire for sin." (TPJS, p. 51.) The blood of Christ sanctifies repentant suppliants, cleansing them through His infinite care: "For by the water ye keep the commandment; by the Spirit ye are justified, and by the blood ye are sanctified." (Moses 6:60.) The power of the Holy Ghost enhances the sanctification process; it purifies the heart and confers upon its recipients an inability to "look upon sin save it were with abhorrence." (Alma 13:12.) Those who are thus strengthened go on in humility and faith, yielding their hearts to God and serving others, becoming sanctified, having "no more disposition to do evil, but to do good continually." (Mosiah 5:2.)

One of the humble, unsung heroes of this dispensation, Brother Joseph Millett, portrays the deeds and blessings of those whose hearts are pure, who have been sanctified through service. During those early, difficult pioneer years in the Great Basin, Brother Millett wrote in his journal:

One of my children came in said that Brother Newton Halls folks was out of bread Had none that day.

I . . . [divided] our flour in sack to send up to Brother Halls. Just then Brother Hall came in.

Ses I, Brother Hall how are you out for flour?

Brother Millett, we have non, well Brother Hall there is some in that sack I have divided and was a going to send it to you your children told mine that you was out.

Bro Hall began to cry said he had tryed others could not get any Went to the cedars and prayed to the Lord and the Lord told him to go to Joseph Millett.

Well Brother Hall you needent bring this back if the Lord sent you for it, you dont owe me for it.

That night, humble, sanctified Joseph Millett recorded the following in his journal: "You can't tell how good it made me feel to know that the Lord knew that there was such a person as Joseph Millett." (Joseph Millett Jr. Record Book, p. 88-89, microfilm of manuscript [Salt Lake City: Church Historical Department], pp. 88-89.)

No act of kindness better sanctifies a soul or exemplifies our love for the needy than the giving of a generous fast offering. Those who are niggardly in their giving will wither their souls, while those who are generous move toward the celestial goal of sanctification. President Kimball reminded us of our obligations relative to the law of the fast:

Each member should contribute a generous fast offering for the care of the poor and the needy. This offering should at least be the value of the two meals not eaten while fasting.

Sometimes we have been a bit penurious and figured that we had for breakfast one egg and that cost so many cents and then we give that to the Lord. I think that when we are affluent, as many of us are, that we ought to be very, very generous. . . .

I think we should . . . give, instead of the amount saved by our two meals of fasting, perhaps much, much more—ten times more when we are in a position to do it. (Conference Report, October 1974, p. 184.)

When we, through our efforts to bless and share with those in greater need, master our own desires and wants, "then the powers of the gospel are released in [our] lives. . . . [and we] insure not only temporal salvation but also spiritual sanctification. . . . In the true Zion—one may partake of both temporal and spiritual salvation." (Spencer W. Kimball, Ensign, November 1977, p. 77.)
