Alexander B. Morrison, Visions of Zion (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1993)

Chapter Six

"A Peculiar Treasure unto Me"

To former-day Israel in the wilderness of Sinai, the Lord declared: "If ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people: for all the earth is mine: and ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation." (Exodus 19:5-6.) In this passage, the Hebrew word for "peculiar" (segullah) means "special possession or property." Spiritually speaking, then, Israel, or Zion, is to be a special possession or treasure unto God, a treasure purchased through the atonement of Christ. (See Acts 20:28; 1 Peter 1:18-19.)

The Almighty has laid down two conditions that must be met if the Latter-day Saints are to become a special treasure unto God and a Zion people: We must obey His voice in all things, and we must keep His covenants, as have the Zion societies of the past. Then will we "increase in beauty, and in holiness" (D&C 82:14); "put on [our] strength" (Isaiah 52:1); become "the perfection of beauty" (Psalm 50:2); "[dwell] in righteousness" (Moses 7:18); be called "the city of righteousness, the faithful city" (Isaiah 1:26); and "be redeemed with judgment" (Isaiah 1:27). Clearly the reason Zion has not been redeemed is that neither of the two required conditions has been met. Although the Lord has said He is well pleased with the Church, speaking collectively and not individually (see D&C 1:30), it is apparent we still have much to do before we become a people worthy of the appellation "Zion."

The Covenant People of the Lord

In the early days of this dispensation, the Saints were sustained in their suffering and persecution by the deep conviction that they were the covenant people of God who had entered into a special relationship with Him. That conviction gave force and impetus to the gathering of the Saints from many lands. They came to the Great Basin, many under conditions of severe hardship, to build up Zion, imbued with the vision that they were a chosen people who had been called by God out of all the nations of the world and had been entrusted with sacred, precious knowledge. President Brigham Young said:

The Christian world have very limited ideas with regard to the Kingdom of Heaven on the earth. We as Latter-day Saints have confessed before Heaven, before the heavenly hosts, and before the inhabitants of the earth, that we really believe the Scriptures as they are given to us according to the best understanding and knowledge that we have of the translation, and the spirit and meaning of the Old and New Testaments.

We have confessed before angels and men, and have acknowledged by our acts that we believe most assuredly that Jesus has called upon us as his disciples—those who will receive the truth, obey His commandments, observe His precepts and honor His laws, to come out from among the wicked, to separate ourselves from sinners and from sin. If we have not confessed this by our acts as well as by our faith, then we are mistaken concerning the gathering of ourselves together. But we have confessed it, and we do believe it, and it is for us to live according to that which we acknowledge. We acknowledge the covenant under which we live; we believe it, and are honest in our belief; and we will honor that covenant by obedience to the laws of God. If we do not, our words and our actions contradict each other. By our acts, by our coming together, by our leaving our homes, our friends and our birthplaces that were dear to us according to the customs and belief of the world, we have declared our desire to serve the Lord. (Journal of Discourses, 12:227.)

John Murdock, for example, sought for years for a society where the true ordinances of the gospel could be found. He eventually received the witness of the Spirit that the restored gospel preached by Mormon missionaries and found in the Book of Mormon was true. He came to realize that the authority to administer the ordinances of salvation resided in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Soon afterward he was baptized. In his autobiography he recorded, "I never before felt the authority of the Ordinance [of baptism], but I felt it this time and felt as though my sins were forgiven." (In Roger R. Keller, "Prepared for the Fulness," Ensign, January 1993, p. 23.)

Although the gathering provided a place for mutual protection and spiritual reinforcement, its basic purpose, the Prophet Joseph Smith averred, was to "build unto the Lord a house whereby he could reveal unto his people the ordinances of his house and the glories of his kingdom, and teach the people the way of salvation; for there are certain ordinances and principles that, when they are taught and practiced, must be done in a place or house built for that purpose." (TPJS, p. 308.) Significantly, it is in the holy temple that the highest and holiest covenants between God and man are made. Out of His love for us, God provides the temple so that therein we may partake of the covenants that are necessary for us to become a peculiar treasure unto Him.

The concept of a covenant people is of less vital force and has less impact in the lives of many Church members today than in the past. Perhaps we preach and teach about it less frequently than previously. Perhaps some members, anxious to be accepted by others not of our faith, downplay our differences while striving to find common ground with others. Finding and building upon common ground with others is a noble goal if in doing so we do not weaken, dilute, give away, or paper over our doctrine. After all, either the Latter-day Saints, speaking collectively, are the covenant people of the Lord or we are not; and if we are, others are not, at least in the full sense of the term. To say so is not to deride the teachings or beliefs of others nor to assert that they are totally in error or deny them the right to their beliefs. Nor is it to suggest that others do not make some covenants with God. It does not give us license to act as though we are superior to them. It is simply to proclaim that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has a unique role and responsibility. Ours is a different vision. We have a higher responsibility that calls upon the Church to "stand independent above all other creatures beneath the celestial world." (D&C 78:14.) When properly honored, the covenants we as Latter-day Saints make, perhaps particularly in the temple, have the potential to change the recipients thereof in ways different from those experienced by others not of our faith.

After reciting a list of the covenants made by the Latter-day Saints, President Joseph F. Smith went on to share this about the role of Church members:

It is expected that [the] officers and presiding authorities in the Church . . . shall see to it that the members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints will keep these covenants that they have made with the Lord, and that they will observe these principles and adapt them to their lives and carry them out, that they may be indeed the salt of the earth; not salt that has lost its savor and is good for nothing but to be cast out and trodden under the foot of men, but salt that has its savor and that is wholesome; that the people of God may be a light unto this generation and unto the world; that men may see your good works and glorify your Father which is in heaven; and that notwithstanding enemies, who are filled with the spirit of persecution, and who say all manner of false things against the Latter-day Saints, those who have entered into the covenant of the Gospel will keep the commandments of the Lord, will obey the dictates of the Spirit of the Lord unto them, will work righteousness in the earth, and will go right on in the path that Almighty God has marked out for them to pursue, fulfilling and accomplishing His will and His purposes concerning them in the latter day. (Conference Report, October 1904, pp. 4-5.)

What an awesome responsibility falls upon leaders to encourage the members of the Church to keep the covenants! Similarly, what responsibility falls on the members to be a light unto the world and the salt of the earth. Zion can be built up only by the covenant people of God, those who are "a peculiar treasure unto [Him] above all people." The concept of a covenant people is powerfully motivational. It can inspire and lift us up to embrace a more glorious vision of what we may become. It can fill us with the endowment of power that we require to become a sanctified people of Zion, "that as God's people, under His direction and obedient to His law, we may grow up in righteousness and truth; that when His purposes shall be accomplished, we may receive an inheritance among those that are sanctified." (TPJS, p. 254.)

The lesson that people respond positively when challenged to greatness is well illustrated by the following tale. Early in this century, so the story goes, the following classified ad appeared in the Times of London: "Men wanted for hazardous journey. Low wages, bitter cold, long hours of complete darkness. Safe return doubtful. Honor and recognition in the event of success." The ad was signed "E. Shackleton." Ernest Shackleton was seeking men to accompany him on his Antarctic explorations. The next morning, more than five thousand men were waiting outside the Times' offices! (Success, January/February 1993, p. 18.)

Those who take seriously the covenants they make, who aspire to be numbered among the covenant people of God, wish only to be humble disciples of Jesus. They endeavor—whatever their age—to become as little children, "submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love." (Mosiah 3:19.) They recognize their dependence on God and His goodness. They are not puffed up with a sense of their own importance, knowing that "God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace unto the humble." (James 4:6.) They "love not the world, neither the things that are in the world." (1 John 2:15.) They are called out of the world to become a Zion people in anticipation of the coming of the Savior. They voluntarily accept covenants that require both sacrifice and consecration. They become endowed with the two great attributes that encompass much of the teachings of Jesus: integrity and love.

Integrity

Those who have integrity are whole and complete. They know who they are and who God is. Sincerity, humility, and meekness are part of their character. They are less concerned about being recognized than in being right. They are driven by conscience, not by a desire for credit. "When the issues are determined," said President Marion G. Romney, "whether we stand with the winners or the losers, of this we may be sure: To make the proper choice on any issue is of far more importance to us personally than is the immediate outcome of the issue upon which we make a decision. The choices we make will affect the scope of our agency in the future. As of now, we have the right of decision. What we will have tomorrow depends upon how we decide today." (Conference Report, October 1968, p. 68.)

President N. Eldon Tanner was known throughout much of his adult life as "Mister Integrity." As Minister in the Government of Alberta, private businessman, and Church leader, he exemplified the highest ideals of honesty, honor, and superior character, "a man to match our mountains: tall, rugged, unyielding, immoveable," as President Kimball said of his beloved associate. (Church News, April 1, 1978, p. 6.) On one occasion, while in government service in Canada, Brother Tanner stood to vote against his own party on a proposal he could not accept. Warned by colleagues that his vote could cost him his government post, Brother Tanner replied, "I would rather be out honorably than to be in voting against my principles." (G. Homer Durham, N. Eldon Tanner, His Life and Service [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1982], p. 106.)

When Brother Tanner retired from government service, a newspaper article of the time commented, "The oilmen with whom Tanner has worked in the past five years deeply respect him; they call him a 'hard apple' in tribute to the way in which he has operated his department to squeeze out the most profit for Alberta but still keep the development capital flowing in." (Ibid., p. 108.) Another newspaper editorial read, "For the general good sense of the government's oil policies, most of the credit must go to Hon. Nathan Tanner, whose impending resignation from the cabinet will be received everywhere with genuine regret. . . . We have not always agreed with him, but we respect him; and now on his departure, we sincerely wish him well." (Ibid., p. 107.)

At a banquet in his honor, in response to the tributes paid him, Brother Tanner spoke with characteristic modesty and simplicity of the philosophy that guided his life: "The service we give is the price we pay for the privilege of living in this world. The type of service we give will determine the kind of world we live in." (Ibid., p. 108.) If integrity is the first step to true greatness, President Tanner was well on the way!

An important component of integrity is honesty. When I thinkof honesty, my thoughts turn to the example set by an Americanwho served his country as an artilleryman in World War I. After the war, he and a partner established a men's clothing store in Kansas City. At first the store prospered, but in the postwar depression of 1921, the two partners fell on hard times. The business failed in 1922, approximately $35,000 in the red. One of the partners filed for bankruptcy, but the other would not. He resolved to pay off his creditors as best he could, little by little. Fifteen years after the store went under, he was still paying business debts and was generally strapped for money for twenty years. But he knew where his duty lay. In later years he did rather well for himself. His name, of course, was Harry S Truman, the thirty-third president of the United States. (David McCullough, Truman [New York: Simon and Schuster, 1992], pp. 145-51.) Significantly, on President Truman's desk was a sign, "The Buck Stops Here."

How glorious and pure are those who have integrity! They can sleep at night, secure in the knowledge that they have done their best; their conscience is clear of offense to anyone, their honor unsullied by the sordid compromises and shady dealings of the world. Their values and convictions are clearly defined and well known to their associates. They seek first the kingdom of God and His righteousness and are little interested in power or wealth. They understand that "a man's life consisteth not in the abundance of the things which he possesseth." (Luke 12:15.) They love people and are deeply interested in them. Others see them as people who can be trusted.

Several years ago, a friend of mine who was serving at the time as a stake president, was out of work. He struggled hard to find employment, without success. Part of the problem was that he was nearly fifty years old, and many potential employers turned him down as qualified but too old. After several fruitless months, job interviews fell away to zero. After nearly a year out of work, the family's savings were exhausted and their year's supply of food and other essentials was nearly all used up. My friend was desperate; his self-confidence had eroded to the vanishing point. Finally, he got another job interview. It went well, but the interviewer was undecided, influenced as others had been by my friend's age. Finally, a senior partner in the firm intervened. "Hire him," he declared. "He's a Mormon stake president; he won't steal from us." Integrity is the jewel in the crown of character!

Love

Love has been mentioned often in this book. No wonder; the theme of love runs like a golden thread through the tapestry of the gospel. Jesus, the very embodiment of love, used it as the central principle of His teachings. To the lawyer who asked, "Master, which is the great commandment in the law?" Jesus replied, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great commandment. And the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets." (Matthew 22:36-40.)

After the physiological needs for food, clothing, and shelter are met, humankind's greatest need is to be accepted, cared for, needed—to love and be loved in return. Those whose lives are deficient in this most important psychological need are unfulfilled and empty, sometimes becoming twisted and perverted.

Love is many things and, in the ultimate analysis, may be impossible to precisely define. In large measure the world has trivialized and degraded love as synonymous with lust or sex. It is, of course, much more. Christian love is characterized by unselfishness, by constancy, and by universality. Love, as Paul pointed out, "suffereth long, and is kind; . . . envieth not; . . . vaunteth not itself; . . . seeketh not her own, . . . rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth." (1 Corinthians 13:4-6.)

Christians, if they are to follow Jesus' admonitions, must love everyone. "Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love thy neighbour, and hate thine enemy. But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you; that ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven." (Matthew 5:43-44.)

Of all the counsel given by Jesus, the admonition to love our enemies is, I think, the hardest to follow. The world over, blood feuds, many of them centuries old, attest to the proclivity of the natural man to strike out at real or imagined enemies. Such behavior is a horrifying affront to the God and Father of us all. It will be cured and prevented only by love. The covenant people of God must rid themselves of every vestige of hatred; they must love all men and women everywhere as their brothers and sisters. The truth is that we can run away from each other, we can even abuse and mistreat each other, but we cannot escape each other. Every soul on this planet is bound to us and we to them.

A 1983 made-for-television movie entitled The Scarlet and the Black portrayed vividly the conflict between good and evil in the world and the struggle of a good man to forgive and love his enemy. In the movie, which is based on a true story, Gregory Peck played Monsignor Hugh O'Flaherty, an Irish Catholic priest assigned to the Vatican; Christopher Plummer portrayed his antagonist, Colonel Herbert Kappler, the head of the Gestapo in Rome during the German occupation of the city in World War II. From his base in the Vatican, which was declared neutral territory during the war, O'Flaherty ran an escape network throughout Rome for hundreds of Allied soldiers fleeing Nazi prison camps. For several months he and Colonel Kappler played a deadly cat-and-mouse game in which the Nazis attempted to lure O'Flaherty outside of the Vatican where he could be captured and have no recourse to diplomatic immunity. All attempts failed, to the intense frustration and murderous anger of Colonel Kappler and his superiors.

As the Allied armies advanced on Rome and the German soldiers began to withdraw, Kappler requested a private meeting with the priest:

O'Flaherty: "What is it you want from me, Kappler?"

Kappler: "They say that you can't pass a beggar or a lame dog, that you see yourself with some sort of obligation to look after anyone in trouble. You help British and American prisoners, Jews, Arabs, refugees, anybody. It's a part of your faith. Is that right?

O'Flaherty: "Well, I won't deny it. That is why I became a priest."

Kappler: "Brotherly love and forgiveness, that is the other half of what you believe, true?"

O'Flaherty: "True."

Kappler: "I am glad of it because I have three more for your mercy wagon—my wife and two children. If the partisans get them, they will be killed. I want them out of Rome and safe. That is what I want from you, Priest."

O'Flaherty: "You're asking me to save your family."

Kappler: "If you really believe what you preach you will do it."

O'Flaherty: "You expect me to help you after what you've done. You think you can demand forgiveness. You think it comes automatically because you want it."

Kappler: "I'm not talking about myself."

O'Flaherty: "You turned this city into a concentration camp. You've tortured and butchered my friends. You violated every principle of God and man. I can't believe after all you've done, you want mercy."

Kappler: "I told you, for my family."

O'Flaherty: "They're just part of you, part of what you stand for. They've taken whatever they could get without a thought for the suffering all around them, and now you demand that they be saved. I'll see you in hell first."

Kappler: "No, you are no different from anyone else. All your talk means nothing. Charity, forgiveness, mercy—it is all lies. You hear me, lies! Don't you talk to me about God and humanity. . . . There is no God, no humanity. You hear me, you hear me, Priest . . . Priest."

When Rome fell to the Allies, Kappler was captured. It was only during his interrogation that he learned his wife and children had indeed been aided and were safe in Switzerland. He was sentenced to life imprisonment for his war crimes. Kappler's only visitor in his Italian jail cell, once a month, year after year, was O'Flaherty. In 1959, the former Gestapo chief was baptized into the Catholic church at the hand of his former nemesis, the Irish priest.

One key aspect of Christian love is its unselfishness. The inspiring story of Donna Carson and of those who cared for her for over three decades illustrates both the unselfish nature of true love and the blessings that come to all, givers and receivers alike, who participate in it.

Shortly after being called to serve as a missionary in 1955, Donna was stricken with polio. Within days she was paralyzed from the neck down, with only limited use of three fingers on her left hand. For many years she was cared for by her loving parents and her brother and his wife. As her parents' health began to fail, hundreds of men and women, volunteers all, moved to provide Christ-like compassionate service. Because of her total helplessness, Donna required a great deal of assistance. At one time, more than forty people served regularly, six persons per day, seven days a week. Several priesthood leaders would take turns staying throughout the night, sleeping on a couch near Donna's bedroom so they could assist if she had difficulty breathing. On one occasion, she became comatose, and it was feared she would die. "We prayed her alive," one priesthood leader said. "We were afraid that if we didn't have her with us, selfishness would come back into our hearts." ("The Donna Carson Story: A Legacy of Love," Ensign, December 1992, p. 57.)

Why did so many help Donna? Their answers tell much about both the givers and the receiver:

"I came because I loved her."

"She was my friend."

"It was an honor. It was no imposition at all."

"I came away feeling as though I had served my Heavenly Father. And yet it was I who had been served. Donna gave and gave and gave until we were filled."

"We were blessed whenever we went. A special spirit abode there." (Ibid., pp. 56-57.) Sister Carson died in 1991, her earthly mission fulfilled—to help others grow closer to the Savior through service and to serve as an example of Christ-like love.

The Weightier Matters of the Law

Jesus pronounced woes on the scribes and Pharisees who had a "form of godliness but [denied] the power thereof." (See Joseph Smith-History 1:19.) "Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye pay tithe of mint and anise and cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of the law, judgment, mercy, and faith: these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone." (Matthew 23:23.) Jesus, of course, was not protesting against men and women who paid their tithes and offerings. To do so is an essential part of obedience. The Savior, was, however, deeply concerned by those who carry out the rituals of religion while neglecting matters of greater importance.

Similar sentiments were expressed by the prophets of ancient Israel who saw in their societies tendencies to live by rote and ritual rather than by a deep and meaningful faith that leads to personal and societal righteousness. Speaking for God, Amos, the shepherd-prophet who lived eight centuries before Christ, proclaimed, "I hate, I despise your feast days, and I will not smell in your solemn assemblies. Though ye offer me burnt offerings and your meat offerings, I will not accept them: neither will I regard the peace offerings of your fat beasts. Take thou away from me the noise of thy songs; for I will not hear the melody of thy viols. But let judgment run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream. . . . Seek ye me, and ye shall live." (Amos 5:21-24, 4.)

Micah, prophesying two generations after Amos, proclaimed the same theme: ritual is no substitute for personal goodness. "Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or with ten thousands of rivers of oil? Shall I give my firstborn for my transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul? He hath shewed thee, O man, what is good; and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?" (Micah 6:7-8.)

Rote and ritual have their place, to be sure; but these great prophets counsel that we must also remember justice, mercy, humility, and obedience to the weightier matters of the law.

Latter-day prophets echo the same theme. "Please, priesthood brethren," said President Spencer W. Kimball, "do not get so busy trying to manage Church programs that you forget those basic duties . . . [which] the apostle James described as 'pure religion and undefiled' (James 1:27)." (Ensign, July 1979, p. 2.) Please understand. President Kimball, like the prophets before him, was not saying that programs are unnecessary or a waste of time. He was specifically reminding us that we can be very busy yet be neglectful of duties and responsibilities that lie at the very heart of Christian stewardship. Unless we are ever vigilant, our religious life can be reduced to a pattern of ritual and repetition, of unthinking habit that limits our vision and perspectives and will stunt our souls if unchecked. Such spiritual myopia is not pleasing to God or to his prophets.

A few years ago, a close associate shared with me a story that teaches much about the weightier matters of the law. My friend and his wife were required to visit his wife's parents, who were not in good health, in a faraway city. While they were gone from home, my friends left their family in the charge of their eighteen-year-old daughter, a capable and competent young woman. During the week they were gone, adversity struck. One of the boys in the family developed blood poisoning from an infected scratch on his leg and had to hobble around on crutches. A second son sliced his finger badly doing amateur woodworking; the youngest son broke a thumb playing softball. To top it off, the baby developed pneumonia.

The day before my friends were scheduled to return, the visiting teachers came around to the home. One stayed in the car, with the motor running, while the second sister rang the doorbell. "Is your mother home?" she inquired of the pitiful cast of walking wounded who opened the door. When told the mother was absent, the visiting teacher said, "Well, we just wanted to call, to make certain we got 100 percent visiting teaching this month. Have a good day!"

Significantly, the weightier matters of the law center on people and on their relationships with each other. What happens to people is what really counts in every situation and setting. Christ's atoning blood was shed to bless the lives of individual people and to enable them to return to their Father's home. The principles and ordinances of the gospel themselves—faith, repentance, baptism, and so on—derive their value and meaning because they build people into a Zion people. Even the Church itself exists to bless people. Man was not made for the Church; rather, the Church was made for man.

In His ministry, Jesus demonstrated repeatedly His great love for and total commitment to people—to the Exalted Man called Elohim whom we (and Jesus) refer to as Father—and to His brothers and sisters, including you and me. Jesus had a special love for the poor and the needy, the sick and the afflicted, those oppressed or in want. He comforted the poor, healed the leper, fed the hungry, and raised the dead. We who aspire to become the Zion people of God, a "peculiar treasure" unto Him, must seek always to emulate the Savior's example, and with love and integrity do all in our power to "bear one another's burdens, that they may be light; . . . mourn with those that mourn; yea, and comfort those that stand in need of comfort." (Mosiah 18:8-9.)

Epilogue

The vision of a Zion society, whose framer and finisher is God, is a powerful motivational force for humble disciples of Christ. It lifts and inspires them to do better; to strive, struggle, and endure; to move upward to new plateaus of righteousness. It draws them closer to Christ, the perfect, sinless Son of God; the Great Exemplar; the Way and the Truth. They wear out their lives in service to Him. They feel deeply the power of His atonement as it works a miracle of change in them. They become as little children and as Saints of God.

Their labors and efforts are full of gladness and rejoicing. Their hearts are "brim with joy" (Alma 26:11); putting aside the selfishness of the natural man, they seek the success and welfare of others above their own. They labor to bring other souls to taste of the "exceeding joy of which [they] did taste" that others, too, might also be "born of God and be filled with the Holy Ghost." (Alma 36:24.)

Although almost all attempts to establish Zion have failed, we must ever cling to the dream of the better world it promises. If Zion is to be redeemed, we must work harder than ever before, pray more diligently, hold ever sacred the covenants we have made with God, struggle each day that we live to cleanse our souls of selfishness, and labor always for Zion and her cause. Only as we become a people pure in heart and in deed will Zion "arise and shine in splendor amid the world's deep night." (Hymns, no. 40.)
