No specific author, Old Testament Pseudepigrapha ( 300)

The Book of Enoch

Section I.

Chapters I-XXXVI

INTRODUCTION

Chapter 1

The Holy Great One will come forth from His dwelling,

appear from His camp]

And appear in the strength of His might from the heaven of heavens.

And the Watchers shall quake,

And great fear and trembling shall seize them unto the ends of the earth.

And the high hills shall be made low,

And shall melt like wax before the flame

And all that is upon the earth shall perish,

And there shall be a judgement upon all (men).

And will protect the elect,

And mercy shall be upon them.

And they shall all belong to God,

And they shall be prospered,

And they shall all be blessed.

And He will help them all,

And light shall appear unto them,

And He will make peace with them'.

To execute judgement upon all,

And to destroy all the ungodly:

And to convict all flesh

Of all the works of their ungodliness which they have ungodly committed,

And of all the hard things which ungodly sinners have spoken against Him.

Chapter 2

Chapter 3

Observe and see how (in the winter) all the trees seem as though they had withered and shed all their leaves, except fourteen trees, which do not lose their foliage but retain the old foliage from two to three years till the new comes.

Chapter 4

And again, observe ye the days of summer how the sun is above the earth over against it. And you seek shade and shelter by reason of the heat of the sun, and the earth also burns with growing heat, and so you cannot tread on the earth, or on a rock by reason of its heat.

Chapter 5

But ye have turned away and spoken proud and hard words

With your impure mouths against His greatness.

Oh, ye hard-hearted, ye shall find no peace.

And the years of your life shall perish,

And the years of your destruction shall be multiplied in eternal execration,

And ye shall find no mercy.

6a. In those days ye shall make your names an eternal execration unto all the righteous,

b. And by you shall all who curse, curse,

And all the sinners and godless shall imprecate by you,

7c. And for you the godless there shall be a curse.

6d. And all the . . . shall rejoice,

e. And there shall be forgiveness of sins,

f. And every mercy and peace and forbearance:

g. There shall be salvation unto them, a goodly light.

i. And for all of you sinners there shall be no salvation,

j. But on you all shall abide a curse.

7a. But for the elect there shall be light and joy and peace,

b. And they shall inherit the earth.

And they shall all live and never again sin,

Either through ungodliness or through pride:

But they who are wise shall be humble.

Nor shall they sin all the days of their life,

Nor shall they die of (the divine) anger or wrath,

But they shall complete the number of the days of their life.

And their lives shall be increased in peace,

And the years of their joy shall be multiplied,

In eternal gladness and peace,

All the days of their life.

Chapter 6

Chapter 7

Chapter 8

Chapter 9

Chapter 10

And shall live till they beget thousands of children,

And all the days of their youth and their old age

Shall they complete in peace.

Chapter 11

Chapter 12

Chapter 13

Chapter 14

Chapter 15

Chapter 16

Chapter 17

Chapter 18

Chapter 19

Chapter 20

1,2. And these are the names of the holy angels who watch. Uriel, one of the holy angels, who is

Chapter 21

1,2. And I proceeded to where things were chaotic. And I saw there something horrible: I saw neither

Chapter 22

Chapter 23

1,2. From thence I went to another place to the west of the ends of the earth. And I saw a burning

Chapter 24

Chapter 25

And into the holy place shall they enter;

And its fragrance shall be in their bones,

And they shall live a long life on earth,

Such as thy fathers lived:

And in their days shall no sorrow or plague

Or torment or calamity touch them.'

Chapter 26

Chapter 27

Chapter 28

Chapter 29

Chapter 30

1,2. And beyond these, I went afar to the east, and I saw another place, a valley (full) of water. And

Chapter 31

Chapter 32

Chapter 33

Chapter 34

Chapter 35

Chapter 36

300
