No specific author, Old Testament Pseudepigrapha ( 300)

Section II.

Chapters XXXVII-LXXI

The Parables

Chapter 37

Chapter 38

When the congregation of the righteous shall appear,

And sinners shall be judged for their sins,

And shall be driven from the face of the earth:

Whose elect works hang upon the Lord of Spirits,

And light shall appear to the righteous and the elect who dwell on the earth,

Where then will be the dwelling of the sinners,

And where the resting-place of those who have denied the Lord of Spirits?

It had been good for them if they had not been born.

And the godless driven from the presence of the righteous and elect,

And they shall not be able to behold the face of the holy,

For the Lord of Spirits has caused His light to appear

On the face of the holy, righteous, and elect.

And be given into the hands of the righteous and holy.

For their life is at an end.

Chapter 39

And mercy shall not be accorded to them, saith the Lord of Spirits.

And set me down at the end of the heavens.

And the resting-places of the righteous.

And their resting-places with the holy.

And they petitioned and interceded and prayed for the children of men,

And righteousness flowed before them as water,

And mercy like dew upon the earth:

Thus it is amongst them for ever and ever.

6a. And in that place mine eyes saw the Elect One of righteousness and of faith,

7a. And I saw his dwelling-place under the wings of the Lord of Spirits.

6b. And righteousness shall prevail in his days,

And the righteous and elect shall be without number before Him for ever and ever.

7b. And all the righteous and elect before Him shall be strong as fiery lights,

And their mouth shall be full of blessing,

And their lips extol the name of the Lord of Spirits,

And righteousness before Him shall never fail,

uprightness shall never fail before Him.]

And my spirit longed for that dwelling-place:

And there heretofore hath been my portion,

For so has it been established concerning me before the Lord of Spirits.

Chapter 40

4,5. The first voice blesses the Lord of Spirits for ever and ever. And the second voice I heard blessing

Chapter 41

And they give thanks and praise and rest not;

For unto them is their thanksgiving rest.

And the course of the path of the moon is light to the righteous

And darkness to the sinners in the name of the Lord,

Who made a separation between the light and the darkness,

And divided the spirits of men,

And strengthened the spirits of the righteous,

In the name of His righteousness.

Chapter 42

Then a dwelling-place was assigned her in the heavens.

And found no dwelling-place:

Wisdom returned to her place,

And took her seat among the angels.

Whom she sought not she found,

And dwelt with them,

As rain in a desert

And dew on a thirsty land.

Chapter 43

Chapter 44

Also another phenomenon I saw in regard to the lightnings: how some of the stars arise and become lightnings and cannot part with their new form.

Chapter 45

And on the earth they shall not come:

Such shall be the lot of the sinners

Who have denied the name of the Lord of Spirits,

Who are thus preserved for the day of suffering and tribulation.

And shall try their works,

And their places of rest shall be innumerable.

And their souls shall grow strong within them when they see Mine Elect Ones,

And those who have called upon My glorious name:

And I will transform the heaven and make it an eternal blessing and light

And I will cause Mine elect ones to dwell upon it:

But the sinners and evil-doers shall not set foot thereon.

And have caused them to dwell before Me:

But for the sinners there is judgement impending with Me,

So that I shall destroy them from the face of the earth.

Chapter 46

And His head was white like wool,

And with Him was another being whose countenance had the appearance of a man,

And his face was full of graciousness, like one of the holy angels.

This is the son of Man who hath righteousness,

With whom dwelleth righteousness,

And who revealeth all the treasures of that which is hidden,

Because the Lord of Spirits hath chosen him,

And whose lot hath the pre-eminence before the Lord of Spirits in uprightness for ever.

Shall raise up the kings and the mighty from their seats,

the strong from their thrones]

And shall loosen the reins of the strong,

And break the teeth of the sinners.

Because they do not extol and praise Him,

Nor humbly acknowledge whence the kingdom was bestowed upon them.

And shall fill them with shame.

And darkness shall be their dwelling,

And worms shall be their bed,

And they shall have no hope of rising from their beds,

Because they do not extol the name of the Lord of Spirits.

raise their hands against the Most High],

And tread upon the earth and dwell upon it.

And all their deeds manifest unrighteousness,

And their power rests upon their riches,

And their faith is in the gods which they have made with their hands,

And they deny the name of the Lord of Spirits,

And the faithful who hang upon the name of the Lord of Spirits.

Chapter 47

And the blood of the righteous from the earth before the Lord of Spirits.

Shall unite with one voice

And supplicate and pray praise,

And give thanks and bless the name of the Lord of Spirits

On behalf of the blood of the righteous which has been shed,

And that the prayer of the righteous may not be in vain before the Lord of Spirits,

That judgement may be done unto them,

And that they may not have to suffer for ever.

And the books of the living were opened before Him:

And all His host which is in heaven above and His counselors stood before Him,

Because the number of the righteous had been offered,

And the prayer of the righteous had been heard,

And the blood of the righteous been required before the Lord of Spirits.

Chapter 48

Which was inexhaustible:

And around it were many fountains of wisdom:

And all the thirsty drank of them,

And were filled with wisdom,

And their dwellings were with the righteous and holy and elect.

And his name before the Head of Days.

Before the stars of the heaven were made,

His name was named before the Lord of Spirits.

And he shall be the light of the Gentiles,

And the hope of those who are troubled of heart.

And will praise and bless and celebrate with song the Lord of Spirits.

Before the creation of the world and for evermore.

For he hath preserved the lot of the righteous,

Because they have hated and despised this world of unrighteousness,

And have hated all its works and ways in the name of the Lord of Spirits:

For in his name they are saved,

And according to his good pleasure hath it been in regard to their life.

And the strong who possess the land because of the works of their hands,

For on the day of their anguish and affliction they shall not (be able to) save themselves.

And I will give them over into the hands of Mine elect:

As straw in the fire so shall they burn before the face of the holy:

As lead in the water shall they sink before the face of the righteous,

And no trace of them shall any more be found.

And before them they shall fall and not rise again:

And there shall be no one to take them with his hands and raise them:

For they have denied the Lord of Spirits and His Anointed.

The name of the Lord of Spirits be blessed.

Chapter 49

l For wisdom is poured out like water,

And glory faileth not before him for evermore.

And unrighteousness shall disappear as a shadow,

And have no continuance;

Because the Elect One standeth before the Lord of Spirits,

And his glory is for ever and ever,

And his might unto all generations.

And the spirit which gives insight,

And the spirit of understanding and of might,

And the spirit of those who have fallen asleep in righteousness.

And none shall be able to utter a lying word before him;

For he is the Elect One before the Lord of Spirits according to His good pleasure.

Chapter 50

And the light of days shall abide upon them,

And glory and honour shall turn to the holy,

And the righteous shall be victorious in the name of the Lord of Spirits:

And He will cause the others to witness (this)

That they may repent

And forgo the works of their hands.

Yet through His name shall they be saved,

And the Lord of Spirits will have compassion on them,

For His compassion is great.

And in the presence of His glory unrighteousness also shall not maintain itself:

At His judgement the unrepentant shall perish before Him.

Chapter 51

And Sheol also shall give back that which it has received,

And hell shall give back that which it owes.

5a. For in those days the Elect One shall arise,

For the day has drawn nigh that they should be saved.

And his mouth shall pour forth all the secrets of wisdom and counsel:

For the Lord of Spirits hath given (them) to him and hath glorified him.

And the hills also shall skip like lambs satisfied with milk,

And the faces of the angels in heaven shall be lighted up with joy.

5b. And the earth shall rejoice,

c. And the righteous shall dwell upon it,

d. And the elect shall walk thereon.

Chapter 52

The mountain of iron, and the mountain of copper, and the mountain of silver,

And the mountain of gold, and the mountain of soft metal, and the mountain of lead,

All these shall be in the presence of the Elect One

As wax: before the fire,

And like the water which streams down from above those mountains],

And they shall become powerless before his feet.

Either by gold or by silver,

And none be able to escape.

Nor shall one clothe oneself with a breastplate.

Bronze shall be of no service,

And tin be of no service and] shall not be esteemed,

And lead shall not be desired.

When the Elect One shall appear before the face of the Lord of Spirits.'

Chapter 53

And the sinners devour all whom they lawlessly oppress:

Yet the sinners shall be destroyed before the face of the Lord of Spirits,

And they shall be banished from off the face of His earth,

And they shall perish for ever and ever.

But the hills shall be as a fountain of water,

And the righteous shall have rest from the oppression of sinners.'

Chapter 54

Chapter 55

Chapter 56

And the days of their lives shall be at an end,

And the days of their leading astray shall not thenceforward be reckoned.

And hurl themselves to the east upon the Parthians and Medes:

They shall stir up the kings, so that a spirit of unrest shall come upon them,

And they shall rouse them from their thrones,

That they may break forth as lions from their lairs,

And as hungry wolves among their flocks.

the land of His elect ones shall be before them a threshing-floor and a highway :]

And they shall begin to fight among themselves,

And their right hand shall be strong against themselves,

And a man shall not know his brother,

Nor a son his father or his mother,

Till there be no number of the corpses through their slaughter,

And their punishment be not in vain.

And they shall be swallowed up therein

And their destruction shall be at an end;

Sheol shall devour the sinners in the presence of the elect.'

Chapter 57

Chapter 58

For glorious shall be your lot.

And the elect in the light of eternal life:

The days of their life shall be unending,

And the days of the holy without number.

There shall be peace to the righteous in the name of the Eternal Lord.

That they should seek out the secrets of righteousness, the heritage of faith:

For it has become bright as the sun upon earth,

And the darkness is past.

And to a limit (lit. ' number ') of days they shall not come,

For the darkness shall first have been destroyed,

the light established before the Lord of Spirits]

And the light of uprightness established for ever before the Lord of Spirits.

Chapter 59

Chapter 60

And fear took hold of me,

And my loins gave way,

And dissolved were my reins,

And I fell upon my face.

Chapter 61

'These shall bring the measures of the righteous,

And the ropes of the righteous to the righteous,

That they may stay themselves on the name of the Lord of Spirits for ever and ever.

And those are the measures which shall be given to faith

And which shall strengthen righteousness.

And those who have been destroyed by the desert,

And those who have been devoured by the beasts,

And those who have been devoured by the fish of the sea,

That they may return and stay themselves

On the day of the Elect One;

For none shall be destroyed before the Lord of Spirits,

And none can be destroyed.

And extolled and lauded with wisdom,

And they were wise in utterance and in the spirit of life.

And he shall judge all the works of the holy above in the heaven,

And in the balance shall their deeds be weighed

To judge their secret ways according to the word of the name of the Lord of Spirits,

And their path according to the way of the righteous judgement of the Lord of Spirits,

Then shall they all with one voice speak and bless,

And glorify and extol and sanctify the name of the Lord of Spirits.

All the holy ones who are in heaven shall bless Him,

And all the elect who dwell in the garden of life:

And every spirit of light who is able to bless, and glorify, and extol, and hallow Thy blessed name,

And all flesh shall beyond measure glorify and bless Thy name for ever and ever.

And all His works and all that He has created He has revealed to the righteous and elect

In the name of the Lord of Spirits.

Chapter 62

'Open your eyes and lift up your horns if ye are able to recognize the Elect One.'

And the spirit of righteousness was poured out upon him,

And the word of his mouth slays all the sinners,

And all the unrighteous are destroyed from before his face.

And the exalted and those who hold the earth,

And they shall see and recognize How he sits on the throne of his glory,

And righteousness is judged before him,

And no lying word is spoken before him.

she has pain in bringing forth]

When her child enters the mouth of the womb,

And she has pain in bringing forth.

And one portion of them shall look on the other,

And they shall be terrified,

And they shall be downcast of countenance,

And pain shall seize them,

When they see that Son of Man Sitting on the throne of his glory.

And the Most High preserved him in the presence of His might,

And revealed him to the elect.

And all the elect shall stand before him on that day.

Shall fall down before him on their faces,

And worship and set their hope upon that Son of Man,

And petition him and supplicate for mercy at his hands.

That they shall hastily go forth from His presence,

And their faces shall be filled with shame,

And the darkness grow deeper on their faces.

To execute vengeance on them because they have oppressed His children and His elect

They shall rejoice over them,

Because the wrath of the Lord of Spirits resteth upon them,

And His sword is drunk with their blood.

And they shall never thenceforward see the face of the sinners and unrighteous.

And with that Son of Man shall they eat

And lie down and rise up for ever and ever.

And ceased to be of downcast countenance.

And they shall have been clothed with garments of glory,

And your garments shall not grow old,

Nor your glory pass away before the Lord of Spirits.

Chapter 63

'Blessed is the Lord of Spirits and the Lord of kings,

And the Lord of the mighty and the Lord of the rich,

And the Lord of glory and the Lord of wisdom,

And Thy glory for ever and ever:

Deep are all Thy secrets and innumerable,

And Thy righteousness is beyond reckoning.

And bless the Lord of kings and Him who is king over all kings.'

'Would that we had rest to glorify and give thanks

And confess our faith before His glory !

We follow hard upon and obtain (it) not:

And light has vanished from before us,

And darkness is our dwelling-place for ever and ever:

Nor glorified the name of the Lord of Spirits, glorified our Lord]

But our hope was in the sceptre of our kingdom,

And in our glory.

And we find no respite for confession

That our Lord is true in all His works, and in His judgements and His justice,

And His judgements have no respect of persons.

And we pass away from before His face on account of our works,

And all our sins are reckoned up in righteousness.'

And shame before that Son of Man,

And they shall be driven from his presence,

And the sword shall abide before his face in their midst.

Chapter 64

1,2. And other forms I saw hidden in that place. I heard the voice of the angel saying: ' These are the angels who descended to the earth, and revealed what was hidden to the children of men and seduced the children of men into committing sin.'

Chapter 65

1,

And will preserve thee amongst those who dwell on the earth,

And has destined thy righteous seed both for kingship and for great honours,

And from thy seed shall proceed a fountain of the righteous and holy without number for ever.

Chapter 66

Chapter 67

Chapter 68

Chapter 69

And they are strong through his oath:

And the heaven was suspended before the world was created,

And for ever.

And from the secret recesses of the mountains come beautiful waters,

From the creation of the world and unto eternity.

And as its foundation He set for it the sand against the time of (its) anger,

And it dare not pass beyond it from the creation of the world unto eternity.

And abide and stir not from their place from eternity to eternity.

And deviate not from their ordinance from eternity to eternity.

And He calls them by their names,

And they answer Him from eternity to eternity.

And through it are preserved and] their paths are preserved,

And their course is not destroyed.

And they blessed and glorified and extolled

Because the name of that Son of Man had been revealed unto them.

And the sum of judgement was given unto the Son of Man,

And he caused the sinners to pass away and be destroyed from off the face of the earth,

And those who have led the world astray.

And in their assemblage-place of destruction shall they be imprisoned,

And all their works vanish from the face of the earth.

For that Son of Man has appeared,

And has seated himself on the throne of his glory,

And all evil shall pass away before his face,

And the word of that Son of Man shall go forth

And be strong before the Lord of Spirits.

Chapter 70

Chapter 71

And it ascended into the heavens:

And I saw the holy sons of God.

They were stepping on flames of fire:

Their garments were white their raiment],

And their faces shone like snow.

And the light of that fire shone like hyacinth,

And I fell on my face before the Lord of Spirits.

And lifted me up and led me forth into all the secrets,

And he showed me all the secrets of righteousness.

And all the chambers of all the stars, and all the luminaries,

Whence they proceed before the face of the holy ones.

And I saw there as it were a structure built of crystals,

And between those crystals tongues of living fire.

And on its four sides were streams full of living fire,

And they girt that house.

And these are they who sleep not

And guard the throne of His glory.

A thousand thousands, and ten thousand times ten thousand,

Encircling that house.

And Michael, and Raphael, and Gabriel, and Phanuel,

And the holy angels who are above the heavens,

Go in and out of that house.

And Michael and Gabriel, Raphael and Phanuel,

And many holy angels without number.

His head white and pure as wool,

And His raiment indescribable.

And my whole body became relaxed,

And my spirit was transfigured;

And I cried with a loud voice, . . .

with the spirit of power,

And blessed and glorified and extolled.

passage wherein the Son of Man was described as accompanying the Head of Days, and Enoch asked one of the angels (as in xlvi. 3) concerning the Son of Man as to who he was.]

This is the Son of Man who is born unto righteousness,

And righteousness abides over him,

And the righteousness of the Head of Days forsakes him not.'

'He proclaims unto thee peace in the name of the world to come;

For from hence has proceeded peace since the creation of the world,

And so shall it be unto thee for ever and for ever and ever.

With him will be their dwelling-places, and with him their heritage,

And they shall not be separated from him for ever and ever and ever.

And so there shall be length of days with that Son of Man,

And the righteous shall have peace and an upright way

In the name of the Lord of Spirits for ever and ever.'

300
