No specific author, Old Testament Pseudepigrapha ( 300)

Section V.

Chapters XCI-CIV.

A Book of Exhortation and Promised Blessing for the Righteous and of Malediction and Woe for the Sinners.

Chapter 91

And gather together to me all the sons of thy mother;

For the word calls me,

And the spirit is poured out upon me,

That I may show you everything

That shall befall you for ever.'

'Hear, ye sons of Enoch, all the words of your father,

And hearken aright to the voice of my mouth;

For I exhort you and say unto you, beloved:

And draw not nigh to uprightness with a double heart,

And associate not with those of a double heart,

But walk in righteousness, my sons.

And it shall guide you on good paths,

And righteousness shall be your companion.

And a great chastisement be executed on the earth,

And all unrighteousness come to an end:

Yea, it shall be cut off from its roots,

And its whole structure be destroyed.

And all the deeds of unrighteousness and of violence

And transgression shall prevail in a twofold degree.

And violence in all kinds of deeds increase,

And apostasy and transgression and uncleanness increase,

A great chastisement shall come from heaven upon all these,

And the holy Lord will come forth with wrath and chastisement

To execute judgement on earth.

And the roots of unrighteousness together with deceit,

And they shall be destroyed from under heaven.

And the temples burned with fire,

And they shall remove them from the whole earth,

And they (i.e. the heathen) shall be cast into the judgement of fire,

And shall perish in wrath and in grievous judgement for ever.

And wisdom shall arise and be given unto them.

after that the roots of unrighteousness shall be cut off, and the sinners shall be destroyed by the sword . . . shall be cut off from the blasphemers in every place, and those who plan violence and those who commit blasphemy shall perish by the sword.]

And a sword shall be given to it that a righteous judgement may be executed on the oppressors,

And sinners shall be delivered into the hands of the righteous.

And a house shall be built for the Great King in glory for evermore,

14d And all mankind shall look to the path of uprightness.

14a And after that, in the ninth week, the righteous judgement shall be revealed to the whole world,

b And all the works of the godless shall vanish from all the earth,

c And the world shall be written down for destruction.

There shall be the great eternal judgement,

In which He will execute vengeance amongst the angels.

And a new heaven shall appear,

And all the powers of the heavens shall give sevenfold light.

And all shall be in goodness and righteousness,

And sin shall no more be mentioned for ever.

The paths of righteousness and the paths of violence.

Yea, I will show them to you again

That ye may know what will come to pass.

And walk in the paths of righteousness,

And walk not in the paths of violence;

For all who walk in the paths of unrighteousness shall perish for ever.'

Chapter 92

For the Holy and Great One has appointed days for all things.

arise] and walk in the paths of righteousness,

And all his path and conversation shall be in eternal goodness and grace.

And He will give him power so that he shall be (endowed) with goodness and righteousness.

And he shall walk in eternal light.

And shall no more be seen from that day for evermore.

Chapter 93

1,2. And after that Enoch both gave and began to recount from the books. And Enoch said:

'Concerning the children of righteousness and concerning the elect of the world,

And concerning the plant of uprightness, I will speak these things,

Yea, I Enoch will declare (them) unto you, my sons:

According to that which appeared to me in the heavenly vision,

And which I have known through the word of the holy angels,

And have learnt from the heavenly tablets.'

'I was born the seventh in the first week,

While judgement and righteousness still endured.

And deceit shall have sprung up;

And in it there shall be the first end.

And in it a man shall be saved;

And after it is ended unrighteousness shall grow up,

And a law shall be made for the sinners.

And after that in the third week at its close

A man shall be elected as the plant of righteous judgement,

And his posterity shall become the plant of righteousness for evermore.

Visions of the holy and righteous shall be seen,

And a law for all generations and an enclosure shall be made for them.

The house of glory and dominion shall be built for ever.

And the hearts of all of them shall godlessly forsake wisdom.

And in it a man shall ascend;

And at its close the house of dominion shall be burnt with fire,

And the whole race of the chosen root shall be dispersed.

And many shall be its deeds,

And all its deeds shall be apostate.

The elect righteous of the eternal plant of righteousness,

To receive sevenfold instruction concerning all His creation.

Chapter 94

For the paths of righteousness are worthy of acceptation,

But the paths of unrighteousness shall suddenly be destroyed and vanish.

And they shall hold themselves afar from them,

And shall not follow them.

Walk not in the paths of wickedness, nor in the paths of death,

And draw not nigh to them, lest ye be destroyed.

And walk in the paths of peace,

And ye shall live and prosper.

And suffer them not to be effaced from your hearts;

For I know that sinners will tempt men to evilly-entreat wisdom,

So that no place may be found for her,

And no manner of temptation may minish.

And lay deceit as a foundation;

For they shall be suddenly overthrown,

And they shall have no peace.

For from all their foundations shall they be overthrown,

And by the sword shall they fall.

those who acquire gold and silver in judgement suddenly shall perish.]

And from your riches shall ye depart,

Because ye have not remembered the Most High in the days of your riches.

And have become ready for the day of slaughter,

And the day of darkness and the day of the great judgement.

He who hath created you will overthrow you,

And for your fall there shall be no compassion,

And your Creator will rejoice at your destruction.

A reproach to the sinners and the godless.

Chapter 95

] That I might weep over you,

And pour down my tears as a cloud of waters:

That so I might rest from my trouble of heart!

And so judgement shall overtake you, sinners.

For again will the Lord deliver them into your hands,

That ye may execute judgement upon them according to your desires.

Healing shall therefore be far from you because of your sins.

For ye shall be requited according to your works.

And to those who weigh out injustice,

For suddenly shall ye perish.

For ye shall be delivered up and persecuted because of injustice,

And heavy shall its yoke be upon you.

Chapter 96

And ye shall have lordship over them according to your desires.

Your children shall mount and rise as eagles,

And higher than the vultures will be your nest,

And ye shall ascend and enter the crevices of the earth,

And the clefts of the rock for ever as coneys before the unrighteous,

And the sirens shall sigh because of you-and weep.]

For healing shall be your portion,

And a bright light shall enlighten you,

And the voice of rest ye shall hear from heaven.

But your hearts convict you of being sinners,

And this fact shall be a testimony against you for a memorial of (your) evil deeds.

And drink wine in large bowls,

And tread under foot the lowly with your might.

For suddenly shall ye be consumed and wither away,

Because ye have forsaken the fountain of life.

And deceit and blasphemy:

It shall be a memorial against you for evil.

Who with might oppress the righteous;

For the day of your destruction is coming.

In those days many and good days shall come to the righteous-in the day of your judgement.

Chapter 97

And perish in the day of unrighteousness.

And the angels of heaven rejoice over your destruction.

And whither will ye flee on that day of judgement,

When ye hear the voice of the prayer of the righteous ?

Against whom this word shall be a testimony:

" Ye have been companions of sinners."

And for you the days of your judgement shall come.

And your faces shall be covered with shame,

And He will reject every work which is grounded on unrighteousness.

Whose remembrance is evil against you.

" We have become rich with riches and have possessions;

And have acquired everything we have desired.

For we have gathered silver,

9c. And many are the husbandmen in our houses."

9d. And our granaries are (brim) full as with water,

For your riches shall not abide

But speedily ascend from you;

For ye have acquired it all in unrighteousness,

And ye shall be given over to a great curse.

Chapter 98

For ye shall have manifold experiences on the earth.

And coloured garments more than a virgin:

In royalty and in grandeur and in power,

And in silver and in gold and in purple,

And in splendour and in food they shall be poured out as water.

And they shall perish thereby together with their possessions;

And with all their glory and their splendour,

And in shame and in slaughter and in great destitution,

Their spirits shall be cast into the furnace of fire.

And a hill does not become the handmaid of a woman,

Even so sin has not been sent upon the earth,

But man of himself has created it,

And under a great curse shall they fall who commit it.

But on account of the deeds of her own hands she dies without children.

That all your evil deeds are revealed in the heavens,

And that none of your deeds of oppression are covered and hidden.

Chapter 99

And glory in lying and extol them:

Ye shall perish, and no happy life shall be yours.

And transgress the eternal law,

And transform themselves into what they were not sinners]:

They shall be trodden under foot upon the earth.

And place them as a testimony before the angels,

That they may place the sin of the sinners for a memorial before the Most High.

And the families of the nations shall arise on the day of destruction.

And they shall abandon them, so that their children shall perish through them:

Yea, they shall abandon their children (that are still) sucklings, and not return to them,

And shall have no pity on their beloved ones.

6, 7. And again I swear to you, ye sinners, that sin is prepared for a day of unceasing bloodshed. And they who worship stones, and grave images of gold and silver and wood (and stone) and clay, and those who worship impure spirits and demons, and all kinds of idols not according to knowledge, shall get no manner of help from them.

And their eyes shall be blinded through the fear of their hearts

And through visions in their dreams.

For they shall have wrought all their work in a lie,

And shall have worshiped a stone:

Therefore in an instant shall they perish.

And observe the paths of the Most High, and walk in the path of His righteousness,

And become not godless with the godless;

For they shall be saved.

For you shall be slain in Sheol.

And (to them) who cause bitterness on the earth;

For they shall thereby be utterly consumed.

And all their building materials are the bricks and stones of sin;

I tell you ye shall have no peace.

And whose souls follow after idols;

For they shall have no rest.

And slay their neighbours until the day of the great judgement.

And bring affliction on your hearts,

And shall arouse His fierce indignation

And destroy you all with the sword;

And all the holy and righteous shall remember your sins.

Chapter 100

And brothers one with another shall fall in death

Till the streams flow with their blood.

And the sinner shall not withhold his hand from his honoured brother:

From dawn till sunset they shall slay one another.

And the chariot shall be submerged to its height.

And gather together into one place all those who brought down sin

And the Most High will arise on that day of judgement

To execute great judgement amongst sinners.

To guard them as the apple of an eye,

Until He makes an end of all wickedness and all sin,

And though the righteous sleep a long sleep, they have nought to fear.

And shall understand all the words of this book,

And recognize that their riches shall not be able to save them

In the overthrow of their sins.

Ye who afflict the righteous and burn them with fire:

Ye shall be requited according to your works.

Who watch in order to devise wickedness:

Therefore shall fear come upon you

And there shall be none to help you.

And on account of the deeds of your hands which your godlessness as wrought,

In blazing flames burning worse than fire shall ye burn.

Chapter 101

Chapter 102

Whither will ye flee, and where will ye find deliverance ?

And when He launches forth His Word against you Will you not be affrighted and fear ?

And all the earth shall be affrighted and tremble and be alarmed.

And shall seek to hide themselves from the presence of the Great Glory,

And the children of earth shall tremble and quake;

And ye sinners shall be cursed for ever,

And ye shall have no peace.

And be hopeful ye that have died in righteousness.

And that in your life your body fared not according to your goodness,

But wait for the day of the judgement of sinners

And for the day of cursing and chastisement.

" As we die, so die the righteous,

And what benefit do they reap for their deeds ?

And what have they more than we ?

From henceforth we are equal.

Behold, they too have died,

And henceforth for ever shall they see no light."

Chapter 103

I know a mystery

And have read the heavenly tablets,

And have seen the holy books,

And have found written therein and inscribed regarding them:

And written down for the spirits of those who have died in righteousness,

And that manifold good shall be given to you in recompense for your labours,

And that your lot is abundantly beyond the lot of the living.

And their spirits shall not perish, nor their memorial from before the face of the Great One

Unto all the generations of the world: wherefore no longer fear their contumely.

If ye die in the wealth of your sins,

And those who are like you say regarding you:

'Blessed are the sinners: they have seen all their days.

And have not seen tribulation or murder in their life;

And they have died in honour,

And judgement has not been executed on them during their life."

And they shall be wretched in their great tribulation.

And the great judgement shall be for all the generations of the world.

Woe to you, for ye shall have no peace.

" In our troubled days we have toiled laboriously and experienced every trouble,

And met with much evil and been consumed,

And have become few and our spirit small.

We have been tortured destroyed], and not hoped to see life from day to day.

We have toiled laboriously and had no satisfaction in our toil;

And we have become the food of the sinners and the unrighteous,

And they have laid their yoke heavily upon us.

And to those that hated us we have bowed our necks

But they pitied us not.

But found no place whereunto we should flee and be safe from them.

And cried out against those who devoured us,

But they did not attend to our cries

And would not hearken to our voice.

Chapter 104

Chapter 105

Fragment of the Book of Noah

Chapter 106

Chapter 107

Chapter 108

300
