Open PDF

I grew up in Nicaragua. When I was little, I did everything with my older brother. We walked to school together. We went to the store together. We had all sorts of adventures in our backyard. We were happy.

Then, when I was nine, something very sad happened. My brother died in an earthquake. At first it didn’t feel real that he was gone. I used to imagine that he would knock on our front door. He would tell us he had just been away somewhere. I used to stare at the door, wishing for it to happen. I wanted so much to see him again.

Over time, it got a little easier. I still missed my brother, but I was able to feel happy again.

Back then, I wasn’t a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. But when I grew up, I learned about the Church and got baptized. One day I was washing my dishes. It was Easter time. I was thinking of the Resurrection and thought of my brother.

Suddenly a feeling came over me. I remembered the daydream I had about my brother. I realized that it wasn’t silly at all! It came from the Holy Ghost, to comfort me and guide me. Someday my brother really will be resurrected. And I really will see him again.

If someone you love has died, it’s OK to miss them and feel sad. Talk to your family or a grown-up when you feel ready. Pray to Heavenly Father about how you feel. He can help you feel peace again.

No matter what, remember that Jesus Christ loves you. At Easter we remember His sacrifice for us. Because of Him, we will all be resurrected and we can live with our families forever.

Cut out these cards. You could fold them in half or use them as bookmarks. Keep them in your scriptures or another place to look at when you feel sad, lonely, or scared.

  “I will not leave you comfortless: I will come to you.”

  John 14:18

  “And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.”

  Revelation 21:4

  “Be of good cheer, and do not fear, for I the Lord am with you, and will stand by you.”

  Doctrine and Covenants 68:6
