Daniel K. Judd, Douglas E. Brinley, Eternal Families ( 1996)

Introduction

In a conference address in April 1995, President Boyd K. Packer expressed these sentiments:

The ultimate purpose of all we teach is to unite parents and children in faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, that they are happy at home, sealed in an eternal marriage, linked to their generations, and assured of exaltation. . . .

The plan designed by the Father contemplates that man and woman, husband and wife, working together, fit each child individually with a shield of faith made to buckle on so firmly that it can neither be pulled off nor penetrated by those fiery darts.

It takes the steady strength of a father to hammer out the metal of it and the tender hands of a mother to polish and fit it on. Sometimes one parent is left to do it alone. It is difficult, but it can be done.

In the Church we can teach about the materials from which a shield of faith is made: reverence, courage, chastity, repentance, forgiveness, compassion. In church we can learn how to assemble and fit them together. But the actual making of and fitting on of the shield of faith belongs in the family circle. Otherwise it may loosen and come off in a crisis. . . .

. . . The great plan of happiness revealed to prophets is the plan for a happy family. It is the love story between husband and wife, parents and children, that renews itself through the ages. (In Conference Report, April 1995, pp. 8-9; emphasis added.)

This book is designed to help parents build that shield of faith, a shield that will protect children in a world predicted to be "as it was in the days of Noah" (JS-M 1:41), when "every man was . . . evil continually" (Moses 8:22).

Our goal as Latter-day Saints is exaltation, defined as the perfection and continuation of the family unit in the celestial kingdom. The life and ministry of Jesus Christ makes this possible, as his atonement allows us to correct mistakes we make in mortality and to receive forgiveness for our sins. But, also important, he provided a resurrection that enables us to rise from the grave as immortal men and women. Eternal life (see D&C 132:24), a synonym for exaltation, is the continuation of marriage for a husband and wife who, in the resurrection, attain bodies capable of increase.1 Mortality is our first opportunity to marry, bear, and rear childrenand for some it is the only time they will have that privilege. (See D&C 131:1-4.) The priesthood key to seal couples and families together was restored by Elijah to the Prophet Joseph Smith (see D&C 110:13-16). Thus it is possible, through Christ's ministry, to be an eternal family for time without end. What a profound and magnificent potential!

Marriage and family matters are at the heart of the gospel plan. Not only are we establishing marriage relationships that are to be wholesome and strong, we are rearing the children of Heavenly Father, the very offspring of Almighty God! No wonder President David O. McKay expressed the thought that parenthood is "the greatest trust that has been given to human beings" (The Responsibility of Parents to Their Children [pamphlet, n.d.], p. 1).

Prophetic Emphasis

Living prophets have counseled us on the need for strong marriages and inspired parenting. This has been especially evident in the last half century, when the assault by the adversary on the family has been carried out in earnest. Church leaders have been adamant on placing the home and family in its divine setting. Our charge from the Lord is to build strong marriage and family relationships that allow us to rear healthy and stable children who reflect the tenets of our faith and whose lives will attract others to Christ and his church.

However, the environment in which we presently marry and rear children is no longer "family-friendly." Things have changed in the past half century in ways that make it more difficult to achieve our spiritual goals. No longer do most families live on the farm where they talk and work side by side and pass on values and faith. Contemporary lifestyles are very different from those of our earlier counterparts. Today we are fortunate to see members of our family for a minute or two in the morning before we scatter for the day. Lunch is usually a solo affair or is spent with nonfamily associates, and dinner is often a quick meal before an evening activity. Families are mobile, and relationships can be stretched in unhealthy ways if we are not wise. If we fail to coordinate schedules, take time for family activities, share ideas, or express mutual affection and appreciation, we may fail to knit the hearts of parents and children together in love (see Col. 2:2). Children may not come to know the faith and testimony of their own parents. The entire venture may be at risk. Even when we are at home, television or headphones can isolate people from each other despite their proximity. Too easily we can become spectators rather than participants in our family adventure. Our home may degenerate into what we might call a boardinghouse, where individuals pass each other in hallways, share brief snatches of conversation at mealtimes, and carry out routine functions, but with little semblance of any interaction that resembles a real family.

Cultural Messages

Consider these blaring messages: divorce receives more coverage than marriage, the two-parent family with only Dad working is thought to be archaic, radical feminists bewail marriage as imprisonment for females, careers other than motherhood are given much higher prior-ity. In an environment of newfound equality, couples live together without marriage to participate in sexual relations, yet they remain unwilling to assume responsibility and commitment to each other and the future of the family enterprise. They clamor for the sacred title of "family." Scriptwriters encourage unwholesome relationships by depicting quick romances that lead to bedroom scenes, with sex the obvious selling point and titillation the viewing by-product. Casual sex is portrayed as free and easy while chastity is scorned as outdated and unrealistic. True love is thought to be a myth while lust is paraded unabated and without shame. Pictures that were once available only in dark alleys and behind-the-counter magazines are piped right into our living rooms with "surround sound." Too easily young people are convinced to follow sophisticated media models who casually lose their virginity to little-known acquaintances on the big screen.

Sadly, divorce claims half of those who marry. Many couples, it seems, desire to void a contract they so eagerly embraced only a short time before. Media stars go through serial monogamyif they marry at all. Of couples who stay the course, many find marriage and parenting to be unsatisfying, unfulfilling, and disappointing. (Could it be because strong marriages and effective parenting require self-denial and self-disciplinetraits not abundantly found in a materialistic-oriented society, as the Book of Mormon warns?)

School administrators, meanwhile, in an effort to stem the tide of unwanted pregnancies, have resorted to taking over the parental role in the name of preventing premarital sexual behavior. Their techniques call for teaching the correct use of condoms rather than stressing the blessings of abstinence and chastity. Homosexuality, the scourge of Sodom and Gomorrah, is unashamedly put forth as a legitimate alternative in our "liberated" society. At the same time that AIDS takes its toll on a freewheeling society, legislators protect its virus carriers under the banner of "civil rights." The cure, they cry, is more sex education in an already sex-saturated environment! These external influences can put our society, as Elder Boyd K. Packer said, "in a current so strong that unless we correct our course, civilization as we know it will surely be wrecked to pieces" (in Conference Report, April 1994, p. 24). We live in an age when the moral foundations of decency and right thinking that have anchored family life in the past are now crumbling and falling down around us. The sad truth is that a culture losing its standards will not sustain nor complement the efforts of parents at home who desire to teach values and morality. A conscientious effort by parents is required to ensure that children obtain and maintain values that not only will safeguard their mortal steps, but will provide leadership and models for other right-thinking and decent people in the larger community who are looking for a safe harbor where they may anchor and secure their family.

Parenting was never easy. "In my opinion," said Elder James E. Faust, "the teaching, rearing, and training of children requires more intelligence, intuitive understanding, humility, strength, wisdom, spirituality, perseverance, and hard work than any other challenge we might have in life" (in Conference Report, October 1990, p. 40). It requires the best in us. However, prophets have provided excellent and specific helps for us to improve our parenting efforts, and, combined with common-sense values "out of the best books" of wise people, we do have effective ways of building close family ties and imparting strong values to our posterity. Selfishness and pride are the prophets' diagnosis of the greatest scourge of our timebroken families. Humility, meekness, and charity are their inspired solutions to stop the breakup of the family.

Our Challenge As Parents

As parents we have the wonderful opportunity to bring the valiant, foreordained spirits of the Father to the earth, where they can carry out the critical tasks of performing missionary work, building a Zion people, and redeeming those who came at an earlier time and knew not the gospel in the flesh. It is a work that requires a love for research and a willingness to labor in behalf of those we do not see.

Our hope as parents in these darkened days was best expressed by Elder James E. Faust: "A moral blackness is settling in. . . . [Yet] I remind you that valuable diamonds shine better against a dark background" ("The Voice of the Spirit," in Brigham Young University 1993-94 Devotional and Fireside Speeches [Provo, Utah: University Publications, 1994], p. 1). In a day of wickedness, the contrast between good and evil is so stark that it may prove to be our advantage if we as conscientious parents teach and model for our children the difference between the Lord's counsel and the ways of men. We are sobered by Elder Neal A. Maxwell's warning: "There will always be a shortage of police if there is a shortage of effective parents!" (In Conference Report, April 1994, p. 119.)

This book is to assist parents to rear "a righteous seed" unto the Lord. We have gathered helpful ideas from some of the best parent educators in the Church. We think you will be impressed and blessed with the basic and profound ideas included here on how to direct your family more effectively, regardless of the age of your children or grandchildren, whether you are a single or a married parent, or whether you are new to the undertaking or are an experienced old hand.

Our approach here is similar to that which we employed in compiling our previous book, Eternal Companions. We asked our colleagues: "After all your years of experience in helping families to be happy, what are the most important ideas you would give to LDS couples involved in the parenting adventure?" We think their ideas and suggestions will inspire you as parents and help you rear the finest spirit sons and daughters our Father is sending to the earth. We hope you enjoy the wise counsel and perspective from faithful counselors and educators who share their wisdom and experiences with you.

Our thanks to Bookcraft. We are especially grateful to Cory Maxwell for his encouragement of our efforts and to Rebecca Taylor for her final editing of the manuscript.

Douglas E. Brinley

Daniel K Judd
