Daniel K. Judd, Douglas E. Brinley, Eternal Families ( 1996)

1 Rearing Children Who Can Cope

Victor B. Cline

The longer I live, the more I am convinced that life is a series of challenges, trials, stresses, hurdles, and disappointments mixed with an occasional sweet victory.

It reminds me of the many years I used to body surf on wonderful California beaches where huge, powerful waves battered me continu-ally, never stopping or slowing down. It was as if they were trying to pummel me down or knock me over, inundating me with tons of surging seawater while I was bouncing, crawling, staggering, gasping for air, and trying to escape being pinned to the sandy ocean floor. Yetoh, what fun and exhilaration! It was a never-ending battle of man against nature. And I loved it!

In raising my kids I can think of nothing more important than teaching them how to cope, to survive, to have street smarts, to be resilient, to handle stress; all with a sense of joy in the privilege of being mortal, never giving up no matter how hard life's challenges are, because that is the nature of our existence. That is what life is all about.

I'm reminded of Hercules, the famous hero of Greek legend who was required to accomplish twelve impossible tasks that included such things as cleaning the Aegean stables in a day, capturing the savage bull of Minos, and killing Hydra, the poisonous serpent with nine heads. The ultimate reward for these accomplishments was to gain immortality and live among the gods. It is speculated by some that Hercules may have been an actual person, possibly a chieftain of Tiryns in Mycenaean times and a servant to King Argos. His deeds, no doubt a meshing of some truth with a great deal of fiction, present some psychological truths far beyond the specific details of the apocryphal history. His story is that of a man who possessed great self-discipline, imagination, and courage, who accomplished a number of incredibly difficult tasks in order to reach the Greek version of the celestial kingdom.

Today, our children face a number of herculean tasks that will require important strategies to deal with them. The big five tasks I have identified include:

The other side of the coin to consider is how we exercise leadership/parenting/supervision skills over others at home, in the workplace, in the community, and even at church. We all find ourselves in both leadership and followership roles throughout our lives. Our children need to learn the "rules" by which these relationships and work situations are governed; otherwise they may be rejected, fired, divorced, or incarcerated, or they may suffer other painful social sanctions. Have you noticed that some adolescents never learn the rules of the game of life? Because of this they suffer painful consequencestypically with anger. Many go to their graves kicking and shouting, always blaming others for their predicaments. But in truth, they are the ones who become the real losers while others pass them by.

As parents we have a clear leadership role to play in our families. We are to establish reasonable rules. Chores are assigned. Courteous and mannerly behavior is expected. As parents we can say no on occasion, set limits, and briefly take away privileges when necessaryall without feeling guilty. In some families I see, it is as if the monkey is running the zoo. The parents are "out to lunch." They are either afraid of their children, hesitant to lead and give them direction, or just not interested or impressed with the influence they could have on their children. They later come to inherit both the wind they have sown and the disapproval of their childrena double whammy.

Now, how do we as caring and concerned parents assist our offspring to accomplish these five awesome tasks or goals so that they may become resilient, loving, responsible, and capable individuals?

The first and perhaps most important thing we can do is to model for them a marriage that works well. Dad and Mom have to have their act together in order to be a united team that can effectively rear their posterity to be healthy and happy. Do whatever it takes to make this happen.1

Parents improve the possibilities of success in this crazy, wonderful enterprise if they do the following: are reasonably united; show respect to each other; work through their differences peacefully; de-velop a set of family rules, rituals, and customs which both partners support; are fully aware that their parental role is a stewardship given to them by God; realize that the parenting adventure won't always be easy; and understand that all kids are different and that what will work for one child may not work for another.

One must also remember that marriage has priority over children. I see some mothers sacrificing everything for their children but then having no energy left for their husbands and the demands of the marriage. I see fathers who allow their work or hobbies to be all-consuming. Neither strategy or approach works well. Too often this pattern stimulates feelings of abandonment or resentment or both in the spouse. But mainly it is the children who lose out. (Remember, if we don't raise our children right the first time, we may be left to do it again later with our grandchildren, and at a time when we thought we were going into a peaceful retirement!)

Of course, no marriage is perfect. All couples have differences and occasional conflicts. But what children need to see again and again is that Dad and Mom love each other in spite of any "bumps in the road," that they are committed to their marriage and to each other, and that both have the energy and will to repeatedly forgive one another and work through their differences. This then becomes a healthy model which will be deeply implanted and imprinted in the children's conscious and unconscious memories. It will help determine whom they marry and how they will later work through marriage and family problems of their own. The marriage and family experience we create for our children becomes the road map for their future lives. Let's be sure to give them a clear guide to follow.

Second, give children a variety of growth experiences that are geared to their maturity level. I'm talking about such things as having a paper route, gaining competency in at least ten different sports, taking music lessons if they have an inclination and talent in that area, opening a savings account where they can learn at a very young age to manage and save money, and so on. An exposure to a wide variety of experiences broadens their view of our culture. Subscribe to some key magazines or publications (a news magazine, National Geographic, Consumer Reports, a daily newspaper, and so on) and regularly take your children to the library, where they can check out not only books but also music and appropriate videos with their own personal cards. Teach them to read (it can be a game ten minutes each night before bedtime) before they ever start school. Teach them to use the local transportation system (getting from one place to another around town where one or two transfers may be required).

Let them experience relationships with families other than your ownwith relatives or close friends of their choosingthrough sleepovers and frequent visits. Give them daily chores beginning at perhaps age five, some of which they can do gratis as a contribution to the family organization, while other jobs they can do for money so that you can teach them to save a portion of what they earn. Let teens spend some of the money they earn working various jobs for a portion of their school expenses, clothes, social and recreational needs, and out-of-home food.

Let them make decisions and choices whenever possible so that they can learn to evaluate courses of action and their resulting consequences. Don't always bail them out when they goof. Let them learn from their own experience. Don't buy them a new car when they are teenagers, but perhaps you could have a low-cost older vehicle which several can share. If they are reckless in driving or have low grades, let them share part of the increased cost of insurance and gas. You should have ultimate control of the vehicle and, when necessary, restrict driving privileges if they abuse or renege on their agreements. It is critical that Dad and Mom be united on all of these suggestions and rules and be mutually supportive of each other. Do not allow your children to pit one of you against the other.

Third, teach your children about life's booby traps, the "alligators in the swamp." I'm talking about such things as drugs, alcohol, smoking, pornography, premarital sex and pregnancy, and pedophiles (people who sexually abuse children). Help your children have a healthy but conservative approach to sexuality; teach them rules, how to say no, and to set boundaries and limits. Give them pointers on financial scams, investing money, signing contracts, reading the small print, discerning who you can trust, and so on. You can do this best by telling them parables or stories from real life which they will never forget.

One of the best places to do this kind of teaching is at the dinner table with a conversation begun by either husband or wife sharing experiences. Children will overhear the conversation and begin asking questions about what they hear. A camping or family trip with no phones, work, or neighbors to interrupt can accomplish similar purposes.

Fourth, help your children develop social skills by modeling them yourself. Invite friends with children of similar ages over for a barbeque, party, holiday, or birthday celebration. Our children watch and imitate us much more carefully than we ever realize. They tend to ape and mimic what we do. If we are mad at them and with each other most of the time, they will most likely become cranky with others too. "Monkey see, monkey do!" On the other hand, if they see us socialize warmly with our friends, they will do the same with their peers.

If parents are lonely social isolates, they set a pattern for their children to become like them. Parents bless not only their own lives but also their children's when they engage in a variety of social activities outside the family.

Have plenty of games, cookies, and lemonade or other fun drinks around the house so that it becomes an attractive place for your children's friends to visit. Brigham Young once commented that it was better to feed the Indians than to fight themnot a bad motto to follow in your home.

If one of your children is a little on the shy side and lacks confidence in social interactions, invite him to go with you on a trip and suggest that he bring along a friend. Then you can engineer a positive social experience as well as help him build a friendship. Repeat this as needed.

We once accidentally discovered another way to make our home and yard the most interesting and attractive place to be in the neighborhood. We bought a trampoline, which no one else in our area had, and found it to be a magnet to the other children in the neighborhood. When they would come and want to jump on it, we put our least social child in charge of hosting its use. Instantly he became very popular. I know that some parents don't want other children in their backyard stepping on the tulips, so to speak, but if you want your children to be in the middle of the social scene and to develop social confidence, it is a price you may want to pay.

Children need to learn to talk and communicate comfortably with others. This is an absolutely critical skill that is best learned as early as possible in life. Be cautious in allowing your children to spend an inordinate amount of time watching TV, listening to rock music (even the good kind), or playing computer games. These activities all pull a child away from others and inside themselves. Interaction with other human beings usually comes to a stop when they do these things.

Have you noticed that some kids become "computer freaks," with parents so proud that their child knows so much about these electronic marvels? Up to a point, that is fine. But I see too many children who get lost in this world and end up knowing little about being a friend or even how to play comfortably with others. Computer games, videos, and TV are very addictive and can take a huge chunk of a child's life. Be careful with this. I'm not suggesting that we say no to all of these activities. They can have their place, but a limit needs to be set on the time spent in these solitary pursuits. We don't want our children's involvement in these areas to be an excuse to escape from real life. Of course, you must handle all of this with tact and pleasantness, but with a firm hand as well.

Also, I'd be extremely cautious about allowing children to use or play with interactive computer games that stress interpersonal violence. Some can be purchased for home use; others can be played for a quarter in the omnipresent video arcades found in almost every mall. Some allow children via computer simulation to engage in very bloody battles with so-called "bad guys," where they violently assault and kill others. Forty years of behavioral science research on this issue suggests that this kind of experience can greatly increase your child's aggressiveness in real life with real people. It also desensitizes them to violent aggressive behavior, blunts the conscience, disinhibits inner controls, and teaches them how to engage in many extremely antisocial kinds of activities. Be wise and careful with these modern time bombs.

Children need to learn how to negotiate solutions to tough interpersonal problems. When you are frustrated, you don't hit someone; you find a peaceful win-win solution by talking problems through. And that takes skill and practice. Children need to see Dad and Mom and other adults function in healthy ways with each other and with them over and over and over again.

Fifth, prevent their addiction to pornography and masturbation. This is another lonely world in which some children, especially young boys from age nine through the teen years, get involved. Although they may feel ashamed about this behavior, they most likely never mention it to their parents. It often becomes a secret illness. I've clinically treated over three hundred men and boys with an addiction to obscene material. It most often starts in the preadolescent or adolescent years with soft-core erotic materialsmen's magazines, videos, or raunchy movies. In addition to the addiction itself, three other things happen: first, the individuals become desensitized to the materials' pathology of increased hostility to and degradation of women. In time and with increased exposure, this material becomes normal and acceptable. Second, they escalate to rougher and more deviant, perverse, and antisocial material. And finally, they begin acting out their sexual fantasies, risking infection and perhaps creating marital problems, or they will have a difficult time relating well to the opposite sex generally. Involvement with this material brings an added risk of acquiring sex deviations through masturbatory conditioning.

Another issue related to this one that needs some brief discussion is the antisocial and brutally obscene lyrics in many current music tapes and CDs that our children buy or to which they are exposed. Most mothers would never in a thousand years feed their children contaminated food which might injure their bodies. But many are not aware that their children are listening to and being influenced by heavy metal rock music. Exposure to some of these raunchy lyrics is like inviting a pervert into your home to abuse your children's minds and spirits. Unfortunately, the exciting music helps lock these very unhealthy lyrics into our children's minds.

Sixth, monitor lying and stealing. In my experience, all children do some of this, some very rarely but others more frequently. Of course, a lot of adults engage in these behaviors too. But sooner or later it always catches up with them. As the old saying goes, "what goes around comes around." And there are always consequences which ultimately can be very painful. When our kids tell the truth and respect the property rights of others, things go better for them in their lives. So we must teach them not to lie or steal. It goes without saying that we, the adults in their lives, must model this behavior too. It won't wash for us to expect responsible behavior from them if we only ask them to "do as I say but not as I do."

It is critically important both how we teach our children and how quickly we handle these problems when they arise in real-life situations. I remember one day when my wife was shopping at the supermarket with two of our young children, ages five and six. When they returned to the car, she noticed that both were chewing gum. Since neither one had gum on the way to the store and she knew she had not bought any, she was puzzled as to how they had obtained it. When she asked them where they got it, both shook their heads and said they didn't know.

When she persisted, they said they found it somewhere. Further questioning led to their admission that they "found" it in the store. She immediately braked the car, turned around, and went back to the supermarket, where she took the two children directly to the store manager. They confessed their sins and paid him with a quick loan from Mom.

There was a lengthy discussion about what they had done and what other consequences might occur. The children were required to earn money to repay their mother within a day or two. They never forgot that experience.

When your kids lie or steal something, never smile or smirk because they are so cute or funny about it. It is a very serious matter, and you must treat it as such. One hundred percent of the time you must confront them and exact appropriate consequences. Many kids lie to avoid trouble or punishment or to get others into trouble. Kids seem to be slow learners in getting over this habit, so expect that it may take some time to break them of it if it has already gotten a foothold. But never look the other way or pretend not to know. You do need to be cautious, however, about making accusations without either proof or a fair amount of certainty of their deception.

Use these occasions as teaching moments. Don't humiliate your children, but talk frankly about how fibbing and lying threaten trust, disturb relationships, and can lead to many negative social consequences, such as the loss of a job or the jeopardizing of a friendship. Share illustrations from your life experiences about how such things have happened. In my experience, children don't instantly learn these lessons. You have to be patient and persist. Such lessons do not come packed in children's chromosomes and genes!

Seventh, teach children the relationship between work and money. If a child is old enough to be in school, he is old enough to do some jobs around the house and yard to earn his or her own money. This allows you a marvelous opportunity to teach them how to save and to be responsible and accountable with their funds. The time and attention you give to this area will be one of the greatest blessings you can ever give them. You should be sure that for the rest of their life, as long as they are living at home with you, they work to earn money. The older they get, the more important it becomes for them to have a part-time job working for somebody else outside the home. If your child is an adult of age eighteen or more and is living with you while working a full-time job but is not going to school, he or she should pay some reasonable or even token sum of money to you for room and board. Children should learn that even within the family the free ride ends at eighteenthere has to be equity and fairness. Children need to be taught to share, to carry their part of the load, to be responsible, and to occasionally sacrifice for others. All of us are brothers and sisters, and we are our brother's (or sister's) keeper.

If children are able-bodied, they can contribute in a number of ways around your home. You don't do them a favor by picking up all their bills. And interestingly enough, in families where the parents constantly dole out money, clothes, and cars to the kids whenever they ask, the children never really appreciate it anyway. They come to expect it. They feel it is due them. In fact, if they don't get it, they will often punish and abuse their parents for being so tight and uncaring! They may not be unlike some people on the government dole who expect something for nothing. For an emergencyyes, we help. It is okay. It is the right thing to do, for if the circumstances were otherwise, any one of us could find ourselves in an emergency condition. But long-term doles and freebies cripple initiative and take away self-respect.

Sometimes children get caught up in power struggles with parents and won't do the work they've agreed to, yet they still want to collect their pay. If this happens to be the case with one of your children, you might want to work it out with another parent in the area to hire your son or daughter while you hire their son or daughter to do work around your home. Kids will often be much more responsible when working for a stranger or somebody outside of their own family than their own kin.

With younger children who are poky and unmotivated about cleaning a bathroom, for example, oftentimes the mother or dad can jump in with them to show them how much fun it is to make the bathroom look sparkling clean. Parents can energize children by working with them a few times, giving enthusiastic instructions like a coach showing them what a good job looks like. Make work a positive and fun experience. Your attitude here means everything. A parent often must become a salesperson as well as the leader/initiator in the home. Also, be sure to show appreciation for a job well done.

I remember once when my wife was teaching one of our little ones to play the piano. The child was interested but sometimes balky, and her attention strayed. While we are very cautious in our family not to overdose the kids on sugar, Lois cut a marshmallow into about twelve to fifteen pieces with a pair of scissors. Every time a series of chords was struck or played correctly, into the mouth would pop this minuscule bit of marshmallow. And oh, how yummy it tasted! It tasted just as good as if it had been a big, full-blown marshmallow. It worked wonderfully well as an immediate reward for a job well done. And still, the child didn't get an overdose of junk food.

Positives work so much more powerfully in motivating children to do well than just crabbing, complaining, or sternly dressing them down, even though once in a while, for a particular child, that may be needed too. But the ratio of positives to negatives should be five or six to one.

Here's an illustration: You've had a wonderful party. But somebody has to do the cleanup afterwards. So Mom says, "I'm so proud of you kids. You were such good hosts to all the children who came to the birthday party this afternoon. But I need your help to get the kitchen cleaned up. Let's all work together, and we will have it done in no time. Then afterwards I've got a new videoa surprisethat I know you will all want to see. It will be really exciting. Let's start now."

Thus, Mother has made work into something that can be done together, something fun, something that will lead to a pleasant outcome or even a surprise after the chores are completed. If children grow up with this attitude, they will most likely enjoy their chosen work as an adult. I know of few greater gifts that parents could give their children than to help them enjoy work and wisely use any monies they receive from their honest labor.

Eighth, be careful of the Hamlet Syndrome. Here, parents become immobilized and unable to make decisions and take action in the face of a child's outrageous behavior. Do you recall Hamlet's famous sililoquy, "To be or not to be?" Indecision was his downfall as he could not decide whether to act or not. Because of that fact, ultimately he lost his own life. I see some parents struggle with guilt and even fear as they face children who are obnoxious, demanding, and manipulative, engaging in improper behavior. Love and extreme permissiveness are not the same thing. Saying no; denying privileges; having an evening curfew; or restricting use of the car, stereo, TV, or telephone briefly when justice demands can actually be the biggest favor you ever do for your child.

Reasonable discipline is a very important form of love. Remember, being a parent isn't a popularity contest. There will be occasions when your children will not like you because you hold the line. That's okay. You do what's right and best for your children in the long runnot necessarily what's going to make them instantly happy. And you do that because you have many more years of experience and maturity, and you can see things in their lives with more objectivity than they often can. I'm not suggesting that parents are perfect or have all the answers, but we usually know more than our children do, or we have access to information or professional help that will allow us to come up with the right answers much easier than they can.

Ninth, rebuild a disturbed parent-child relationship. Sometimes one parent gets on the outs with one of the children. No matter what you do, it seems, you irritate each other. In fact, there are times when you may not be able to stand each other. It has happened on occasion in our family. A healing solution to this problem is to let the other parent totally take over the role of being the disciplinarian, the one who follows up to see that homework gets done, chores are handled, and so on. This has to be done by specific agreement between Dad and Mom as they counsel together. This allows you to rebuild your relationship with a particular child, to narrow the distance between the two by being positive. You can stop getting on his case. You can do many things to heal your friendship, mend the fence, show him that you love him and that he is important in your eyesthings that will rebuild your relationship. This technique really works. But it takes husband and wife working together to pull it off.

Tenth, I would suggest that you not look back. Some parentsmore often mothersoften wallow in self-hatred and punish themselves unmercifully for some supposed mistake they made with one of their youngsters in the past. Maybe a mother put her child with the wrong teacher, with supposedly disastrous results, or she let him play in the tree and he later fell out and broke his arm, or she chose a baby-sitter who mistreated him, et cetera, et cetera. If you keep looking back on all the mistakes you think you have made with your children, life can become perfectly awful for you.

You can't change the past, but you can learn from it. And you can influence the future. Being a good parent is a trial-and-error learning experience. And this is true for all of us; there are no exceptions.

No parent ever has his act completely together. But, thank goodness, children are marvelously resilient. They are built to emotionally and physically survive a lot of bumps in life. The critical thing is that they know you really care for them, that they are wanted and valued, that they are loved. If that is truly the case, they can forgive you for a lot of mistakes you make with them. And in most cases they'll turn out okay. Just like us, they have their ups and downs. But don't look back! If you keep punishing yourself for a supposed mistake you made six or ten years ago, it will be like picking at scabs and opening wounds again that never heal. Keep your attention and energy focused on the present, the here-and-now, where you are needed most.

Finally, if a problem with a child persists no matter what you do, get some help. If your child has a problem that goes on and on despite everything you do to correct or remedy itget help. You don't necessarily have to see a shrink. Maybe you can talk with an older, mature woman who has successfully raised a large family. Ask her how she dealt with problems like yours. Maybe you need to see a therapist, but choose one who is topflight. Or take a parenting workshop. If you have a super rebellious teenager, join Tough Love, a nationwide parents' support group with virtually no costs or fees (look it up in the phone book).

Raising good kids isn't easy. But the alternative is so much worse. My wife and I would never trade our nine childrennow all adultsfor anything in the world. They are our treasures. The work, the money spent, the time given, the sacrifices made, the tears shed, were an extremely small price for what we got. It is my hope that it will so be for you.

_____

Victor B. Cline was born in Seattle, Washington, and was raised in Southern California. He received his B.A. and Ph.D. degrees in psychology from the University of California at Berkeley. He has worked as a research scientist for George Washington University's Human Resources Research Office and later joined the Department of Psychology at the University of Utah, where he is now an emeritus professor. He and his wife, Lois, are the parents of nine children, and they are currently presidents of Marriage and Family Enrichment, a nationwide nonprofit seminar organization. He also engages in a counseling and psychotherapy practice in Salt Lake City, specializing in marriage and family counseling and addictive illnesses.
