Daniel K. Judd, Douglas E. Brinley, Eternal Families ( 1996)

2 As Christ Would Parent

Glenn I. Latham

Though in scripture he is often referred to as "Father," there is no record of Christ having had a family of his own. Nevertheless, his teachings, and those of his disciples both ancient and modern leave us no doubt as to what he expects of parents in the rearing of their children.

In this chapter I emphasize the need for parents to acquire specific parenting skills that are taught to us by both scripture and science. Brigham Young observed, "God will improve the religion of the nations of the earth in proportion to the improvement made in the sciences" (Discourses of Brigham Young, comp. John A. Widtsoe [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1954], p. 108). We have certainly seen that to be true in the field of mass communication, which has made it possible for the teachings of Christ to be broadcast instantaneously to millions of listeners and viewers around the globe. Advances in technology have made it possible for the disciples of Christ to travel considerable distances in a matter of hours, even minutes, to be physically in the company of those they are servinga circumstance which in generations past could have taken days, weeks, or months.

Though these advances in the physical sciences are nothing short of spectacular, even miraculous, parallel advances in the behavioral sciences have been no less spectacular. Through research about human behavior we have learned marvelous ways of improving our parenting abilities. With this research we have designed valuable, effective parenting skills, all of which are consistent with the teachings of Christ.

I suspect that easily ninety percent of good parenting is just simple, basic common sense. But as my good friend, colleague, and teacher Dr. Howard Sloane observed to me thirty years ago, "It's common sense applied systematically." That is where the remaining ten percent becomes critical.

We live in a remarkably complex world. The tools of the past are no longer adequate for all the tasks of today. The tools my father and grandfather used to turn their North Dakota prairie soil into fertile farmland were adequate for turn-of-the-century farming, but they are antiques today. And so it is with parenting. In generations past, common sense, common knowledge, conventional wisdom, necessity, and intuition were usually quite adequate for raising a stable family. But not so today. In today's complex world, parents need skills. The teachings of Christ tell us what to do in raising children. That's the ninety percent. The science of human behavior tells us how to do it. That's the ten percent.

Though what I discuss in this chapter is anchored in science, as well as in the teachings and example of Christ, it is not difficult to understand. At times it might be hard to believe, but nothing about it is hard to understand. There might be a feeling of resistance in wanting to do it, but there is little to no difficulty in being able to do it. In fact, once learned (that is, acquired as a skill), it becomes quite easy and so effective that one would never think of parenting any other way!

I call your attention to the Old Testament account of Naaman the leper, as recorded in 2 Kgs. 5:1-14. Naaman was a commanding officer of the Syrian army, a "great man" and "honourable," "a mighty man in valour, but he was a leper."

On the advice of his wife's maid, an Israelite, Naaman was put in touch with the prophet Elisha, "for he would recover [Naaman] of his leprosy." What Elisha told Naaman to do was certainly easy to understand and easy to do. Elisha told Naaman, "Go and wash in Jordan seven times, and thy flesh shall come again to thee, and thou shalt be clean."

Though this was easy to understand and to do, Naaman had difficulty accepting Elisha's counsel. He "was wroth" and asked angrily, "Are not Abana and Pharpar, rivers of Damascus, better than all the waters of Israel? . . . So he turned and went away in a rage."

As counselors work with parents who are struggling with the behaviors of their children, they occasionally encounter similar resistance, even though what they counsel them to do is easy to understand and altogether doable. The parents sometimes become annoyed: "There is nothing the matter with my behavior. It's my kid's behavior that's out of whack. But you're telling me that I have to change my behavior!" And sometimes they, like Naaman, go away upset.

Naaman's servants pleaded with him: "My father, if the prophet had bid thee do some great thing, wouldest thou not have done it? How much rather than, when he saith to thee, Wash, and be clean?"

At last Naaman acquiesced, perhaps more out of desperation than anything else: "Then went he down, and dipped himself seven times in Jordan, according to the saying of the man of God: and his flesh came again like unto the flesh of a little child, and he was clean."

There is a great parenting message in this timeless story. If parents will do even a few simple things "according to the saying of the [men] of God" and behavioral scientists of good will, remarkable and even seemingly miraculous improvements will occur in their relationships with their children. As noted by Alma to his son Helaman, "by small and simple things are great things brought to pass" (Alma 37:6).

While I was serving as the bishop of a married student ward at Utah State University, a young mother and father came to my office after church one Sunday, perplexed about the behavior of their young son. They said they had tried everything, and matters were only getting worse. When I visited them in their home the following Tuesday evening, it quickly became evident what was the matter, and I made a few easy-to-do suggestions. We then did some practice and role-playing so that I was sure they had learned exactly what to do and how to do it.

The following Sunday before Primary, I quietly asked the mother of this little boy (who had been driving his parents crazy), "How's it going?" The mother's face lit up. A tear glistened in her eye and she said, "Bishop, it's a miracle!" Later, when we had more time, she described to me in considerable detail what had happened and how such little things had made such a big difference.

This was by no means a rare or unique experience for me as I served as bishop to several hundred young families over the nearly four years of that calling. It was wonderful to be told again and again, "It's a miracle." But performing miracles was never my intention. Miracles are hard to replicate. What I wanted was for those young parents to learn some basic, easy-to-apply parenting skills with which they could properly "train up [their children] in the way [they] should go" (Prov. 22:6).

Below, within four broad areas of responsibility, I illustrate sev-eral parenting skills exemplified by the life of Christ that all parents should possess. It is by no means an exhaustive treatment of all valuable, effective parenting skills. But as I work daily with parents, I have found that when these skills are applied consistently, accurately, and continually, the great majority of parenting problems are either solved completely or are reduced in seriousness to the point of being altogether tolerable.

At this point I must emphasize the importance of applying these skills continually. Time is an important variable in the shaping or mending of human behavior. Overnight success is rarely achieved, particularly with older adolescent children. We are taught a great lesson in this regard from the allegory of the tame and wild olive trees, as recorded in the fifth chapter of Jacob. Figuratively, the house of Israel is likened "unto a tame olive tree" (verse 3). Over time, the olive tree, and the vineyard of which it was a part, became corrupt and began to "bring forth evil fruit" (verse 35).

The Lord of the vineyard was grieved and, while weeping, said to his servants, "What could I have done more in my vineyard? Have I slackened mine hand, that I have not nourished it? Nay, I have nourished it, and I have digged about it, and I have pruned it, . . . and I have stretched forth my hand almost all the day long." (Verse 47.)

How often I hear grieving parents with the same lament! The distraught mother of an errant seventeen-year-old son was in my office one day. Tears streamed down her face as she acquainted me with her grief: "It isn't fair, Brother Latham. It just isn't fair! I have kept myself clean and unspotted from the world so that I could be a good mother. I served an honorable mission, and after my mission I married a worthy elder in the temple. He too had served an honorable mission. We did everything we had been taught to do. I don't know what else we could have done. This just isn't fair!" I assured her that she was absolutely correct; it was not fair. But fairness isn't the most important issue where parenting is concerned. The most important issue is for parents to behave as Christ would behave, as described herein.

The Lord of the vineyard was beside himself, and he said to his servant, "Let us go to and hew down the trees of the vineyard and cast them into the fire . . . for I have done all. What could I have done more for my vineyard?" (Verse 49.)

How often I hear parents of out-of-control older adolescent children say, "I have no option but to kick the kid out of the house!" Parents shouldn't do that! The longer you keep a child home and under proper parental influence, the more likely it is that the child will be successful as an adult. Don't ever forget that!

"But . . . the servant said unto the Lord of the vineyard: Spare it a little longer. And the Lord said: Yea, I will spare it a little longer." (Verses 50-51.) "Perhaps, the trees of my vineyard may bring forth again good fruit; and . . . I may have joy again in the fruit of my vineyard" (verse 60).

The Lord of the vineyard and his servants then began to "labor diligently with [their] might in the vineyard" (verse 61). But (and this is very, very important) the Lord of the vineyard instructed his servants that they should "not clear away the bad thereof all at once." Rather, he instructed them to "clear away the bad according as the good shall grow, that the root and the top may be equal in strength, until the good shall overcome the bad." (Verses 65-66.)

We have learned in the study of human behavior, as the prophet Zenos knew centuries ago, that behavior that changes direction too rapidly tends to regress to its old ways. Small, incremental changes over time tend to produce the most lasting, durable results (see 2 Ne. 28:30; Glenn I. Latham, The Power of Positive Parenting [Salt Lake City: Northwest Publishing, 1994], pp. 144-45). The Savior taught this valuable lesson, as found in Matt. 13:3-8, in the parable of the sower: "Some [seeds] fell upon stony places, where they had not much earth: and forthwith they sprung up, because they had no deepness of earth. And when the sun was up, they were scorched; and because they had no root, they withered away." (Verses 5-6.) With the root and the top being unequal in strength, the plant perished.

I am inclined to wonder if a too-rapid change of behavior contributed to the dramatic falling away of so many of the thousands, "even tens of thousands," of Nephites who were baptized into the Church, as recorded in Hel. 3:24-26. In a scant five verses of scripture, and over but a few years' time, those converts degenerated from a state of "peace and exceedingly great joy" (verse 32) to a state of "exceedingly great pride" (verse 36), ultimately losing many lives at the hands of the Lamanite armies (see Alma 4:5, 11).

Parents of errant children are well advised not to be in too much of a hurry for their children to return fully and actively to the value system. My research has shown that if a child leaves the value system during adolescence, the probability is close to zero that the child will come back into the value systemand remain thereduring adolescence (see Latham, Positive Parenting, pp. 135-44). However, if parents will rise above the behavior of those children; will continuously model maturity, self-confidence, and Christlike living; and will get on with their lives with purpose and determination; the probabilities are great that as adults those errant children will return as active participants in the value system.

Not all will return, but a great majority will (the data indicate between eighty-five and ninety percent return to the value system) if parents properly set the stage for that return. As noted in the allegory of the tame and wild olive trees, the Lord of the vineyard and his servants labored with all their might that perhaps the trees of their vineyard would bring forth good fruit (see Jacob 5:60-62). With human behavior, one can rarely, if ever, be absolutely certain that people will behave in a predictable way every time and in every situation. But if we establish the right conditions, the chances are great that the desired results will eventually be realized.

A distraught couple came to see me because their sixteen-year-old daughter was "out of control" and they wanted to know what they could do to "get her straightened out." After hearing their vivid descriptions of the girl's behaviors, it was clear to me that she was indeed beyond the immediate control of the parents, and that achieving the results they were yearning for was going to be long in coming. When I told them that it would likely be five to seven years before things would be much better, the mother broke down and wept. She was hoping for something like five to seven days, or a few weeks at most. It doesn't happen that way. Human behavior being what it is, there is always the remote possibility for a dramatic, metamorphic change (usually brought on by trauma), to take place in such a child's behavior, but it is unlikely.

I was reminded on one occasion of the time it takes for troubled adolescent behavior to improve. While shopping at a local supermarket, I met a couple with whom I had worked several years earlier. At that time their nearly seventeen-year-old son had been "off the wall"failing in school, having serious Word of Wisdom problems, running with the wrong crowd, and so on. In short, he was behaving outside of the family value system and having the time of his life!

This couple and I had discussed at length a few alternative parenting strategies, some of which are addressed below, and they had agreed "to do it." Of course, they had to make some significant changes in their own behavior first, and though it took a few practice sessions for them to learn the skills they needed, they did indeed "do it."

Upon meeting the parents at the supermarket, and after exchanging greetings, the mother said, "I suppose we should have told you this a long time ago, but our boy finally straightened out, went on a mission, and is now going to school at the university. You know, that stuff really works! But it takes time." You bet it really works, and here is a description of what some of "that stuff" is.

Four Important Parenting Responsibilities Exemplified by the Life of Christ

We grieved together deep into the night and into the early hours of the morning, and though many things were discussed and many feelings shared, nothing made a more lasting impression on me than did this good brother's reflection on his first and fundamental responsibility as a father. "Brother Latham," he said, "almost from the time I was married I have either been a counselor in a bishopric or a bishop, a counselor in a stake presidency or a stake president. I have spent the better part of my parenting years away from my family in Church service, all the while thinking that if I took care of the Saints, the Lord would take care of my family. But I was wrong. It wasn't until it was too late that I realized that my family was my first responsibility all along." Then he wept.

As I work with members of the Church far and wide, I am forever amazed at how often parents put other things before parenting, sometimes even Church serviceand sometimes even to the point of hiding behind Church callings as a shield from parenting responsibilities! Not infrequently young mothers will take me aside, tears bathing their faces, with the sad lament of that of a mother I recently encountered: "My husband is a good man, but he's never home. He's thirty-four years old and the bishop. We have five children and they rarely see their father. He's a wonderful bishop, and the members of the ward love him. I can see why he would give more of his time and attention to his Church calling. Being adored by ward members has got to be more pleasant than dealing with dirty diapers, crying babies, and fighting kids. But they need him more as a father than the ward needs him as a bishop."

What parents in Zion must understand is that the only unit of society that will outlast mortality is the family. Not even the Church in its exact present form will outlast mortality! Though we certainly should be active in Church service, we must be active in the family, which is the most noble Church service of all. In its finest sense, that means teaching our children what is expected of them.

The Church, as the premier source of family support on the face of the earth, has established among its many superb programs a means by which parents can teach their children what is expected of them and how to behave accordingly. Unfortunately, many LDS families ignore this potent and powerful teaching tool. It is called family home evening (sometimes satirized as the only fight that begins and ends with prayer).

In 1970, while I was a graduate student at Utah State University, Elder Howard W. Hunter was the visiting authority at our stake conference, which was held in the beautiful historic Logan Tabernacle. As the concluding speaker at the afternoon session of conference, Elder Hunter told us of our responsibility as parents to hold family home evening faithfully every Monday night. Emphasizing the commitment of the Church to this program, he reminded us that no Church activities were to be held on Monday night and meetinghouses were to be closed and locked. Even the temples would not be open in deference to family home evening. Then he said something I'll never forget. People often ask, he said, how they can possibly put everything else asideChurch activities, work, studies, whateverand devote Monday evenings entirely to their families. His answer was simple and direct: "We can't tell you how to do it. We just expect you to do it."

Louise and I left that meeting committed to "doing it." We had six children, were living on a meager graduate student stipend (Louise was fully employed at home), and our days and evenings were full. Nevertheless, the prophet had spoken, and why sustain a prophet if we are not willing to listen to him?

Every Monday night, until the children were in bed asleep, was family home evening. There were times when these indeed were fights that began and ended with prayer. We were astonished at Satan's singular crusade to destroy Mondays, typically beginning about 5 p.m. (It might interest you to know that the Church announced the Monday night family home evening program the week of 4 October 1970 [see Church News, 10 October 1970, pp. 3, 6]. Monday Night Football commenced 21 September 1970 [ABC Archives, 1994, personal communication]. If you think it's a coincidence that Monday Night Football preceded Monday night family home evening by a mere two weeks, I'd like to talk to you about a bridge I have for sale in Brooklyn. Cheap!)

Despite the occasional associated miseries, we regularly and consistently held family home evening. It was in my daytimer as FHE every Monday night. There was no room left to write in anything else.

The years passed, our children grew up, and almost before we knew it they were leaving home and striking out on their own. One day I found myself wondering if FHE had really been of much value to our family. I decided to ask the children. The results were so dramatic that I wrote about them in an article that was published in the Ensign, titled, "Do We Have To? Another Look at Family Home Evening" (April 1984, pp. 66-67). To my astonishment, our children's recollections of family home evening were virtually 180 degrees from what I expected them to be. From the article in the Ensign, here is a sample of responses from our children when asked, "What do you remember most about family home evening?"

We've had some really good times together in family home evening: bowling, miniature golf, picnics in the canyon." Others remembered the time we did charades and when we wrote down the things we like about each other and, of course, one liked the refreshments best.

Amazed at this outpouring of positive recollections, I probed deeper. "Is there anything else that you consider to be particularly characteristic of family home evening? Anything at all?"

Again, I received positive responses:

"Your lessons are always good, Dad."

"Family home evening has straightened out a lot of messed up days and ended the day on a high."

"They just make me feel good."

Finally, after further probing, my oldest daughter said, quite casu-ally, "Oh, sometimes we complain a little about family home evening."

"Sometimes!" I thought. "A little!" Those bad times were all Iremembered. "What happened?" I asked myself. "How could I have missed all of that great stuff?"

Our six children are raised now. Three of them live near us in the Logan area. It will likely come as no surprise to you that every Monday night we gather as a family at the home of one of our daughters and her good husband for FHE. What a legacy. What a lesson. What a family!

In all of the research I have seen on human behavior and how to shape, manage, and fix it, there is not one single shred of evidence that supports shouting, screaming, or hitting (including spanking) as defensible methods for child rearing. None! My wife, who has never raised her voice in anger in her life, has a nice way of putting it: "If you have nothing worth saying, say it loud."

In parents' verbal exchanges with annoying, disobedient, misbehaving children, they often commit three common errors: First, they react with anger. They say things that are mean, critical, and cutting. None of those would ever fall from the lips of the Savior. The following passage by an unknown author is timely advice; I've used this strategy for years and it works beautifully. It is called "The Pause That Refreshes."

I am the father of a large family. I go home tired from the routine of busy days. Before I cross the threshold, I pause. I reflect for just a moment to remember what may be inside. Someone probably broke a dish. The carpet sweeper may be out of order. There may be a broken arm. The neighbor may be phoning us about a paper our boy did not deliver. There may be children to jump on me for attention and love (maybe with jam on their hands) to tell me the important happenings of the day.

So I pause and repeat a prayer something like this: "O Lord, may my presence in this home bring faith and a cheerful good evening to those I love. May my homecoming strengthen this home and bring us together, not tear us apart. Keep my voice even, that I may build confidence and respect in me as their father and their friend."

This is the "pause that refreshes." I walk in prepared to act, happily and positivelynot to react in an unbalanced way. It is amazing what it will do for me. We can try this not only in the home but also in a meeting that promises to be tense in which human relations are bristling.

The "pause that refreshes" is the priceless moment when we root the center of emotional gravity within us where it belongs, rather than in the social climate into which we are going.

Let us try the "pause that refreshes" plan. It will give us power and influence as fathers, mothers, and leaders.

Isn't that wonderful! What a powerful example of stable, proactive parenting.

I have a dear friend and colleague at Utah State University who, upon arriving home at the end of the day, would pause at the threshold of the front door. After opening the door, but before entering the house, he would kindly call out, "Does anyone in this family love me?"

From throughout the house, his family would call back to him: "I love you, Daddy," "I love you, dear," "You bet I love you, Dad!"

After hearing from each of his family members, he would lovingly call back: "Then why aren't you here giving me a hug and a kiss?" And they would come running. Before this good man had even entered the house he had already exchanged warm expressions of love and affection with every member of his family. Can you imagine the effect of that on the quality of the environment in that home for the remainder of the evening?

As parents, you might want to conspicuously display this bit of sage advice on your bedroom or bathroom mirror, where you'll see it every day and be constantly reminded of the importance of bridling your tongue and controlling your anger:

Unless what you are about to say or do has a high probability for making things better, don't say it and don't do it.

An ounce of "I didn't say it" is worth a pound of "I didn't mean it."

In the early 1970s, while I was on the faculty of the University of Oregon, I served as a member of the Willamette Oregon Stake high council. Occasionally the youth program would sponsor stake dances, and members of the high council were assigned as chaperones. One Saturday evening while I was on duty, a couple of husky boys whom I recognized as members of their respective priests quorum were competing for the attention of an attractive young lady. They decided to settle the matter out in the parking lot. But they didn't make it there. By the time they had reached the back door of the church, blows were already falling and I was called in to break up the fight.

As you can imagine, a crowd of enthusiastic, encouraging onlookers had gathered. I worked my way through the crowd, where I was met by two very angry, intense, and big boys! For me to have stepped between them would have been an invitation to disastereither one of the boys could have broken me in two as if I were a matchstick. To have tried to catch their attention by shouting above the roar of the crowd would have been absolutely futile. Rather, I got as close as I dared, looked each boy in the eye, and asked quietly, "What priesthood office do you boys hold?" The response was instantaneous. They dropped their fists as if they were made of lead, looked at each other and at me, and then each quietly responded, "I'm a priest." I asked, "What is the duty of a priest, as found in the twentieth section of the Doctrine and Covenants?" Neither one knew, so I told them. "Among other things, it is your duty Ãto see that there is no iniquity in the church, neither hardness with each other.' Does that sound familiar to you?"

By now the crowd was hushed. People were starting to trickle away. Eyes were staring at the floor. Both boys quietly and meekly answered, "Yes." Then I said, "I'm glad you boys understand what the Lord expects of you." I patted each one on the shoulder, looked at them, smiled, and said, "Now I'll leave you fellows alone to settle your differences." As I walked away, I looked back to see them shake hands. Though I couldn't hear it, from the lips of the boy whose face I could see I could easily tell what he said: "I'm sorry." The fight was over.

In D&C 31:9, Christ gives us wonderful direction: "Revile not against those that revile. Govern your house in meekness and be steadfast." What that means, very simply, is that we should not return "railing for railing," that we should "not turn and revile again" (3 Ne. 6:13) we should not return shouting with shouting, hitting with hitting, anger with anger, name calling with name calling. Though others in the family might be out of control, we as parents must be in control, meek, and steadfast.

On at least two occasions the Savior was the perfect example of calmness in the face of fury and turmoil. Accused of all manner of falsehoods, Jesus, standing before Pilate, was asked, "Hearest thou not how many things they witness against thee?" The Savior's response was classic: "And he answered him never . . . a word; insomuch that the governor marveled greatly." (Matt. 27:13-14.)

The second occasion was the visit of Christ to the Nephites, following his resurrection. While the Nephites marveled with one another about the dramatic events of the previous days, "they heard a voice as if it came out of heaven; . . . it was not a harsh voice, neither was it a loud voice; nevertheless, and notwithstanding it being a small voice it did pierce them that did hear to the center" (3 Ne. 11:3). Parents, if you really want to be heard, say it quietly, say it softly.

These are sublime models to follow. No matter what the circumstances, as parents we are well advised to be calm, quiet, and nonreactive. The following scenario illustrates how parents can be calm and in complete control even when a child is enraged and out of control:

Child:I hate you, Mother. You make me sick. I wish you'd die!

Mother:I'm really sorry you feel that way, dear. I can tell you are angry. Let's talk about it in a while when you're not so angry.

Child:Don't pull that active listening empathy crap on me, Mom. That makes me sicker than you do!

Mother:When you're angry, it's hard to hear anything that's acceptable. You'll feel better soon. Let's talk then.

(Positive Parenting, p. 169.)

The mother "answered him never a word." She didn't revile. She didn't return railing for railing. Research has revealed that in such settings, if parents remain calm, quiet, reflective, direct, and unintimi-dated, in ninety-seven out of one hundred instances the child, within a minute or less, will quiet down and become reasonable and ready to comply, or at least ready to negotiate a solution.

The second common error irate parents typically commit is hitting a child, including spanking, as a means of discipline. I tell you this without reservation: never hit a child in anger, or as a means of punishment or of controlling behavior. The message delivered by years of research on the long-term negative effects of spanking and hitting is unequivocal. An adequate representation of this research was published by The Harvard Educational Newsletter under the title "Corporal Punishment: Paddling Against the Stream" (May/June 1994, pp. 5-6). The following excerpt emphasizes what needs to be said about this matter: "When we paddle children, the message we're giving is, ÃI'm bigger than you so I have the right to use violence against you.' We think we're teaching one thing when we're actively doing another. It's the hidden message kids hear the loudest."

The enduring and venerable adage "Spare the rod and spoil the child" has inadvertently heaped mountains of misery on children in the guise of discipline masquerading as good parenting. It has its origin in a biblical scripture found in Prov. 13:24: "He that spareth his rod hateth his son: but he that loveth him chasteneth him betimes." It is not my intention to take on the book of Proverbs, nor to question the wisdom of Solomon, who may have written this proverb, but a lot has been learned through science in the last three thousand years about teaching children to behave well. I'm sure if Solomon were alive today, being as wise as he was then, he'd counsel us to learn wiser and more fitting lessons from science. He would probably even quote his father, David, who said, "Thy rod and thy staff comfort me" (Ps. 23:4).

President Gordon B. Hinckley, in an October 1994 general conference address, recalled his own and his father's Christlike approach to child rearing:

I have never accepted the principle of "spare the rod and spoil the child." I will be forever grateful for a father who never laid a hand in anger upon his children. Somehow he had the wonderful talent to let them know what was expected of them and to give them encouragement in achieving it.

I am persuaded that violent fathers produce violent sons. I am satisfied that such punishment in most instances does more damage than good. Children don't need beating. They need love and encouragement. They need fathers to whom they can look with respect rather than fear. Above all, they need example. (In Conference Report, October 1994, pp. 73-74.)

Another interpretation of the word rod is "the word of God"; hence, in this context, the scripture would read, "Spare the word of God and spoil the child." I like that! In light of what contemporary research has taught us about high- and low-risk families, not only is that a fitting interpretation, it's good advice. (See Positive Parenting, p. 199.) Jesus never recommended hitting kids!

The third most common error parents commit when confronted with a difficult-to-manage child is to lapse into despairto use a lot of useless questioning and to begin arguing and trying to reason with the child: "What am I going to do with you? I've tried everything! Surely you have to know why you can't use the car on Sunday to go to a rock concert! It amazes me that you'd even ask. I just don't know what I'm going to do with you."

Think about it. What is the probability, after having said these kinds of things, that a child would respond compliantly and say, "You're right, Father. I can see that this is troubling you more than you deserve to be troubled. I surely didn't want to upset you. Just forget about the car, and I'll forget about the concert. Rather, I think I'll go to the stake fireside on dating." Arguing with your child and succumbing to the frustration you may feel simply will not work.

When children are very young, parents have a clear responsibility to directly govern (or in other words, control) their behavior. We literally lift them out of harm's way to save them from pain, suffering, and even death from dangers they don't understand.

As they grow older, however, we can no longer directly intervene in their lives and the decisions they make. It is at that point in their growth and development that we must step back, permit them to act, and let the consequences deliver the message. Both the model of how to do this and the value of doing it are found in the Pearl of Great Price. The model for how to do it was established by the Lord when he told Adam, "Thou mayest choose for thyself, for it is given unto thee; but, remember that I forbid it, for in the day thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die" (Moses 3:17). Though it was forbidden, it was permitted, yet it had consequences.

Adam and Eve disobeyed, and the consequences delivered a powerful messagea message, in fact, that was regarded by Adam and Eve as a blessing. The Pearl of Great Price tells us that Adam "began to prophesy . . . , saying: Blessed be the name of God, for because of my transgression my eyes are opened, and in this life I shall have joy, and again in the flesh I shall see God. And Eve . . . was glad, saying: Were it not for our transgression we never should have had seed, and never should have known good and evil, and the joy of our redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedient. And Adam and Eve blessed the name of God." (Moses 5:10-12.)

The only way we can learn is by exercising our moral agency. Satan's efforts to deny us of that opportunity helped make him what he is (see Moses 4:3). This must not be construed to mean that we should invite transgression into our lives or into the lives of our children. It simply means that the natural consequences of inappropriate behavior can often deliver powerful messages that can be delivered in no other way, and in those instances we as parents should not shelter our children from these messages.

The following scenario helps illustrate how parents can allow consequences to deliver the message without getting angry, without shouting, and without hitting:

Parent:I'm sorry you were upset and became so angry that you broke the lamp. That was so uncharacteristic of you. We need to come to an agreement on how you will pay to have it replaced. Do you have any suggestions?

[Note: As quickly as possible, engage the child in the problem-solving process.]

Child:Why do I have to pay for it? Other kids break things around their houses and they don't have to pay for it. Just because I broke it because I was mad doesn't mean that I should have to pay for it. This just isn't fair. And after all, that idiot brother of mine started it. You're always picking on me.

[Note: It isn't unusual for a child to respond this way. People are always trying to figure out ways of avoiding responsibility for their own behavior. It is certainly no different for children.]

Parent:Paying for our mistakes is certainly no fun. In this instance, what suggestions do you have for paying for this breakage?

[Note: The parent totally and completely ignores any of the stuff the child says that is designed to relieve him of any responsibility or to pull the conversation off course. The parent simply responds with empathy and then restates the question.]

Child:Mom, this just isn't fair! Why should I have to pay? No one else ever has to pay! I just don't believe I'm being treated fairly.

Parent:I'm sorry you feel you are being treated unfairly. What suggestions do you have for paying for this breakage?

Child:I don't have any suggestions. I don't even know what it would cost.

[Note: Now we are getting somewhere. In about ninety-five times out of one hundred, if parents will stay on course and not be dragged into an argument with the child over what is right or wrong, fair or unfair, after only two attempts at derailing the conversation the child will begin to come around. However, if after the third time the child is still balking, the parent should terminate the discussion by saying the following.]

Parent:I can tell you are not ready to discuss this matter yet. I'm ready to discuss it anytime you are. In the meantime . . . [Note: At this point indicate a reasonable consequence that will remain in place until the child is ready to discuss the matter to resolution. That consequence might be having to stay home or being denied the privilege of using his bicycle or driving the car or whatever is age-appropriate for the child. When the child is ready to discuss the matter to resolution, proceed as follows.]

Parent:I'm glad you are ready to discuss the matter and get it resolved. What suggestions do you have for paying for this breakage?

[Note: The parent does not scold the child for delaying the discussion or carrying on about what a terrible thing was done. Rather, the child is thanked for being ready to discuss the matter. Remember, attend only to those behaviors you want strengthened.]

Child:Well, I guess I could pay for it out of my allowance [or out of what is earned from a paper route, baby-sitting, a job, or whatever is consistent with the child's ability to pay].

Parent:Good suggestion. I'll find out what it is going to cost to repay the breakage and then let you know. At that time, we will come to an agreement of some sort on a reasonable pay-back schedule.

[Note: If it is an irreplaceable item such as an heirloom, objet d'art, a gift from another country, or whatever, some kind of replacement (as part of the consequence) should be insisted upon. Whatever payment is selected, it should be reasonable and accomplishable by the child. Obviously, the child should not be expected to pay on the thing for the next four years of his life. And besides, that is not the point. The point is that this is an opportunity to teach the child a lesson in being responsible for his actions. That is the bottom line. It is more of a learning experience than it is an effort to replace value for value. In the long run, if handled correctly, the lesson learned will be of infinitely greater value than was the object that was damaged or destroyed.] (See Positive Parenting, pp. 63-64.)

Christ set the example, as found in 3 Ne. 17:21, 24:1 "And he took their little children, one by one, and blessed them, and prayed unto the Father for them." Then "angels[descend[ed] out of heaven . . . and encircled those little ones . . . and the angels did minister unto them."

What a perfect example for parents to follow, the fruits of which are perhaps best illustrated in the experiences of Alma as he agonized over the behavior of his son Alma, recorded in Mosiah 27. Alma the Younger, with the sons of Mosiah, was going about to destroy the church of God . . . and to lead astray the people of the Lord" (verse 10). Nevertheless, though "they were the very vilest of sinners" (Mosiah 28:4), the Lord heard father Alma's prayers, "for he . . . prayed with much faith" (Mosiah 27:14). Through angelic ministration, Alma and the sons of Mosiah were brought to a knowledge of the truth, ultimately becoming among the most valiant and effective missionaries in all of scripture.

Not all of the prayers of anxious parents are answered so dramatically as were those of Alma. But perhaps if we as parents knew all there was to know about the effects of our prayers in behalf of our children, they would be no less dramatic. It will be at a time yet to come, when we will be able to look back on what happened, that we will know "the rest of the story."

Elder John H. Groberg of the Seventy, in his gripping account of his mission to Tonga, recalls one such instance while stranded alone at a wharf in Fiji en route to his assigned field of labor:

I closed my eyes again, this time in prayer. Suddenly I felt almost transported. I didn't see anything or hear anything in a physical sense. But in a more real sense, I saw my family in far-off Idaho kneeling together in prayer. I heard one, acting as mouth, say as clearly as anything can be heard, "And bless John on his mission."

As that faithful family called down the powers of heaven to bless their missionary son in a way they could not physically do, the powers of heaven came down, lifted me up, and in a spiritual way allowed me for a brief moment to once again join my family circle in prayer. I was one with them. I was literally swallowed up in the love and concern of a loving family and sensed for a moment what being taken into the bosom of Abraham might be like (see Luke 16:22). . . .

Tears of joy flowed freely as I had restored to me the warmth of family, the light of love, and the strength of hope. When I again felt the hard, uneven cement beneath me, there was no fear, no sorrow, no trepidation, only deep gratitude and assurance. (In the Eye of the Storm [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1993], pp. 20-21.)

No matter whether our children are, as was Alma the Younger, "the very vilest of sinners," or dedicated with all their hearts to serving God and man, as was young Elder Groberg, we must cry unto the Lord over them "morning, mid-day, and evening" (Alma 34:21).

It is quite typical for children of the same family to have varying degrees of commitment to the principles of salvation, but our love and concern should never favor one over the other. When we kneel daily in prayer, we must be equally mindful of each of them, that all will be saved and not perish (see Moro. 9:22).

Elder Boyd K. Packer of theQuorum of the Twelve reminded us of our responsibility to our wayward children, and of the divine promises made to faithful parents:

It is not uncommon for responsible parents to lose one of their children, for a time, to influences over which they have no control. They agonize over rebellious sons or daughters. They are puzzled over why they are so helpless when they have tried so hard to do what they should.

It is my conviction that those wicked influences one day will be overruled.

"The Prophet Joseph Smith declaredand he never taught a more comforting doctrinethat the eternal sealings of faithful parents and the divine promises made to them for valiant service in the Cause of Truth, would save not only themselves, but likewise their posterity. Though some of the sheep may wander, the eye of the Shepherd is upon them, and sooner or later they will feel the tentacles of Divine Providence reaching out after them and drawing them back to the fold. Either in this life or the life to come, they will return. They will have to pay their debt to justice; they will suffer for their sins; and may tread a thorny path; but if it leads them at last, like the penitent Prodigal, to a loving and forgiving father's heart and home, the painful experience will not have been in vain. Pray for your careless and disobedient children; hold on to them with your faith. Hope on, trust on, till you see the salvation of God." (Orson F. Whitney, in Conference Report, April 1929, p. 110.) (In Conference Report, April 1992, p. 94.)

Conclusion

Whether quoting scripture or referencing the scientific literature, the positive, controlled, calm, prayerful approach to parenting is the only reasonable and ultimately most successful way to go. My dear friend and mentor Dr. Sidney Bijou has expressed it as well as I've ever heard it: "Research has shown that the most effective way to reduce problem behavior in children is to strengthen desirable behavior through positive reinforcement rather than trying to weaken undesirable behavior using aversive or negative processes" ("Behaviorism: History and Educational Applications," in T. Husen and T. N. Postlethaite, eds., The International Encyclopedia of Education [New York: Pergamon Press, 1988], pp. 444-51).

Parents tend to use aversive stimulation to weaken undesirable behavior rather than using positives to strengthen desirable behavior. It's as though we have a passion to punish and an aversion to teach. Children don't learn to behave well by being punished for behaving badly. They only learn how not to behave. That is a terrible way to learn! It is a terrible way to be taught!

Kahlil Gibran, in his epic poem The Prophet, penned these classic words of wisdom for parents:

You are the bows from which your children as living arrows are sent forth.

The archer sees the mark upon the path of the infinite, and He bends you with His might that His arrows may go swift and far.

Let your bending in the archer's hand be for gladness;

For even as He loves the arrow that flies, so He loves also the bow that is stable.

(The Prophet [New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1923], p. 18.)

In review, as parents we have the responsibility to (1) teach our children what is expected of them, (2) nurture them carefully, (3) allow them to exercise their moral agency and then let consequences deliver the message, and (4) pray for our children unceasingly. This is how Christ would parent. "Go, and do thou likewise" (Luke 10:37).

_____

Glenn I. Latham, a professor of education at Utah State University, is the director of a federally funded project that provides technical assistance to ten states and the Bureau of Indian Affairs in serving hard-to-teach and hard-to-manage children. He is a consultant and advisor to numerous school systems nationally and internationally and has authored books, audiotapes, and a videotape training program for teachers. He has lectured extensively on family issues as a member of the Church Educational System faculty. He and his wife, Louise, are the parents of six children and twelve grandchildren (and counting). They reside in Logan, Utah.
