Daniel K. Judd, Douglas E. Brinley, Eternal Families ( 1996)

4 One by One

Scott and Angelle Anderson

When our family first moved to a farm, we were determined to learn as much as we could about farm life, including raising a variety of animals. One day in early spring we had a neighbor's ram grazing in our field. From Scott's journal:

Unaware of any potential danger, I took my young son into the field to help me fill the watering trough. While I was drawing water, I was pointing out to him some of the beauties of spring, when a shrill scream from my priceless little partner set off my adrenaline alarm. Quickly spinning around, I saw the large curly-horned ram with its head down charging full bore toward my son. I was two steps away from him, but the ram was only one step away. I lunged to intervene, but it was too late. In an instant the ram pinned him to the water tank, cracking two of his ribs.

Perhaps as parents you have experienced a time when you were a step away and could not prevent a physical mishap from occurring the first bicycle crash or the first fall from a tree limb. We handle these incidents as a matter of course and they are soon forgotten. However, this feeling of helplessness has a spiritual parallel. And in truth, it is the spiritual mishaps that we should fear most and be most anxious to avoid, for these can have a lasting effect on our children that is not easily repaired with stitches or splints.

The scriptures and living prophets give us the prescription for drawing closer to our children and helping them avoid any serious, long-term spiritual injuries.

Do you recall the story of the little boy who ran to his father and asked if he would play, just as the dad returned from an exhausting day at work? Feeling the need to relax after a hectic schedule, the father said to his son, "Okay, in a few minutes." Two minutes later, when the boy returned to take his dad up on his word, he found his father engrossed in the newspaper. Disappointed, he requested again that his dad play with him. Not wanting to be disturbed just yet, the father came up with a delaying tactic. He tore out a picture of the world from his newspaper and shredded it into smaller pieces. Then he told his son that as soon as the boy put the picture together, he would play with him. Surprisingly enough, the little boy returned in a few minutes with the picture of the world all taped together. The amazed father queried, "How did you do that so fast?" "It was easy, Dad," came his son's reply, "I just taped up the picture of the home on the other side, and the world took care of itself!"

A Lesson from the Book of Mormon

There is an account in the Book of Mormon that outlines the prophet Alma's interviews with his three sons. From this record we observe an important way that we can be one step closer to our children and thus strengthen our homes through a stronger parent-child relationship.

As Alma is recounting his missionary labors, there is a critical point when the ongoing flow of the storyline is altered substantially for more than seven chapters. It is one of those moments when we are allowed to look in on a problem and watch a prophet solve it with the Lord's help. Alma was not only a prophet but a father of three sons. He labored all his life to help the Nephites avoid destruction at the hands of their enemies and also labored to preach the gospel of repentance to them. He ministered to his people, yet suffered at their hands as he was jailed, spat upon, and severely persecuted.

After years of personal service and sacrifice for his people, Mormon wrote of him and his feelings for his people: "Now Alma, being grieved for the iniquity of his people, yea for the wars, and the bloodsheds, and the contentions which were among them; and having been . . . sent to declare the word, among all the people in every city; and seeing that the hearts of the people began to wax hard, and that they began to be offended because of the strictness of the word, his heart was exceedingly sorrowful" (Alma 35:15).

Not only were things going badly with his people, but one of his own sons had been immoral as a missionary. No doubt Alma was weighed down in his heart and soul for his people and his own son. Where does a prophet begin to change things? What could he do to turn things around in the land? Notice that he did not begin with a general conference, though he was the prophet, nor did he call a press conference to gather public support. He chose instead to start at home. In fact, perhaps Mormon, in making his abridgment, felt this point was so critical for us as a latter-day people to understand that he put aside his account of wars and difficulties that Alma faced in governing his people and instead detailed in his transcript how a prophet may have helped change the entire social order. He began at home! For the next seven chaptersalmost seventeen pages' worthwhat he did was so critical that we have the privilege to observe the key to how we too can change our environment. We can sit by the prophet's side and listen to his every word as he solved his problems by interviewing his three sons. Let us explain.

Former First Lady Barbara Bush understood the problem when she said on one occasion, "Whatever the era, whatever the times, one thing will never change: Fathers and mothers, if you have children, they must come first. . . . Your success as a family, our success as a society, depends not on what happens in the White House but on what happens inside your house." (In Conference Report, October 1990, p. 40.) That is where Alma began and where all of us should begin as well.

What happened inside Alma's home becomes an impressive pattern for all parents to follow. We are indebted to Alma for keeping a journal of these things so that we can learn how to deal with our childrenespecially those who have made mistakes in their young lives. We strengthen relationships with our children and thus increase our influence in their lives.

Parent-Child Interviews

In Alma 35:16 we read these words: "Therefore, [Alma] caused that his sons should be gathered together, that he might give unto them every one his charge, separately, concerning the things pertaining unto righteousness." From our experience as parents it is our feeling that parent-child interviews should be conducted separately with each child, one on one and one by one, even as Alma did. The Savior set the pattern for this idea as recorded in 3 Nephi, when Jesus "took their little children, one by one, and blessed them, and prayed unto the Father for them" (3 Ne. 17:21; emphasis added). The principle of individual attention and concern is an important guideline for all parents. Having interviews with our children is one of the best ways to apply this principle in order to reap its rewards.

For the dedication page of the book Cheaper by the Dozen, the authors, Frank B. Gilbreth Jr. and Ernestine Gilbreth Carey, wrote simply, "To Dad, who only reared twelve children, and to Mother, who reared twelve only children" (New York: Harper and Row, 1949). Whether families are large or small and children are young or old, the relationship of parent and child is a matter of such significance that it has eternal consequences.

With the fast pace and demands of tending, teaching, transporting, and training children in this modern era, one-on-one time may be hard to come by. However, scheduling a parent-child interview on a regular basis with each parent is an excellent way to ensure that individual time and attention is given to each child.

Elder Carlos E. Asay discussed parent-child interviews in a conference talk when he said:

Several years ago, I approached one of my daughters and said, "My dear, it's time for an interview." Her response was less than enthusiastic, and I determined within my own mind that I was boring her terribly. So instead of subjecting her to a formal conversation, I invited her into the car and drove to the Dairy Queen where we both enjoyed a root beer float. All the way to and from the store, I asked questions, and she freely responded. She didn't even realize that she was being interviewedor at least that is what I thought. A few weeks later, I announced once again that I wanted to interview her. This time she promptly asked, "Wet or dry?" (In Conference Report, October 1983, pp. 16-17.)

If parent-child interviews are a new idea for you and you think your children would run for cover at the mention of this activity, then perhaps a spoonful of sugar will help the medicine go down, so to speak. For a while in our home as we were instigating interviews we entitled them "ice-cream interviews," and, following Elder Asay's example, we served an ample dish of this favorite treat as we met with each child. The result of these "wet" interviews was an increase in our children's enthusiasm to meet with us. Our interviews were scheduled weekly, usually on Sundays, and in addition to the ice cream the children discovered that having one or both parents all to themselves was not all that bad either. In fact, when all of our seven children were at home and the interviews were getting longer and longer, we found Sundays were too short to fit them all in. As a result, we initiated the "ten-minute interview" as a general rule and then scheduled a time during the week to have additional individual time with each child. We think that it was one of the most important things we have done as parents. President Ezra Taft Benson suggested years ago to fathers: "Have regular one-on-one visits with your children. Let them talk about what they would like to. Teach them gospel principles. Teach them true values. Tell them you love them. Personal time with your children tells them where Dad [or Mom] puts his [or her] priorities." (Come, Listen to a Prophet's Voice [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1990], p. 46.)

Interview Format

The format that works best for a scheduled parent-child interview will depend on the child, the parents, and the situation. One idea is to have each child meet separately with each parent so that the parents both have a chance to express their love and give counsel. Both parents have a right to inspiration as the mother and father.

It seems to work best to open with prayer and invite the Spirit of the Lord to be there with the two of you. An informal overview of the child's concerns and needs is an appropriate beginning, which allows the parent to give some direction to the discussion. Some parents find that making an interview form for each child is helpful. Writing down a list of areas of importanceconcerns, goals, feelings, suggestions to improve both self and familyhas many benefits. This list can help parents remember what topics to cover, smooth the flow of conversation, note needed follow-up, and establish a written record to avoid memory gaps. As these interview forms are filled out, they also become a history for that child.

The Parent's Role

Establishing an atmosphere of mutual love and respect opens the door for counsel and advice in these interviews. It must have been a great joy for Alma to interview his righteous, obedient sons Helaman and Shiblon. We might compare these interviews to going to a "back to school night" for a straight-A student.

Alma began his interview with Helaman by reminding him how important it is to keep the commandments and trust in God. Then he shared his own story of gaining faith. For the first time in the Book of Mormon account, Alma describes in his own words his conversionand in some detail. He is very open with his son and willingly admits that he struggled himself at times in his youth and that he needed to rely totally on the Lord and his mercy to survive spiritually. This direct, open, and frank conversation is an example to parents of an important key in interviewing their children. It is often hard for children to think that their parents may have once struggled with the same things that they do.

I (Scott) remember one occasion when I was following Alma's example and having an interview with my young son. I told him how thrilled I was that he was my boy and thanked him for his good example. I mentioned to him that he was a better boy than I had been at times growing up, and that I felt he was probably my big brother in heaven. He paused and then, with his six-year-old wisdom, said, "You know, Dad, I have been thinking the same thing!"

Alma finished a wonderful interview with Helaman by counseling him about keeping the records, warning him about challenges he would face, and giving the following advice: "O, remember, my son, and learn wisdom in thy youth; yea, learn in thy youth to keep the commandments of God" (Alma 37:35).

Shiblon was also a faithful sonsteady and committed to righteousness. Many of the same messages shared with Helaman were recorded in a shorter form in this interview. Alma included this wisdom: "Bridle all your passions, that ye may be filled with love" (Alma 38:12).

An atmosphere of mutual love and respect opens the door for a parent to reprimand or chasten when needed. We learned this effective principle together when we called in our firstborn daughter for her interview. She had been somewhat upset about how we had handled a problem involving sibling rivalry. We talked with her about her behavior and tried to explain why we had reacted the way we didacting in haste to remedy a situation without hearing her side of the issue. When we listened to her feelings and discovered that we had been wrong to act as we did, we apologized. I (Angelle) told her, "Jana, Dad and I are sorry that we didn't listen to you. We made a mistake. We've never been parents of an eight-year-old before!" She answered, "Well, I've never been an eight-year-old before!" After that we felt we were on equal ground in our interviews, and, as the beginners that we were, we could discuss important issues more openly together.

Alma exemplified how to maintain an atmosphere of mutual love and respect while at the same time chastening a child as he counseled his son Corianton. Beginning in chapter 39, this counsel has several elements that are different from his words addressed to Shiblon and Helaman. Suddenly Alma wasn't speaking to a faithful son but was dealing with a struggling young man who had been a major disappointment as a missionary.

An incident that happened in a neighboring stake gives some insight into how Alma must have felt as he began to speak with his wayward son. A mother did all she could to prepare her son for his mission. He struggled to get himself ready to submit his papers. He went first to his nonmember father and asked him to support him financi-ally on his mission, but the father refused. So this mother found a part-time job cleaning a bank, scrubbing floors and walls so that she could send a check to her missionary son.

Nearly every fast Sunday she would come to the pulpit and share a moment from her son's missionary experiences. Then, after a year, he was sent home for immoral conduct while serving his mission. The missionary called his stake president and asked him not to call his mother because he just couldn't face her. The president, of course, had to notify her, and passed on the request that she not come to the airport. The mother, however, felt that if her son ever needed her, he needed her now.

The stake president and the mother waited patiently as the plane unloaded. The terminal was the kind where moving stairs were placed next to the plane to allow passengers to exit. Everyone deplaned, including the flight attendants, and yet the missionary was not to be found. The stake president went to telephone the mission president to see if the missionary had missed the plane. As the mother stood watching alone at the window, her son slowly appeared with the weight of the world on his shoulders. He stepped from the darkened interior of the plane into the light. The only person visible to him in the window of the terminal was his mother. This six-foot-three-inch boy covered his eyes in shame and missed the first step, tumbling down the stairs. The mother pushed her way past the airline agent and rushed to her son. When the stake president returned he found her kneeling with her son, hugging him and weeping, repeating over and over, "I love you, son! I love you, son!" How many of these emotions and feelings were in Alma's heart as his son approached for his interview?

Alma had been far off the path himself as a young man, so he knew well what it would take to repent. In his earlier days he had been racked "with inexpressible horror" (Alma 36:14), so much so that he wished that he could become extinct, that he might not ever experience the pain of standing in the presence of God. With these memories still alive in his soul, Alma's third interview began. We learn a great deal from this humble prophet on how to be calm, supportive, loving, and reasonable even in the midst of having a broken heart.

Alma's first comment is insightful. He told Corianton he had more to say to him than he did to his brothers. Recall that it was the Savior who said, as he sat with publicans and sinners, that the sick need ministering more than do the healthy (see Matt. 9:12). This boy needed the attention of a loving father who understood his feelings.

Notice the direct and to-the-point beginning of this interview. Alma said, in effect, "This is exactly what you did wrong: you boasted in your own strength, you went to an inappropriate place, you associated with someone who had terribly bad standards, and sinful actions followed." Alma pulled no punches in saying that repenting of this sin would be very difficult.

Notice that this boy had been with his father for only a brief time and yet Alma had outlined specifically not just the objectionable behavior but steps leading to his great sin. He also taught Corianton the seriousness of this spiritual crime (see Alma 39:5).

The principles thatAlma used are mirrored in D&C 121. We can focus even more forcefully on the powerful message of this well-known scripture by inserting the word parenthood in the place of priesthood. Because family is the most important priesthood assignment of all, it is an appropriate insert: "No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of parenthood (verse 41). This is not to say that the power of parenting can't be used, for it is often used, but focusing on parenthood power does not lead to happy children over time. If we want to influence our children positively in the long run, we are to use persuasion, long-suffering, gentleness, meekness, love unfeigned, kindness, and pure knowledge.

It is not unusual, as children mature, for the influence of parents to diminish while at the same time the influence of peers increases. The important thing we can do as parents to minimize this loss of our influence is to maintain good relationships with our children. The relationship then becomes the binding tie that allows parental influence to be maintained.

When correction of a child's actions is needed, the Lord teaches us to reprove "betimes with sharpness" (verse 43). Betimes means immediately or soon after the infraction. Elder Gordon B. Hinckley stated, "Of course, there is need for discipline with families. But discipline with severity, discipline with cruelty, inevitably leads not to correction, but rather to resentment and bitterness. It cures nothing and only aggravates the problem. It is self-defeating." (" ÃBehold Your Little Ones,' " Ensign, November 1978, p. 19.) Elder James E. Faust said, "In my experience, the Holy Ghost moves to reprove with sharpness only very rarely. Any reproving should be done gently in an effort to convince the one being reproved that it is done in his own interest." ("These I Will Make My Leaders," Ensign, November 1980, p. 35.)

An interesting scripture that discusses the sharpness of the word of God is found in Heb. 4:12: "For the word of God is quick, and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of the soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart." This scripture helps us see that when God's word is "quick and powerful and sharp," it comes to the point of being so specific that it even discerns the thoughts and intents of the heart. Alma didn't generalize his counsel by calling Corianton a "bad kid"; rather, he exemplified the ability of an inspired parent when he spoke the word of God to his son, even to the point of specifically discerning the thoughts and intents of Corianton's heart.

It is interesting how many times Alma used the phrase "I perceive" with Corianton. He specifically discussed several points of doctrine with his son, and the specific points discussed seem to be the very "thoughts and intents of the heart" that may have led Corianton to justify his inappropriate behavior. Alma exemplified being "moved upon by the Holy Ghost" in his reproving, and, as Elder Faust counseled us, he reproved "gently in an effort to convince the one being reproved that it [was] done in his own interest."

Alma specifically listed Corianton's inappropriate behaviors (Alma 39:2-4), even called them "an abomination" (verse 5), and went on to explain their great severity (verses 5-6). He then immediately stated, "I would not dwell upon your crimes, to harrow up your soul, if it were not for your good" (verse 7). This shows the focus of Alma on the welfare of his son. He was obviously not just an angry father venting his frustrations on his boy. He truly did["[show] forth afterwards an increase of love toward him whom [he had] reproved, lest he esteem [Alma] to be his enemy" (D&C 121:43).

We turn again to the lengthy doctrinal discussion Alma had with his son. Alma certainly had the desire to change the attitude and behavior of Corianton. In Mosiah 26 the record mentions behaviors that the unbelievers at that time, undoubtedly including Alma, would not do (see verse 4). The repeated phrase is "would not"they "would not" do this, and they "would not" do that. Often when we desire to change the actions of someone, we work directly on their behavior. This account, however, prefaces the "would nots" with "could not understand" (verse 3), and before that, "did not believe" (verse 2; see also verse 3). If placed in a chart, it might look like this:

Belief

Understanding

Behavior

The wording is that these people did not believe, so they could not understand some basic gospel teachings; therefore they would not do what was right. The real pattern of change seems to be that if we change our beliefs, we will come to a different understanding and thus a different conclusion. Then appropriate behavior will follow, and for the right reasons. Elder Boyd K. Packer said it this way: "Our behavior is not totally controlled by natural impulses. Behavior begins with belief as well. Beliefs are born of philosophies, of doctrines. Doctrines can be spiritual or secular, wholesome or destructive, true or false. . . . True doctrine, understood, changes attitudes and behavior." (In Conference Report, October 1986, pp. 19, 20.) Changing beliefs to correspond with true principles brings about a more permanent change in the lives of all of us.

After reproving with sharpness and showing forth an increase of love, Alma did not go over his son's weaknesses or emphasize again and again what he had done to offend. From chapters 39 through 42, this inspired father made the loving effort to change the beliefs of his wayward son. He taught his son of Christ's atonement and resurrection, and reminded him that in the long run we will be restored to what we really aregood for good, evil for evil. He taught his son to repent. He instructed him that mercy is for the penitent. Throughout the entire interview there was a constant loving focus on Corianton and his needs and questions. His father was sensitive to spiritual promptings, perceived the needs of his son, and, through inspiration, gave answers that were doctrinal and yet filled with love and mercy.

We believe this to be one of the finest examples in all scripture of the love of a father for his son. Alma reproved with sharpness when moved upon by the Holy Ghost, showed forth an increase of love, helped Corianton center his beliefs on true principles (thereby focusing on the root of his sinful actions), and was led by the Spirit throughout the father-son visit. All of these actions are keys to effective parenting.

Note some of the results of this father's interview. Tucked in the ongoing story of the Nephite wars we find a reference to the change that Corianton made in his personal life. Peace was in the land again and the people prospered "because of their heed and diligence which they gave unto the word of God, which was declared unto them by Helaman, and Shiblon, and Corianton, and Ammon and his brethren" (Alma 49:30). Notice who was back on his mission again. Hurrah! Through a parent-child interview, Alma brought about a transformation in the life of his beloved son, and this united family of missionaries and Nephite ministers made an incredible difference in the society in which they lived. It was as if they first "taped together" the home and then the world began to take care of itself.

As parents we are thankful for this account of a wise father who worked with his son through an interview process until his son caught the vision and desired his own success. This process has been a blessing in our lives. Our sincere desires were rewarded by our daughter's remarks in the interview we gave her on the eve of her marriage. With feelings of hope, we asked her to tell us how she felt about us as parents and how she felt about leaving our home. She replied, "Well, we've had our challenges, but I have always known that you loved me and that you loved the Lord and his gospel." We are convinced that parent-child interviews over the years gave Jana this sure knowledge of the intent of our hearts and a measure of our love for her. From the time of her interview when she was eight years old to the time of her marriage, these one-on-one sessions opened the door for us to teach, train, and bear our testimonies to her of the gospel and the goodness of God.

In his April 1987 general conference address, Elder James E. Faust quoted from the White House Report on the Family:

For most . . . life is not a matter of legislative battles, judicial decrees and executive decisions. It is a fabric of helping hands and good neighbors; bedtime stories and shared prayers; loving-packed lunchboxes and household budget balancing; tears wiped away and a precious heritage passed along; it is hard work and a little put away for the future. In a healthy society, heroes are the men, women, [and] children who hold the world together one home at a time; the parents and grandparents who forgo pleasures, delay purchases, foreclose options, and commit most of their lives to the noblest undertaking of citizenship; raising children who, resting on the shoulders of the previous generation, will see farther than we and reach higher." (The White House Report on the Family, November 1986, pp. 8-9; as quoted in Conference Report, April 1987, p. 103.)

Elder Faust then discussed the need that all parents have to teach principles to their children and give them a sense of belonging. He said:

There is reason for hope. More people seem to recognize that public solutions are not as effective as family solutions. Some authority seems to be returning to the head of the home. But, most important, I see many adults, mostly parents and grandparents, who are Ãcrazy about kids.' If in the process we can bring back into our lives and into our homes sacred spiritual and moral truths, we will reclaim a sacred and precious part of our heritage. (In Conference Report, April 1987, p. 103.)

It is our hope that the children who come into our homes will know that we are crazy about them and that they are loved, and that we as parents will help them reclaim their sacred heritage of peace and happinessone by one.

_____

Scott and Angelle Anderson live in Bluffdale, Utah, and have seven children and one grandchild. Brother Anderson graduated from the University of Utah with a bachelor's degree in psychology. He received a master's degree in counseling and guidance and a Ph.D. in marriage and family therapy from Brigham Young University. He is on the faculty at the institute of religion at Utah Valley State College, and is the advisor to the institute of religion council. Sister Anderson is a homemaker, a past member of the executive board of the Festival of Trees benefit for Primary Children's Hospital, and a member of the Bluffdale Arts Council's governing board. She lectures at BYU Education Week and has also lectured for the Governor's Conference on Families. She is president of Homespun Harmony, a nonprofit organization specializing in materials to strengthen families. She has a degree in elementary education from BYU.
