Daniel K. Judd, Douglas E. Brinley, Eternal Families ( 1996)

5 The Lord's Plan for Parents and Children

Daniel K Judd

We are greatly blessed to live in an age when the gospel of Jesus Christ has been restored to the earth in its fulness, but while blessings abound, all is not well in Zion nor in the world in general. There continues to be an increasing number of children, parents, and families, within and without the Church, who are experiencing serious social and emotional problems. The Apostle Paul prophesied of these difficult times when he wrote: "This know also, that in the last days perilous times shall come. For men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, trucebreakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good, traitors, heady, highminded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God; having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof: from such turn away." (2 Tim. 3:1-5.)

We live in challenging times. Some of the most difficult problems we face during our lifetimes have had or will yet have to do with issues concerning marriages, families, and children. It is difficult to think of a problem one can have that doesn't directly or indirectly influence family relationships. The family is central to who we are (see D&C 130:2). Perhaps this is the reason Satan continues to attack family relationships, for he knows that if he can destroy the family, the future of mankind will be in his power.

After describing the "perilous times" that would exist in the last days, and prophesying that men would be "ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth" (2 Tim. 3:1, 7), the Apostle Paul provided the following counsel:

But continue thou in the things which thou hast learned and hast been assured of, knowing of whom thou hast learned them;

And that from a child thou hast known the holy scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus.

All scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness:

That the man of God may be perfect, throughly furnished unto all good works. (2 Tim. 3:14-17.)

As members of the Church, past and present, we have been counseled to remain faithful and turn to God, to the scriptures, and to the words of our living prophets for answers to the problems we face. But are these sources of truth sufficient to address the complex problems of our day? This chapter is an attempt to explore some of the problems we face and to consider some possible answers to these problems from a doctrinal perspective.

Sacred and Secular Philosophies

Several years ago my wife, Kaye, and I were dealing with one of the day-to-day problems experienced by most parents. Our son Jacob was becoming more and more aggressive with his younger sister, Jessica. We reasoned in part that Jake's problem could be due to his fascination with the violently virtuous "Masters of the Universe" cartoon characters. Such figures as He-Man, Sheera, and Skeletor had come to replace our family as the central figures in Jake's life. When Jake first began to play with these action figures we were amused as he, playing the role of He-Man, would rescue Jessi's Barbie dolls from the various villains who had abducted them. But soon our delight turned to distress as Jake became more and more aggressive in his talk and play. He soon changed from acting the part of the hero, He-Man, to the evil character, Skeletor. Jessi was upset not only because of the rough treatment she was receiving from Jake, but because Barbie was spending more and more time as a hostage, for the good guys were no longer winning the battles. It seemed Jake and Jessi were constantly fighting. Kaye and I became increasingly concerned as to what we should do.

As a graduate student studying family science, I had been taught all the answers to dealing with these kinds of problems. But the problem I had was that many of the various solutions I had learned contradicted one another.

Family life educators, therapists, and writers coming from the Freudian tradition would have reasoned that Jake's aggressive behavior was to be expected and we ought to allow him to work out his "inner conflicts" through his play. Those coming from the behavioral perspective would have encouraged us to identify the behaviors we wanted to "extinguish" and those we wanted to "reinforce." We would have then been instructed to set up a schedule of rewards and punishments that would help us "manage" Jake and obtain the results we were looking for. Other writers would have explained that Jake's aggression was only a stage through which he was passing and not to worry. Still other "experts" would have encouraged us to reason with Jake and help him come to an understanding that his style of play was harmful both to himself and others.

Other writers, coming from an Adlerian perspective, which had become very popular in LDS circles, would have encouraged us to identify the goal behind Jake's misbehavior (such as seeking attention). We would then have to set up a series of "logical and natural consequences" which would help us and Jake deal with the inferiority complex we all supposedly have. Family Systems theorists would have encouraged us to admit that Jake was simply the "identified patient" and that his misbehavior was a symptom of a problem with the way our family system was functioning. Was our family too rigid and in need of greater freedom and more opportunity of expression?

Our "politically correct" friends wouldn't allow their children to play with toys that encouraged violence and were somewhat disappointed we hadn't done the same. Should we forbid Jake from playing with such toys?

We responded by muddling along, dealing with each crisis as it came but being tacitly concerned about Jake's increasing aggressiveness and resistance and our seeming inability to do much about it.

One day as I was listening to Jake and his friends do battle, the thought came into my mind that I should simply abandon my "conscientious objector" status and jump in and play! What if this really was a battle in which I had been called upon to participate? How would I and how should I respond to the challenges of war? At first I tried to justify not playing. I thought of all the other supposedly more important things I had to do at the time and told myself that I really didn't want to give my support to such an abominable marketing charade as the "Masters of the Universe." But for the first time in this particular sequence of events, my rationalizations weren't convincing, and I asked Jake if I could play. I don't know if he was more surprised or reluctant, as his expression was a combination of both. He was probably surprised that I wanted to play, and reluctant to allow me to play because I would probably get in the way of the fun he and his friends were having. Whatever his thoughts were, Jake responded by saying, "Okay, Dad, you can be Man-at-Arms." Man-at-Arms was one of the "good guys" who wasn't one of the main playerskind of symbolic of my role as Jake's parent at the time.

After a few light skirmishes, I soon found myself without much to do. If you weren't in the process of capturing or being captured, the game was somewhat meaningless. This changed quickly, however, as Skeletor abducted Barbie. I knew it was my duty to rescue her, which, after a heroic battle, I did. I also arrested Skeletor and took him to my newly constructed military prison (Grandma's antique end table). Much to Jake's chagrin, I then began reading to Skeletor from a Book of Mormon that was nearby. Jake voiced his protest, "Dad, you can't do that . . . These guys aren't churchy!" Between thwarting various rescue attempts by Jake and the other disciples of doom, I continued to explain the gospel to Skeletor. After some time had passed, I informed Jake and his friends that Skeletor had agreed to be baptized. Jake continued his protest, but his resistance soon softened as he watched me fill a large Tupperware bowl with water and invite the other "Masters of the Universe" characters to attend Skeletor's baptismal service. We then "baptized" Skeletor.

I realize that to some, holding a mock baptism may sound like sacrilege, but my change of heart which allowed me to enter Jake's world, and the subsequent baptism of Skeletor, marked a change in my relationship with my son. I gave my heart to Jake and he gave his to me. No longer did I see Jake as my enemy, but as my son and brother whom I have the privilege of introducing to the Master of the UniverseJesus Christ. Today, if you were to ask Jake to describe his dad, he would probably tell you this story with a mixture of incredulousness and delight.

The Language of Revelation

While the story I have just recounted deals with the resolution of quite a simple problem, the experience taught me several lessons that have helped me in dealing with the more complex problems that have followed. I learned I must exercise caution as I encounter the philosophies of the world. Just because an idea is logical, is being taught by someone who is well educated, and seems to be well accepted by others, that doesn't necessarily mean that it is correct. I have also learned I must seek to always be sensitive to the promptings of my conscience, for this is the Lord's main way of communicating with me. Also, asking and following through on the question "What would the Lord have me do?" is a simple suggestion with profound implications. President Howard W. Hunter counseled: "Let us follow the Son of God in all ways and all walks of life. Let us make him our exemplar and our guide. . . . We should at every opportunity ask ourselves, ÃWhat would Jesus do?' and then act more courageously to act upon the answer. . . . We should make every effort to become like Christ, the one perfect and sinless example this world has ever seen." (In Conference Report, October 1994, p. 118.)

The methods I used in dealing with my son's aggressive behavior weren't as important as the change of heart I experienced as I tried to be true to my prompting of conscience. There are no recipes for rearing children. Be wary of those who tell you they know what is right for your child, especially when it goes against your own sense of right and wrong. Elder James E. Faust has said:

One of the most difficult parental challenges is to appropriately discipline children. Child rearing is so individualistic. Every child is different and unique. What works with one may not work with another. I do not know who is wise enough to say what discipline is too harsh or what is too lenient except the parents of the children themselves, who love them most. It is a matter of prayerful discernment for the parents. Certainly the overarching and undergirding principle is that the discipline of children must be motivated more by love than by punishment. Brigham Young counseled, "If you are ever called upon to chasten a person, never chasten beyond the balm you have within you to bind up" (in Journal of Discourses 9:124-25). Direction and discipline are, however, certainly an indispensable part of child-rearing. (In Conference Report, October 1990, p. 41.)

I have also come to understand that in following the Savior's example, what is right might not always be what seems reasonable (see Hel. 16:18). President Joseph Fielding Smith wrote of the danger of relying solely on the power of intellect:

The worship of reason, of false philosophy, is greater now than it was [in the past]. Men are depending upon their own research to find out God, and that which they cannot discover and which they cannot demonstrate to their satisfaction through their own research and their natural senses, they reject. They are not seeking for theSpirit of the Lord; they are not striving to know God in the manner in which he has marked out by which he may be known; but they are walking in their own way, believing in their own man-made philosophies, teaching the doctrines of devils and not the doctrines of the Son of God. (Doctrines of Salvation, comp. Bruce R. McConkie, 3 vols. [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56], 3:275.)

This isn't to say that reason and intellect should be rejected, only that reason shouldn't be exercised without regard to the wisdom of God, of which it is inextricably a part. Nephi taught that the Lord said we should not "hearken unto the precepts of men, save their precepts shall be given by the power of the Holy Ghost" (2 Ne. 28:31). Nephi's brother Jacob taught that "to be learned is good if they hearken unto the counsels of God" (2 Ne. 9:29). Note the following counsel from President Hugh B. Brown:

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints accepts newly revealed truth, whether it comes through direct revelation or from study and research. We deny the common conception of reality that distinguishes radically between the natural and the supernatural, between the temporal and the eternal, between the sacred and the secular. For us, there is no order of reality that is utterly different in character from the world of which we are a part, that is separated from us by an impassable gulf. We do not separate our daily mundane tasks and interests from the meaning and substance of religion. We recognize the spiritual in all phases and aspects of living and realize that this life is an important part of eternal life. (In Conference Report, April 1964, pp. 81-82.)

Truth can be found in a textbook as well as on a mountaintop. The important point is that we need to make "righteous judgment" (JST, Matt. 7:1-2) of the knowledge we obtain, whether it comes from secular or sacred sources. Mormon teaches us that the way to make these judgments is as plain as "the daylight is from the dark night. . . . For every thing which inviteth to do good, and to persuade to believe in Christ, is sent forth by the power and gift of Christ; wherefore ye may know with a perfect knowledge it is of God" (Moro. 7:15-16). This isn't to say, however, that we will always be able to discern right from wrong in the present moment. From the Doctrine and Covenants we read: "But as you cannot always judge the righteous, or as you cannot always tell the wicked from the righteous, therefore I say unto you, hold your peace until I shall see fit to make all things known unto the world concerning the matter" (D&C 10:37). There will be times when we will need to exercise patience and "wait upon the Lord" (2 Ne. 18:17) for the understanding that is sought. Oftentimes revelation is more of a process than a singular event.

We will also be expected to use our own experience and powers of reasoning to decide upon a course of action:

For behold, it is not meet that I should command in all things; for he that is compelled in all things, the same is a slothful and not a wise servant; wherefore he receiveth no reward.

Verily, I say, men should be anxiously engaged in a good cause, and do many things of their own free will, and bring to pass much righteousness;

For the power is in them, wherein they are agents unto themselves. And inasmuch as men do good they shall in nowise lose their reward. (D&C 58:26-28; see also D&C 9:7-9.)

A powerful example of the Lord teaching ways of dealing with problems is found in the Book of Mormon account of his schooling of the brother of Jared. The Lord gave the brother of Jared detailed directions concerning the building of barges that would take him and his family from the old world to the new (see Ether 2:16-18). The Lord also gave him specific instructions concerning the ventilation of the barges (see Ether 2:19-20). But when the brother of Jared inquired of the Lord as to what he should do to solve the problem of there being no light in the barges, the Lord answered him as follows:

What will ye that I should do that ye may have light in your vessels? For behold, ye cannot have windows, for they will be dashed in pieces; neither shall ye take fire with you, for ye shall not go by the light of fire.

For behold, ye shall be as a whale in the midst of the sea; for the mountain waves shall dash upon you. Nevertheless, I will bring you up again out of the depths of the sea; for the winds have gone forth out of my mouth, and also the rains and the floods have I sent forth.

And behold, I prepare you against these things; for ye cannot cross this great deep save I prepare you against the waves of the sea, and the winds which have gone forth, and the floods which shall come. Therefore what will ye that I should prepare for you that ye may have light when ye are swallowed up in the depths of the sea? (Ether 2:23-25.)

The Lord responded to the question the brother of Jared asked by listing several alternatives that wouldn't be effective. He then asked the brother of Jared, "What will ye that I should prepare for you . . . ?" The brother of Jared, using his own experience and ability, arrived at a solution and presented sixteen stones to the Lord for his blessing. The Lord then literally empowered the brother of Jared's solution by touching his finger to the stones. (See Ether 3:1-6.)

It has been my experience that the Lord often deals with each of us in this very same way. He responds to many of our challenges with specific instructions on how to handle them. Many of the answers are available to us even before we ask the questions. The Lord answers other questions by asking us, "What will ye that I should do . . . ?" (Ether 2:23.)

Many of our questions concerning the rearing of our children could very well have answers we arrive at on our own or by the suggestion of others, but never should we seek to employ them independent of the Lord's empowerment. Most important, we can always have confidence in the knowledge that our Heavenly Father loves us and wants to help us deal with the challenges we face:

And I say unto you, Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you.

For every one that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened.

If a son shall ask bread of any of you that is a father, will he give him a stone? or if he ask a fish, will he for a fish give him a serpent?

Or if he shall ask an egg, will he offer him a scorpion?

If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children: how much more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him? (Luke 11:9-13.)

A Change of Heart

While there is some truth in most, if not all, of the various theories of child development and parenting, most do not focus on what really mattersa change of heart. Neither do these theories focus on the means of this[transformation"[yielding] to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, and [putting] off the natural man . . . through the atonement of Christ" (Mosiah 3:19). The following words of the Savior have always been of value to me as I have studied and attempted to make sense of the various theories of human behavior: "But if it be not built upon my gospel, and is built upon the works of men, or upon the works of the devil, verily I say unto you they have joy in their works for a season, and by and by the end cometh, and they are hewn down and cast into the fire, from whence there is no return" (3 Ne. 27:11). Notice that the Savior distinguishes between the "works of men" and the "works of the devil." Not every idea conceived by man is evil, only those which lead us away from God. Also, notice that those who follow a plan that is contrary to the Savior's teachings may indeed be successful, but only "for a season."

Elder Boyd K. Packer gave the following counsel concerning the relationship of the philosophies of man and the doctrines of God:

I have come to believe that it is the tendency for many members of the Church who spend a great deal of time in academic research to begin to judge the Churchits doctrine, organization, and leadership, present and pastby the principles of their own profession. Ofttimes this is done unwittingly, and some of it, perhaps, is not harmful.

It is an easy thing for a man with extensive academic training to measure the Church using as his standard the principles he has been taught in his professional training. In my mind it ought to be the other way around. A member of the Church ought always, particularly if he is pursuing extensive academic studies, to judge the professions of man against the revealed word of the Lord. (Let Not Your Heart Be Troubled [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1991], p. 101.)

While the majority of Church members do not spend their time in academic research, many devote a significant amount of time reading self-help books pertaining to marriage and family issues. While these books may contain some truths, they always need to be measured against the standard of truththe gospel of Jesus Christ. If what is read isn't consistent with what the Lord or his prophets have taught, we should follow the Apostle Paul's counsel and "from such turn away" (2 Tim. 3:5).

An example of an area of controversy about which much has been written is child discipline. More specifically, to spank or not to spank our children has become a divisive issue. Many parents will cite the scriptures as their justification for spanking their children. While most of us have heard the phrase "Spare the rod and spoil the child," it may come as a surprise to some to learn that the phrase is not found in scripture. The closest scriptural references are found in the book of Proverbs: "He that spareth his rod hateth his son: but he that loveth him chasteneth him betimes" (Prov. 13:24) "Withhold not correction from the child: for if thou beatest him with the rod, he shall not die" (Prov. 23:13; see also Deut. 21:18-21; Prov. 3:11-12; 10:13; 19:18, 29; 20:30; 22:6, 15; 26:3; 29:15, 17). President George Albert Smith stated:

We are very well aware that it is but little use to whip "Mormon" children. You undertake to thrash anything into them, and you will most surely thrash it out of them. . . . The manner in which it must be done is by moral suasion, superior intellect, wisdom, prudence and good straightforward management. . . . I know they say Solomon declared if you spare the rod you will spoil the child. My opinion is that the use of the rod is very frequently the result of a want of understanding on the part of a spoiled parent or teacher in guiding, directing and controlling the feelings and affections of children, though of course the use of the rod in some cases might be necessary; but I have seen children abused when they ought not to have been, because King Solomon is believed to have made that remark, which, if he did, in nine cases out of ten referred to mental rather than physical correction. (In Journal of Discourses 14:374.)

President Gordon B. Hinckley has said:

In terms of physical abuse, I have never accepted the principle of "spare the rod and spoil the child." I will be forever grateful for a father who never laid a hand in anger upon his children. Somehow he had the wonderful talent to let them know what was expected of them and to give them encouragement in achieving it.

I am persuaded that violent fathers produce violent sons. I am satisfied that such punishment in most instances does more damage than good. Children don't need beating. They need love and encouragement. They need fathers to whom they can look with respect rather than fear. Above all, they need example.

I recently read a biography of George H. Brimhall, who at one time served as president of Brigham Young University. Concerning him, someone said that he reared "his boys with a rod, but it [was] a fishing rod" (Raymond Brimhall Holbrook and Esther Hamilton Holbrook, The Tall Pine Tree: The Life and Work of George H. Brimhall [n.p., 1988], p. 62). That says it all. (In Conference Report, October 1994, pp. 73-74.)

The actual spanking of a child may not be as much an issue as the condition of the parent's heart as he or she disciplines a child. The following diagram contrasts the divine attribute of justice with man's selfish motive of punishment, and the divine attribute of mercy with the adversary's counterfeit of indulgence.

Punishment

Justice Mercy

Indulgence

I have put punishment and indulgence on what I call the vertical "I" axis of this diagram because they are both representations of selfish "I" motives. When we are punishing or indulging our children, we have put our own desires before the needs of our children. We see our children as obstacles that get in the way of our own self-centered agenda. These motives are characteristic of the "natural man" described in scripture (see Mosiah 3:19; 1 Cor. 2:14; D&C 67:12). While selfish motives are natural and even normal, they are certainly not Godlike. Even though there are those who criticize the God of the Old Testament as being selfish, angry, and vengeful (see Philip Greven's book Spare the Child: The Religious Roots of Punishment and the Psychological Impact of Physical Abuse [New York: Knopf, 1991]), a careful study of the personality of Jehovah reveals a God that does "all things for the welfare and happiness of his people" (Hel. 12:2; see also 2 Ne. 26:24). The scriptures teach of a God that is perfectly just as well as perfectly merciful.

Being a parent becomes the most important apprenticeship one could have for one day becoming perfect even as our Father in Heaven is perfect (see Matt. 5:48). Parenthood gives one the ideal opportunity of developing the same attributes our Father in Heaven has.

The Great Plan of Happiness

Before we become parents, we typically have idealistic notions of what the experience will bring. We see our future selves as being warm, nurturing parents with competent, obedient children. While this is an ideal we can hope for and work toward, it rarely describes reality. For most of us who have become parents, reality soon hits as we find ourselves facing the very challenging realities of being a father or mother. In a metaphorical sense, we have gone from the Garden of Eden to the imperfect mortal world as we face the challenges of parenthood. We can resent the fact that our fantasy of the ideal family may have been challenged, or we can work and pray to make something of this sacred opportunity.

While bookstores are full of books on different plans and strategies for child rearing, all pale in comparison to the Lord's plan described in scripture. This plan goes by different names including the plan of redemption (Alma 12:25), the plan of salvation (Alma 24:14), the great plan of the Eternal God (Alma 34:9), and the great plan of happiness (Alma 42:8). (For a more detailed account see the author's chapter "The Creation, the Fall and the Atonement: The Great and Eternal Plan for Family Relationships," in Douglas E. Brinley and Daniel K Judd, Eternal Companions [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1995], pp. 44-67.)

A careful analysis of scripture reveals that the Lord's plan is founded on the doctrines of the Creation, the Fall, and the Atonement. The doctrine of the Creation describes man's origin and potential, the Fall describes man's earthly reality, and the doctrine of the Atonement reconciles the differences between the two.

What follows is a brief description of the implications each of these doctrines has for family life and how each of these doctrines of God compare with the philosophies of men.

The Creation

A parent's beliefs about the nature of children can have important implications for how they rear them. In Victorian England, many parents considered their children to have evil natures because they were "born in sin" as a consequence of Adam and Eve partaking of the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil in the Garden of Eden. Because of this erroneous belief, proposed by Protestant theologians such as John Calvin, many parents believed their duties included providing stern discipline even to the extreme of "beating the devil" out of their children (see P. Aries, Centuries of Childhood: A Social History of Family Life, trans. R. Baldick [New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1960], pp. 128-33). Some historians believe that the phrase "rule of thumb" originated in England when parents were instructed they could not discipline their children with a rod any larger in diameter than their thumb (see I. Gibson, The English Vice: Beating, Sex and Shame in Victorian England and After [London: Duckworth, 1978], p. 49). The idea that a child is born evil, which is still believed by some, can lead to harsh, rigid parenting and even outright physical violence in some cases. Being "born in sin" can also become a rationalization for sin on the part of the parent as well as the child.

Another tradition we find in our midst was first proposed by French philosopher Jean-Jacque Rousseau (1712-1778). Rousseau considered children to be born good and simply in need of a warm, supportive, nurturing environment for optimal growth. Parents and the culture of which they were a part were seen as being the problem, and if the child was left more to himself, he would achieve his greatest potential. (See W. Crain, Theories of Development: Concepts and Applications, 3rd ed. [Englewood, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 1992], pp. 8-10.) Rousseau once wrote, "Man is born free, and everywhere he is in chains" (The Social Contract, trans. G. Hopkins [New York: Oxford University Press, 1962], p. 1). In other words, Rousseau believed children are naturally good but become enslaved by a corrupt society. This philosophy is the foundation for many humanistic theories of parenting today.

If the limitations of humanistic philosophy are not understood properly, believing and practicing its principles can contribute to serious problems for the family. If the parents believe that a child is naturally good, they will be more inclined to indulge their children by allowing them to have total freedom of choice in what they choose to do. Indulgence, called "free agency" by the indulgent, is the adversary's counterfeit of what the Lord has termed moral agency. Elder Boyd K. Packer clarifies this point of doctrine in his discussion of the pro-choice philosophy:

Regardless of how lofty and moral the "pro-choice" argument sounds, it is badly flawed. With that same logic one could argue that all traffic signs and barriers which keep the careless from danger should be pulled down on the theory that each individual must be free to choose how close to the edge he will go.

The phrase "free agency" does not appear in scripture. The only agency spoken of there is moral agency, "which," the Lord said, "I have given unto him, that every man may be accountable for his own sins in the day of judgment" (D&C 101:78). (In Conference Report, April 1992, p. 92; emphasis in original.)

It is the parents' duty to teach their children that moral agency doesn't simply imply the choice between alternatives but the choice between right and wrong (see D&C 68:25).

The English philosopher John Locke (1632-1704) raised concerns about the contradictory philosophies of Calvin and Rousseau and proposed that a child is born neither good nor evil but with a mind that is a tabula rasa, or "blank slate." Locke proposed that children develop and personalities are formed as they are acted upon by the environment. American psychologist John Watson, whose ideas follow the philosophy of John Locke, once wrote: "Give me a dozen healthy infants, well-formed, and my own specified world to bring them up in and I'll guarantee to take any one at random and train him to become any specialist I might selectdoctor, lawyer, artist, merchant, chief, and yes, even beggarman and thief, regardless of his talents, penchants, tendencies, abilities, vocations, and race of his ancestors" (Behaviorism [New York: W. W. Norton, 1930], p. 104). This notion reinforces the idea that children are products of their environments.

Locke's and Watson's ideas are the predecessors of the more "scientific" theories of child development in use today. One of the greatest weaknesses in these theories is found in their implications for parenting. Many parents who believe their child is born with a "blank slate" typically feel a great responsibility to "make something" of them. These parents characteristically believe that if their child is going to amount to anything in life, it is going to be the result of their successful parenting. Parents who have these kinds of beliefs will often attempt to have their child enrolled in multiple extracurricular activities, demanding excellence in each. Conversely, the other side of this counterfeit philosophy could lead parents to believe that if their child has problems or challenges or isn't a success, it is also the fault of the parent.

This philosophy is represented by the statement, "If it is to be [my child amounting to something], it is up to me!" One writer described a typical child participating in such a lifestyle as "the hurried child" (D. Elkind, The Hurried Child: Growing Up Too Fast Too Soon, 2nd ed. [New York: Addison Wesley, 1988], p. xi). Sadly, another implication of this style of parenting is the mother feeling it necessary to work outside the home in order to afford the fee for these extra activities. Beware of an activity which demands that your children run faster than they have strength.

The kinds of false beliefs I have presented so far are a portion of what the scriptures refer to as "the wicked and abominable traditions of their fathers." It is imperative that we come to understand these false doctrines for what they are and the truths of which they are a counterfeit: "And behold, ye do know of yourselves, for ye have witnessed it, that as many of them as are brought to the knowledge of the truth, and to know of the wicked and abominable traditions of their fathers, and are led to believe the holy scriptures, yea, the prophecies of the holy prophets, which are written, which leadeth them to faith on the Lord, and unto repentance, which faith and repentance bringeth a change of heart unto themtherefore, as many as have come to this . . . are firm and steadfast in the faith" (Hel. 15:7).

In my classes at BYU I often ask my students to choose between these three alternative views of the nature of childrenCalvin's, Rousseau's, and Locke'sthat I have outlined. The majority will say they have been reared according to Locke, but they want to rear their own children differently. The votes representing their own personal views are usually split between the views of Calvin and Rousseau. Those espousing Calvin's view will quote King Benjamin's discourse wherein he writes, "The natural man is an enemy to God, and has been from the fall of Adam" (Mosiah 3:19). Those favoring Rousseau's view of the innate goodness of children will typically quote the words of Christ in Mormon's letter to his son Moroni: "Wherefore, little children are whole, for they are not capable of committing sin; wherefore the curse of Adam is taken from them in me, that it hath no power over them. . . . Little children need no repentance, neither baptism." (Moro. 8:8, 11.)

Which one of these views is correct? My vote is none of the above. The scriptures, while supporting parts of these various theories when taken out of context, teach something quite different. From the Doctrine and Covenants we read: "Every spirit of man was innocent in the beginning; and God having redeemed man from the fall, men became again, in their infant state, innocent before God" (D&C 93:38). Being born innocent is being born neither good nor evil but having the potential for both. Some may argue that being born innocent is the same as being born with a blank slate. The difference between these two assertions is found in the fact that as children mature, they are free "to act for themselves and not to be acted upon" (2 Ne. 2:26, see also Hel. 14:30). The blank slate idea espouses the notion that as a child matures he continues to be a passive object conditioned by the environment. The scriptures teach that as innocent children mature they become active agents free to choose good or evil. In the Book of Mormon we read: "Wherefore, men are free according to the flesh; and all things are given them which are expedient unto man. And they are free to choose liberty and eternal life, through the great Mediator of all men, or to choose captivity and death, according to the captivity and power of the devil; for he seeketh that all men might be miserable like unto himself." (2 Ne. 2:27; see also 2 Ne. 2:26, 28-30; 10:23; Alma 13:3; Hel. 14:31.)

"As man now is, God once was; as God now is, man may be" is the essential message of the creation (The Teachings of Lorenzo Snow, comp. Clyde J. Williams [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1984), p. 2). While we have the potential to become like God, we also have the potential to become like the devil. The choice is ours; we do not have some preformed, predestined fate. Therefore, we must come to understand the mission the Lord has for each of us and do everything we can to fulfill it. We must also speak to our children in terms of identifying and fulfilling their own unique missions. It is only in fulfilling the measure and purpose of our creation that we will experience the meaning and joy each of us seek.

The Fall

While we are born innocent, we give up our innocence to virtue and vice. In D&C 93 of the Doctrine and Covenants the Lord gives a description of how each of us lose our innocence and become the "natural man": "And that wicked one cometh and taketh away light and truth, through disobedience, from the children of men, and because of the tradition of their fathers" (D&C 93:39). As we disobey the commandments of God and suffer the consequences of believing and living the incorrect traditions of our fathers, we become fallen. In the Doctrine and Covenants we read: "He created man, male and female, after his own image and in his own likeness, created he them; and gave unto them commandments that they should love and serve him, the only living and true God, and that he should be the only being whom they should worship. But by the transgression of these holy laws man became sensual and devilish, and became fallen man." (D&C 20:18-20; see also Moses 5:13.)

Our fallen natures can also come as a result of sins that are not our own. For example, if a child grows up in a home where alcohol is used freely, the chances are great that he will not see it as a sin. This child, however, will still suffer the consequences if he consumes alcohol. He will also develop traditions and appetites that will be carried forward into his later life. The same is true of other incorrect traditionswe suffer the consequences of sinning, even if we are sinning in ignorance (see Mosiah 3:11).

In my work with families over the years, I have come to believe that one of the most important things parents can do for their childrenand for themselvesis to identify and become free of the incorrect traditions that exist in their families.

Several years ago I received a phone call from a woman who asked if I could help her deal with some of the psychological problems associated with a serious illness.1 As we talked, it soon became quite evident that her marriage and family were in serious trouble. She related to me how disappointed she was in her husband's "faithlessness" in his Church responsibilities and how her oldest son was following his example. She described to me in great detail how she had thought the week before that maybe there was some hope for her husband, as he had told her he was going to take their fifteen-year-old son to general priesthood meeting. She found out later they had gone to the shooting range instead. They had deliberately deceived her by walking out of the house dressed for the meeting, only to change into other clothes they had hidden in the pickup truck. They had then changed back into their dress clothes before coming home. She was quite sure that divorce was the only option, as her husband was setting such a poor example for the children. She also described how she was quite sure he drank alcohol from time to time and might even be involved with another woman. I asked if it was possible to meet with them as a couple. She said that she didn't think it was a good idea for the three of us to meet, because her husband would just "twist things around" to make her look bad. She did say that she thought he would meet with me privately.

As anyone who has spent time talking to couples in conflict will appreciate, his story was quite different from hers. His first question to me was to ask if I thought his wife would be helped by psychiatric hospitalization. He then described to me what he termed the "religious fanatic" he had married. When I asked him about the incident where he and his son had gone shooting instead of to the priesthood meeting, he agreed they probably shouldn't have deceived her but said that he had good reason for doing what he did. He then related to me the previous events of that day to show me what his wife was really like.

She had insisted the entire family watch general conference on television from 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon and then again from 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Not only had she insisted they all watch conference, they had to be dressed in their Sunday clothes and sit quietly through the conference sessions. He thought this was especially cruel for their younger children (three children under ten years of age), as well as for their thirteen-year-old daughter, fifteen-year-old son, and him! He explained to me how he had tried to reason with her in the past, but she would typically become sullen and lock herself in the bedroom, crying that he wasn't being supportive.

The husband further explained to me how his lack of activity in religious matters was designed to balance his wife's fanatical religious behavior. He didn't want his children to grow up to be "religious fanatics" like their mother. He reasoned that while he knew some of his actions seemed inappropriate, he was simply doing the best he could under very difficult circumstances.

Interestingly, his wife would later explain to me how everything she was doing was only meant to save their children. She felt she wasn't being a fanatic but was only trying to help her children learn to live the gospel in spite of the bad example of their father.

Do you see what was happening? Both the husband and the wife were seeing each other as the problem, and for years their solution had been to insist that the other one change. The wife wanted the husband to become more religious, the husband wanted the wife to be less. Also, they both saw themselves as doing what they had to do to save the children. In reality, they were in a downward spiral of blame and accusation. In the words of another husband who had come to see himself in a similar situation with his wife, "So you see, what to her was the best solution available was to me the very problem that I needed to solve!" (C. Terry Warner, "Bonds of Anguish, Bonds of Love" [unpublished manuscript, 1992], 4:5.)

Can you appreciate the fact that the problems this troubled couple were facing involved the children's happiness as well? Might some of the traditions this family was acting out have influence on future generations? Can you see how the children in the family might even choose to become allies with either the father or the mother, or to disassociate themselves from the family altogether? What would you say has to change for this troubled relationship to be healed?

First of all, we must understandwhether our problems are with our spouse, children, neighbors, or business associatesthat seeing other people as the problem is the problem. This is part of what the Savior was teaching us when he said:

Judge not, that ye be not judged.

For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged: and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again.

And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye, but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye?

Or how wilt thou say to thy brother, Let me pull out the mote out of thine eye; and, behold, a beam is in thine own eye?

Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye; and then shalt thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brother's eye. (Matt. 7:1-5; see also JST, Matt. 7:4-8.)

The answer to solving this problem is found in the latter part of this passage: "First cast out the beam out of thine own eye." In the story I have been relating, this was somewhat difficult for the wife to understand. At first she couldn't understand how doing all of the "righteous" things she had been doing could be part of the problem. After all, she was only doing what the scriptures and prophets had been teaching her. It wasn't until we read the following verse that she began to see her own sins: "But behold, the Jews were a stiffnecked people; and they despised the words of plainness, and killed the prophets, and sought for things that they could not understand. Wherefore, because of their blindness, which blindness came by looking beyond the mark, they must needs fall; for God hath taken away his plainness from them, and delivered unto them many things which they cannot understand, because they desired it. And because they desired it God hath done it, that they may stumble." (Jacob 4:14.)

The wife came to understand that her going "beyond the mark" was just as much a sin as her husband's falling short. To this woman's credit, she was teachable and began to seek the Lord's direction in solving her marital and family problems. As she became more and more sensitive to following her promptings of conscience, which included seeking her husband's forgiveness of her "fanatical" behavior, she was able to invite a miraculous change into her family. While at first her husband thought this was simply another ploy to manipulate him, he soon became convinced she was sincere and began to do much sincere repenting of his own.

The Atonement

One of the most powerful truths I have come to know is that the Lord's plan for family relationships includes opposition. It is naive to believe or even to desire that life can or should be lived void of problems. As Lehi taught his son Jacob: "For it must needs be, that there is an opposition in all things. If not so, my firstborn in the wilderness, righteousness could not be brought to pass, neither wickedness, neither holiness nor misery, neither good nor bad . . . no life neither death, nor corruption nor incorruption, happiness nor misery, neither sense nor insensibility." (2 Ne. 2:11.) The process of overcoming the problems we face as individuals and as families is an essential part of the Lord's plan for our happiness.

The heart of our Heavenly Father's plan is the atonement of Jesus Christ. I have come to believe that while social science can sometimes help us come to an understanding of our problems and can provide effective strategies for coping with them, it is only through the atonement of Christ that we can truly be free.

The word atonement literally means "reconciliation." Not only can we be reconciled with God, the atonement of Christ offers a means of reconcilement with our friends and family members from whom we may have become estranged.

To begin with, not only does the at-one-ment include the Savior's suffering in the Garden of Gethsemane and his subsequent death and resurrection, but it also includes the example of his mortal life. The Prophet Joseph Smith once taught the following concerning the process by which we can come to exercise faith in God the Father and in the Lord Jesus Christ:

Let us here observe, that three things are necessary in order that any rational and intelligent being may exercise faith in God unto life and salvation.

First, the idea that he actually exists.

Secondly, a correct idea of his character, perfections, and attributes.

Thirdly, an actual knowledge that the course of life which he is pursuing is according to his will. For without an acquaintance with these three important facts, the faith of every rational being must be imperfect and unproductive; but with this understanding it can become perfect and fruitful, abounding in righteousness, unto the praise and glory of God the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ. (Lectures on Faith 3:2-5.)

I have always found it interesting to note that the Prophet emphasized the word correct in the third paragraph. Coming to a "correct idea of his character, perfections, and attributes" can give us an important understanding as to what our own and our children's potentials are and toward what end we should be working. The First Presidency in 1909 taught: "Man is the child of God, formed in the divine image and endowed with divine attributes, and even as the infant son of an earthly father and mother is capable in due time of becoming a man, so the undeveloped offspring of celestial parentage is capable, by experience through ages and aeons, of evolving into a God" (James R. Clark, comp., Messages of the First Presidency, 6 vols. [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-75], 4:206).

As we come to understand the character of God, we can come to comprehend who we really are. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught, "If men do not comprehend the character of God, they do not comprehend themselves" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976], p. 343).

One of the Savior's greatest attributes is selflessness. When faced with the greatest pain and anguish any member of the human family has experienced, he said the following words in a prayer to Heavenly Father: "If thou be willing, remove this cup from me: nevertheless not my will, but thine, be done" (Luke 22:42). He acknowledged his own wishes but was committed to doing the will of God, which meant he would take upon himself the pains of all mankind (see D&C 19:16) and would eventually die that we might live. Notice the parallels to the atonement of Christ in the following story by Carlfred Broderick:

The term "savior on Mount Zion" [see Obad. 1:21] is ordinarily reserved for those engaged in vicarious work for the dead. . . .

But I believe that the term might also be applied to another group of the Saints. These have been called to sacrifice for the sake of saving the living, often of their own household.

I first began to think in these terms as a result of counseling two women who had hard life assignments. The first had convinced her boyfriend to join the Church and one year later to marry her in the temple. Unhappily, the conversion didn't "take," and soon thereafter he returned to his worldly ways, which included all of the minor vices and several of the major ones. They had children who seemed to elect their father's life-style rather than their mother's. I watched this good sister struggle with her rebellious family over the years, and I am ashamed to admit that I had sometimes judged her harshly. For example, if she had asked my opinion, I could have told her before she married him that her husband-to-be was more committed to her than to the gospel. Also, I felt that she had been overly permissive with her children. In short, I self-righteously judged that if she had made better choices (as I had, for example) her life would have turned out better (as mine had, for example).

It eventually became necessary to excommunicate her husband, and in agony of spirit she asked me, her stake president, for a blessing to guide her as to what her duty was under the circumstances. In that blessing I learned a few things that even now make me burn with shame for my earlier spiritual arrogance toward that sister. The Lord told her that she was a valiant spirit in the premortal existence who had volunteered for hazardous duty on earth. Not for her was the safety of a secure marriage to an equally valiant partner. Not for her was the relative ease of rearing naturally obedient children. . . . In the blessing she was told that the Lord loved her husband and her children despite their rebellious spirits and that if they were to have any chance at all it would be because of her Christlike patience and long-suffering with them. . . .

True to her promise, she is succeeding against all odds in her mission. To everyone's surprise, her rowdy eldest son straightened out his life and went on a mission. He came back on fire with the Spirit and committed to the gospel. Her second son, who had often stated his intention of playing football instead of going on a mission, was helped by his elder brother and has also completed a successful mission and is headed for a temple marriage. Her daughters are slower to turn around, but I begin to see some softening there. Even her husband, the toughest of all, is beginning to mellow at the edges and to talk about putting his life in order (no action yet, but I am prepared to believe in miracles in this family). (One Flesh, One Heart [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1986], pp. 50-51.)

Part of what it means to take upon ourselves the name of Christ is to suffer as a result of the sins of others, especially those we love. Note the following description of the "spirits of the just" given by President Joseph F. Smith: "And there were gathered together in one place an innumerable company of the spirits of the just, who had been faithful in the testimony of Jesus while they lived in mortality; and who had offered sacrifice in the similitude of the great sacrifice of the Son of God, and had suffered tribulation in their Redeemer's name" (D&C 138:12-13).

Elder Boyd K. Packer has taught us that the righteous lives of parents can even have redemptive power in the lives of their wayward children:

The measure of our success as parents . . . will not rest solely on how our children turn out. That judgement would be just only if we could raise our families in a perfectly moral environment, and that now is not possible. . . .

"The Prophet Joseph Smith declaredand he never taught a more comforting doctrinethat the eternal sealings of faithful parents and the divine promises made to them for valiant service in the Cause of Truth, would save not only themselves, but likewise their posterity. Though some of the sheep may wander, the eye of the Shepherd is upon them, and sooner or later they will feel the tentacles of Divine Providence reaching out after them and drawing them back to the fold. Either in this life or the life to come, they will return." (Orson F. Whitney, in Conference Report, April 1929, p. 110.) (In Conference Report, April 1992, p. 94.)

The most powerful dimension of the Atonement is also the least understood. While we can all appreciate the importance of following the example the Savior has set, it is more difficult to comprehend the literal power of redemption and resurrection found in the Atonement. But we can be assured that through the atonement of Jesus Christ, sin can be forgiven, the dead will be resurrected, and husbands and wives as well as parents and children can be reconciled to each other. To access the power of the Atonement we must first reconcile ourselves to the will of God:

Therefore, cheer up your hearts, and remember that ye are free to act for yourselvesto choose the way of everlasting death or the way of eternal life.

Wherefore, my beloved brethren, reconcile yourselves to the will of God, and not to the will of the devil and the flesh; and remember, after ye are reconciled unto God, that it is only in and through the grace of God that ye are saved.

Wherefore, may God raise you from death by the power of the resurrection, and also from everlasting death by the power of the atonement, that ye may be received into the eternal kingdom of God, that ye may praise him through grace divine. Amen. (2 Ne. 10:23-25.)

_____

Daniel K Judd was born and reared in Kanab, Utah. After completing a mission in San Diego, California, he earned a bachelor's degree in zoology and chemistry from Southern Utah State College. He also holds an M.S. in family science and a Ph.D. in counseling psychology from Brigham Young University. In addition to having been a seminary and institute instructor in Arizona, Utah, and Michigan, he was also a professor of family science at Ricks' College in Rexburg, Idaho. He has served as a bishop and is now president of the Young Men in his home ward. He is presently an assistant professor of Ancient Scripture at BYU, where he also conducts research studying the relationship of religion and mental health. He and his wife, Kaye Seegmiller, are the parents of four children and live in Orem, Utah.
