Daniel K. Judd, Douglas E. Brinley, Eternal Families ( 1996)

6 Cat's in the Cradle

K. Douglas Bassett

On a beautiful spring morning in 1974, my bride of only a few months announced to me that we were expecting our first child. Stunned and yet pleased with the news, I slid into our car and headed for my job. The journey to work each day was a beautiful drive through the breathtaking mountains of Northern California near Shasta Lake. The heady images of fatherhood drowned out the scenery surrounding me. However, my thoughts were interrupted by words coming from a song on the radio that spoke directly to the emotions engulfing me at the moment. It was the first time I had ever heard this now well-known song. Titled "Cat's in the Cradle," it tells the story of a man who couldn't spend time with his young son because "there were planes to catch and bills to pay." The son wanted to be just like his dad when he grew up, and by the end of the song it is clear that he had indeed done so, for when he got older he was too busy to spend time with his father.

This song hit me with such an impact that I pulled over to the side of the road. Over and over I pondered the message behind the lyrics. I began to understand that the next few decades of my life I could be acting out the theme of this song. My prayer to my Heavenly Father was that my children would grow up with a father who cared about them and who expressed his love verbally as well as by spending time with them.

A Pakistani folktale with a similar message was retold by President Thomas S. Monson in a general conference address:

An ancient grandmother lived with her daughter and grandson. As she grew frail and feeble, instead of being a help around the house, she became a constant trial. She broke plates and cups, lost knives, spilled water. One day, exasperated because the old woman had broken another precious plate, the daughter sent the grandson to buy his grandmother a wooden plate. The boy hesitated because he knew a wooden plate would humiliate his grandmother. But his mother insisted, so off he went. He returned bringing not one, but two wooden plates.

"I only asked you to buy one," his mother said. "Didn't you hear me?"

"Yes," said the boy. "But I bought the second one so there would be one for you when you get old." (In Conference Report, April 1993, p. 77.)

How we treat our children comes back to either haunt us or bless us in our advancing years. I have observed, too, that when adults are under stress, they usually act just like their parents did during times of crisis. This is illustrated by a story about a young boy who was given a summer job of sitting on the back of a harvester. His father had given him the responsibility of relaying to his older brothers, who were sitting on the front of the harvester, when the machine had broken down. Even though this boy was young, he realized that the value of the job had nothing to do with the job description. It was just a way to keep him occupied and out of mischief during harvest time. This task of sitting on the back of the harvester lasted for only a few summers, but an impression was branded on his mind that would remain with him forever.

Of course, it was not uncommon for the machine to break down a few times during each harvest season. Obviously his brothers didn't need his help in telling them what had happened. But that was not the part that bothered him the most. Each time the harvester broke down, within minutes his father would be racing in his pickup truck from the house or the barn through the field to where his sons were working. In a rush he would jump out of the truck and stand in front of this youngest son. With penetrating displeasure in his eyes he would grab his big western belt buckle with both hands; then his hands would travel to the brim of his hat. Bending it down in the direction of the boy standing in front of him, he would blurt out, "What's the problem?" His words were delivered more like an accusation than a question.

Each time this happened, his young son felt rebuked for something which was clearly no one's fault. The harvester had just experienced a mechanical breakdown. It was not necessary to place blame or put anyone in a position to feel cast down. Even though this happened only a few times over those two summers, the young boy made a commitment to himself that when he became a man he would never do what his father had done to him.

Years later, this young man was ordained an elder and had the wonderful opportunity of serving a full-time mission for the Lord. He put his heart and soul into the work, and as the months passed he was called to a leadership position. On one occasion he and his companion were scheduled to work with another team of missionaries. They arrived at the elders' apartment at 7 a.m., and although the missionaries should have been awake and out of bed for a half hour, such was not the case. To make matters worse, the temperature was below freezing. In the hope of waking up the missionaries without disturbing the landlady, this missionary tried gently knocking on the front door. When this failed, he and his companion went to the side of the house and began tossing pebbles against the upstairs window of the two sleepyheads. However, their efforts yielded only frozen fingers because they had to remove their warm gloves to pick up and throw the pebbles. Exasperated, this former farm boy stomped to the front door and began pounding on it with his fist. A very irritated landlady came to the door. Without uttering a word, she pointed upstairs to where the missionaries remained fast asleep.

The young man's long strides quickly carried him to the top of the stairs, and, without knocking, he grasped the doorknob and flung the door open with a determined flip of his wrist. As the door quickly swung open, it met the wall with an abrupt thud. The two sleepy elders sat up in bed as if they had been instantly resurrected from the dead, and through glazed eyes they stared at their leader. He stood before them, his eyes fired with anger. Instinctively he grabbed his belt buckle with both hands. His hands then clasped the brim of his hat. Bending it down in the direction of the two guilty elders, he blurted out, "What's the problem?"

Suddenly, in an instant flashback, he was no longer a missionary but a young boy standing before his father, silently making a commitment to himself, I will never do that when I become a man! His hands fell limp to his sides as he slowly fell against the wall. Here he had done the very thing he had said he would never do. It did not matter whether the elders had deserved his rebuke. He had told himself he would never do it, and he had. Taking a deep breath, and silently recommitting himself that it would not happen again, he changed his tone of voice and they proceeded with the day's labors.

Sometimes it takes a conscious effort on the part of children to change patterns of behavior or thinking instilled in them by parents who did not model Christlike behavior. We can avoid this "Cat's in the Cradle" syndrome by understanding the effect of our behavior on our children, and by building strong relationships with them when they are young and then maintaining those relationships over the years. President Spencer W. Kimball, in a conference in the British Isles, reminded the Saints: "Most people are largely the result of their home environment, good or bad. As Lehi said, on the brink of the grave, to his children, ÃI know that if ye are brought up in the way ye should go, ye will not depart from it' (2 Ne. 4:5). Our conclusions must therefore be taking life at its best and life at its worst; the difference seems to be the catalyst of love and family solidarity." (British Area Conference Report, August 1971, p. 82.)

Cat's in the Cradle and the Book of Mormon

As my life has given way to time and study, I have come to understand that the concept of "What goes around from parents, comes around from children" was not introduced by Harry Chapin and his thought-provoking song. The Book of Mormon has a number of illustrations of how a parent's actions influence their children. Nephi's first one-on-one experience with the Lord, for example, was tied directly to his father's influence: "I, Nephi, . . . having great desires to know of the mysteries of God, wherefore, I did cry unto the Lord; and behold he did visit me, and did soften my heart that I did believe all the words which had been spoken by my father" (1 Ne. 2:16). Among the mysteries that Nephi was seeking to know was the truth of the things his father had seen in a vision, described in 1 Ne. 1:6-14. Nephi would not have been as receptive to the Spirit if Lehi had not taught his son. Parents in Zion are admonished to instruct their children in such a way that the Spirit can confirm the truth of their teachings (see 1 Ne. 1:1; Mosiah 1:2).

Following Lehi's recounting of the tree of life dream to his family, Nephi sought to obtain the same manifestation. In a personal visit with the Spirit of the Lord, Nephi declared, "I desire to behold the things which my father saw" (1 Ne. 11:3). If our children prayed to behold the things we have experienced spiritually, and if our spiritual experiences were duplicated for them, would they be brought to Christ and receive a stronger testimony?

The Spirit then asked Nephi, "Believest thou that thy father saw the tree?" (Verse 4.) Nephi replied, "Yea, thou knowest that I believe all the words of my father" (verse 5). Could a son give a greater tribute to his father? The Spirit of the Lord rejoiced in "a loud voice, saying: Hosanna to the Lord" (verse 6). He was overjoyed that this father taught his son in such a way that a boy could believe his father's witness.

Each of us must obtain a testimony by a sincere personal striving for the truth, but as students of the Book of Mormon we must also recognize that Nephi's journey for truth was based on a father who led the way. Unlike the father in "Cat's in the Cradle," we must do our best to ensure a positive outcome in our relationships with our children even as Lehi did with his young son Nephi.

Enos reported his own experience with his father: "I, Enos, knowing my father that he was a just manfor he taught me . . . in the nurture and admonition of the Lord" (Enos 1:1). Enos went on to relate his "wrestle" in obtaining "a remission of [his] sins" (Enos 1:2). The experience of praying all day and into the night before receiving this remission was preceded by a session of very deep pondering. "The words which I had often heard my father speak . . . sunk deep into my heart" (Enos 1:3). Obviously the Savior removed the sin, but consider the role of Jacob in this process. Jacob could not give his son a "sacred grove" experience, but it was his responsibility to show him the pathway there. It would have been very difficult for Jacob to show his son the path had he not been there himself.

Recall the experience of Alma the Younger, who for three long days was "racked with torment . . . [and] harrowed up by the memory of [his] many sins." During this time of suffering, Alma's mind turned to the words of his father: "I remembered also to have heard my father prophesy . . . concerning the coming of one Jesus Christ." (Alma 36:17.) Upon crying out to the Lord, he stated, "I could remember my pains no more; yea, I was harrowed up by the memory of my sins no more" (verse 19). Like Enos, his father was instrumental in his spiritual growth. The Savior removed Alma's pain and stain of sin, but the words of the elder Alma led his son to the blessings of Gethsemane. The spiritual example and instruction by many Book of Mormon fathers illuminated the strait and narrow path for many of their sons who became powerful servants of the Lord and thus models for us (see Hel. 5:5-6).

Another powerful example found in this ancient text is exemplified by the Lamanite converts of the sons of Mosiah who took on the name of Anti-Nephi-Lehies. Two thousand of their sons became "stripling warriors" on the side of the Nephites. These youthful patriots were untested in battle, yet they exhibited no fear at the prospect of death. The reason: "They had been taught by their mothers, that if they did not doubt, God would deliver them" (Alma 56:47). What was it that they were not to doubt? That their mothers were telling the truth? That the gospel was true? Not to doubt Helaman, their military leader, and to obey with exactness? (See Alma 57:21.) Not to doubt the oath they had taken to defend the freedom of their fathers and the Nephites? (See Alma 53:17; 56:47.) Yes, perhaps the answer encompasses all of thesebut there is more.

Recall that at an earlier time their parents were part of the Anti-Nephi-Lehies, many of whom were slaughtered by the Lamanites because they would not take up arms to defend themselves (see Alma 24:13-22). The king of the Anti-Nephi-Lehies asked Ammon to "inquire of the Lord" as to what they should do (Alma 27:10). The Lord responded to his inquiry by giving a blessing of protection to the parents of these stripling warriors: "Blessed are this people in this generation, for I will preserve them" (Alma 27:12). In this context, preserve meant to deliver or to protect. The text records no more slaughter among these newly converted Lamanites. Years later, a similar promise of preservation was given to the stripling warriors by their mothers, who promised that "God would deliver them" (Alma 56:48). When these young men went to battle for the first time, it was not hard for them to believe that the Lord would deliver them in battle, because the concept of the Lord's preservation had been known in their families long before they fought on the side of the Nephites. This spiritual "Cat's in the Cradle" lesson does not end here. Ammon, who had received the revelation giving the Anti-Nephi-Lehies their blessing of preservation, had received a blessing of protection from the Lord himself, years earlier, when he and the other sons of Mosiah pleaded with their father to allow them to preach the gospel to the Lamanites. Mosiah inquired of the Lord, who spoke these words to him: "I will deliver thy sons out of the hands of the Lamanites" (Mosiah 28:7). The sons of Mosiah had received a blessing that was similar to the one given later to their future converts, the Anti-Nephi-Lehies. And now a promise of protection was likewise made to the two thousands sons of these loyal converts! The faith of these youthful men mirrored the faith of their parents and the missionaries who taught them, becoming a positive "Cat's in the Cradle" lesson. Surely the promises of the Lord are extended from generation to generation when his children are faithful in keeping their covenants.

Gospel Parenting Cannot Be Delegated

The responsibility of parents to help children find the path to spiritual victory is adequately detailed by Latter-day prophets, as it is in ancient scripture. As parents we cannot delegate the responsibility to teach our children. Certainly our children will have other teachers in the Church and in their lives, but the primary responsibility for teaching them gospel principles rests on our parental shoulders. The Lord places the responsibility for helping them "come unto Christ" directly on us. Consider the words of President Harold B. Lee:

Sometimes as I go throughout the Church, I think I am seeing a man who is using his church work as a kind of escape from family responsibility. And sometimes when we've talked about whether or not he's giving attention to his family, his children and his wife, he says something like this: "Well, I'm so busy taking care of the Lord's work that I really don't have time." And I say to him, "My dear brother, the greatest of the Lord's work that you and I will ever do is the work that we do within the walls of our own home." Now don't you get any misconception about where the Lord's work starts. That's the most important of all the Lord's work. And you wives may have to remind your husbands of that occasionally. (Address to seminary and institute personnel at Brigham Young University Summer School, BYU, 8 July 1966.)

In a final blessing Lehi told the children of Laman that if they were cursed, "I leave my blessing upon you, that the cursing may be taken from you and be answered upon the heads of your parents" (2 Ne. 4:6). If our offspring have not been taught the gospel, the Lord cautions, "the sin be upon the heads of the parents" (D&C 68:25). President Spencer W. Kimball instructed the Saints in a conference in Japan, "We the parents cannot escape the responsibility that is ours of training our children" (in Japan Area Conference Report, August 1975, p. 38). This responsibility was emphasized by President David O. McKay: "These are parents who say: ÃWe will let our children grow to manhood and womanhood and choose for themselves.' In taking this attitude, parents fail in the discharging of a parental responsibility. . . . It is the responsibility of parents to teach religion to their children." (Treasures of Life [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1962], pp. 74, 75.)

The Savior quoted Malachi to the Nephites: "Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord; and he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a curse" (3 Ne. 25:5-6; see also Mal. 4:5-6). Many Saints think that this refers only to departed relatives. But President Harold B. Lee gave this interpretation:

Now keep in mind this: that when the full measure of Elijah's mission is understood, that the hearts of the children will be turned to the fathers, and the fathers to the children. It applies just as much on this side of the veil as it does on the other side of the veil. If we neglect our families here in having family home night and we fail in our responsibility here, how could we feel that we are doing our full duty in turning the hearts of our children to their fathers. . . .

. . . So, the hearts of you fathers and mothers must be turned to your children right now, if you have the true spirit of Elijah, and not think that it applies merely to those who are beyond the veil. Let your hearts be turned to your children, and teach your children; but you must do it when they are young enough to be properly schooled. If you are neglecting your family home evening, you are neglecting the beginning of the mission of Elijah just as certainly as if you were neglecting your genealogy research work. (Priesthood genealogy seminar, 1973; quoted in Leaun G. Otten and C. Max Caldwell, Sacred Truths of the D&C 2 vols. [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1982], 1:16.)

The Blessings of Teaching Children While They Are Young

Sometimes parents neglect the teaching of the gospel to their children because they feel that their children are too young to understand or that they just don't need it until they are older. Spiritually speaking, this philosophy can be fatal to a child. Prior to the age of accountability, the Lord says, "power is not given unto Satan to tempt little children" (D&C 29:47). Therefore, it is imperative that instruction in gospel principles begins at an early age, before the adversary can influence our children. In a general conference address Elder Merlin R. Lybbert of the Seventy explained the importance of teaching our children at very early ages:

This teaching is to be done before a child reaches the age of accountability and while innocent and sin-free. This is protected time for parents to teach the principles and ordinances of salvation to their children without interference from Satan. It is a time to dress them in armor in preparation for the battle against sin. When this preparation time is neglected, they are left vulnerable to the enemy. To permit a child to enter into that period of his life when he will be buffeted and tempted by the evil one, without faith in the Lord Jesus Christ and an understanding of the basic principles of the gospel, is to set him adrift in a world of wickedness.

During these formative, innocent years, a child may learn wrong behavior; but such is not the result of Satan's temptations, but comes from the wrong teachings and the bad example of others. In this context, the Savior's harsh judgment of adults who offend children is better understood, wherein he said, "It were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and he cast into the sea, than that he should offend one of these little ones" (Luke 17:2).

We offend a child by any teaching or example that leads a little one to violate a moral law, causes him to stumble or go astray, excites him to anger, creates resentment; or perhaps even leads him to become displeasing and disagreeable. (In Conference Report, April 1994, p. 41.)

President J. Reuben Clark Jr., a former member of the First Presidency, reminded Church educators that children have a much greater capacity for spiritual instruction than they are oftentimes given credit:

Our youth are not children spiritually; they are well on towards the normal spiritual maturity. . . . You do not need to disguise religious truths with a cloak of worldly things; you can bring these truths to him openly, in their natural guise. . . . There is no need for gradual approaches, . . . for coddling, for patronizing, or for any of the other childish devices used in efforts to reach those [who are] spiritually inexperienced. ("The Charted Course of the Church in Education," as quoted in Boyd K. Packer, Teach Ye Diligently [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1975], p. 317.)

President Gordon B. Hinckley explained the consequences of not teaching children in their youth:

Not long after we were married, we built our first home. . . . The first of many trees that I planted was a thornless honey locust. . . . It was so supple that Icould bend it with ease in any direction. I paid little attention to it as the years passed.

Then one winter day, . . . I chanced to look out the window at it. I noticed that it was leaning to the west, misshapen and out of balance. . . . Iwent out and braced myself against it as if to push it upright. But the trunk was now nearly a foot in diameter. . . . It seemed to say, "You can't straighten me. It's too late. I've grown this way because of your neglect, and I will not bend."

Finally in desperation I took my saw and cut off the great heavy branch on the west side. The saw left an ugly scar, more than eight inches across. . . . I had cut off the major part of the tree, leaving one branch growing skyward.

More than half a century has passed since I planted that tree. . . . The other day I looked again at the tree. It is large. Its shape is better. . . . But how serious was the trauma of its youth and how brutal the treatment I used to straighten it. . . .

When it was first planted, a piece of string would have held it in place against the forces of the wind. . . .

I have seen a similar thing, many times, in children whose lives I have observed. The parents who brought them into the world seem almost to have abdicated their responsibility. The results have been tragic. A few simple anchors would have given them the strength to withstand the forces that have shaped their lives. Now it appears it is too late. (In ConferenceReport, October 1993, p. 78.)

Children Who Go Astray

What of parents who have been obedient to the commandments and who have taught their children to do the samethose who have done everything in their power, and after all their efforts, their children have not responded to their teachings? It is to these parents that Elder Boyd K. Packer has spoken, quoting, in part, Elder Orson F. Whitney and President Brigham Young:

"The Prophet Joseph Smith declaredand he never taught a more comforting doctrinethat the eternal sealings of faithful parents and the divine promises made to them for valiant service in the Cause of Truth, would save not only themselves, but likewise their posterity. Though some of the sheep may wander, the eye of the Shepherd is upon them, and sooner or later they will feel the tentacles of Divine Providence reaching out after them and drawing them back to the fold. Either in this life or the life to come, they will return." (Orson F. Whitney, in Conference Report, April 1929, p. 110.)

. . . When parents keep the covenants they have made at the altar of the temple, their children will be forever bound to them. President Brigham Young said:

"Let the father and mother, who are members of this Church and Kingdom, take a righteous course, and strive with all their might never to do a wrong, but to do good all their lives; if they have one child or one hundred children . . . , they are bound up to their parents by an everlasting tie, and no power of earth or hell can separate them from their parents in eternity; they will return again to the fountain from whence they sprang" (Discourses of Brigham Young, sel. John A. Widtsoe [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1941], p. 208.) (In Conference Report, April 1992, pp. 94-95.)

Elder Vaughn J. Featherstone of the Seventy referred to this concept when he encouraged married couples to serve full-time missions:

There is a neednot to leave homes forever, but for a timethen return and reap the rich harvest of the faithful labor. Your children and grandchildren will be blessed. . . .

President Harold B. Lee taught the principle that only as we make ourselves totally available are we worthy disciples of Christ and obtain another promise that reaches beyond us. We worry and ache and pain over family members who have erred. The thirty-first section of the Doctrine and Covenants provides a great key in verse five:

"Therefore, thrust in your sickle with all your soul, and your sins are forgiven you, and you shall be laden with sheaves upon your back, for the la-borer is worthy of his hire. Wherefore, your family shall live." . . .

. . . The promise is sure: "Wherefore, your family shall live." Blessings will come to our wayward or wandering children, even those who are married and have children of their own. . . .

What better way have we to prepare to meet our God than to serve a mission when the autumn and winter of life is upon us? (In Conference Report, April 1992, pp. 61, 63, 64; emphasis added.)

These are powerful promises, and notice that President Packer and Elder Featherstone quote other prophets throughout their appeal to parents to stay focused on the promises of the Lord concerning wayward children.

Conclusion

The story is told of the great leader Mahatma Gandhi, who was approached by a woman who had been told by her doctor that her son should not eat sugar. "I am deeply concerned about his health," she said. "He looks up to you. If you would suggest to him to stop eating sugar, I'm confident that he would follow your advice." After pondering her request, Gandhi determined that he would attempt to help her son. He asked her to bring her son to him no sooner than two weeks. A few weeks later the mother returned with her child, and Gandhi visited privately with the son. The boy agreed to follow the words of his leader. The mother, overwhelmed by her son's decision, inquired of Gandhi why he had insisted on the two-week delay. He replied, "I needed to go two weeks without eating sugar myself." (See Al Gore, Earth in the Balance [New York: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1992], p. 14.)

As parents we must ever set the example. Good parental instruction together with a bad parental example are not compatible if the goal is to raise righteous children. The "Cat's in the Cradle" concept can be summarized by these words of unknown origin:

A careful man I want to be;

A little fellow follows me.

I do not dare to fall astray,

For fear he'll go the self-same way.

Parents have the charge to live the gospel honestly, sincerely, and openly, and to teach their children to follow their example. No matter what other talents we possess as parents, we are, most importantly, their teachers. That task cannot be delegated to others. Our children not only are ours but are the children of the God of Heaven, and his "work and [his] glory [is] to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life" of his children (Moses 1:39). And as Elder Neal A. Maxwell of the Quorum of the Twelve has explained, "Our Heavenly Father has no distracting hobbieswe are his work" (fireside, Missionary Training Center, Provo, Utah, 26 May 1987). As parents, our assignment is to go forth with "no distracting hobbies" until our family is secured and exalted in the celestial kingdom.

_____

K. Douglas Bassett was born in Gridley, California, and lived in that area until serving a full-time mission to England. He received a B.S. degree in psychology and a master's degree in youth leadership from Brigham Young University, and a Ph.D. in education from the University of New Mexico. He has been in the Church Educational System since 1979 and has taught Book of Mormon classes part-time at BYU for five years. He married Arlene Chapman in 1974. They are the parents of seven children.
