Daniel K. Judd, Douglas E. Brinley, Eternal Families ( 1996)

7 Parents: Preserve Your Children's Future

Terrance D. Olson

Parenting in a culture that embraces so many destructive attitudes and behaviors is becoming an ever greater challenge for modern fathers and mothers. Parents who grew up in a different age and time wonder what they can do to help their children live in ways that will preserve, rather than destroy, their future happiness. Principles such as freedom of conscience and freedom of worship nestled in a democratic form of government can be blessings only insofar as the beneficiaries of these principles honor the moral foundations that produced them. These underpinnings are, of course, Christ-centered ideals, such as "Love thy neighbor as thyself" (Matt. 19:19) and "Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them" (Matt. 7:12).

Our children are often attracted to philosophies that seem legitimate but actually are not in their best interests and, in the final analysis, limit their opportunities. In this chapter I present a view of how we as a nation, as a people, arrived where we are in our cultural stance and what practical steps parents can take to help their children preserve a tomorrow that will be in their own and their children's best interests.

It has been common for the older generation to complain about the up-and-coming generation. Skeptics have rebutted this attitude in at least two ways. One response has been to point out that such criticism has been consistent over the generations and is not new; it has always been so. That is, every past generation is sure that the changes they see in the current one are evidence that decadence is certain and destruction lies just ahead! The skeptics' concerns seem to be justified because civilization has not ended, leading to the observation that those past mid-life have difficulty imagining a world different from or as worthwhile as what they experienced growing up. The other response to generation-bashing is labeled just plain nostalgia, a longing for the "good ol' days," which turns out to be nothing more than sentimentalism.

Some would use a supposed teacher survey that has been circulating (and which no one has successfully documented) to illustrate how things are getting worse. Reportedly, in 1940 teachers were asked to identify the most pressing problems in their tutelage of the young. Having students who talked out of turn, chewed gum, made noise, ran in halls, cut in line, committed dress code infractions, and littered were common responses. Teachers in the 1990 survey, so the story goes, identified drug and alcohol abuse, pregnancy, suicide, rape, robbery, and assault as the most prevalent school problems. Even skeptics of this survey might admit that something has happened in our culture over the years to make it no longer family-friendly.

Parents have a vested interest in cultural changes, for it is their children who live and grow up in the changed schools and neighborhoods. Understanding how we got to this point may help us make decisions about how to handle current problems. William J. Bennett, former secretary of education and author of The Book of Virtues, suggests that "many of the most serious social and behavior problems we now face (particularly among our young) are remarkably resistant to government cures" (The Index of Leading Cultural Indicators [Washing-ton, D.C.: The Heritage Foundation, 1993], p. i). This may say more about how government operates than about how hard these problems are to solve, yet it also describes a reality that parents face in forming a community conducive to their children's progress.

Bennett also produced, under the auspices of the Heritage Foundation, what he termed "The Index of Leading Cultural Indicators." Patterned after the "Index of Leading Economic Indicators" used by the government, Bennett combined arithmetic summaries with commentary on the changes that have occurred in our culture. Data from the last three decades are presented regarding crime, prison sentences, juvenile violence, child poverty, infant mortality, teenage pregnancy, birth and abortion rates, child abuse, teen suicide, marriage and divorce rates, single-parent families, and so on. Bennett's graphs reveal an increase in most of the categories. For example, adolescent violent crime and pregnancy are up.

Bennett's "cultural indicators" are expressions of changes in societal beliefs and mores. The question might be framed, "What are some of those changes?" Bennett's own starting point of interpretation of his cultural factors includes social scientist James Q. Wilson's observation that "people, especially young people, have embraced an ethos that values self-expression over self-control." According to Bennett, pollster Daniel Yankelovich notes that our society attends less now to what our moral obligations are to others; places less value on sacrifice as a moral good; and has less belief in social conformity, respectability, and obedience to societal rules. Physical pleasure is touted as a personal right, and freedom in such matters as drug use and sexual involvement is advocated. (Ibid., p. ii.)

These indicators suggest a philosophy of individualism that takes precedence over concern for, and relationships with, others. It is a philosophy of hedonism, of making pleasure the fundamental goal or good. Personal preferences and choices are considered more fundamental, and independent of, commonalities of moral conduct or obligations to others. As Richard Weaver reminds us, ideas do have consequences (see Ideas Have Consequences [Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1948]), and the dramatic changes in the cohesiveness of society seem directly related to changes in ideas, whether unintended or deliberate.

Even when discounting both nostalgia and suspicion of natural, inevitable changes in the coming generation, however, today's parental concerns about where society is going and what the quality of life will be like for their children are valid. How can parents produce good families in a culture that is moving in directions which are opposed to or undermine the well-being of families? Is it possible to find starting points to reclaim the best of a culture and create a future that incorporates the best of the past?

Becoming Victims

Parents might begin by examining what beliefs and values contribute to the very problems they wish to avoid. For example, our culture seems to justify an attitude of victimhood, a way of explaining human action by shifting responsibility for behavior from the individual to the situation, culture, or circumstance. Even the courts occasionally seem to approve of the idea that perpetrators of crimes are themselves victims too and therefore are not responsible for their actions. Such explanations can arm youth with a rationale for being irresponsible.

Authority

Another belief under attack is that of legitimate authority. To be in charge, to expect standards, to direct the lives of others, especially children, currently are not popular ideas. Many attribute this to a cultural shift in the '60s, when disclosures of hypocrisy and deceit in high levels of government leadership led many people to lose faith in what they were told and often to give up on the legitimacy of any authority, including parental authority. This atmosphere of disgust with authority and of hopelessness regarding trust of others is an ironic reminder that people long for integrity in leadership and example while at the same time they have become suspicious of many in authority just because they are "in charge."

Latter-day Saints are no strangers to the concept of unrighteous dominion, and the Lord reminded us of the Book of Mormon principle that "when the wicked rule the people mourn" (D&C 98:9). Yet we do not abandon hope that there can be legitimate, righteous authority among men. The arm of flesh is not to be trusted in spiritual things, but we are counseled that "honest men and wise men should be sought for diligently, and good men and wise men ye should observe to uphold; otherwise whatsoever is less than these cometh of evil" (D&C 98:10). Men and women of integrity and good will can preserve the nation.

Unfortunately, the disparagement of all authority, without regard to the ethical or moral decency or example of many leaders, is often a convenient rationalization for every individual to become a law unto him- or herself. Individualismthe idea that my decisions, choices, values, and feelings are my business onlyis a notion logically linked with philosophies of victimhood and of discarding legitimate authority. If I must protect myself or react against those forces that have victimized me (and this includes denying the moral force of authorities such as parents), then the understandable, necessary, defensible thing to do is to look out for number one. Is not self-preservation a worthy and logical goal? But when this preservation requires cutting or ignoring connections with all humans on our own self-dictated terms, we must allow or even expect others to use the same approach; hence, suspicion of others and their motives follows. Unfortunately, mistrust, being personally harsh and demanding of others, cynicism, and self-centeredness then become the hallmarks of our relationships. Life is reduced to those qualities noted by Thomas Hobbes in the seventeenth century: poor, solitary, nasty, brutish, and short.

Moral Relativism in the Culture (Being "Value-Free")

Another issue parents face is the shift in moral and ethical foundations adopted and promoted by many members of the culture. In an effort to honor diversity, or perhaps in the name of tolerance, specific standards, values, and beliefs are sometimes either suspended or thought impossible to impose on everyone, especially in a public setting such as the schools. It is thought by many that we must become more objective, even "value-free" in the way we approach certain topics, and that we must not be so bound up in cultural beliefs that we harm people of other cultures. One illustration of this position is the idea that I can hold personal beliefs privately but I cannot impose them on others; thus, I must tolerate beliefs different from my own. I once thought that such a position was moral relativismwhere, a priori, every value must be granted equal moral stature. This idea of granting diversity in values looks to be tolerant and untroubling except in at least two ways. First, even this position is not value-free because it makes tolerance the sole and fundamental virtue. Those who wish to make a case against sexual relations between unmarried adolescents, for example, can be accused of being intolerant and of imposing their "antiquated" values on a modern, diverse world.

Once upon a time, public argument against premarital sex and other behaviors that are destructive of the individual and thus of the public good was considered a means of preserving society's values. In our times such arguments have been labeled intolerant. It was this issue that prompted Elder Boyd K. Packer to explain:

The word tolerance is also invoked as though it overrules everything else. Tolerance may be a virtue, but it is not the commanding one. There is a difference between what one is and what one does. What one is may deserve unlimited tolerance; what one does, only a measured amount. A virtue when pressed to the extreme may turn into a vice. Unreasonable devotion to an ideal, without considering the practical application of it, ruins the ideal itself. (In Conference Report, October 1993, p. 108; emphasis in original.)

Tolerance is a quality worthy of subscribing to, but when it is the solitary criterion for assessing the defensibility of a moral position, all other moral criteria are made illegitimate. Thus, the new public morality has become an intolerant absolutism which insists that all values be granted an equal place, without debate as to the value of granting the legitimacy of diverse positions. If the real reason for granting tolerance were to honor other cultures, the mores of those cultures ought to be examined and be central to the discussion. What is in the best interests of those cultures would become part of the public arguments, and decisions that honor the best of what we have in common across cultures and that can build a cohesive community could be identified and acted upon. Such behavior would be an example of tolerance but would be ethically grounded in criteria that attend to the best interests of individuals and cultures. To illustrate, the majority of parents in the United States do not believe that adolescent sexual activity is a good thing. But precisely because some adolescents or some parents, from whatever culture, might argue in favor of sexual access, public schools end up, in the name of tolerance, teaching youth that they must make their own decisions freely about such things once they have "the facts." If that is the direction the new public philosophy requires of us, we would be better off to tolerate silence on the matter.

Once a culture decides that no values are more valuable than any others and that no criteria exist for judging values, moral anarchy results. The philosophical seeds of immorality have been sown.

To focus on the negatives or on philosophies that might help contribute to the decline in culture is not to say that everyone believes in destructive philosophies or that all is lost. To acknowledge a brown patch in the lawn is not to give up on the green beauty of the rest of the grass, nor does it mean that we should despair. In fact, parents can do something according to their own beliefs and according to their understanding of what discolored the grass. What is destructive rather than helpful, however, is to consider the brown grass just a new way of landscaping that we must tolerate because it is not inferior to green sod.

Parental Influences

Parents must teach their children with examples from their own lives and experiences. These are starting points of action that will help preserve and prepare the next generation to survive the onslaught against values. Specifically, I am proposing that parents be examples in word and deed of how it is possible, beneficial, and correct to (1) believe in humanity's ability to act on the environment and behave responsibly, rather than simply seeing ourselves as psychological victims of circumstance; (2) honor the idea that authority and leadership are legitimate when carried out with personal integrity, morality, and a concern for others; (3) promote the idea that individuals have an inescapable moral obligation to others rather than the belief that the only criteria of action are personal, private choices based on pleasure; and (4) demonstrate that the heart of human experience is based on compassion and moral judgments about what is best for individuals, families, and the larger community, rather than discarding all criteria for judgment.

The Power of Belief and Example

How can parents who agree with what I have proposed act on the proposals? They can begin by being examples of their beliefs in an environment of love and patience. Example is still the best teacher. No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by "shoving it down their throats." Compulsion begets resistance; dictatorial action is the mother of rebellion. Thus, parental example is the most effective and fundamental way to invite and entice children to do good. This is true even when support for complementary parental teaching is missing from public schools, television, or popular music. Though the philosophy of individualism in public culture seems to undermine the legitimacy of parental authority in family relationships, obedience to correct principles can be learned.

Interestingly, suspicion of authority, which may have contributed to our cultural disintegration, can be beneficial in one backhanded way. Authoritarian parentsthose who have tried to rule by forcewill find it much more difficult to extract compliance from their children!

Forgiveness, Repentance, Imperfection, Guilt, and Example

Two areas foreign to our present cultural framework are the concepts of forgiveness and repentancetwin avenues to rebuilding relationships that have gone awry. To acknowledge one's ability to change and to communicate humbly the need to start anew are examples of acting on the environment and living responsibly. Parents who are aware of these remedies have an optimistic starting point to prepare and preserve their children whatever the past or external environment may be, and regardless of the child's age.

By offering everyday and even personal examples, parents can point out and discuss the roots of society's troubles. Elementary-age children can be taught the difference between selfishness and an interest and concern for others. When a family does, in fact, engage in being helpful to others, the demonstration becomes an even more powerful expression of the principles.

Parental forthrightness about the meaning of certain behaviors and how they square with beliefs and values is the issue. Where quarreling has been a pattern between siblings, for example, it can be made illegitimate by asking, "Darrin, how would you feel if I were to yell at you as you are yelling at Cherie?" Parents with a flair for the dramatic might even demonstrate, in caricature form, what quarreling looks like when the child is an observer instead of a participant.

Parental examples include acknowledging when their own examples have been poor ones: "Chuck, I just yelled at you to quit yelling. I'm sorry." Or, "I've been impatient with you all day instead of doing what I should have done to solve the problem. Can we start over?" Parental perfection and guilt is not the issue hereand complaining or worrying about such matters is a waste of time. Parental defining, explaining, demonstrating, and repenting are all features of example that invite the child to see the world through the parents' eyes. When that actually happens, children evaluate competing philosophies by drawing on their own experience with parents. Many middle and high school students, for example, question authority as well as injustice. They often are quick to note hypocrisy or phoniness. On the other hand, they can be seduced by the world's philosophies if parents do not provide an alternative to those seductions through a better example. In cases where parental behavior and example have been poor, I know of no solution to restoring relationships without repentance and forgiveness.

When I propose example as a powerful starting point of influence with children, some will discount such counsel as unrealistic. I am reminded by them that nobody is perfect, especially not themselves, and they are not going to feel guilty about their children going astray. Such parents are bad examples, but not for the reasons they think. Their attitude reveals at least two of the philosophies I am attempting to dismantle here. First, they see themselves as victims of "imperfection," which is a "perfect" rationalization for not giving their best. Second, a common behavior of parents who are frustrated with their children is to feel guilty and moan about their guilt. I have found that sorrow for the waywardness of children is a compassionate response; personal guilt is a self-centered one. Whether parents have done their best in the past or not may be debatable, but to focus on that issue competes with what can be done now in the present moment. Either we use the present moment to give our best, or we will use the present moment to despair over what we have been unable or unwilling to do in the past. The first response places a love for our children at the center; the second response places ourselves in the center, and becomes a rationalization in the present moment for not doing what needs to be done now. Again, repentance and forgiveness must be taken seriously if parent-child problems are to be solved and if influence across generations is to be a blessing.

One of the reasons I feel strongly that it is never too late for parents or children to repent and forgive each other is because of an experience I had with a student years ago. Jerry came to Brigham Young University with service in Vietnam behind him. His mother had died when he was seven. In his youth he had run away from a father he thought harsh and demanding. Ironically, his idea of how to escape from his father's authoritarian approach had been to join the Marines. Now at the university, he carried baggage from the past which made his present a very wearisome and troubled time. He was nervous around women. He was sensitive against authority, in part, as he described it, because of the "unrighteous dominion" of his father, which was repeated among military leaders in Vietnam. He could not concentrate on his studies, and he found himself in emotional wars with everyone from his home teaching supervisor to his chemistry teacher.

He came to my office to complain of the sins of others against him. I listened too long. My suggestion sounded ridiculous to him: "Jerry, your troubles will disappear when you forgive your father." He did not see the relationship between his current miseries and his attitude toward his father. Moreover, he challenged me, almost triumphantly: "How am I supposed to do that, Brother Olson? My father died while I was in Vietnam." I responded that I thought any work we did on our own hard-heartedness would have an effect across the veil. He went from incredulous to furious: "My hard-heartedness? Haven't you been listening to what I have been saying? Whose side are you on?" I wish now I had said, as Abraham Lincoln once did, "The Lord's side," but I was not that adept or swift of word. I did say, "You are behaving as if there were a chain shackled to your foot, the other end of which is wrapped around your father's headstone somewhere in California. You are one of the few people I have met whose life is being controlled from beyond the grave. As long as you can blame your distress on your father, you don't have to take any responsibility in the present moment." Then, in what I would later view for a time to be an exercise in bad taste, I added, "Wouldn't it be easier for you to just wear a sign around your neck with the printed message ÃIt is all my father's fault'?"

He stood up to storm out of the room, first pausing to say, "I thought you might be of some help." I said, "I believe you can help yourself. You can't decide what others are going to do, but you can decide what you are going to do. Explore the idea of forgiving your father." He didn't leave, he fled.

He returned three months later, wearing a different countenance. Before he could say anything, I asked him what had happened. He said that two nights before, he had found himself on his knees, which surprised him, given how he had been feeling. It came into his mind to say, Heavenly Father, is there a way to have someone visit my father in the spirit world and see if he is willing to forgive me for the attitude I've held against him? He felt the warmth and peace that so many who give up hard-heartedness have experienced. He felt immediately that he should do the temple work for his father which he had been avoiding.

His answer to prayer also taught me that I didn't have quite the same answer the Lord had for him. I had counseled him to forgive; the Lord counseled him to seek forgiveness. It costs parents nothing to worry first about what they have done that might have become a stumbling block to others. To seek forgiveness dissolves most of the reasons we think we have for needing to forgive others. In any event, the Lord will forgive whom he will forgive, but it is required of us to forgive all. When we seek forgiveness from others, we are giving them a chance to be blessed by the Lord, and the humility required for us to do such a thing is probably evidence that we are no longer refusing to forgive. I affirm: parents' call to children as to how they are to be in the world is best when founded on example.

When living as an example, a parent can also instruct by precept. Using examples from literature, television, or the newspaper, parents can help children examine events for moral meaning. Does the story of the thief at city hall contain any quotes that reveal a belief in victimhooda belief that the sin was really not the thief's fault? What does the television teach about authority? How is the moral meaning of events ignored, treated trivially, or undermined? How is a heroine or hero who has behaved irresponsibly excused for that behavior? What rationalizations are accepted as legitimate instead of being revealed as excuses? What shows do teach moral responsibility and accountability? Which characters portray the value of commitment to others and in accordance with correct principles? In the last drama the family watched, who behaved in humility? What principles are taught in literature that square with truths found in the scriptures?

When parents know what meanings to look for, and teach their children to assess those meanings, they have provided their children with a scaffolding for making sense out of a world which presents a variety of moral possibilities. The ability to see telestial or terrestrial philosophies for what they are, to document them with the scriptures, and to find examples in everyday life can help children measure meaning in ways that give them anchors of understanding. Celestial possibilities become understandable and realistic. Jerry, the Vietnam veteran, had his world change when he changed his heart. He saw his father's sins differentlycompassionatelyand felt a call to temple service. Hopefully, parents who examine the meanings of everyday life and teach their children what to look for and how to see are likely to live more pure lives and to be purified by the questions and challenges posed by their children.

We reclaim a culture and create a future when we teach our children in love and example about the meaning of moral, responsible living. We also bless our children when we talk about the spiritual and practical value of citizenship. In addition to being examples within our homes, we must be more involved in public, community arenas of service where we give voice to responsibility, respect for proper authority, concern for the best interests of others, and righteous, compassionate judgments of what directions our community ought to move in order to promote the best interests of the next generation. Perhaps the most fundamental truth along these lines, which our children deserve to know, is that being a righteous person is a blessing to the community, the public good, and the nation. It is Moroni's reminder as he recounts the plight of the Jaredites:

This is a choice land, and whatsoever nation shall possess it shall be free from bondage, and from captivity, and from all other nations under heaven, if they will but serve the God of the land, who is Jesus Christ. (Ether 2:12).

_____

Terrance D. Olson is a former chair of the Department of Family Sciences at Brigham Young University. He served as an editor of the Encyclopedia of Mormonism. He has served on national committees addressing adolescent pregnancy and issues of character and citizenship in family life education. He received a Ph.D. in marriage and family living from Florida State University, and is the author of numerous articles for professional journals. He has taught at the University of New Mexico in Albuquerque. In the Church he has been a Cubmaster, high councilor, bishop, and stake president. He and his wife, Karen, have six children.
