Daniel K. Judd, Douglas E. Brinley, Eternal Families ( 1996)

8 Parents Kind and Dear

S. Brett Savage

I had just begun writing the outline for this chapter when my four-year-old daughter, Haley, appeared at the door of my home office. I was pondering what title would be most appropriate and would best describe the feelings and thoughts I had outlined. She had been singing her favorite Primary song, "I Am a Child of God." I had been listening with one ear from inside the closed doors of my office. As Haley opened the door, the phrase "with parents kind and dear" floated out from her angelic soul. I grabbed her up into my arms and we both squeezed, kissed, and tickled each other till we were filled with delight. I was so moved in that moment by her sweet gift of love to me, I knew the title of this chapter had to be "Parents Kind and Dear." I told her, "Haley, baby girl, you came in at just the right time, and your beautiful song was the answer to Daddy's prayer." She replied, in the pure innocence of her guileless youth, "I know. That's why you need me in this family."

After she left the office, I was also moved in another way, panged this time by a distressing question. I asked myself, Have I been a kind and dear parent to this sweet little soul? Does little Haley see me as this type of parentkind to her and dear to her heart? I did not ask her right then, for my own heart seemed to answer. The answer was no, not all the time. I was troubled again by memories of the many times when I had not been the kind of parent my Father in Heaven would have me be for this daughter of his. In the middle of this experience I began to sense, along with this healthy twinge of parental shame, a gentle invitation by the Spirit of the Lord. His Spirit comforted my whole being, replaced my shame with peace, and filled my heart with love and thanksgiving for our little daughter.

This experience invited me to once more rededicate myself to living righteously as a husband and parent. It also confirmed to my heart what a friend, Chris Wallace, had taught me once. Said he, "The outcome of parenting is not for the child, it's for the parent. The issue is not so much whether my children turn out right; instead, it's whether my heart is right with my children." I did not understand just what he meant when he first said this to me, but I believe I have come to an understanding of it now, several years and six children later.

I would like to build on this thoughtthat the measure of a successful parent rests first and fundamentally with how the parent turns out, not necessarily with how the children turn out. I'm not saying that we shouldn't be concerned about what our daughters and sons become as they grow up. Indeed, caring about our children, teaching, loving, directing, and guiding them is of the utmost importance. What I am saying is, we must be living our adult lives in such a way that we are the kind of parents who invite our children to become disciples of the truth, for we teach by example as well as by precept. The most powerful and essential example we will ever give to our children comes from the daily conversations, actions, feelings, and relationships we have with them. Put another way, our children will come to know the Lord's teachings more fundamentally by watching us live our lives with them in everyday settings than by any other means. This is good news, for it means we can prepare our children for the challenges of their future lives, marriages, and families by giving them a "firm foundation" in our homes as they grow up. Our everyday example will set the stage so they can see how to repent, forgive, love others, obey the commandments, and heal problems when they are parents themselves. In this way, many future generations can be blessed and our righteousness can be visited upon our children and even our children's children (see D&C 98:23-30).

Parents Responsibility to Love First

President Joseph F. Smith taught:

If you wish your children to be taught in the principles of the gospel, if you wish them to love the truth and understand it, if you wish them to be obedient to and united with you, love them! and prove to them that you do love them by your every word or act to them. . . . When you speak or talk to them, do it not in anger, do it not harshly, in a condemning spirit. Speak to them kindly; get them down and weep with them if necessary and get them to shed tears with you if possible. Soften their hearts; get them to feel tenderly toward you. Use no lash and no violence, . . . approach them with reason, with persuasion and love unfeigned. With these means, if you cannot gain your boys and your girls . . . there will be no means left in the world by which you can win them to yourselves. But, get them to love the gospel as you love it, to love one another as you love them; to love their parents as the parents love the children. You can't do it any other way. You can't do it by unkindness; you cannot do it by driving; our children are like we are; we couldn't be driven; we can't be driven now. . . .

This is not the way that God intended, in the beginning, to deal with his childrenby force. It is all free love, free grace. . . .

You can't force your boys, nor your girls into heaven. You may force them to hell, by using harsh mean in the efforts to make them good, when you yourselves are not as good as you should be. . . . You can only correct your children by love, in kindness, by love unfeigned, by persuasion, and reason. (Gospel Doctrine [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1939], pp. 316-17.)

This sweet and enlightening counsel from President Smith invites parents to live their lives as models of the Lord's love and principles. The responsibility of parents is to create a marriage and home atmosphere where love for one another is the foundation for teaching, inviting, preventing and solving problems, and reclaiming wayward or lost children if the need arises. In an era and culture bent on teaching the world's false notion of loving one's self, it is refreshing and consoling to hear prophetic doctrine spoken in clarity regarding the Lord's view of loving. (See A. Scott Loveless, "What in the World Is Love?" This People, December 1994, pp. 41-51.) President Harold B. Lee counseled parents similarly: "An author once said, ÃThe most important thing a father can do for his children is to love their mother.' And I would add to that, ÃA woman happy with her husband is better for her children than a hundred books on child welfare.'" (In Speeches of the Year [Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1973], p. 92.)

I believe that this prophetic counsel means that an atmosphere of love in our marriages provides a faithful family context within which our children will grow and be nurturedlike planting a seed in good fertile soil and then nourishing it as it grows. It will then be a matter of course, a natural occurrence, that our children will love, listen, and learn within this loving parental atmosphere. This atmosphere may not be a perfect setting all the time, but it need not be. What our children need is not perfect parents but loving, honest ones; parents who, by their daily living, teach lessons of love, forgiveness, righteousness, and patience. In homes where parents "love one another" (John 13:34), correct principles become daily practices. In their relationships with each other, they are true disciples or doers of righteousness (John 7:17). The scriptures put it this way: "But be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves" (James 1:22). By our every thought, word, and deed, we should witness to all that we are living proof of correct principles, not just people who have heard about or believe in principles (see Mosiah 18:7-10).

Correct principles, then, are not just words, phrases, or mental ideas we think about or believe in, but instead are descriptions of truthful ways of living in the world. The scriptures teach: "Then said Jesus to those Jews which believed on him, If ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed; and ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free" (John 8:31-32). To be a disciple means to be a follower or doer, not just a believer. Principles, described in the above scripture as the "word," are what truthful, loving living should be based upon; they should not be just mental concepts in our minds. Jesus was asking his disciples to both believe and live the words or principles he taught them. He had already set the perfect example by living them himself. He said, "When ye have lifted up the Son of man, then shall ye know that I am he, and that I do nothing of myself; but as my Father hath taught me. . . . For I do always those things that please him." (John 8:28-29.)

The example of the Savior can and should be emulated by parents, for we have been commanded to bring up our (and his) children in "light and truth" (D&C 93:40) and to teach them correct principles. We do this best when we are living examples of those principles we wish to teach our children.

Too often, however, correct principles are used by parents as rationales to push their views upon their children. They do this by driving or forcing the correctness of what they think or want upon their children. But principles cannot be forcefully imposed. Though as parents we sometimes try to teach correct principles by coercive edict, demanding obedience from a position of parental authority or power in order to get our children to behave, it is also true that no principleeven a gospel principlecan be correctly taught using coercive means, no matter how justified or righteous the outcome may appear to us. The Lord warned: "Verily I say unto you, he that is ordained of me and sent forth to preach the word of truth by the Comforter, in the Spirit of truth, doth he preach it by the Spirit of truth or some other way? And if it be by some other way it is not of God. And again, he that receiveth the word of truth, doth he receive it by the Spirit of truth or some other way? If it be some other way it is not of God." (D&C 50:17-20.)

A woman who had struggled for years in her marriage and with her wayward children once said to me: "My husband and children have not rebelled against the good things I have tried to make them do, they have rebelled against me trying so hard to make them do it. I felt it was my job, my obligation as a wife and mother, to make them turn out right, while all the time my own heart was not right. I did not lovingly teach, invite, or persuade them; I pushed them to do these things very often so that I would look like a good mother in the eyes of my friends."

The following story from a rebellious daughter illustrates what often occurs when one is on the receiving end of parental pushinesswhen parents shove their children towards good. I do not suggest by this story that this girl's parents were solely responsible for their daughter's actions; indeed, she took great offense and made a considerable contribution to the problems in her home by becoming controlling in her own way. Consider her story:

For years I haven't read my scriptures or said my prayers, and if I did happen to go to church I found it the biggest waste of time. I hated church, hated my parents, my sister, and I think I even hated God. I had hatred pouring from every pore . . . especially if it had anything at all to do with church.

I think most of the problems started as I was entering high school. I wanted to date, party, hang out with friendsyou know, do all the things teenagers do at the time. I felt that no one had the right to tell me what to do or when to do it. Of course, my parents, being the manipulative people they are, wouldn't let me date before I was sixteen, and gave me the unreasonable hour of 11:30 p.m. as my curfew. I always had to tell them where I was going, what I was doing, and who I was with. Then came the matter of church. It took up too much of my timeseminary in the morning, family home evening, various youth activities, three hours of church on Sundayall of which I had no choice but to do. I resented my parents and everyone at church for insisting that I live my life the way they wanted.

As time went on, things only got worse. I refused to acknowledge my family, refused to go to seminary, church activities, even eat dinner with them. The more they tried to make me do things, the harder I rebelled. I wouldn't pray no matter who asked me, whether it was our home teachers or my Sunday School teacher. I began to live only for my friends; they didn't try to force me to do anything.

I was still going to church on Sunday, and it was probably the worst day of the week for my parents. I knew they dreaded Sunday mornings when they had to fight me to go to church. I made their lives a living hell, and Sundays twice as bad. I took a lot of pleasure in this. At church I challenged anything anyone taught or said. I felt that all the members were brainwashed, and I couldn't believe anyone could believe such nonsense. As soon as I got home from church, I immediately took off with my friends, went into the city, went drinking, and did anything we weren't supposed to do.

So far it may sound like the typical controlling parents / rebellious teenager story, but things only got worse. In fact, it got so bad that I wouldn't even allow a set of scriptures in my room. If I saw any lying around the house, I'd either chuck them out the door or hide them where no one could find them. My life just got worse and worse. I had problems I felt no one would understand because they were too tied up in the Church. It was all my parents' fault for being members. When blaming my parents wasn't enough, I began to blame my grandparents. If they hadn't raised my dad in the Church, I wouldn't have all these problems. Now my hate for them also began to grow.

One Sunday as I was reluctantly sitting in Sunday School (my dad would pace out in the halls and would every so often crack the door to check and see if I was still in class), the teacher made some comment that really offended me. To this day I can't remember exactly what it was that he said, but I remember the anger I felt. I stormed out of the room, and that was the last time I ever went to church. I remember storming out of the building and ignoring my dad calling my name, threatening me, and demanding that I get back to class. I ran for miles, furious that I was even associated with that church. No longer was I blaming my parents and grandparents now, but I began to blame God. He was the one who started this whole dumb thing of religion, and of course he made my family believe that the stupid church we belonged to was true. He was the one to blame for my miserable life. He was the one who caused all my problems and was the one I hated with all my soul. I never wanted to hear the word God again. That was what God had become to mea word. A word that I hated more than anything.

This scenario is too commonparents trying to coerce goodness from their children and feeling righteous, morally justified, even morally superior in doing it. The result of this parental provocation is often an open rebellion or perhaps malicious compliance from their children; both are forms of resistance and neither is a desirable behavior. Parental control most often elicits some form of resistance in children. Our use of force provokes them to shy away from doing the good things we would want them to do and becoming the responsible adults we want them to become. In the earlier quote by President Joseph F. Smith, this parental counsel was given with regard to teaching or disciplining children: "You cannot do it by driving. . . . This is not the way that God intended, in the beginning, to deal with his children by force." (Gospel Doctrine, pp. 316-17.)

If forcing principles upon others is not the way of God, whose way is it? To force a righteous outcome was Satan's unrighteous and ineffectual alternative from the beginning. His plan was supposed to bring us all back to exaltation in the Father's presence, but with this spin: he was going to do it by force, removing our agency, and ultimately for his own glory, not the Father's (see Moses 4:1). To try to force any principle, particularly a righteous principle, on our children is not to be a parent "kind and dear" but a parent mean and distant. To do this is to be an unrighteous parent who is not following the Savior's plan to honor others' agency and invite them to live righteously "by persuasion . . . and by love unfeigned" (D&C 121:41; see also Loveless, "What in the World Is Love?" pp. 41-51). We may also be guilty of seeking our own glory when our attempts to control our children are motivated by how we might be judged by others. If this is the case, our concern turns away from our children towards ourselvesand now this self-concern becomes manipulative. Now we are not only trying to control our children but also trying to control how others see us as parents. We are fearful that our children's bad behavior will be a bad reflection on us (as many parents have admitted to me). This anxiety removes us even further from appropriate relationships with our children and the positive influence we could have, were we genuinely and lovingly concerned for them. This is how parental control makes family problems worse instead of solving them.

To force principles, rules, or parental guidelines upon our children is invariably to do so in an accusing manner. The attitude in our heart says to others, "You're the problem," "I'm the boss here, and I have the authority to fix you," or "as long as you live under my roof you'll do as I say." This kind of accusatory authority is what the Lord calls "unrighteous dominion" (D&C 121:39). For "when we undertake . . . to exercise control or dominion or compulsion upon the souls of the children [especially our children] of men, in any degree of unrighteousness, behold, the heavens withdraw themselves; the Spirit of the Lord is grieved; and when it is withdrawn, Amen to the priesthood or the authority of that man" (D&C 121:37). No wonder President Smith said a parent can't be effective through unkindness, anger, violence, or driving.

Since accusing attitudes tend to provoke resistance, it is not so much a matter of what we are doing as parents but how we are doing it. The "how" includes the "what" but also involves the condition of our hearts as we do it.1 For example, if we are angry or contentious toward our children, our hearts are impure and accusing, and the meaning of what we are doing will be determined and communicated by the attitude of our hearts. The Lord said, "Of the abundance of the heart his mouth speaketh" (Luke 6:45). In other words, the attitude of our blaming hearts will be an inseparable part of any principle we are trying to teach and will ultimately undermine the righteousness of any teaching endeavor. Our blaming, controlling attitudes always get communicated no matter how skillful we might become at trying to cover our frustration, anger, or impatience. With hearts hardened in this way, we cannot help but exercise dominion and compulsion upon our children, and they will feel they are being accused and will likely defend themselves or cower against our unloving denunciation upon them. Joseph Smith gave counsel that I believe is as applicable to mothers and fathers as it is to priesthood holders: "We have learned by sad experience that it is the nature and disposition of almost all men, as soon as they get a little authority, as they suppose, they will immediately begin to exercise unrighteous dominion" (D&C 121:39). Any attempt to force righteous principles, rules, or consequences upon others is always unrighteous dominion. When our hearts are angry, forceful, and accusing, the meaning or intent of what we are doing is seen by our children as unloving and unrighteous. There is a simple reason for thiswhen our hearts are accusing and forceful, we are unloving and unrighteous.

So What's a Parent to Do?

Should parents give up on expectations, rules, consequences, discipline, and the teaching of their children? No! Parents are to give up on trying to force these things upon their children. Elder Marion D. Hanks taught:

If we do not really love and really believe in free agency, we may be inclined to impose our will on others for what we think is their best good. If we love enough, we will not do that, even at the risk of failure. Instruction and rules and training and discipline are essential, of course. From our Father's example of godly love and patience, we should be motivated to stretch to any lengths to teach, to persuade, to encourage, to help. But in matters of conscience and faith, if we truly love we will never seek to impose our will and deprive others of their agency. That is, after all, Satan's way. (In Conference Report, October 1983, pp. 30-31.)

It might help to remember that the premise of this chapter is that parenting is primarily for parents. The way in which we as parents are living, choosing, loving, and responding to the Spirit of the Lord is crucial in our relationships with our children. We need to be living examples of correct principles and to be parents who "truly love" as Elder Hanks suggests. Again, the teachings from the Doctrine and Covenants are helpful, not only for priesthood bearers but for parents:

No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the priesthood, only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned;

By kindness, and pure knowledge, which shall greatly enlarge the soul without hypocrisy, and without guile

Reproving betimes with sharpness, when moved upon by the Holy Ghost; and then showing forth afterwards an increase of love toward him whom thou hast reproved. . . .

Let thy bowels also be full of charity towards all men, and to the household of faith, and let virtue garnish thy thoughts unceasingly; then shall thy confidence wax strong in the presence of God; and the doctrine of the priesthood shall distil upon thy soul as the dews from heaven.

The Holy Ghost shall be thy constant companion, and thy scepter an unchanging scepter of righteousness and truth; and thy dominion shall be an everlasting dominion, and without compulsory means it shall flow unto thee forever and ever. (D&C 121:41-43; 45-46.)

Paradoxically, if we are to have "power or influence" with others, and I think particularly with our children, we should seek to not force our power at all but instead to influence "only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned; by kindness, and pure knowledge, which shall greatly enlarge the soul without [parental] hypocrisy, and without [parental] guile." With hearts in this loving condition, the teaching, correction, or discipline of our children will be free of unkindness, violence, harshness, blame, or bitterness. If we are moved upon by the Holy Ghost to["[reprove] betimes with sharpness," our hearts are filled with love and concern, not angry, contentious animosity, for contention and unrighteous anger is of the devil (see 3 Ne. 11:29-30; D&C 10:62-70; see also S. Brett Savage, "True Doctrine as Marital Therapy," in Douglas E. Brinley and Daniel K Judd, eds., Eternal Companions [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1995], pp. 151-76). I have personally come to believe that "reproving betimes with sharpness" doesn't mean, as we often suggest in discussions when we are looking to justify our contentious actions, "yelling with demanding loudness when moved upon by anger." With the Holy Ghost moving upon us in these times we would not be angry, accusing, demanding, pushy, forceful, seeking dominion or control; but we would be enjoying the "fruits of the Spirit," teaching with love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance, not provoking one another (see Gal. 5:22-26). Said President Brigham Young: "Now I charge you again, and I charge myself not to get angry. Never let anger arise in your hearts. No, Brigham, never let anger arise in your heart, never, never! Although you may be called upon to chastise and to speak to the people sharply, do not let anger arise in you, no, never!" (In Journal of Discourses 14:156.) President Young also taught:

In all our daily pursuits in life, of whatever nature and kind, Latter-day Saints, and especially those who hold important positions in the kingdom of God, should maintain a uniform and even temper, both when at home and when abroad. They should not suffer reverses and unpleasant circumstances to sour their natures and render them fretful and unsociable at home, speaking words full of bitterness and biting acrimony to their wives and children, creating gloom and sorrow in their habitations, making themselves feared rather than loved by their families. Anger should never be permitted to rise in our bosoms, and words suggested by angry feelings should never be permitted to pass our lips. (In Journal of Discourses 11:136.)

Parents Repent and Change First

'Twas a sheep, not a lamb, that strayed away

In the parable Jesus told,

A grown-up sheep that had gone astray

From the ninety and nine in the fold.

(Author unknown.)

The responsibility of righteous parents to first set an example for their children corresponds with the teachings and example of the Savior. Jesus taught, "Come, follow me" and "Do the things ye have seen me do" (Luke 18:22; 2 Ne. 31:12, 17). He asks the question "What manner of men ought ye to be?" and then answers, "Even as I am" (3 Ne. 27:27). He lovingly commanded us to follow his example and "Love one another" as he loves us (John 13:34). Having set a righteous example first, he could then lovingly persuade us to keep the commandments (see 1 Jn. 5:3).

Parents daily set examples for their children one way or another, for better or worse. Our children see us act, speak, laugh, choose, feel, sin, repent or not repent, and live our daily lives with them. As a result, parents may need to do some repenting and changing of their own before they can ask their children to do so. Elder Boyd K. Packer has counseled parents along these lines:

I speak to the parents of wayward and lost children. . . .

Even parents with the best intentionssome who have really triednow know . . . heartache. Many parents have tried in every way to protect their childrenonly now to find they are losing one. . . .

Parents, can we first consider the most painful part of your problem? If you want to reclaim your son or daughter, why don't you leave off trying to alter your child just for a little while and concentrate on yourself. The changes must begin with you, not with your children.

You can't continue to do what you have been doing (even though you thought it was right) and expect to unproduce some behavior in your child, when your conduct was one of the things that produced it.

There! It's been said! After all the evading, all the concern for wayward children. After all the blaming of others, the care to be gentle with parents. It's out! It's you, not the child, who needs immediate attention.

Now, parents, there is substantial help for you if you will accept it. I add with emphasis that the help we propose is not easy, for the measures are equal to the seriousness of your problem. There is no patent medicine to effect an immediate cure.

And parents, if you seek for a cure that ignores faith and religious doctrine, you look for a cure where it never will be found. When we talk of religious principles and doctrines and quote scripture, interesting, isn't it, how many don't feel comfortable with talk like that? But when we talk about your problems with your family and offer a solution, then your interest is intense.

Know that you can't talk about one without talking about the other and expect to solve your problems. Once parents know that there is a God and that we are His children, they can face problems like this and win.

If you are helpless, He is not.

If you are lost, He is not.

If you don't know what to do next, He knows.

It would take a miracle, you say? Well, if it takes a miracle, why not. ("That All May Be Edified" [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982], pp. 137, 139.)

The Lord similarly taught in the Sermon on the Mount that if we are to be effective in helping others remove or overcome sin from their lives, we must first be on the path to removing our own sins. I believe that this can be applied to parents and Church leaders. The Lord said: "And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye, but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye? Or how wilt thou say to thy brother, Let me pull out the mote out of thine eye; and, behold, a beam is in thine own eye? Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye; and then shalt thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brother's eye." (Matt. 7:3-5.)

As parents, if we are to "see clearly" the motes in our children's eyes, our eyes and our hearts must be seeking repentance first. This means we must be on a course in pursuit of eternal life by loving others and keeping the commandments. This task is not grievous or too difficult for us to accomplish. The following story is an example of how one father repented of his offense against his son, had the beam removed from his own eye first, and saw clearly what to say, feel, and do for his son and wife:

It was BYU homecoming weekend. Schedules were tight with the Arbinger seminar on relationships Friday night and all day Saturday, homecoming activities Saturday night, and a trip to Salt Lake to hear our daughter and son-in-law speak in church. I had just flown in from California as I do every Friday (being a California commuter from our Utah home). We had just returned from the Saturday night BYU homecoming entertainment, part of which I slept through. I was extremely tired and thought I might be coming down with some ailment, as my body was starting to ache and all I really wanted was to see my eyelids close as I drifted off to sleep. It was under these expectations that I learned that my ten-year-old son has a project due first thing Monday morning and nothing had been doneno work, no thought, and no supplies. My wife was under pressure to finish a graduate paper in nursing, so I knew the task of helping my son fell directly on me.

Though in my heart I did feel to help my son, I immediately pushed the feeling aside and said in my mind, I don't want this assignment. I began to fuss and said, "It's nearly ten o'clock on Saturday night; this is no time to start a project of this kind. This is pure insanity." I stormed out of the kitchen into the bedroom, leaving my son and wife with coldness, tension, and guilty feelings.

As I lay on my bed reviewing the events of the last few minutes, my sin, my offense against my son, became all too clear. I began to blame my son for putting off his project (and to blame my wife for letting this happen)no materials, no plans, no supplies and no warning. After all, I thought, I'm only here for two days. Why do I have to spend my time designing, cutting, and pasting a colonial house together?

At that moment of offense, I saw my "beam," and I chose to get out of the anger, blame, and hard feelings. I prayerfully searched my heart for repentance and for the right spirit to return. It came and I knew just what to do.

With love in my heart, my son and I commenced "our" project. He was delighted with my help and grateful to be rescued. We made rapid progress, and as he saw the house actually coming together he would periodically give me a hug around the neck and say, "Isn't this neat?" After about an hour, my wife came into the kitchen and made us some popcorn and iced us some orange juice, all of which provided the final touch to a wonderful experience. The experience was so sweet and fulfilling and ideal that it seemed almost fictional to me.

During the several hours that it took us to complete this project, I now and again wanted to remind my son, in a critical way, that he should not put things off and wait until the last minute. But I resisted this second offensive inclination as each time I remembered a statement by Elder F. Enzio Busche: "When we criticize people, their conscience will console them; when we love them, their conscience will indict them" (as quoted in C. Terry Warner, "Bonds of Anguish, Bonds of Love" [unpublished manuscript, 1992]). The project was completed with a great deal of satisfaction and delight. Because my wife had several hours yet to go on her paper, I decided to sleep in my son's room. As I knelt down to say my prayers, he was immediately by my side. After our prayers, he said, "You know, Papa, I really shouldn't wait so late to start big projects. It would be much better if I were to do a little bit each day." As I climbed into bed, tears of joy flowed freely as I reflected on how close I had come, through taking offense at my son, to have missed the entire experience and how grateful I was to have had such an "on-point" experience confirming principles I had come to know are true.

I am very often approached by troubled parents and asked the question "What do I do when my child acts so rebellious, insensitive, or disobedient?" I am reluctant to give any direct answer, because I almost never know what would be right for them and because what-ever advice I might give could be acted upon in an unrighteous way. I usually try to tell a story like the one above, pose a question, or teach a correct principle of the gospel to invite their hearts to be right first before they do anything.

For example, a single mother once told me she was just plain "sick and tired" of her two-year-old pulling all the nice books off the shelves in the living room. She asked me in total exasperation, "What's a mother to do with a child like that? He's just a typical, destructive two-year-old who has no appreciation for my feelings." In her frustrated and accusing request, she had essentially asked me for a behavioral recipe, a parental formula, some technique she might employ to get her little son to be different. She was quite dismayed with my answer, as I suggested she was the one who needed to be different for her sonthat her heart would have to be loving toward him first before he would respond appropriately. I asked her a few questions about her situation, reassured her, and then gave her my answer in the form of a question she was to pose to herself the next time a problem arose. I said, "The next time he starts to pull down the books or do some other naughty thing, stop for just a moment. Don't get angry or start blaming him for ruining your day; just ask yourself, "Of all the things I could do right now, what would be the right thingwhat would love for him require in this very moment?"2 She looked very puzzled, even put off by my suggestion. I added, "I'm asking you simply to crawl into his world and be with him in the moment, lovingly. Then you will know by the Spirit of the Lord what to do." She agreed, with some skepticism, to try this and to call me later to report on her experience.

A few weeks passed, and one day I got a call from this single mom. She told me:

Nothing short of a miracle has occurred between me and my little boy. Soon after we talked he was at it again, this time pulling out all the pots and pans from the cupboards. I was just about to blow up at him, when I remembered to stop, crawl into his world, and do the loving, right thing. It took a moment for the right thing to come into my heart, but even before I knew in my mind what to do, I was on the floor playing with him. He was as surprised as I was to see me down on the floor playfully tapping pans with a wooden spoon. Only a few delightful minutes went by and he began putting things away. Working together, we had everything back in no time. It was fun. As amazing as this was to me, what happened next was the real miracle.

Usually when I'm home with him he fusses most of the time, pulling on my pant leg, whining, constantly calling, "See me, Mom; look at me; look, Mom, here." Well, regardless of how busy I am now, he no longer whines, pulls, and tugs at me but instead brushes gently up against me as we are in the house together. I have stopped working when it is the "right thing" to play, read a little book, wrestle, or just hug him. This happens often now but never takes very long. However, in the long run he and I are much happier together, frustration is at an all time low, and he doesn't mess up the house like he used to. By the way, he's not a disrespectful, messy, unappreciative two-year-old either, he's just an innocent little child who needs a mother to love him without anger or blame.

Parents repenting or changing first means they give their children parents who have repented of contentious feelings, accusing attitudes, and controlling behaviors. In other words, when we repent and the Lord removes the beam from our eyes first, we give our children a new and loving parent to respond towe give them an adult heart that respects them and grants that they are children of a loving Father in Heaven (see Warner, "Bonds of Anguish, Bonds of Love"). We see them, as Elder Hanks commented earlier, as having agencyan ability to be sensitive to the Spirit of the Lord and to choose whether to follow or go against what they know is right. We also see the personality and character of our children differently, as did the mother in the previous story. We can now see the truth about them. Where once we may have seen them as uncaring, stupid, or malicious, we now might see them struggling in their sins and trying to get out, calling for help, hurting and not knowing why. Now that our hearts are no longer hardened with accusations against our children, we feel to help them with their struggles and wrong choices rather than punitively disciplining them. This newness of spirit is a love and concern that is inviting and persuasive instead of repressive and provoking. Our intent is not to force our kids to be good but instead to entice, hope, persuade, grow, and, as Joseph Smith said, to lovingly teach them correct principles and let them govern themselves (see quotation in Journal of Discourses 10:57-58).

This does not mean parents abandon rules or consequences in their homes, for love is never indulgence. It means that rules and consequences are worked out mutually between parents and children without anger, harshness, violence, retaliation, or manipulation. When parental hearts are loving instead of accusing, they see their children as partners in the process of finding solutions to problem situations. Children can be encouraged to offer recommendations as to what will be most helpful for them. Far from being too immature or incapable of offering wise counsel, children, even very young ones, often come up with the most guileless and simple advicecounsel that actually addresses the real problem as they see it. Parents can then follow, add to, and help direct their children's suggestions and can work at joint solutions together without demanding, cajoling, or forcing the issues. If parents have consistently taught and set an example of correct principles with their children, this collaborative process of finding real solutions that address the real problems comes intuitively and joyfully. Even when correction is necessary, it is often a playful moment between parent and child so that fear or viciousness is absent. Children and parents are then sensitive to one another's needs, listen to each other carefully, and are more willing to try something new.

If parents do not have a history of loving, teaching relationships with their children, it is never too late to start. A father who came to me for consultation concerning his troubled family situation wept as he recounted this story to me:

I think I have messed up with my children so badly over the years I don't even know where to start the healingI don't even know what to say to them anymore. I have been so controlling over the years, demanding that they give me the detailed results I outlined, that I think they won't listen to me even if I try. They both have become so belligerent and hypersensitive to anything I say to them that I'm afraid it's too late for me.

Well, he did try by simply going to his two teenage children and saying to them, brokenhearted, what he had said to me. He told me later what happened:

Sunday morning I had fixed breakfast and called the family to the table. My son was first in the kitchen. He stopped in the middle of the floor, looked puzzled, and asked what was different. I told him I wasn't sure what he meant. He looked around the kitchen and said, "Something is . . . well, different." He sat down and my wife and daughter came in soon after. We began our meal with the typical alienated silence that had come to mark our home life. I broke the silence, with a prayer in my soul that my children might forgive me and sense my change of heart. I said, "Kids, your mom and I have done some real soul searching, praying, and pondering of the scriptures lately, trying to get things right in our home. I feel I have been so controlling of you over the years that I have pushed you away. I think I've messed up so bad I don't even know how to talk with you anymore." I got choked up and couldn't say more. They looked at each other, as if amazed to hear this from me. Their surprised looks melted into softness, and my son said, "It's okay, Dad, I'm sure we can work it out."

In the months that followed, this father told me of his struggles in trying not to fall back into his old "command and control" style of parenting but to "just teach clear and fair expectations." He has reported that his children have actually become pretty nice, and though the rules in his home haven't changed much, his kids are more willing to obey them. He said they even ground themselves sometimes for doing wrong, and they tell him of how their consciences bother them now that Dad isn't playing as though he has to be their conscience for them.

Rules and consequences imposed by force create discouragement and provoke children to defend themselves and rebel against parental control attempts (see Col. 3:21). However, when parents repent of controlling, provoking attitudes and behaviors, often the relationship with their children is altered so fundamentally that fears and problems which seemed previously unsolvable yield to solutions much more easily, or they may even cease to exist. For example, this repenting father writes:

On her seventeenth birthday my daughter decided to move in with her boyfriend. We were shocked. It seemed as though she was going against everything we had ever taught her. At first I tried to be nice to himhe seemed like an honest enough guybut later I found out different. My daughter explained the emotional and sexual abuse that she had experienced while living with him. When we found out she was pregnant it was no huge surprise, but we were heartsick for her, especially when they considered an abortion. Well, she eventually moved home and I began to hate her boyfriend more each day. I did everything I could to put him down, to keep the hate alive, fearing she would go back to him. It was my greatest fear.

The other night my daughter and I were talking, trying to be reconciled and heal the hurt. She was telling me of her part in the problems while living with her boyfriend. It became crystal clear that she had contributed somewhat to the problems they had had together. Her part was no excuse for his abuse, but all of a sudden the thought hit me that I was contributing too. I was hating him with a fear and a desire to control my daughter's life. As that truth hit me, the hate was gone; it just vanished from my heart. I could feel love and freedom and peace return to my soul. The fear was totally gone too, and with it, the desire to dominate my daughter. I'm not sure what will happen to them now. I do know this muchI don't see her boyfriend with eyes of hate. I desire to be close to him, to love him and help these two kids get on the right track again. Much has already been said and done; I have asked forgiveness of them both. We're all doing much better.

Love does not manipulate or guarantee an outcome but invites children into a relationship of mutual love and respect, into a context of caring, compassionate "doing" for each other. With love in our hearts, we are then in a position to teach, invite, persuade, discipline, set limits, forgive, ask to be forgiven, understand each other, and communicate effectively and properly (see Rom. 5:5; Eph. 3:17; 1 Ne. 11:22). The Book of Mormon teaches this, referring to Lehi: "And he did exhort them then with all the feeling of a tender parent, that they would hearken to his words, that perhaps the Lord would be merciful to them, and not cast them off; yea, my father did preach unto them" (1 Ne. 8:37). So, when (and only when) our hearts are loving toward others, doing what is right will naturally follow. The right thing to do in behalf of our children is what we humbly will be seeking for moment by moment, when our hearts are "knit together in love" with them (Col. 2:2; Mosiah 18:21). If our hearts are "right in love," we will be free of contentious, controlling feelings and will know what to do in response to our children's needs (see Mosiah 18:21; 3 Ne. 11:29-32). If we remain faithful, our hearts will be vulnerable and open to specific guidance from the Spirit of the Lord, and we can be given "in the very moment" what to say or do with our children (D&C 100:6).

Changing circumstances provide endless possibilities for interaction with our children and may often present new and unique struggles. Each challenge will require a sensitive and flexible parental response so we can appropriately meet each distinctive need as it appears. In crucial moments like these, God is a faithful parent to us (see 1 Cor. 10:13), and if we will hearken to his Spirit, he will not leave us without comfort and knowledge of what to do in that moment (see John 14:12-18). Unique and changing situations are further reasons why inflexible communication recipes, parenting formulas, or step-by-step techniques may ultimately prove destructive. Patented skills or rehearsed communication techniques may predispose us to being insensitive to the Spirit of the Lord and to our children's particular and immediate needs. Our focus in these moments is typically on our own agendas and "strategies of understanding" and not upon the needs of our child. If we are not willing to be spiritually influenced when responding to our children's needs, particularly in moments of crisis, we may miss the mark. This is why we need to be meekly vulnerable to the sweet influence of the Spirit of our Father in Heaven to guide us as parents.

King Benjamin taught the following to the parents of his day:

Believe that ye must repent of your sins and forsake them, and humble yourselves before God; and ask in sincerity of heart that he would forgive you; and now, if you believe all these things see that ye do them.

And again I say unto you as I have said before, that as ye have come to the knowledge of the glory of God, or if ye have known of his goodness and have tasted of his love, and have received a remission of your sins, which causeth such exceedingly great joy in your souls, even so I would that ye should remember, and always retain in remembrance, the greatness of God, and your own nothingness, and his goodness and long-suffering towards you, unworthy creatures, and humble yourselves even in the depths of humility, calling on the name of the Lord daily, and standing steadfastly in the faith. . . .

. . . I say unto you that if ye do this ye shall always rejoice, and be filled with the love of God, and always retain a remission of your sins; and ye shall grow in the knowledge of the glory of him that created you, or in the knowledge of that which is just and true.

And ye will not have a mind to injure one another, but to live peaceably, and to render to every man according to that which is his due.

And ye will not suffer your children that they go hungry, or naked; neither will ye suffer that they transgress the laws of God, and fight and quarrel one with another, and serve the devil, who is the master of sin. . . .

But ye will teach them to walk in the ways of truth and soberness; ye will teach them to love one another, and to serve one another. (Mosiah 4:10-15.)

Notice that this great prophet-king does not give a recipe or formula to follow but rather says that if we will repent, humble ourselves with sincerity of heart, and call upon the Lord daily, we will grow in the knowledge of what is just and true. The result of living daily in the world this way, King Benjamin says, is that we will "not have a mind to injure one another" and we will not let our children serve the devil by being quarrelsome. Rather, we will teach them in truth and soberness to love and serve one another. This is the context or atmosphere that is created in a home where "kind and dear" parents are humbly repenting, loving, and serving one another and their children. President Ezra Taft Benson taught:

Fathers, would it please the Lord if there were daily family prayer and scripture reading in your home? And what about the holding of weekly home evenings and periodically having individual time with your wife and each child? And if your child went temporarily astray, do you think it would please the Lord and He would honor your efforts if you continued to live an exemplary life, consistently prayed and frequently fasted for that child, and kept the name of that son or daughter on the temple prayer roll? (The Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1988], p. 351.)

Summary

Parenting is for parents. As parents our primary concern should be to give our children a parent whose heart is right with the Lord, and with everyone. This means striving to live the gospel of Jesus Christ with all our hearts, following the President of the Church, repenting of our sins, and forgiving others of their sins. This means loving our spouses and children with all our hearts, with the pure love of Christ (see D&C 42:22; Moro. 7:47). In doing these things we would actively, consistently, and diligently teach our children, speaking the truth in love (see Deut. 6:5-7; Eph. 4:15; D&C 88:77-78, 118-19). We would teach not only the scriptures and prophetsnot leaving our children's religious education predominately up to othersbut would also be involved in helping them with schoolwork, teaching them of social and moral issues, helping them develop talents, and having fun and playing with them (see D&C 93:50, 53; 109:7). Teaching the doctrines of the restored gospel as found in the Book of Mormon would be a central feature of family learning and involvement.

President Marion G. Romney spoke of the responsibility and blessings of studying the Book of Mormon with our children when he said:

I feel certain that if, in our homes, parents will read from the Book of Mormon prayerfully and regularly, both by themselves and with their children, the spirit of that great book will permeate our homes and all who dwell therein. The spirit of reverence will increase; mutual respect and consideration for each other will grow. The spirit of contention will depart. Parents will counsel their children in greater love and wisdom. Children will be more responsive and submissive to the counsel of their parents. Righteousness will increase. Faith, hope, and charitythe pure love of Christwill abound in our homes and lives, bringing in their wake peace, joy, and happiness. (In Conference Report, April 1980, pp. 90-91.)

Wise teaching would include gradually giving children expanded responsibilities as they mature and are able to learn and do more. When our hearts are loving towards our spouses and children, we can sense what duties are appropriate. At first we will offer assistance, guidance, and practice. We will then patiently let children experience success and failures. When discipline (which comes from a Greek word meaning "a follower") is called for, we will be neither punitive nor permissive but will calmly soothe a crisis moment if need be, and create appropriate settings to quietly receive our children's account of the problem. Especially with our little ones, we will "crawl into their world" and let their lives, their eyes, their struggles, speak to and soften our hearts. With their recommendations and concerns as a foundation, and prayerfully asking guidance from the Lord, it is then our parental opportunity to accept responsibility and ask forgiveness for our contributions to their problems (if any); to teach sound principles; to guide, invite, pray, and fast with them; and to express love and encouragement to them. Throughout the process of correction we will faithfully remain by their side to support, guide, love, and express our confidence in them. Furthermore, we will let them work through solutions and make the necessary amends without suspiciously or accusingly looking over their shoulder and controlling every move, nor indulgently giving up on them and letting them flounder alone and undirected.

Children typically struggle through and experience failure as they grow in learning to be responsible. They may whine, resist, and seem unreliable or even unwilling. This is when your child needs you to be the most loving and sensitive to their needs, but ironically it often is the time when parents falter in their faithfulness and may resort to the coercive alternatives of punishing or indulging their children. President Joseph F. Smith, as quoted in the beginning of this chapter, pleaded for parents not to be harsh, angry, violent, or punitive. In the following quote he calls parents to involve themselves in the lives of their children as nonindulgent exemplars of righteousness. He taught:

I have a fervent prayer in my soul, an earnest desire, that when I shall be called to give my last account, to the Judge of the quick and the dead, I may not be chargeable for the misdeeds of my children. . . .

I have had the joy and satisfaction of knowing, as far as it is possible for me to know, that the Lord has put into the hearts of my children the love of God and the love of truth. . . . I would to the Lord that every man, who is a father in Israel, could say as much for his children; and why can't they say so much? . . . I want to tell you one reason why a few of them, at least, can not do it. . . . It is because they love their children with a shallow and unreasonable love. They indulge them to the utmost limit. . . . If a child of theirs should ask them for a razor or a deadly instrument, figuratively speaking, rather than disappoint the child or deny its request, they would put into its hand an instrument of destruction. . . . That is what they are doing when they weakly yield to their foolish whims. . . . God forbid that there should be many of us so unwisely indulgent, so thoughtless and so shallow in our affection for our children that we dare not check them in a wayward course, in wrong-doing and in their foolish love for the things of the world more than for the things of righteousness, for fear of offending them. . . .

. . . The time has come for [parents] to look after their children. Every device possible to the understanding and ingenuity of cunning men, is being used for the purpose of diverting our children from the faith of the gospel and from the love of the truth. (In Conference Report, October 1909, pp. 3, 4, 5.)

Finally, as parents our divine stewardship is to do all we canshort of anxious manipulation or controlto teach, invite, guide, and persuade our children to be close to our hearts, love the truth, believe in the gospel of Jesus Christ, and live happy, moral, responsible lives. To offer our children a parental heart that is loving, right, and pure is to be a parent kind and dear. It is to be a parent who honors the Spirit of Christ, agency, and the divine lineage of his or her children. Our children are not ours; we do not own them, nor is it our job to force them to turn out right. With hearts faithful and loving toward our spouses and children, we can create an atmosphere in our homes that will bless our posterity for generations in this life and in the next. Elder Boyd K. Packer observed:

It is a great challenge to raise a family in the darkening mists of our moral environment.

We emphasize that the greatest work you will do will be within the walls of your home (see Harold B. Lee, in Conference Report, April 1973, p. 130), and that "no success can compensate for failure in the home" (see David O. McKay, in Conference Report, April 1935, p. 116; quoting J. E. McCulloch, Home: The Savior of Civilization [Washington D.C.: The Southern Co-operative League, 1924], p. 42).

The measure of our success as parents, however, will not rest solely on how our children turn out. . . .

"The Prophet Joseph Smith declaredand he never taught a more comforting doctrinethat the eternal sealings of faithful parents and the divine promises made to them for valiant service in the Cause of Truth, would save not only themselves, but likewise their posterity. Though some of the sheep may wander, the eye of the Shepherd is upon them, and sooner or later they will feel the tentacles of Divine Providence reaching out after them and drawing them back to the fold. Either in this life or the life to come, they will return." (Orson F. Whitney, in Conference Report, April 1929, p. 110.) (In Conference Report, April 1992, p. 94.)

So after all is said and done, when our children return to us it will be because our hearts were right with them, not because we forced them to turn out right. May we all be so "kind and dear" to our children.

_____

S. Brett Savage is very happily married to the former JaLee Deaton, his college sweetheart ("My life began when I first saw her in class"). They have six childrentwo sons, four daughters. Brother Savage is currently a management consultant with the Arbinger Company, and is the assistant director of outpatient therapy for the Anasazi Foundation, a residential treatment program for youth and their families. He has also been a part-time faculty member in the Department of Ancient Scripture for three years at Brigham Young University. Having received a bachelor's degree in child and family studies from Weber State University and a master's in family life education from BYU, he is currently a doctoral candidate in theoretical philosophical psychology at the latter institution.
