Daniel K. Judd, Douglas E. Brinley, Eternal Families ( 1996)

9 Fathering Comments from the Fathered

Douglas E. Brinley

Early family research in the social sciences centered around the impact of mothers on their children and the effect of a mother's employment on marital satisfaction. It has only been in recent decades that Dad has received much attention in the social sciences as to his importance in the family. That research shows Father to be an important figure in the lives of his children not only in how he relates to his sons but in how he treats his daughters. Basic research supports what the prophets have long told usthat a father's influence is very important in his children's lives, especially in such areas as their moral development, academic progress, gender orientation, and later performance as marriage partners and parents themselves.

I learned the importance of fathers years ago (before abortions were common), when I worked with a number of unwed mothersyoung single girls between the ages of fourteen and eighteen who were expecting babies. In visiting with them during their final hours before delivery, I learned something about their families, especially their fathers; how they were treated as daughters; and something of their dads' personalities. Consistently these fathers were not kind, warm, loving fathers who spent much time with their girls (one reason I was there in their place), and the time that their fathers spent with them was usually in critical and unloving exchanges. Sometimes I felt that these girls were trying to get back at their fathers in some way for absences or lack of caring. This is not to say that their fathers were solely to blame for their conditions, but it became evident that these fathers were lacking in some of the practices that President Ezra Taft Benson counseled fathers to do, as we will see. It became clear that dads with pregnant teens are oftenbut not always, of courseharsh, distant, aloof, busy, uncaring, critical, and impatient, and they generally express little affection to their daughters. (These negative personality traits can also cause great harm to sons. Insecure boys, those with little or no leadership from a caring and loving father, are often the ones who impregnate insecure girls who are desperately looking for love.) Good men, strong men, spiritual fathers, are needed to provide leadership in families so that wives can utilize their own divine gifts and traits as mothers, and children can have and see an example of healthy parents from which they may gain much-needed experience and maturity for when they create families of their own.

The truth of the following statement became obvious to me as I visited with these young women: "One of the greatest things a father can do for his children is to love their mother." Two corollaries of this premise are also important: "One of the greatest things a father can do for his wife is to love their children" and "One of the greatest things a mother can do for her children is to love their father."

Fathers have a divine commission to provide materially for their families and to provide for their spiritual welfare as well. If they are not wise and careful, men may have a tendency to put material pursuits ahead of spiritual. A classic illustration of this issue occurred in our own early Church history, when the Lord rebuked the fathers serving in the First Presidency for their neglect at home. To Frederick G. Williams the Lord said bluntly: "You have not taught your children light and truth, according to the commandments; and that wicked one hath power, as yet, over you, and this is the cause of your affliction." Then he provided the solution: "If you will be delivered you shall set in order your own house, for there are many things that are not right in your house." (D&C 93:42-43.) Sidney Rigdon was instructed similarly, "that in some things [you have] not kept the commandments concerning [your] children; therefore, first set in order thy house" (verse 44). The Prophet did not escape censure, as the Lord admonished, "Your family must needs repent and forsake some things, and give more earnest heed unto your sayings, or be removed out of their place" (verse 48). The bishop of the Church was not left unscathed either, as the Lord warned that he "hath need to be chastened, and set in order his family, and see that they are more diligent and concerned at home, and pray always, or they shall be removed out of their place" (verse 50). Notice that the Lord condemned not the mothers in these situations but the fathers.

Now, if the leaders of the Church were careless in their family responsibilities and needed a reprimand and a reminder of the magnitude of their callingseven if they felt justified in spending their time trying to get the fledgling Church off the groundcould not all of us as fathers take a closer look at our leadership and influence at home to see if our families are "set in order"?

Elder L. Tom Perry in a general conference talk reflected on his own days as a father with young children. He said:

I've often thought of the happy times we had when our family was young and our children were at home. I have made a mental review of those day and considered the changes I would make in our family organization and administration if we had the opportunity to live that period over again. There are two areas I would determine to improve if that privilege were granted to me to have young children in our home once again.

The first would be to spend more time as husband and wife in a family executive committee meeting learning, communicating, planning, and organizing to better fulfill our roles as parents.

The second wish I would like, if I could have those years over, would be to spend more family time. This includes more consistent, meaningful family home evenings. (In Conference Report, April 1994, p. 49.)

I wrote elsewhere of a father I knew:

Tom was good at making moneyin fact, he was great at it. Tom made sure that his wife and children had every toy and convenience that was available. He took them on lavish vacations and made sure they ate at the best places. He worked hard at his profession, and when he was home he worked hard to keep the garden and the yard in tip-top shape and all the things in the house running smoothly. But his rare moments of relaxation were spent in front of the TV. He felt awkward with his children and had little to say to them unless they wanted to work with him side by side in the garden. Even then, he became easily frustrated with their inability to do things right. When they were small, he said that he didn't know what to say to them, and he would talk to them when they were older. When they were older, they didn't particularly want to talk to him. And he couldn't understand what had gone wrongafter all, hadn't he always given them everything they had needed and wanted?

He had given them everythingeverything except what they really needed. Unfortunately, it is a common experience in counseling interviews to find that fathers are often negligent and somewhat insensitive to the needs of their family members. It is often easier for them to give their money and advice than their time and interest. They often struggle to know how to lead out as the family head. (Toward a Celestial Marriage [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1986], pp. 162-63.)

So the world needs fathers who are not just breadwinners, not just men who keep the fridge full or pay the bills, but men who will influence their young sons and daughters to rise up and be responsible and trustworthy men and women of God. Will not every one of us fathers have to account someday for the way we carried out our high and holy calling?

President Ezra Taft Benson a few years ago counseled men on their fathering responsibilities (see Conference Report, October 1987, pp. 59-63). He included practical things that every father can do to be more effective. Following his ten suggestions does not require any training in family science or a Ph.D. in psychology. They are simple things that all fathers can do, and they can be done now. I have presented his ten points below with comments from students at Brigham Young University whose fathers did as the prophet suggested.1

Father's blessings have definitely been the spiritual highlights in my life and have brought me to love and respect the priesthood. I have many times needed and requested a father's blessing, especially in the past few years when life has become so complicated. I remember one experience in particular when I was struggling with a lot of questions and uncertainties. I asked my dad for a blessing and then went and told my Heavenly Father what I was struggling with and asked that he might use my father as a vessel to tell me what my Father in Heaven would have me do. How thankful I am for a worthy earthly father who is worthy of his priesthood and listens to the Spirit! In that blessing he touched on everything that I was worried about, and more. How blessed I am to have two very loving fathers who, working together, help me get through the challenges of life. (Emphasis in original.)

Jessica, whose father works on campus, talked about her feelings when her dad gave her a blessing:

I read [about father's blessings] and it hit me really hard, right dead in the center of my heart. I have had a really tough two weeks, and this coming week I have three midterms. I gave my dad a call at about 11:30 this morning and left him a message on his answering machine that I wanted a blessing. He will go into shock when he hears it, because he has always been the instigator of blessings throughout my life. I am really glad he has the authority to give me a blessing, because I know it will help me finish out this semester in a positive way.

Jamie recalled blessings from her early years:

When I was younger my dad always gave me blessings before he traveled out of town and when I left for a week for summer camp or visiting in the summer, but I did not realize the significance of a father's blessing until I was a junior in high school. I was on the drill team my sophomore and junior years of high school. My sophomore year drill team was a wonderful experience. My junior year was the opposite. The team members were very competitive with one another, and I did not have many opportunities to perform because my advisor decided to keep girls in the routines even though they had violated serious drill team rules. She didn't follow her own rules or play fair, and this was hard for me to accept. I came home after school every day and cried for hours. The comfort I received at this time came from a blessing my dad gave me.

I remember one really hard day my mom called him and told him I was home crying again. He came home early from work that afternoon and asked me if I would like a father's blessing. I don't remember exactly what he said in that blessing, but I will never forget the power of his priesthood and the love he radiated to me at this time. I had never asked for a father's blessing before this time, but this opened the door for many more opportunities. Now I often ask my dad for a father's blessing, and he is always willing and worthy to give me one. I go home many weekends and ask him for a blessing so I can get through another week of school. We are told that we are given adversity to grow.

My dad is now my best friend. The power of the priesthood is so incredible. I often take it for granted that my dad is a worthy priesthood holder, but his example has influenced me. I want this power in my home, and for this reason I will only date young men who honor their priesthood. You marry who you date, and for this reason I will not even take the chance of falling in love with someone who cannot bring the power of the priesthood into my home. My dad has many roles, but his sacred calling as a father in Israel is the most important to me, and I will never forget his example.

At the beginning of every school year my father gives all of us children a father's blessing. He holds family home evening and family prayer on a regular basis. I know there have been times when the family has not cooperated like my father would have liked us to, but I think that's part of having family home evening! I remember while living in Japan as a small girl my father would take me on dates to the officer's club. I loved spending time with my dad. My dad also made sure we went on some kind of vacation each year, whether it was driving across the country to Utah, traveling to a different country, going to the beach, or visiting a historical site. Through these trips our family has grown very close. I think it's healthy to spend time away from the stresses that work, callings, and housework bring to a home.

My father brings spiritual strength and direction to our family. He always serves faithfully in his Church callings and shows us the importance of serving the Lord. Yet even with the tremendous responsibilities of a stake president, he always makes time for our family. After long days of traveling to small branches on the outskirts of the stake, Dad comes home for family home evening.

Amanda remembers her dad this way:

My father has always honored his priesthood as head of the household. He is a great example to me. He led family prayer every morning and night and family home evening every Sunday and Monday night. He counseled with my mother and always avoided debt. He taught us children through example the things that we should do. He has a great job that allows my mother to stay home and him to still provide well for the family. He is home as often as possible and also attends many of the children's activities.

Tressa recalled her father in this way:

Dad wasn't always as verbal with his love, although he learned to express himself over the years. My relationship with my father was one of the most special things that I remember from my childhood. Both of my parents were two of my best friends, but I guess because fathers aren't usually portrayed as being loving people, I really appreciated my dad.

Growing up, I was always "Daddy's little girl." He took me to the hardware store, I tagged along to the lumberyard, I watched him work on the cars, and he always welcomed my sometimes unhelpful presence. My dad loved me and taught me the way to travel in this life. At the beginning of each school year he gave me a father's blessing where he conveyed to me what my Heavenly Father wanted me to know. It was at times like that my dad put into practice what he had always taught me. He respected his priesthood, and respected and revered my mother for the role that she played in our home. If there is one thing that I want my home to be like, it would resemble that of my parents' home. I remember many of our family home evenings, and I'm sure my dad was not happy about the way some of them progressed, but I love him for bringing us together.

Jessica recalled her feelings about what it meant to have her father and mother active in the Church:

The most influential thing my parents have ever done for me was showing me they love the Church. I had my rebellious moments in junior high and high school. My parents would give me an option when I didn't want to go to church. I could stay home and clean or I could go to church. I chose church. I remained active throughout this time. As I look back, though, I remember my mom telling me how much she loves the Church. I never understood why until this summer. I attended church about four times between April and August. I missed church so much. I suddenly realized how much I really love the Church, but it wasn't until I couldn't go that I realized it. I love my parents for helping me learn to love the Church, because now I appreciate it more than I ever imagined possible.

The last three or four years I've begun to see my parents in a new light. I see their love and dedication and realize all they've done in my life. Since I was in diapers we haven't missed a father-sons' outing except for the time I was on my mission. From the time I was only ten or eleven, I remember working with my dad. I'm sure I wasn't a great help and maybe even a hindrance at times, but from all the yard work, roofing, and office work I've learned responsibility and gained an appreciation for hard work in order to meet my needs.

Interviews with my father are a part of my childhood memories, as are father's blessings. Often my father will tell us all that we don't have any traditions; we just do the same thing every year. I really look forward to the same thing every year! We've always sat as a family at church even though we never all got there at the same time, but we were always there. Not going to church wasn't an option in our family, so now to not go to church would confuse my system so much I'd probably end up thinking it was Saturday again and go to church instead of school on Monday.

I see many things that my parents did to help in my learning and growth. My most cherished moments are of my father taking two young, questioning boys fishing and watching them systematically destroy his poles and his tackle, while he taught some of the more important lessons in life: patience, sharing, respect, and hard work. I remember my mother giving summer school to us kids and taking five noisy, quarreling children on fieldtrips to local museums and monuments, and teaching lessons that not many children received. We were truly blessed by our parents.

Jennifer remembered it this way:

I am reminded of all the many things my father has done for me. From as early as I can remember, he was there for me. When I decided while living in Alaska that I was going to build an igloo, Dad was there to help and laugh with me when the icy clump of snow fell right on top of my head. When in elementary school in Alabama, my father was always the first parent to volunteer for chaperoning. I do not remember a school trip that I took without my father present. After we moved to Floridain fact, to my father's hometownI became a cheerleader for our high school. Nothing can compare to the pride that my father felt towards me as I rooted my team on to victories on the same grass that my father had "bled and sweat" on thirty-some odd years earlier as a star football player. That place became "our field"filled with separate memories of happiness, exhilaration, and heartbreak, and also shared memories like my father being my escort to the homecoming court and watching my graduation ceremonies from the bleachers.

Paula said:

My parents have always made each one of their children feel like they are their favorite. Being affectionate with us is one way our mother showed she loved us. I remember as a child we were always to go in to our parents' bedroom and kiss them good-night. This was my favorite part of the day. Oftentimes I'd score a back scratch from my dad, or my mom would let me hide under the covers so I wouldn't have to leave.

I think the best way my mother and I showed we loved each other was by having fun together. I remember one year in early fall I missed class one day; I don't quite remember why now. My mom and I went to Lake Meridian about ten minutes away, a popular duck feeding area for our family. Well, this time we were there we noticed some water lilies skimming the surface of the lake. They were so beautiful that we wanted to take some home. You can imagine who was volunteered to go wading. My mom handed me a rake and I started out. She laughed as I screeched in the cold Washington water. I never let her forget my sacrifice of retrieving her precious lilies. But I think she knew that I secretly loved it, just because we did it together.

My father is one of the constants in my life. He is my rock, and I am forever indebted to his unselfishness and constant unconditional love. I hope that my future husband will show as much interest in our children's lives as my father did in mine.

This year my dad and I have talked more than ever before. I don't see him very often, but we try to have lunch together once a week. When we are together, we talk about everything ranging from family reunions to my dad's wardrobe. It's not so much the conversations we have that mean a lot, but the fact that we're together means so much to me. I learn more information from the conversations with him than I learn in a semester of school.

Julie shared the impact her father had on her:

Just before I turned eight, I learned about what would happen at my baptism. I've always been a little wary of new things and change, and so I was nervous about my upcoming baptism. My father took time to go over how the ordinance would be performed and made sure I was comfortable with what to do with my hands and when to hold my breath. I was terrified that my father would make a mistake and my baptism wouldn't work. My father looked into my little scared eyes and said, "I won't make a mistake, because the Lord won't let me." The fear left me and I remember my baptism being a wonderful moment highlighted by the fact that my father wouldn't let me down.

Carter shared his recollection of earlier times with his dad:

My dad believed in having those one-on-one times with all of us. I have four brothers, and my dad took time to be with and support all of us. Some of my very best memories as a kid are of fishing with my dad. We used to go to Moses Lake, Washington, and fish at the Pot Holes. The Pot Holes are a series of lakes that were created when the Grand Coulee dam was built. We spent every Thanksgiving morning there fishing with my brothers. Sometimes we didn't catch a lot of fish, but we sure found a lot of time to talk. I learned that my dad loved me and I loved him too.

I really enjoyed [President Benson's] talk to fathers because I could relate to some of the suggestions he gave there. The one that stands out in my mind is to teach your kids to work. My father and I did countless projects around the home together, with the most memorable being the basketball court. For us to put up our court it was necessary to haul out twenty-seven pickup-loads of dirt. This took many hours and quite a few weeks. When my father would come home from work, we would eat and immediately it was into the grubbies and work in the backyard to start digging. It entailed quite a process. We had to remove a section of the fence so we could back the truck into the yard and make it easier to wheelbarrow the dirt into the truck. Once the truck was full it also had to be unloaded. At times the calloused hands and aching back didn't seem worth it, but finally we had our court.

I will never forget the many hours we spent side by side discussing life and the gospel. I learned more than just a good work ethic; I learned a lot about my dad and I grew really close to him. It will always be something we can look back on and see the fruits of our labors, and the stronger ties that now bind our relationship are impossible to break.

Stacy recalled her father's work ethic:

My parents have always taught us kids to be hard workers, and that you will not get very far in life if you rely on others and can't be self-sufficient. My parents are very hard workers and have been very blessed for their efforts. My father is a very intelligent man. He has been a very good example to me and has been my hero. I want to marry someone just like my father, and, well, I am still looking. My father has taken his responsibilities in the Church very seriously, and he is not the type to do anything half-heartedly or mediocre. My mother is the same way and has stood by my father and supported him not only in his Church callings but in his career also.

When you live near a college or university there are many opportunities to attend plays, musical concerts, and band performances that can inspire children in the musical or dramatic fields. Reading good books ought to be a tradition in our homes. Stacy wrote of her memories:

My parents have encouraged us to listen to good music. I grew up listening to singers such as Billy Joel, the Kingston Trio, and the Carpenters. We always sang in the car whether it was on our way home from church or on family trips. My parents encouraged us to play the piano and other instruments during our school years.

John shared his feelings about music in his home:

Music in our home was what is now called "elevator music." But I don't care. I never did like the loud, raucous music of my friends. I remember my mom and dad talking to us about music early on, and all of us kids learned to play an instrument or two. I ended up on the piano and the bass. I didn't especially like the lessons at the time, but my dad insisted, and luckily I was obedient. Now I am glad they insisted, for music is one of the highlights of my lifegood music, that is. My mom encouraged me with treats when I finished practicing. That probably got me through it. Now, of course, I take pride in my performances, and it has become a source of self-esteem and joy for me.

And Emily shared this touching experience:

My dad has always encouraged good music in our home, even though he may not excel in that area. But one of my fondest memories is when he would rock me to sleep or just sit by my bed and sing "Angel Lullaby." As a small child it soothed my fears and made me feel safe and secure to know that my heavenly friends were watching over me while I slept. Well, years passed, and this "little" girl grew to the age of nineteen. One night I was feeling the weight of the world in my heart and as scared as a little girl in the dark. So I finally put aside my pride and called my daddy into the room. "Dad, will you sing the song for me?" I can't express the calm and peace I felt as my dad's beautiful voice sang quietly those familiar words. As you might guess, "Angel Lullaby" will be one of the first songs my children will hear.

My parents have always quietly fulfilled their callings and gone to the temple. I never really noticed, but I see their example now and realize how it shaped my life as I was growing up.

James remembered his parents leaving the children to serve in the temple:

There were many times that my parents left my older sister in charge while they went to the temple to do work for family members they had researched on their own. I guess I never felt neglected over it, because they explained how they had found names from our family in the library and what it meant to those relatives to have their work done for them. We had many lessons on the temple in our home besides their going frequently. Maybe that is why I always looked forward to going to the temple myself. When the Bountiful Temple was open for visitors, I was the first to want to go, and now I understand why the temple was so important to my parents. You can be sure that it is important in my life too.

One of the things that has been really defining of my father is his demeanor. I have never ever heard my father curse. To me this is a great source of strength because my father is my greatest living example of how to live a good Latter-day Saint life. Having had such a good example to follow makes making all the little decisions in life all that much easier. When I catch myself doing things that I saw other men do and swore to myself that I would never do these same things, I am even more thankful for a righteous father who has lived the gospel of Jesus Christ every single day that I have lived. I will forever be in the debt of my father for showing me the way that Christ would have lived had he been here on earth today.

If I could only say one thing about my dad, it would be that he was always there for me. When I felt that the world was against me as a young ten-year old and felt a lack of love from my brothers and sisters, Dad was the reason that I could not run away in haste. Dad has always been the silent motivator in my life. When we'd win a game and I thought I played poorly, Dad always comforted me. My father was there at every single game that I played. I know it was a sacrifice to make some of the two- and three-hour trips each way, but somehow he did it. I could count on him to be waiting outside the locker room to give me his impressions of how well I had played. His being there would not have been nearly as special to me unless you realize that I am the second of eleven children, and Dad has worked two full-time jobs since I was a baby. There was always something else that he could have been doing, but he chose to be my biggest fan and has been for the other ten as well.

I think that the single most sad day of my life will be the day that my father passes away. He has been so much more than just a man to me. He has been a soother of temper, spiritual leader, greatest fan, finest example, community leader, and uncompromising on values. If I end up being half the father that my dad is and has been to me, then I can consider my life a success. I never could be able to tell him quite how he has touched my life and spirit, and changed my life for the better. Maybe the best way I could show him how much he means to me would be by living a life like he has led and striving to be the type of person that he believes I can become.

Another Jared, whose father had passed away, shared this:

At the same time of his death, Dad was fulfilling his role as a father. He worked very hard to be able to provide for our family, but he did not forget us in the meantime. My dad was always with us in the evenings and on the weekends. He made any excuse he could to be with his family. He taught us to respect our mother. He protected her from anyone and everyone. She was and is his jewel. I think the greatest thing that Dad taught us by his actions is that families are forever. We didn't even know what divorce was until we were teenagers, and even then we didn't believe that it actually happened. My parents were married for nineteen years before my dad passed away, and in those nineteen years I did not once hear my mom and dad fightthey wouldn't even raise their voices with each other. All differences were lovingly talked out with the benefit of the other in mind.

Our home life truly was joyful. We would all get on our "grubbies" and work in the yard and garden on Saturdays. Before family night on Mondays Dad would mow the lawn, Mom would rake the grass, and we children would put the grass clippings in a garbage bag. Dad always made us feel good. He let us help him even when all we did was slow him down. He was very funny too. He taught us to enjoy life. His life was filled with sacrifice for his family and for others. His Church callings took up a lot of his time, which made him work even harder to be able to spend the time he wanted to with Mom and us. He had his life in such order when he died that my mom could continue being Mom at home and not have to go to work. It was his very teachings and faith that kept us all going when he was killed. We know now more than ever that families are forever.

When you read the sentiments of these young men and women, it is comforting to know that there are great marriages and great fathers who care for their children in such a way as to instill in the hearts of their offspring a love for the gospel. They provide wonderful examples for their children to follow. No doubt these students with such powerful models in their lives will be able to succeed in their own marriages and family relations. My hope is that by seeing what children value in their parents, you and I will be inspired to be better fathers; we will provide experiences for our children that will help them to be valiant in their testimonies and, just as important, to implement in their lives the principles of the gospel in order to fulfill their divine destiny in their future challenging but rewarding roles of husband and father, wife and mother. If we can, surely Zion will prosper and our eternal goal of forever families will be achieved.

_____

Douglas E. Brinley earned bachelor's and master's degrees in economics from Utah State University and a Ph.D. in family studies from Brigham Young University. He served as the director of several LDS institutes of religion. He is presently an associate professor on the Religious Education faculty at BYU. He served as mission president in Dallas, Texas. He and his wife, Geri, are the parents of six children.
