Daniel K. Judd, Douglas E. Brinley, Eternal Families ( 1996)

10 Mothering Comments from the Mothered

Douglas E. Brinley

Abraham Lincoln once said, "The greatest book I ever read, you ask me? My mother." What more exciting and challenging roles could come to a woman than to be a wife and mother in the final winding-up days of this dispensation before the Second Coming? To be the mother of the best spirits currently being sent to the earth in these latter days?1

The finest treatise on the importance of motherhood was issued by the First Presidency years ago while World War II was raging. Their counsel has proven to be prophetic:

Motherhood [is] a holy calling, a sacred dedication for carrying out the Lord's plans, a consecration of devotion to the uprearing and fostering, the nurturing in body, mind, and spirit, of those who kept their first estate and who come to this earth for their second estate "to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them" (Abr. 3:25). To lead them to keep their second estate is the work of motherhood. . . .

This divine service of motherhood can be rendered only by mothers. It may not be passed to others. Nurses cannot do it; public nurseries cannot do it; hired help cannot do itonly mother, aided as much as may be by the loving hands of father, brothers, and sisters, can give the full needed measure of watchful care.

The mother who entrusts her child to the care of others, that she may do non-motherly work, whether for gold, for fame, or for civic service, should remember that "a child left to himself bringeth his mother to shame" (Prov. 29:15). In our day the Lord has said that unless parents teach their children the doctrines of the Church "the sin be upon the heads of the parents" (D&C 68:25).

Motherhood is near to divinity. It is the highest, holiest service to be assumed by mankind. It places her who honors its holy calling and service next to the angels. (In Conference Report, October 1942, pp. 11-13.)

This inspired counsel came at a time when many mothers had left home to work in manufacturing plants while husbands and sons were in far-off climes battling to preserve our nation's way of life. However, the First Presidency, with prophetic power, counseled that the loss of our mothers from our homes could affect the rising generation in ways much more adverse and damaging than the war itself. The employment of women seemed to be justified when German and Japanese forces were relentlessly seeking to destroy us. However, the Lord's servants warned publicly that dire consequences lay immediately ahead if Mother neglected her more important post. Their prophecy, by any measure used, has come to pass. At this present day people have become so used to mothers working out of the home that in many circles mothers are almost embarrassed to admit they stay at home with their children. Our "liberated" society has encouraged women to leave home to do "non-motherly" duties. We have done, in fact, what the First Presidency asked us not to do. With the benefit of hindsight, we now can see the wisdom of the Lord's servants. "I know of no better testimony that we are led by prophets," said President Boyd K. Packer, confirming the wisdom of the First Presidency, "than our preparation for this present emergency" (in Conference Report, April 1994, p. 24). And "no voice," he reminded us, "from any organization of the Church on any level of administration equals that of the First Presidency" (in Conference Report, October 1993, p. 30).

The Lord was saying to us that without Mother's steady influence to bless the lives of her children, this generation is in great danger of destruction. Of course, there are mothers who must work to support their families; cases exist where a husband is incapacitated and the wife is needed to carry that role. But the counsel of the prophets has been consistent in teaching us that such an arrangement is not the ideal and that we should return to the Lord's program when possible and as quickly as we can. It is as though the Lord were saying: "The modern challenges to your way of life, to all that you hold dear today and in the coming days, can best be met by strong mothers who rear their children with a sense of destiny and missionthat mission being to bring souls to Christ by taking the gospel to the world, perfecting the Saints, and performing research and temple work for the dead. If you do not follow this counsel, you may be overwhelmed by the evils of the day. Rearing righteous children for the enormous tasks they will face can best be done by mothers who are not preoccupied with non-motherly activities, which principally involve acquiring greater material possessions."2

The Brethren have not left us without counsel on how to become more effective mothers. Excellent and specific helps to be better parents have been given by all of our latter-day prophets. I would like to stress in this chapter an address by President Ezra Taft Benson titled "To the Mothers in Zion" (Come, Listen to a Prophet's Voice [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1990], pp. 25-37). Toward the end of his remarks he gave mothers ten practical suggestions to assist them in their sacred callings. I believe that if mothers were to implement these inspired suggestions, they would improve relationships with their offspring, hasten the establishment of Zion, and provide the world with a model for motherhood that would be the envy of mothers everywhere regardless of church affiliation or membership. As Latter-day Saints, we are called to rear a generation of young peopleAbraham's seedwho not only love their Heavenly Father and their families but all of mankind as well, because they are under covenant to carry the message of the Restoration to the far-flung reaches of the world (see Abr. 2:8-11). President Benson's counsel can help mothers accomplish this important task.

My purpose here will be to share with you what young men and women attending Brigham Young University had to say about their mothers' influence on them in their formative years as it related to President Benson's counsel.3

Ten Suggestions from President Ezra Taft Benson to Mothers

When [the prophets] talk about the mother's role in the home, I just get tingles all over. I grew up in a home where my mother did not work away from us. We needed extra money badly, so she baby-sat a little, but that way she was there for us. It was rare when we would get home from school to find her gone. I had such a wonderful example of motherhood my entire life, and I am very thankful for that because as I am being faced with starting a family of my own, I want to raise them the way my mother raised me.

Marie lamented what she missed growing up:

I never had any of the family values that President Benson talks about in his discussions on parenting. I was a latchkey kid from the time I was seven years old. In fact, I was so young that my parents didn't want me to have the responsibility of having a house key to lose somewhere at school, so they made me crawl through the doggy door until a few years later when I could no longer fit through. Real funny, huh? I didn't have a mother there after school to make sure I got a good, healthy snack to eat and to make sure that I got to swim practice on time. That's one thing I wish I'd had while growing up:

Another student made this observation of what happened to the younger children when her mother decided to seek employment out of the home:

My mother has been a great mother. While I was growing up she was always there. She did all she could for us and taught us many things. I loved having her there. About three or four years ago she started going to work. This has had a big influence on my family. I see the things that my little brother and sister are getting away with and the trouble they are getting into. My sister now thinks she is exempt from every rule and that she can do anything she wants to. She is always arguing with my mother, and if Mom says no, she does it anyway. My little brother watches TV or plays Nintendo for most of the day. He doesn't listen to anyone, and if he gets mad he just tries to beat everyone up. He is quite successful at it too. It has been frustrating at home, and I don't think anyone is happy about it. I know that I am not. I never realized how much it meant to have my mother there when I came home from school or activities or playing with my friends. I wish he had given this talk earlier so that my parents could read it and see what they have missed.

From Paula:

One thing that made an impression on me, though I didn't have an appreciation for it at the time, was that my mom was always there! She was there when I woke up, when I came home from school, and when I went to bed. Sure, there were exceptions when it couldn't be helped, but even then she made her best effort to be home when we came walking through the door.

I remember one instance when my mother wasn't home when I returned from school. My best friendwhose parents were also goneand I decided to try something daring. We were going to climb onto her roofsomething irresponsible and foolish. Well, we were feeling pretty adventuresome until the mean lady who lived on the street saw us and told us to get down before we killed ourselves. I thought she was going to tell on me for sure! I ran home as fast as my ten-year-old legs could carry me and didn't leave the house until I saw our familiar Ford pull into the driveway. My mother could tell I was upset, and I did like almost any child that thought she was in for it would doI told the truth! Well, one version of it anyway. She seemed especially concerned about how sensitive and nervous I was about being left to sit in the house by myself until [my parents] returned. The mean lady next door never did tell her, but needless to say, after my acting job my mom made an extra effort to be home before I was.

Amanda shared her mother's strengths:

Growing up, my mother was always home taking care of the children, helping with homework; cooking; carpooling; attending recitals, tennis matches, baseball, softball, soccer, basketball, and badminton games, performances, award ceremonies, you name it. She was always there supporting us children, and any award we received was the direct result of her encouragement and persistence. My mother is a graduate from BYU and also has her teaching credentials, but she chose to stay home with the children and teach them how to live in accordance with our Heavenly Father's plan.

I remember when I was almost eight years old and the only one my age in my ward. They kept putting me with the seven- or nine-year-olds during Primary, so I wasn't getting any of the baptism lessons I should have been receiving. After several weeks of complaints by my mother, she finally asked the bishop to release her as part of the Relief Society presidency and give her the calling of teaching my Primary class, even if I was the only one that age. It was important to her that I received the knowledge I needed before my baptism. Her children always came first.

Julie felt this way about her mom:

My mother has done everything a good mother should do. She has been a pillar in my life. I hope to follow in her footsteps and be as good as she has been for me. My mother has always been at the crossroads for me. Every time I arrived home, no matter what time, my mother was waiting for me. I looked forward to this time because she always wanted to know how I felt. What did I learn in school? How did that math test go? Was the dance as fun as I hoped it would be? Even now, my mother is at the crossroads and welcomes me home after a week away at college.

I remember coming home from school and having my mother there to listen to the excitement or disasters of the day. I also remember the few days that she wasn't home when I got home with something great to tell her. I was so disappointed that I would have to wait even longer to tell her that I considered punishing her by not telling her at all! Even now, in college, I find myself saying, "I can't wait to tell Mom! or Dad!" My phone bill is really hurting!

I know from my own experience that there is no more important place for a woman to be than at home with her children. My mom has spent the last twenty-five years at home taking care of us kids, and she has about another twenty to go before the last one will be gone. She has always been there when we came home from school, work, or dates. She has always been there when we were upset, angry, sad, happy, or just needed someone to talk to. We always knew where we could find her. Our family has made many sacrifices and gone without the nicest, newest things rather than have a double income, but the benefits and blessings of always having a mom around have been worth it. (But I wouldn't be surprised if there have been several times she has wanted to escape to work somewhere just to get away from all of us kids.) I pray that when the time comes for me to be a mother that I'll be able to stay at home with my family also.

Justin had these comments to make:

Perhaps [my mom's] greatest asset to us was being a true friend. She took time to listen and share our lives. We could share with her our ambitions, fears, hopes, and desires without her getting upset. We liked to do things with her and she even liked our music. One thing I always loved was that she always let me drive when we went somewhere. In return, we were her friends. We did small acts of service constantly that would nurture our relationship. This does not go to say that we were continually without any quarrels, but those times were rare and handled well. One of my fondest memories was at the farewell for my mission. Perhaps the most touching thing she said then was that I was not just her son but her friend. Of all the friends who have come and gone, my mother has outlasted them all.

Molly expressed the feelings she had about her parents while she was growing and maturing:

Despite what I viewed as a hopelessly unfair childhood, I am very grateful for the guidance and care my parents took in raising us. Our family operated a bit differently than other families. When we went to church we didn't get to read books, sit on the floor, or fall asleep; we had to sit attentively and listen to the sacrament speakers. We got good grades in school and always looked our best. Most of our ingrained good behavior came from my mom. She was always there, especially when we needed her. She wasn't the kind to make us cookies and play soccer with us in the backyard; instead, she taught us to sing, value hard work, play the piano, and have self-confidence and respect. She used any moment she could as a teaching moment, and her consistency helped us gain our own incentives to choose the right. Many rulessuch as no TV on Sunday, check-in by 10:30, Monday night reserved for family night, and many others established earlydidn't give us much room to experiment and "learn from mistakes." I will never forget the saying: "Zartocks don't do that." As a teenager, I felt that many of these restrictions were unnecessary. But now I am a person who wants to steer clear of anything questionable. In fact, I am pleased when I think of my family's standards. None of us has ever sworn, seen an R-rated film, had problems with immorality, or been so caught up in worldly fun that we compromised our integrity.

Together my mother and father would give us counsel and tell me how I needed to change my life and attitude. My father is a great example in many ways. He shared time with us on family outings and vacations and most often on Saturdays when we worked in the yard and cleaned the house.

I think growing up I never wanted to disappoint my parents in any way. My parents have been stern with us and have laid down certain guidelines, but never have I been on restriction or punished unjustly. There is a respect in our home for our parents. I hope that I may one day raise my children as my parents have raised me.

Another aspect President Benson mentioned was reading the scriptures with children. That is how I learned how to read. I remember being very young and, upon learning how to read the word the, asking what it meant. It set a pattern in my life that is positive and has benefitted me greatly. I owe much to my mother, who nurtured, taught, and loved me. Her influence upon me and all her children was great. If we could have more mothers like her, the work of the Lord would roll forward at a quickened pace.

Here's what Jessica remembers from her youth:

When I was very young I was an only child for a while, and my parents had lots of time to read to me. When I wasn't outside playing or helping my dad in the garden, someone was reading to me. We wore out my books. They would read so much during the day that by bedtime I didn't want any more stories. When I was old enough to read by myself, I devoured books. I read so many books that one of the librarians at the local library had my library card number memorized.

One of my favorite reading memories took place when I was around eight years old. Both my father and I were home sick from school one day (Dad is a teacher). I climbed in bed with him and he read to me all day. He read The Clue in the Crumbling Wall, a Nancy Drew mystery. That day made a profound impact on me. I still remember the name of the book and its storyline. It was the greatest sick day ever!

My father would come over from the barn for family prayer every morning at 7:00 a.m. before we left for school. We'd also have family prayer together kneeling down in the new room Dad and we boys built on. I loved to hear my mother pray. I think she had a special link to the heavens.

Jamie shared this experience in prayer with her mother:

My mother never missed an opportunity to pray with us children. When we fell down and hurt ourselves, or we were angry with her over some trivial thing, she would kneel with us and ask Heavenly Father to soften us, or heal us, or help our spirits grow. I learned that there is a Heavenly Father from my mom's pleadings with him. They were answered too. I remember one time we asked God to help me find a button I had lost from my dress, my favorite dress. I was crying and crying when my mom suggested that we kneel down and ask Heavenly Father where it might be. He will know, she told me. As soon as we said "Amen," I remembered putting it in the pocket of the outfit I was wearing at the time. I ran to my closet, and there it was, right where I remembered. No one can tell me that God doesn't live. My mother taught me that he loves me and that he is real.

I have many memories of FHE with good lessons, fun games, and refreshments. One of our favorite FHEs was when we'd just sit around and ask my parents gospel questions and we'd discuss them together. Every time we'd read the Bible and Book of Mormon stories. We didn't just go to the movie or the park. I can honestly say that most of my knowledge of the gospel and love for the gospel came from my early childhood and the time my parents took to teach us correct principles.

I think one factor that helped in our family was that we did not have a TV. Looking back on it, I loved it! It made us take time for the more important things, like the gospel, each other, our homework, work around the house and farm, etc. We have a TV now and things are not the same. Some of these important things are not done as frequently, and I feel bad that the younger kids won't have some of the same memories that I have had. I hope I will be able to convince my husband that we can live without a TV. The negative factors of TV by far outweigh the positive factors, as far as I'm concerned, and I think the salvation of my family is more important than a few good shows.

Katrina shared her feelings about family gatherings:

Family home evenings didn't always go exactly as planned. We had our fair share of flops, but we also had plenty of meaningful experiences. The biggest challenges came when the older kids became teenagers. As I look back now, I am starting to understand how difficult it must have been for my parents to keep four teenagers in line with four little ones to entertain as well. I remember family home evenings each year where, after a lesson, we would plant and weed the garden. Even though we all grumbled, we enjoyed the benefits at harvest time. Other family home evening activities also brought some complaints, but looking back on it now, it was the best thing we ever did.

Jared recalled his experience with family home evening:

One of the great hymns of the church is entitled "There Is Beauty All Around." Our family, after fifteen or so years of singing it, have memorized the words. It is our family night theme song. I don't know that we have had a family night without singing this song. The message is of peace and love and joy that can be felt "when there's love at home." I sing those words when I have trouble controlling my thoughts.

I also think it is very important to have meals together as a family, and my mom made sure of that. It was another time that my family grew closer together. We talked about everything, and even the little kids got in their say. We kept our scriptures right by our dining room table so that we could read after our meal. They have a little spaghetti and a little milk spilled on them, and they are well-worn, but I wouldn't trade them for a new set for anything.

My mom has always taught us gospel principles and how to love others based on the Savior's example. One of her famous sayings was, "Let us all speak kind words to each other," like the words from the hymn. I genuinely look up to my mother and hope to someday be a mother like her. Along with my dad, my mom has added greatly to my life. It meant a lot to me to have her there whenever I came home to ask me how my day went. My mom has always been a good friend to me, but as I get older, she has even become a better friend.

Jim recalled his own family's meals:

Another important time in our family's life was eating meals together. This of course took a lot of planning. There was always a well-cooked, nutritional meal. As soon as my dad came home from work we would gather around the set table to kneel in family prayer. Some of the best times were shared with those six chairs filled. It is true that a mother is in charge of the home. So often my dad could only be there long enough to take care of the big tasks.

My mother is a wonderful example of someone who honestly feasts on the scripture daily. She has taught me by her example to pray, to search the scriptures every day for answers to my prayers and for comfort. My sister and I attended early morning seminary. Before we left, we would have our prayer, then sit down with our bowls of cereal while Mom would read us a couple of scriptures. We would discuss them and she taught us how to apply the scriptures to our daily lives. Right now she is working on her own Book of Mormon project. She has photocopied each page of the Book of Mormon, and each day she takes the page and researches each cross reference. She then writes her feelings about each scripture around the edge of the page. She has given me a wonderful gift: my love for the scriptures.

Along with the spiritual side, my mom and dad have given our family the fun-loving side of life by the numerous vacations we have gone on. Just as President Benson said, these memories will never be forgotten! I have probably camped at every national park on the western side of the United States. There are seven of us in my familyfive childrenand as we would travel around, fellow travelers would stand in awe that two parents would attempt to take vacations with five small children. The thing that would startle them the most was to see us, four girls and one boy, stagger out of a small truck-bed-camper at gas stations to use the nearest facility. I must admit, it was very cozy in that very small camper, but those are the times when our family grew closer together. I wouldn't have traded for a full-size trailer camper for anything.

I remember the summer we played Wiffle ball. I say "the summer" because it was an activity that was repeated frequently. My parents were determined to teach us good sportsmanship. Because there are nine children, we had just enough to field the ball while each of us took a turn at bat. Most people would have considered that first week a disaster and left it at that. My parents aren't most people, though. They decided to have us play Wiffle ball every week until we could play with decent sportsmanship. We thought they would give up after the first few games. I don't know exactly how it happened, but somehow we came around. I must admit that I wasn't the most helpful. After a month or so though, we did it. Now it's kind of a family joke, but I really admire my parents for their dedication. They felt that it was important for us to learn to both work and play together, and they accomplished this goal in spite of the kicking and screaming.

Looking back in retrospect to the time before my birth, it may not have been suspected that my mother would be such a wonderful mother. She was one of those fun-loving California girls. Her priorities were not set on the skills of raising children. In fact, after her engagement to my dad, they read his patriarchal blessing which spoke of his wife being a great mother in Israel. She felt he had made a big mistake in his selection, and she suggested that he perhaps try again! It was only a year and a half later that she held my sister in her arms.

In our home, children have never been thought of as possessions. We are instead involved in a stewardship program. Our home has been a school from which to learn and grow and eventually graduate. My parents have had success from basing their teachings on correct principles. My mother has been an excellent example. She was always at the crossroads. The spare key to the house was seldom used. She took the effort to plan her schedule so that she could be there when we needed her most. This did not mean that she lived a sheltered, reclusive life, only one which was organized and planned. I can often remember coming home to an afternoon snack prepared in our behalf.

Jared thought about his mother this way:

I can remember things that happened back to when I was three years old. Most of my first memories are of my mom playing little games with my sister and me. She would read and tell us stories, and teach us to love each other. I also remember that our house was always neat and tidy. It was a very comfortable place to live, even though it was not very big. I don't ever remember feeling scared and alone, because as we got older and went to school, Mom was always at home when we came back from school. She would greet us with a smile, ask about our day, and sometimes feed us a little snack. I felt protected and secure, and boy, did I love my mom.

She wouldn't let too much time go by before she helped us get going on our daily chores and homework. We continued to grow up, and more brothers and sisters came into the family. There are five of us now, and Mom's time has become more limited trying to be there for all of us all of the time. I remember feeling a special confidence with my mom. We had shared so many experiences together that I could talk to her about anything. During junior high and high school I took advantage of that special friendship, and Mom and I would have wonderful talks about life. I am who I am today because my mom understands what it means to be a mother. Just last night I went home to visit. In a way that I can't explain here, my wonderful mom gently taught me yet another lesson. Oh, how I love her with all my heart.

Listen to Cameron express his views about his mom:

I was pondering on the talk that President Benson gave to mothers in Israel relative to the "Ten Points." In a way I was grading my own mother on each point, seeing just how well she'd done with us as children. It was surprising how each point could be clearly seen in her method of child rearing and daily life. One point really seemed to be her strengthit was the tenth and final point that President Benson concluded with. It reads simply, "Love your children," and seems simple, but as I thought about it, it got more and more complicated. I think that more often than not we took our mom for granted and sort of expected her to be the way she was. It hasn't been till recently, when my father and I were talking about the family and how they were able to raise eight kids who not only turned out sane, but well rounded and strong in the Church. I recall how he paused to ponder and said that he was gone all day so most of the work was done by Mom. Well, what did she do that made the difference? I thought to myself. My dad then paid perhaps the biggest tribute to my mother that a woman can receive. He said that "no mother has ever loved her kids more than she did." He talked of how she would just hold each of us hour after hour. She would talk to us, sing to us, play with us, and laugh with us. We were her life, he said. I suppose that as the years crept by there were a few instances where this love has literally changed my life.

I recall that while in seventh grade I was having some struggles in school. I was skinny and clung to my best friend for my stability and sole companionship. It wasn't until one day when we moved away that my troubles began. I was insecure, alone, and used to dread the lunch bell that would begin the longest hour of my day. As if things weren't bad enough, I was hitting that stage of maturity referred to as prepubescence. Of course, I had no idea what that was, but I did know that for some reason all of a sudden I was not a happy little camper. I remember sitting in class and for no reason at all just feeling extremely depressed. Although I was insecure and had a bully pick on me at my locker daily, I was normally a happy guybut not now. It got worse every day to the point where I would sit in class and fight back the tears. Sometimes I wouldn't win that fight, and those around me would ask what was wrong. I still remember telling them it was just allergies.

With hindsight it's easy to forget about those hard times as I began lifting weights and finally straightened that bully out and got in with the right crowd and took off with sports. But at that point in time the world was coming to an end. I will never forget as long as I live the days on end where I couldn't figure out what was wrong with me, where I felt that I was going crazy. But I'll tell you that every morning I would set a goal to make it back to that front door, because I knew that if I did there was going to be my mother waiting there for me. She'd hurry to finish all her chores of the day, waking up early many days so that she could be with one of her eight children in his time of need. And it wasn't the things that she said, but she would take me back to my room and just hold me. No words were spoken, she just did the one thing that only a mother couldlove and never lose faith. I remember her praying and crying with me, rocking me and reassuring me that everything was going to be okay. This doesn't present a very manly picture, does it? Well, even after winning all-state honors in football during high school and two years of college ball here at the "Y," I know that being tough was not the way out of that dark place. I can't imagine what would have happened had I not been flooded with love at that timeeven more, if I'd have come home to an empty house.

Besides our times of need, my mother's love was consistent even when we messed up bad. When a sentence was passed and punishment exacted, our slate was always wiped clean. She was literally the heart of the family. Her job requirements were more than cooking, cleaning, and laundry. My mother pumped the blood of life through our house and family. She was not as funny as the comediennes on TV or as quick-witted as many of the women in the workforce. Sometimes we felt that she would come down too hard on us, ride us too hard about practicing the piano or those "dating rules," but the bottom line is that she knew that no matter how much of a botch she made out of some things, if she tried her best and just loved us to pieces then her salary and reward as a mother would be astronomical. In the world's terms my mom has the best contract in the world. It's guaranteed for life, and one of the best parts is the built-in bonus that extends throughout eternity.

From these student comments, the importance of a mother to her children becomes obvious as she uses her divine talents to lift, bless, listen, care, and serve her children. As you can see, it is not a theoretical, pie-in-sky model the Lord has given us, but there are practical things that can make a difference in the lives of children whose mothers hold their sacred calling in the highest regard. As Abraham Lincoln said, the most important book we may read is the one called "Mother."
