Daniel K. Judd, Douglas E. Brinley, Eternal Families ( 1996)

11 The Power of Love and Affection in Our Families

Randal A. Wright

All of us as human beings have a basic need to feel loved. Not only does parental touch in the form of holding and hugging signify love to a child, but mounting evidence from research confirms that physical affection is an important physiological need. When children feel love within the context of their family setting, they feel secure and confident in their own abilities, and therefore their behavior is more consistent with parental values and ideals. When this need for love and affection goes unmet, however, there is the probability that children will seek attention, love, and affection elsewhere. For teenagers this quest becomes especially dangerous because they often turn to members of the opposite sex (and sometimes the same sex) to meet these needs. The adversary uses this basic human requirement to entrap susceptible youth in immorality.

President Ezra Taft Benson referred to this when he said, "I recognize that most people fall into sexual sin in a misguided attempt to fulfill basic human needs. We all have a need to feel loved and worthwhile. We all seek to have joy and happiness in our lives. Knowing this, Satan often lures people into immorality by playing on their basic needs." ("The Law of Chastity," New Era, January 1988, pp. 4-5.)

Dr. Elizabeth R. McAnarney, director of adolescent medicine at the University of Rochester Medical School, explained, "Adolescents need touch to facilitate communication and convey caring. When children are no longer held and comforted by their parents, they may turn to their peers instead. There is almost no data on this, but I wonder if the increase in very young teenage pregnancy comes from the need to be held. They may be using sex for a nonsexual purpose." ("Hugs and Kisses," Parents, November 1984, p. 77; emphasis added.)

Unfortunately, many parents, and thus their children, have trouble expressing love and affection. The problem seems to be more prevalent with fathers than with mothers, and older children seem to be more distant than younger. In a survey among high school students, only twenty-four percent said their fathers showed affection to them daily, while forty-nine percent said their mothers did. The problem is that too often this lack of affection is passed on to the next generation and an unfortunate cycle is perpetuated.

A friend of mine shared an excerpt from her grandfather's journal which illustrates the point. As a young man he had a strong desire to leave his native Norway and come to America. He recorded:

In the fall of 1922, four other boys in the neighborhood and I de-cided to go to America. It took several months to get our papers ready.

In January 1923, we were ready to leave home. On the morning I was to leave, my mother came upstairs at 4 a.m. to wake me up. As I lay there, she knelt by my bed and put her arm around me with her cheek against my cheek, and told me how she loved me and how she would miss me. She told me to be a good boy. She felt that she would not see me again in this life.

I had been taught never to cry or show emotion, but at that moment I wanted to put my arms around her. Unfortunately, I let them lie still by my side under the covers. I didn't say or do anything, because I was a man. How could I be so soft to put my arms around my mother, or maybe cry and tell her how I loved her? I couldn't do that. It wasn't manly. How I have regretted that moment all these years!

I got up, and she walked me two miles in the knee-deep snow to the bus stop. She helped me carry my suitcase. When I got on the bus, I shook hands with my mother and said good-bye. Now for fifty-two years I have regretted all this.

Thirty-eight years after I came over to this country, I had a chance to go back to Norway for a visit.My mother had died eighteen years before. The first thing I did the first day I was there was to go to the graveyard. I didn't know where the graves were located. I searched up and down the rows till I finally came to the graves of my mother and father. I stood there and looked at them for a minute, and all my past days were going through my mind, especially the last day I saw my mother.

I knelt down and put my arms around the marker. I put my cheek against her name, and those tears that I should have shed thirty-eight years earlier were shed there. I was not such a big man after all.

How unfortunate that this young man had been taught "never to cry or show emotion." I wonder who taught him that it wasn't manly to show emotion? Obviously it was not his mother. It's sad to imagine this young man with his arms around the tombstone expressing his love for his mother. We can learn a valuable lesson from this story. As parents, sons, and daughters, we need to learn how to convey love and affection among family members, or to continue if we have already been doing so. Such displays of affection can be a great protection in a day of sexual temptation. It is clear from research that youth who come from homes where love and affection are shown on a daily basis are much less willing to engage in immoral acts than those without such experiences.

Being a Teenager

The teen years can be a particularly difficult time of life. So many things are happening at once with so many questions in teenagers' hearts: Who am I? Why am I here? Where am I going? Do I have any talents? What can I do with my life? New feelings, desires, and urges now confuse the emotions of our youth. Fear of rejection, concern with personal appearance, peer pressure, school, homework, tests, and temptations of all kinds are of major concern.

Too, this time of life represents a major crossroad for them in their lives. The decisions they make during these critical yearseducation, missions, career, and marriageare crucial and have a great impact upon their future happiness. No wonder so many are frightened and turn to others for help. Most of us are so far removed from those days of adolescence that we are often unsympathetic, and our teenage children may find it difficult to share their feelings with us.

Ironically, it is from parents that some of our youth feel the most pressure. If we are not careful we bombard them with criticism instead of love and understanding. The following exaggerated examples on the part of critical parents may not be too far from reality in many homes:

Â¥"Why can't you clean your room? I'm going to buy you a shovel instead of a broom."

Â¥"Will you please quit eating so fast? Your tongue looks like a conveyor belt."

Â¥"I thought I told you to turn off the lights. Do you think we have a money tree growing in the backyard?"

Â¥"Didn't I tell you not to smack your lips? You sound like a cow!"

Â¥"Don't tell me this F on your report card stands for fabulous."

Researchers have estimated that an average teenager hears ten negative comments about himself for every one positive comment. Consider, parents: How are you doing in this ratio in your home? Do you give your children more positive comments than negative? What do you think you would do if someone in your home or at work were to give you the same messages that you give your children? Perhaps you would feel offended or unloved.

In our desire to help children be better than we were, we often feel that we need to point out every error and mistake they make. But if we are not careful, all they will hear is negative messages about themselves. One mother recently told me she chastised her teenaged son for some trivial matter. When she was through, her fourteen-year-old meekly looked up and asked, "Mom, is there anything you do like about me?" This shocked her into realizing that though she greatly loved her son, her desire for him to achieve caused her to spend most of her time pointing out his faults.

We need to remember that many of our youth are feeling rejected or frightened while struggling at school, with peer relationships, and many times even at church. Our homes must be a safe harbor from the storms of life. We can eliminate much of their fears by sending genuine love messages to them. I am reminded of the scripture that says, "There is no fear in love; but perfect love casteth out fear" (1 Jn. 4:18).

The key, then, to casting out fear is found in one simple word: love. If we can just apply our love by letting our children know that we care for them, truly love them, there is a greater chance that their fears will vanish. They will also be more secure and better able to accomplish their life's mission while staying morally clean. It sounds easy enough, but Nephi reminded us that "because of the simpleness of the way, or easiness of it, there were many who perished" (1 Ne. 17:41). It takes effort and a softened heart to show love to others, but the principle is a simple one and within the power of all of us to do.

While walking outside after a youth conference in a midwestern state, I met two Mia-Maid-age girls. I knew that I probably would never see them again, so I gave them both a brief hug and told them how much I enjoyed being at their conference with them.

When I returned home, I received a letter from one of these young girls. She wrote, "I thought you might want to know how much it meant to Misty and me when you talked to us after youth conference. It really made us feel good that you cared enough about the youth of the Church to talk to us when you really needed to leave. And whether you knew it or not, we were touched so much when right before you left, you hugged us and then on top of that you said, ÃI love you.' That meant a lot to both of usthank you very much."

I wondered why this simple act of affection had meant so much to this young woman. It began to make more sense as I continued her letter.

"When I got into the car, my father was angry about something, and he started degrading the Church, its leaders and members. He didn't want to hear about youth conference or anything that had happened. This really upset me, as I love the Church and its leaders. It hurt me so much that I couldn't stop crying from 12:30 to 3:00."

She went on to describe her dad as a very good man, but one who had a bad temper and who showed her little love and affection. She doubted if he even loved her. My heart went out to this fine young teenager, and I began to realize why a simple hug and saying "I love you" had meant so much to her. I fear for her, and for all young girls in similar situations if a young man with few values comes along to take advantage of her need for love.

Before we are quick to judge this father, however, I ask you fathers who may be reading this if your own children really know they are lovedand feel it. Oh, sure, we say they know, we think they know, we told them once or twice when they were little. I have a strong feeling that my young friend's father really does love his daughter; he just has a hard time showing it. He probably doesn't even realize his daughter has any doubts about his love for her, for he may be providing her with clothes, allowance, and a nice home.

I'm afraid the old story of Ole and Olga would describe all too many families. It seems Ole and Olga lived on a small farm in Iowa. Olga was starved for affection. Ole never gave her any indication that he loved her, so Olga's need to be appreciated went unfulfilled. At her wits' end, Olga blurted out, "Ole, why don't you ever tell me that you love me?" Ole stoically responded, "Olga, when we were married, I told you that I loved you. If I ever change my mind, I'll let you know."

Family members who are treated like Olga may find a reason to look outside the home for affection. When this happens, the results can be extremely detrimental. Why, then, are some parents so reluctant to tell their teenagers they love them or to demonstrate some physical affection?

Researchers have discovered many reasons for this reluctance. Obviously individuals who were not shown any affection in their own homes while growing up often don't know how to show affection to their own children, or they may feel hesitant or even awkward about it. Others have been conditioned by society to believe that to show affection, especially between father and son, is somehow a sign of weakness. Many men in our culture feel that to be strong they should not show emotion or affection to their children at all. In reality, those who don't display any affection are the ones who are weak, while those who demonstrate affection to their children are building strong and lasting relationships with their children.

The consequences of men believing Satan's lies are devastating. All types of illicit sexual behavior have been rising dramatically for years. A lack of love and affection in our homes creates an unfortunate cycle that is often carried on to future generations. Youth who are starved for love in their homes tend to produce children who are even more starved for love.

Here is an illustration of this point: "ÃWhen my father stopped hugging me, I decided I could either tear up the beautiful book he had given me for Christmas, or I could kill myself, or I could try to get hugs from someone else,' says Janie, thirteen, who recently had her first sexual encounter. ÃI finally decided to get a boyfriend.' " (Kathleen McCoy, "Is Your Child Flirting with Sex?" Readers Digest, September 1989, p. 114.)

This young girl's story points out something that all parents need to seriously consider. I really don't believe that her dad loved her any less because she turned thirteen years old. From this point of view, he may have felt justified in his withdrawal of physical affection because of some societal conditioning. From the daughter's point of view, he quit hugging her because he must not love her anymore. After getting a confusing message from his actions, she acted on the false assumption that he no longer cared. The solution to her need for love was to get a boyfriend, which led to immorality. Satan won another victory over an unsuspecting youth and her dad. I'm sure this father had no idea that his lack of affection could possibly influence his daughter's sexual behavior.

Do our children get confusing messages about our love for them? How many young girls do you think have become sexually active in a desperate search for affection they are not receiving at home?

If youth are to make it through the dangerous teen years with the self-control needed to avoid immorality, they must know they are loved. Elder Marion G. Romney once said, paraphrasing author Hugh Evander Willis, "The only motive strong enough to induce men to exercise that self-control required by the religion of Jesus is love" (in Conference Report, October 1962, p. 94).

What, then, is the solution to this perplexing problem? How can we let our children know of our great love for them? How can we show this love in appropriate ways? How can we be sure that our youth are not receiving messages that they are unloved?

The Savior as a Model

Let's briefly look at the earthly ministry of the Savior to see if we can gain some insights as to how he treated those closest to him. Since we have no record of Christ having children during his earthly ministry, we must look to his relationship with the Apostles and disciples for an example to use in our own homes.

A friend told me his son once posed an interesting question to him: "Dad, how come you only tell me you love me when you're mad at me?" The father said he analyzed his past actions and agreed with his son's assessment. He had shown greater love after his rebukes but forgot to tell his son when there was no problem. If we want our children to feel loved, we must tell them often when they are doing good things too!

In one classic study, several thousand high school students were asked what they would most like to hear from their parents. The survey found that fifty percent of the students said they wanted most to know if their parents loved them. (Paul Popenoe, "Do Your Children Know You Love Them?" Parents and Better Homemaking, December 1965, pp. 43-45.)

Our children, like us, have bouts of loneliness, fear, depression, embarrassment, frustration, regret, and temptations. We must be there to heal their afflictions and pain with kindness, compassion, and mercy, just as Jesus did. Whatever our children needhelp with a problem or assignment, an encouraging word, even a blessingwe can give them by following Christ's modeling.

The Prophet Joseph Smith expressed the value of friendship as he said, "When persons manifest the least kindness and love to me, O what power it has over my mind, while the opposite course has a tendency to harrow up all the harsh feelings and depress the human mind" (History of the Church 5:24).

I'm the star player on the school basketball team, but never once has either parent come to see me play. They're either too busy, too tired, or can't get a baby-sitter for my younger sister. The crowds cheer for me, the girls hang around my locker, some kids even ask me for my autograph. But it doesn't mean anything if the two most important people in my life don't care." (F. Phillip Rice, The Adolescent [Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1987], p. 476.)

Adolescents want and need their parents' attention. They may come to resent parents who are away from home too much. Wise parents put children above friends, recreation, and work, for family time is more important than time spent in any other activity. President Benson counseled mothers to be at the "crossroads" in their children's livesto be at home as their children leave and return from their various activities (see Come, Listen to a Prophet's Voice [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1990], pp. 25-37).

Perhaps the greatest evidence of the need for this counsel is that, as surveys indicate, the time period when most illicit relations between young teenagers occur is between three and five o'clock in the afternoon. Also, research indicates that the automobile is no longer the place where the majority of teens lose their virtue. Over half have their first sexual experience in their own home or in the home of their partner. Young people today can easily become isolated and lonely. Many are frequently left alone with little supervision, and as their sexual impulses are fanned by the modern media and coupled with a need for affection, the likelihood of a disaster is increased. Maybe that's one of the reasons President Benson counseled us to be at the crossroads of our children's lives "whether [they] are six or sixteen" (ibid., p. 32).

Of course, some parents cannot be at the crossroads of their children's lives even though they desperately want to be. In these cases it takes careful planning and inspiration to provide proper supervision. Our Heavenly Father is aware of our needs, and I am convinced that if we listen to the promptings of the Spirit of the Lord and follow through in teaching our children correct principles, he will inspire us on a course that will prevent any circumstances that would destroy our children. Then, if we build strong loving relationships with them so that they feel loved and secure, their basic need for affection will be met.

Of the many ways we can show love to other family members, touch is one of the most powerful. Perhaps it is the most direct method of communicating love. Does it not seem to you that love flows when we hug, place an arm around another's shoulder, plant a kiss on their cheek, hold hands, or even share a handshake?

Studies show that while many parents give their infants and toddlers physical affection, hugging and kissing decreases with each passing year. By the time most children reach their teenage years, they get very little physical affection from their parents.

Consider the power of physical affection in the following story by Melvin J. Ballard:

I recall an experience which I had two years ago. . . .

Away on the Fort Peck Reservation where I was doing missionary work with some of our brethren, laboring among the Indians, seeking the Lord for light to decide certain matters pertaining to our work there, and receiving a witness from Him that we were doing things according to His will, I found myself one evening in the dreams of the night in that sacred building, the temple. After a season of prayer and rejoicing I was informed that I should have the privilege of entering into one of those rooms to meet a glorious Personage, and, as I entered the door, I saw, seated on a raised platform, the most glorious Being my eyes have ever beheld or that I ever conceived existed in all the eternal worlds. As I approached to be introduced, he arose and stepped towards me with extended arms, and he smiled as he softly spoke my name. If I shall live to be a million years old, I shall never forget that smile. He took me into his arms and kissed me, pressed me to his bosom, and blessed me, until the marrow of my bones seemed to melt! When he had finished, I knelt at his feet, and, as I bathed them with my tears and kisses, I saw the prints of the nails in the feet of the Redeemer of the world. The feeling that I had in the presence of Him who hath all things in His hands, to have His love, His affection, and His blessing was such that if I ever can receive that of which I had but a foretaste, I would give all that I am, all that I ever hope to be to feel what I then felt! (Melvin J. Ballard: Crusader for Righteousness [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966], pp. 138-39.)

Have you ever stopped to consider how physical touch is used in the Lord's church today? Handshakes, blessings, anointings and sealings, ordinations, confirmations, baptisms, temple ordinancesall use touch to transfer power and love from the Savior and priesthood holder. Following the Savior's example and using this power with our family members can bring abundant blessings to our children and spouse.

Joseph Smith said, "Nothing is so much calculated to lead people to forsake sin as to take them by the hand, and watch over them with tenderness" (History of the Church 5:23-24). If taking someone by the hand and watching over them with tenderness can lead people to forsake sin, can it not also help prevent them from sinning in the first place?

By following the Savior's example of touching, the Prophet Joseph had a powerful effect on a little boy. L. O. Littlefield accompanied Zion's Camp and recorded an experience he had with the Prophet while encamped at Salt River in June of 1834.

While there the men were paraded outside of the camp for exercise and instruction. This was an unpleasant feature for me, as I was too young and too small of stature to act with the men. This created within me, as I remember, some lonesome reflections. I sat down upon a rock where the men were passing, the better to observe their movements. While thus seated, the Prophet Joseph Smith, who happened to be passing by in quite a hurry, noticed me.

He stepped to where I sat alone. It might have been my isolated position that attracted him. I knew not the motive; but that man, who to me appeared so good and so godlike, really halted in his hurry to notice meonly a little boy. Placing one of his hands upon my head, he said: "Well, bub, is there no place for you?"

This recognition from the man whom I then knew was a Prophet of God created within me a tumult of emotions. I could make him no reply. My young heart was filled with joy to me unspeakable. ("The Prophet Joseph Smith in Zion's Camp," Juvenile Instructor, 15 February 1892, p. 109.)

One family I know forms a circle every morning and evening to kneel in family prayer. As they arise they look into each child's eyes and say "I love you" and give each a kiss and a hug. There are practical benefits that come from this tradition:

A few years ago I attended a high school basketball game between two powerhouse teams vying for the championship of an important tournament. Lincoln High had garnered five Texas State championships in the 1980s and was ranked as the number one team in the state on this occasion. The opponent was Beaumont West Brook, led by Lukie Jackson, son of former Olympic and NBA All-Star Luke Jackson. Both teams gave it everything they had. West Brook held the lead from the beginning of the game, thanks to the twenty-seven points accumulated by Lukie Jackson. Then, with just a few seconds left in regulation play, Lincoln tied the score, and the game went into overtime. The West Brook team was able to gain a one point advantage over their opponents. It appeared they would hold the lead to win the gamea great upset. However, with less than thirty seconds to go, a Lincoln player drove to the basket and was fouled by Lukie. He made both free throws, and Lincoln won the game by one point. Lukie was visibly upset. To have played so hard, scored so many points, but then commit a foul that cost his team the game against the defending state champions was devastating.

I wondered what his dad was thinking. Would he yell at his boy for making a mistake that cost them the game? Then I turned around to see a huge man coming down the aisle toward the dejected player. It was Lukie's father. Surely Lukie would get a tongue lashing that many sons would receive in similar situations when the father was embarrassed by his son's actions. But when they met, Luke Jackson threw his arms around his son and, in front of thousands of people, held him tightly, patted him on the back, and quietly talked to him. I watched this touching scene, wondering what I would have done had he been my son. When the long embrace ended, Lukie's countenance had changed. He looked like his team had just won the state championship. He was smiling and happy as he went over to congratulate the winning team.

I don't think I've ever witnessed such a change in attitude in such a short time. Do you think Lukie Jackson loves and respects his father? Do you think he will be more inclined to listen to his father's counsel in the future? Lukie, by the way, went on to stardom at Syracuse University.

President Ezra Taft Benson once said, "I am convinced that before a child can be influenced for good by his or her parents, there must be a demonstration of respect and love" (in Conference Report, April 1981, p. 46). Showing love and affection to our children under all circumstances really does pay dividends.

Joseph Smith pointed out this great principle when he said, "It is a time-honored adage that love begets love. Let us pour forth loveshow forth our kindness unto all mankind, and the Lord will reward us with everlasting increase; cast our bread upon the waters and we shall receive it after many days, increased to a hundredfold" (History of the Church 5:517). When we understand the great love that Jesus possessed for us in order to go through the ordeal of the Atonement, we are softened and humbled, and turn to him in meek appreciation and adoration. As John the Beloved recorded, "We love him, because he first loved us" (1 Jn. 4:19).

Is that not a sure formula? Will our children not love us when they know we loved them first, and regardless of their behavior or actions? Will they be more likely to follow our counsel even as the disciples followed Jesus when they love and respect us? I think so. Will they then be more likely to listen when we counsel and warn them of the dangers of immorality? I think they will likely be more receptive to counsel when they know these values are so important to us. Our challenge is to express love to them as Jesus did to his disciples, so that there is no room for doubt in their minds that they are our first priority.

Two Latter-day Saint researchers conducted a survey of approxi- mately two hundred successful Mormon families to determine why their children were so exceptional. The families were referred by stake presidents because they were faithful to gospel principles and appeared to be close and supportive of each other. The conclusions seem to verify that demonstrating love and affection helps youth to stay morally clean.

The parents were asked how they showed affection in their homes. The results showed the following:

How Effective Families Show Love

Tell them we love them97%

Do things for them96%

Hugging94%

Tell by writing or phoning91%

Kissing85%

Provide a living for them74%

These families were also asked how frequently they exchanged some form of physical affection, and eighty-one percent of the families said that it was a daily thing. (William G. Dyer and Phillip R. Kunz, Effective Mormon Families [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1986], pp. 80-84.)

This research demonstrates our need for appropriate physical touch. If you have been a stranger to sharing physical expressions of your love with other family members, decide now to start. It may feel a little uncomfortable at first because of its newness. You may want to begin with a pat on the back or even a handshake. Remember, sharing physical tokens of love can have a great impact on family members. Consider my friend Mark's journal entry:

"I seem to be at rock bottom in my life. I'm so depressed." That was my journal entry for February of 1981. I was nineteen years old, attending school at the Brigham Young UniversityHawaii Campus in Laie, Hawaii. I lacked direction and purpose and felt that my life was floundering. My reason for coming to Hawaii seemed clear: my family was experiencing some serious problems, and I wanted to get away from them. Upon arriving in Hawaii, I found that I was not any happier. Surfing, swimming, playing on the beachnone of these activities seemed to fill the emptiness I felt. With time I learned that it was not my family I was trying to get away from. I was really running away from myself.

I had fought off all pressures of going on a mission. My testimony had weakened over the years, and it became increasingly difficult to understand the role the Church played in my life. At BYUHawaii I was slow to make friends. I had a chip on my shoulder and people could detect it. My countenance and appearance seemed to underscore the fact. I kept my hair down to my shoulders, and because I was in violation of the standards code, I would tuck my hair into a baseball cap whenever going to class. No one was going to make me get a haircut. My hair had become a symbol of my rebellion and unhappiness.

Although I had closed myself off to family and friends, deep down I wanted to change. I wanted to be loved. But because of family problems, because of past mistakes I'd made, and because of my feelings of inade-quacy, I would not open myself up, nor did I know how to. I did not love myself, and therefore I concluded that no one else loved me either. What was there to love?

One day I heard that President Spencer W. Kimball was coming to Hawaii and was to speak on campus to a gathering of members in the newly constructed sports arena. I had never seen the prophet before. The Sunday he was to speak, I dressed, walked over to the arena, and took a seat on the back row. I was very moved by President Kimball's remarks and expressions of love.

After arriving back at my dorm room, I lay on my bed thinking about the wonderful words that had been spoken and how I felt during the talk. I was restless and wanted to get awayto think about my life and try to understand myself. I walked to the Hawaii Temple, located near campus, and sat on a stone bench in front of the entrance. I sat there for some time poring over my life, wondering why I had elected to take certain pathways.

I suddenly noticed that a small number of people were excitedly gathering around the entrance of the temple. Moments later, President Kimball and some of the other General Authorities emerged from the building. As they shook his hand and embraced him, I watched from a distance away, too frightened to approach him. I feared that he, as a prophet of God, would be able to discern the present state of my spirit and would peer into my eyes, seeing the mistakes I had made. I also feared he would see my long hair, chastise me for breaking the rules, and possibly have me kicked out of school. And so I quietly watched as he proceeded down the walkway across from where I stood.

The image of what then happened will always remain with me. President Kimball stopped and gazed into my frightened eyes. I prayed he would not come toward me. And yet he left the group he was traveling with and walked directly toward me. The feeling of shame that engulfed my soul made me want to get up and run from him. When he reached me, he threw his arms around my neck, kissed my cheek, and whispered in my ear, "I love you." I shall never forget the warmth and love that I felt. I could not dispute ithe loved me. I actually felt his love for me. I then did something I hadn't done for a long, long timeI cried. I couldn't control myself and I went behind the temple and continued to sob. That pure love had melted away my anger and bitterness and made me realize that I did have worth. I felt that I was loved, and that if my Father in Heaven had been there, he would have told me the same thingthat he truly loved me.

Can we not follow President Kimball's example in our families? I am convinced that if every family in the Church expressed their love for each other frequently and genuinely, the immorality that we see on the part of both youth and adults would be virtually eliminated. In a world where rejection is so common, it is vital that our children find affirmation and security at home with each other, and especially with their parents. The love and comfort parents extend can enable our young adults to form loving relationships when the time comes for them to organize eternal families of their own.

_____

Randal A. Wright's degrees are from Brigham Young University. He received his Ph.D. in family studies in 1995. He has been a seminary and institute teacher in the Church Educational System for many years. He is a popular speaker for BYU Education Week and the Know Your Religion and Especially for Youth series. He and his wife, Wendy, are the parents of five children. He is the author of a number of books on morality in media. He is currently the LDS institute director at the University of Texas in Austin.
