Daniel K. Judd, Douglas E. Brinley, Eternal Families ( 1996)

12 The Power of Positive Discipline

Geri R. Brinley

I think that most parents of past generations viewed discipline as a form of punishment associated with spanking, grounding, a denial of privileges, or sending children to their rooms. However, the word discipline itself comes from the same root word as disciple and is best thought of as being related to teaching. Let's face itparents are teachers and children are disciples, meaning that they will learn good and bad from us. It is our task as parents to prepare them to live an abundant life in this modern, complex, and sometimes crazy world. There are many things they will need us to teach themnot only to survive but to live well. Consequently, discipline should be a positive experience as we teach our children what we would like them to know. It was never intended that discipline would be a punitive exercise involving physical and emotional pain. Discipline should be designed to strengthen relationships between parents and children.

A New Definition of Discipline

Consider this "new" definition of discipline: "Setting limits so that children feel safe to explore their world and gain confidence in their ability to handle social and emotional experiences in their lives." Limits allow youngsters to grow up with the confidence they need to deal with life, because through limits, children learn self-control in a safe environmenthome, enabling them to make wise choices when they become independent of you and move out on their own.

Given the foregoing definition, the primary goal of discipline is to teach children responsibility by helping them learn how their choices affect both themselves and those around them. When children learn to be accountable at an early age, not only do they gain confidence in their ability to handle life's problems but they generally turn out to be more considerate of others. To learn responsibility a child must be allowed the freedom to make many of his own choices, and that means that he will make mistakes. But parents soon learn that it is of little value to force a child to behave in a certain way, even if they know it is in the child's best interest to do it their way.

The Lord never uses force with his children. In the premortal life, when Satan's plan to negate agency was rejected, the Lord made it clear that agency was to be an integral part of our education, with responsibility and accountability attached to it. Thus, it is called moral agency (see D&C 101:78). This principle was also reinforced by the Lamanite prophet Samuel, who taught:

And now remember, remember, my brethren, that whosoever perisheth, perisheth unto himself; and whosoever doeth iniquity, doeth it unto himself; for behold, ye are free; ye are permitted to act for yourselves; for behold, God hath given unto you a knowledge and he hath made you free.

He hath given unto you that ye might know good from evil, and he hath given unto you that ye might choose life or death; and ye can do good and be restored unto that which is good, or have that which is good restored unto you; or ye can do evil, and have that which is evil restored unto you. (Hel. 14:30-31.)

Ralph was a young man whose parents did not allow him to make many decisions. Fearful of his parents, he obeyed their rules when they were present, but when he was out of their range of control he rebelled in destructive ways. Because others made decisions for him, he never learned to think through issues on his own. As he grew up and peer friendships developed, he continued his pattern of following others, and most often those decisions were not in his best interests. Some were even illegal.

The gospel teaches us that because we have agency we are to act for ourselves and not to simply be acted upon; we are to learn to choose wisely and responsibly. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught, "I teach the people correct principles and they govern themselves" (Joseph Smith, quoted by John Taylor in Journal of Discourses 10:57-58). Thus, teaching principles of behavior to children is important for their healthy development. Boundaries and limits protect young children from unwise choices and assist them in learning to trust loving and caring parents. Gradually children must be given the freedom to make decisions within reasonable limits and expectations appropriate to their age and maturity levels. Proper discipline allows children to make good decisions and to learn responsible behavior as they relate with others. The best time for a child to experience the consequences of behavior is in youth, when consequences are fairly benign.

Children must be taught ways to live compatibly with other human beingsanother function of discipline. It is the parents' responsibility to define for their children what constitutes responsible behavior and then to provide opportunities for them to practice these principles in the home. Such teaching suffers when it is left to nonfamily caretakers, baby-sitters, or TV role models. Joseph F. Smith counseled parents:

Do not let your children out to specialists in these things, but teach them by your own precept and example, by your own fireside. Be a specialist yourself in the truth. . . . Not one child in a hundred would go astray, if the home environment, example and training, were in harmony with the truth in the gospel of Christ, as revealed and taught to the Latter-day Saints. Fathers and mothers, you are largely to blame for the infidelity and indifference of your children. You can remedy the evil by earnest worship, example, training and discipline, in the home. (Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1939], p. 302.)

Even child development specialists or counselors do not know your child as well as you do. Your common sense as a couple, together with the Lord's inspiration, can provide adequate guides to help you rear your children to be socially mature and responsible adults.

If parents are to make discipline a positive experience, they must first understand the goals and motivation of children.

Why Do Children Do What They Do?

You'll hear it over and over again in this chapter, so may I suggest that you brand this on your hand or burn it in your brain: All behavior has purpose. Though we may not always be aware of why we do some things, there are reasons behind our actions. Parents need to understand these reasons as they deal with their children on a daily basis. Elder Richard G. Scott taught the principle that "when, as mothers, you are consistently in the home, at least during the hours the children are predominantly there, you can detect the individual needs of each child and provide ways to satisfy them. Your divinely given instincts help sense a child's special talents and unique capacities so you can nurture and strengthen them." (In Conference Report, April 1993, p. 41.)

Before we can help our children make behavioral changes, it is important that we understand why children do what they do. Understanding why a child behaves in a certain way can be determined or discerned in a number of ways: by knowing something about the stages of physical, mental, and emotional growth common to human development; by praying to Heavenly Father (we are, after all, rearing his children); and by gaining inspiration through the scriptures and the messages of living prophets, who know something about human nature. Here are some helps for you to assess the behavior of young children:

Your Child Is Working Through a Stage of Growth

Young children may simply be in a stage of growth that is perfectly normal for their developmental age. (For a summary of the age characteristics of children up to age twelve, see The How Book for Teaching Children [Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1984].) These questions can help you determine what is "normal" behavior for an age group:

1.Do you remember similar behavior at that stage of your own life or with your older children?

2.Have you observed this kind of behavior in other children of the same age?

3.Can you find this behavior mentioned in child development texts for his or her age group?

4.Does this behavior seem reasonable given the age of the child?

Once you've decided that a certain behavior is normal or reasonable for a child's age and stage of development, what can you do about it? The answer depends on several factors, including your own tolerance level! If a particular behavior is unacceptable to you, it may be channeled into something more positive while allowing the child room to learn and mature. It is important to remain patient and calm rather than becoming emotionally punishing or punitive. You may simply have to wait out this stage. At the same time, it is important that you not withhold love or send your child negative messages such as "You are bad" or "You are incompetent" because of his or her actions.

An example of unacceptable behavior is that which often occurs when a child learns to feed himself. Usually at about age two, a child begins to take control of his motor activities sufficiently to insist on feeding himself. It may be a mess at first! Attempts will be awkward and clumsy, and he may refuse to use a spoon. He may be so determined to be independent of you that he'll refuse any food you attempt to spoon him, possibly shaking his head back and forth with his lips tightly pursed. He may even knock away the spoonful of oatmeal you offer, spilling its contents everywhere. If you are in a hurry to get this meal over with or are uptight about the mess he makes, or if you see his independence as a threat to your authority, you may be impatient and may be tempted to force the child to eat your way, or to put the meal away and let him go hungry. Neither response serves a useful purpose. You might end up with two temper tantrumsyours and his! Your child's desire to become more independent and take more control of his life, even in eating, is perfectly normal and healthy and should be encouraged. Here are some ways to deal with this problem:

1.Plan on a meal taking more time so you're not feeling pressured to hurry the child.

2.Initially use foods that can easily be eaten by hand (sandwiches, cut up pieces of fruit or vegetables, Cheerios, crackers, cheese) and a cup of milk or juice with a tight lid and a small spout.

3.Patiently put a spoon in your child's hand and encourage him to try to use it, but do not insist.

At first he might pick up the food with one hand, put it on the spoon he is holding in the other, and then try to get it into his mouth without turning it upside down. With practice and patience on your part he'll eventually get the idea and the coordination necessary to carry it all off. Then you can move to messier foods, when it may be wise to put a plastic sheet under his chair.

Fulfilling Basic Human Needs

A second cause of behavior in children has to do with basic needs that are common to most of us. In the 1995 April general conference President James E. Faust referred to a poll conducted by the Wirthlin Group concerning man's basic needs. They found three essential elementsself-esteem, peace of mind, and personal contentment. (See Conference Report, April 1995, p. 81.) Abraham Maslow is known for arranging human needs into an organized hierarchy, suggesting that human beings have ego needs that must be met if they are to develop in normal, healthy ways. They include:

Physical needs: food, clothing, shelter, physical touch.

Security: feeling safe from physical and emotional harm.

Social: affiliation, acceptance and belonging, a confidential relationship with another person that includes trust and sharing.

Achievement or recognition: confidence, self-esteem, feeling needed.

Self-actualization: using one's agency, conscience, and values to fulfill one's potential.

Erik Erikson, a development psychologist, described these typical traits or skills that you might observe your children developing now and as they mature to adulthood.

Trust. Trust in others develops during the first year of life as a child's physiological needs are met. Trust can be frustrated by parents who do not teach their children to negotiate their environment, or who view the world as unpredictable and threatening. It is thought that children from such backgrounds may face life with hesitation and that they often fear participating in new experiences.

Autonomy. A two-year-old needs to do things for himself, such as making simple decisions to gain confidence and competence. This, of course, requires more time than if Mom does everything, and it will not be done as well as she does it. But if a parent insists on doing everything for the child, the message received by the child is that he or she is inadequate, or "disabled."

Initiative. Between ages three and six, a child is learning to follow others and to move out on his own. He needs to solve his own problems and learn to negotiate solutions in relationships. If Mother is constantly involved in arbitration processes, a child may learn that being a tattletale is rewarding. Unless physical danger is imminent, parents should let children work through their own squabbles.

Industry. Between ages six and twelve, a child wishes to excel and be recognized for his developing skills. Parents can help by providing opportunities for a young person to develop new proficiencies and experience the joy of success.

Identity. Adolescents need an identity of their own, a commitment to a value system; and they may investigate values and ideas other than those of their parents. It is most helpful at this time to have parents assist in this searchto talk and listen to their children's ideas rather than forbidding questions or being dictatorial. If children don't internalize values of their own, they may try to be everything to everyone else. Sometimes parents recognize this stage when a child does not want to go to church or tries to decide if he believes the same things as his parents. Patience and understanding are important at this point so that a youngster does not feel that family values are not open to his choosing. Most children who feel free to choose personal ideas and values will choose parental values after some exploration of ideas. Recall Joseph Smith as a boy of fourteen wanting to know which church was true.

Intimacy. Late adolescence through young adulthood is a time of life when a child searches for a degree of intimacy with a member of the opposite sex. This includes learning to be friends and finding appropriate ways of interacting. If this stage remains undeveloped (for such reasons as preferring to play computer or video games in isolation because these activities are less threatening than social adventures), loneliness and solitude may follow. On the other hand, if this socialization with the opposite sex is tackled before other skills have been acquired, a child, in this day of erotic media and secular influences beyond his ability to handle, may get into trouble.

Parenthood. Most people desire to bear children, but many couples in our day are unwilling to assume parenthood. The result can be selfishness and stagnation individually and as a couple. Generally, those who desire to be parents but find they are unable to conceive children often feel unfulfilled and make an effort to adopt children.

Self-actualization. In this later stage of development, individuals look back on their lives with a more long-range perspective, evaluating experiences and accomplishments. If a chosen career or family relationships haven't materialized, the person may become discouraged and even panic (ever heard of mid-life crises?).

Though you may not agree with all thatMaslow and Erikson had to say, their categories provide us with a perspective in thinking and dealing with child behavior. I personally think they are fairly accurate. The question is, how might needs and stages be handled successfully by parents? For example, the need to be physically close to others may provide the incentive for a child to use attention-seeking behavior to obtain closeness. His social need to feel worthwhile and accepted may lead to bragging or accumulating things (the most toys, the right kind of clothes, the best bike, and, later, the shiniest car, the biggest house). A child's natural curiosity and need for new experiences may lead to spectacular but unwholesome activities. When developing his sense of autonomy he has a need to be in control, which often prompts him to say no when he thinks you want him to say yes, or vice versa.

The question arises thenhow does a parent know when a certain behavior is abnormal rather than merely a symptom of an unfilled need? See if these questions are helpful:

Â¥Is the behavior inappropriate for the age of the child? For instance, does your five-year-old insist on Mother feeding him?

Â¥Does the behavior have a disruptive quality? Does he enter a room full of happily playing children and immediately run through the play areas, upsetting and disrupting each group or activity?

Â¥Does the behavior manifest itself everywhere? Is the child consistently whiny or cranky?

Â¥Does the behavior persist, or, when "fixed," manifest itself in some other way? A common attention-getting strategy, for example, is to interrupt parents involved in conversation; or, if forbidden or ignored, a child may seek attention by pinching or teasing a younger sibling.

Coping with a Change in the Environment

If behavior occurs rather suddenly and yet does not fit into one of the other behavioral categories, it may be helpful to examine the child's environment. Has there been a change in the child's life such as a change in routine? Has a family event such as a marriage, death, divorce, a family move, or a new teacher at school affected him?

Behavior long discarded may manifest itself again as a child attempts to stabilize a disruption. For example, a two-year-old who has given up a bottle may regress to demanding a bottle when a new baby joins the family. Understanding and patience on the part of parents is of utmost importance until the child readjusts.

Not Knowing a Better Way

Many times a child's behavior is the result of an effort to cope with a situation for which he or she has not been prepared, such as starting school, sitting in a chapel or other sacred place, entering a library, encountering enticing toys and candy on display in a store, or having a peer want to play with a cherished toy. Parents often take social skills for granted and assume too much for their children. We don't teach what we expect of them, nor do we think to prepare them to handle themselves in simple but new experiences.

For example, very young children who are just beginning cooperative play but who lack the social skills to play with a group or initiate play with another child may seek attention in negative ways. Knocking over another's block fort may be a child's way of saying, "Can I play too?" Many times adults take normal behavior and social skills for granted and fail to teach and prepare children to handle themselves in simple situations.

Carol related how she often had make-believe rehearsals with Jon before going to such places as the doctor's office, dentist, restaurant, library, or church. It helped him to be less afraid and better prepared, knowing both what to expect and what was expected of him.

Role playing is an excellent way to teach a child how to behave before facing the actual event. For example, if you have invited some other children over to play, take time beforehand to role play with your child what might occur and how he might handle the situations that could arise so that everyone will be happy. You might say, "Pretend I am Susan and I want to play with your train set. I might ask, ÃCan I play with this?' or I might just sit down and start playing. What will you do to make sure Susan enjoys her visit here?" Then have the child actu-ally play his part out.

Discouragement

Often a child's difficulties and misbehavior are rooted in his feeling of not belonging to the family or not knowing his place in the family. A misbehaving child is often a discouraged child, according to Rudolf Dreikurs, a prominent psychiatrist (see Don Dinkmeyer and Gary McKay, Parent's Handbook [Circle Pines, Minn.: American Guidance Service], pp. 8-10). He suggests that the goals of the misbehaving, discouraged child tend to be:

1.To get attention: to keep Mother busy.

2.To boss Mother: to demonstrate power.

3.To counterhurt: to hurt Mother, get revenge.

4.To appear disabled: to get Mother to do a task or job.

Before a mother and father decide how to teach their children to behave responsibly, it is important that they analyze and discuss to-gether their understanding of what they believe their child is trying to accomplish by his or her bizarre behavior. Actions and activities that seem totally illogical to others may still be consistent with the goals the child is seeking. And as I mentioned earlier, the child may be unaware of his own goals.

Perhaps a guide to understanding and dealing with any behavior would be:

Â¥Observe the behavior.

Â¥Consider the goal or goals of the child.

Â¥Look at what your impulsive responses to your child's behavior have been in the past, and then alter your response if what you have been doing is not working. Put the responsibility back on the child. Here are some examples of a change in response:

Goal:

To get attention

To boss Mother

To counterhurt

To appear diabled

Your Old Response:

Become irritated

Become angry

Take Offense

Become impatient; do it for him

Your New Response:

Ignore; if possible withdraw

Sidestep power struggle

Ignore; don't show hurt

Be encouraging; refuse to do it for him

Often when we act upon our first impulses we tend to do the very thing the child is manipulating us to do. Rememberbehavior is always purposeful, and if we are not careful we may be rewarding a specific behavior by paying attention to it. If such is the case, you must do the unexpected. Ask yourself these questions:

Â¥What is going on, or what really happened? Try to focus on the facts as best as you know them. We don't always know all the circumstances but often feel we must make judgments anyway.

Â¥What is my child's point of view? What is my child's orientation to this problem? Where is he or she coming from? Keep in mind developmental levels, social skills, and personal goals.

Â¥What can be done to improve the situation? What should my immediate and long-range responses be?

If you conclude that your child's behavior is the result of discouragement, ask yourself: "How can my spouse and I help our child gain courage? confidence? How can we help him change his discouragement to feelings of adequacy, confidence, and acceptance?" This is always easier said than done, so let's practice. Here are four examples. I have completed the first one for you.

Example 1

What happened?

Mother sat on the park bench with several other mothers watching their children play. David, age two, ran from one child to another, snatching toys, kicking over sand castles, and teasing. Mother called to him to stop and play with his own toys, and then she returned to her conversation. David continued his disruptive behavior, ignoring her requests. Finally one of the mothers got up and walked over to her children and suggested they go to a different part of the park to play. Mother was embarrassed, got up, grabbed David, and swatted him on the seat, hissing angrily, "David, I told you to stop that!" David sat down in the sandpile and played with his toys.

What was David's goal?

The goal might have been to get attention. David kept Mother busy with him, causing her to interrupt her conversation.

What should Mother's immediate response have been?

When David misbehaved, Mother could have removed him from the area, sat him next to her on the park bench, and explained that he could only get down when he was ready to play nicely. Then she could have turned back to her conversation, ignoring his howls and protests. She would not need to explain again, no matter how much she was tempted, until he quieted down and agreed to play nicely. As soon as he misbehaved again, Mom could have put him back on the bench without a word.

What could Mother and Father's long-range responses be?

Children who seek undue attention are often discouraged and sense that they are important only when they are the center of attention. Their goal is to gain attention by keeping others busy with them. When parents yield to these demands, they reinforce the child's desire to engage in this mistaken goal; yet in the process the child receives no genuine sense of belonging and his quest becomes an endless one. The parent's task is to ignore misbehavior where possible and reinforce positive experiences when the child is not demanding or being disruptive. (I intended this to be an example of a discouraged child; however, it might also demonstrate developmental inadequacy. Perhaps David wasn't seeking attention from Mother at all but simply wanted to enter into play and didn't know how. If Mother suspects this is the problem, she could demonstrate to David how he might ask another child if he can play too. Social skills need to be learned; they do not come programmed in the genes and chromosomes!)

Example 2

What happened?

Heather, age three, had a great time swinging her arms back and forth through the block tower she had built and watching the blocks fly across the room. When it was time to put the toys away, Mother in-vited Heather to pick up the blocks and put them in the bucket. Heather pouted and did not move. Mother demanded, "Pick up the blocks, Heather." Heather refused to move. Finally Mother sighed and picked up the blocks herself, complaining angrily, "Heather, that's naughty of you to make Mommy clean up after you."

Before reading further, try to answer the last three questions I listed in example 1. You may even want to make notes. Then compare your answers with my comments below. Follow this same format with examples 3 and 4.

Comment

As soon as Mother demanded, "Pick up the blocks, Heather," and saw that Heather was not going to comply, she was inviting a power struggle between her daughter and herself. When she gave in, it seems obvious who won. However, in power struggles such as this, actually nobody wins. Mother lost control over her child, but Heather lost because Mother was unhappy with her. Mother could have avoided the power struggle by saying to Heather, "Look, your blocks are all over the room. What are we going to do now?" Heather might possibly have suggested that she could pick them up, but if she didn't, Mother might have said, "Would you like me to help you pick them up?" The responsibility would have been placed on Heather, but Mother's offer to help would have made the job seem less overwhelming. When this type of approach didn't work in similar situations with my own children, I said on occasion, "These are your toys, and if you want to play with them again it is your job to put them away where you know you can find them next time. If I put them away I'll put them in the Ãsad closet' and you won't be able to get them for a while."1

What was Heather's goal in this case? To boss Mother by winning a power struggle? Most likely. Often a child gains satisfaction in refusing to do what the parent wants done. The child senses a loss in personal value if he gives in to the parent. It is as if the child needs to boss Mother to feel worthwhile. The goal of the parent should be to teach and encourage cooperation and avoid power struggles by focusing on positive ways to reinforce a child's worth when he is behaving properly and cooperatively. It is important that parents not feel threatened by a child's quest for power, or it will become more difficult to respond rationally.

Example 3

What happened?

Six-year-old Katie slapped her three-year-old brother, Tyler, for coloring in her coloring book. Tyler ran crying to Mom. Mother scolded Katie and sent her to her room. When Katie refused to go to her room, Mother swatted her on the rear and pushed her into her room, slamming the door. Katie screamed, "I hate you!" Tyler settled down happily to color in his own book. The next day Mother found Katie tearing all the pages out of Tyler's coloring book. Mother grabbed the book away from Katie and gave Tyler Katie's book to color in. Katie protested by grabbing all the crayons and throwing them across the room. What's going on here?

Comment

This is another kind of power struggle followed by Katie seeking revenge against Tyler and attention from Mother.Tyler purposely provoked Katie by scribbling in her book and then ran to Mother when she retaliated, forcing Mom to take sides. Mother could have minded her own business, refusing to get involved and letting the two of them work out their differences without her interference. It has been my experience that children know how to get along with each other very well when they know that Mother is not there to run to. In fact, often when a baby-sitter or Dad is around, the child does not do the same things. Many times they tease each other in a bid for Mother's attention even when the attention is negative and may lead to negative consequences.

What was Katie's goal in sneaking into Tyler's room to tear up his coloring book? Revenge and retaliation? Probably. This occurs when a parent and child become increasingly involved in a power struggle and each tries to outdo the other. The discouraged child seeks revenge as his only means of winning the war, and if he can win, he gains a feeling of power and importance. He is satisfied only if he hurts others. These children need love and encouragement. They see themselves as being bad and unlikable. The parent must avoid feeling responsible to be judge and jury on every squabble. Punishment only reinforces an already poor self-concept, and the child feels justified to retaliate. The parent must break this sort of cycle by (1) not getting involved, (2) not feeling hurt, and (3) offering encouragement and unconditional love to the discouraged child at times when they are behaving properly.

Example 4

What happened?

Brian, age six, wanted to go out to play with his friends on Saturday, but Mother insisted he had to straighten up his room first. Brian sat on his bed for a few minutes and then started playing with a toy. When Mother came in to check on his progress, he started to cry, "I can't do my room. It's too hard!" Mother encouraged him to try and pointed out exactly what he needed to do, step by step: "Hang up your clothes, put your books on the shelf and your toys in the box, and make your bed. You can do it." She smiled confidently at Brian and left the room, shutting the door. Brian half-heartedly started but soon tired and went into the kitchen, whining, "I can't do it! It takes too long." Mother, losing patience, grabbed Brian by the arm and pulled him back into his room, sitting him down firmly on the bed. "Of course you can do it!" she said. "Look how easy this is!" She began to demonstrate by hanging up the clothes angrily, throwing the toys in the box, and shoving the books into place on the shelf. "You stand over there and help me make this bed!" she told Brian. "Now, see how easy that was! That only took a few minutes, and you made a big deal about it." Then she stormed out of the room. Brian happily put on his ball glove and hurried outside to join his friends.

Comment

Brian used helplessness to gain service and pity. It wasn't necessary for Mother to demonstrate how to straighten a room after she had gone over exactly what she expected from Brian. She should have maintained her composure, reassured Brian that he could do it, and let the consequences followif the room wasn't done, he could not play. Once he realized she was not going to feel sorry for him or buy into his "helpless" routine, he would have buckled down and done the job and felt much better about himself.

Brian's goal was to appear disabled and avoid work. The child who gives up easily becomes a victim of his own helplessness. He feels he has no chance for success and exaggerates his deficiencies and weaknesses, avoiding many tasks to save himself from the embarrassment of possible failure. The child in his case seems unable to perform the simplest of tasks at times. He needs help with his homework, getting dressed, and completing even small jobs at home. Parents must resist the temptation to do anything for him that he can do for himself and should give him lots of encouragement and praise when he does well. They must show the child that they have faith in him in order for him to have faith in himself.

Conclusion

The point of all this is that children, like many adults, learn to do what works. Discipline therefore must take on new meaning. It is synonymous with teaching, training, and guiding, rather than punishing and restricting. Though we may often be skeptical, if this kind of discipline is done patiently with love and gentle firmness, children will gain confidence in their own abilities, and your relationship with them will be strengthened as they gain competence in completing small and large tasksan important part of their evolution into adulthood.

_____

Geri R. Brinley was born in Galesburg, Illinois, and grew up in Cache Valley, Utah. She graduated from Utah State University in child development and elementary education, and later received a master's degree at USU. She organized and ran a nursery lab for two-year-olds at USU and supervised student teachers at the child development lab at the University of Utah. She taught mother education classes for the BYU-Ogden Center and parenting classes at Education Weeks around the West. She served on a Church writing committee for Primary. She has served in the Primary and Young Women organizations and currently is the Relief Society president in her ward. She and her husband, Doug, have six children and live in Provo, Utah.
