Daniel K. Judd, Douglas E. Brinley, Eternal Families ( 1996)

13 Changing Children's Behavior

Geri R. Brinley

Charlie, a rather normal three-year-old, was having a hard time settling down when bedtime came. In the past his mother had developed a routinefirst a bath, then pajamas, brush teeth, have a story, prayer together and into bed, lights out, door shut. She tucked him in with a kiss and a pleasant good night, and she left the room. But no sooner had she shut the door, then out he came behind her. Patiently she tucked him in again and left the room. But again he followed her out. Dad, after watching his wife and son repeat this pattern several times, playfully snatched Charlie up in his arms and started wrestling and tickling him. "Let him play a little longer," the father said to his wife, who was now scowling. "He's just not tired yet, are you, Charlie?"

It is important that parents are consistent and united in their approach and response to their children's behavior. Where Father and Mother are both in the home, it is important that they work together in their roles rather than against each other. Husbands must help wives in sharing the child-rearing role. President Howard W. Hunter counseled fathers not to leave it up to Mom:

You [fathers] share, as a loving partner, the care of the children. Help her to manage and keep up your home. Help teach, train, and discipline your children. . . .

. . . The teaching and governance of the family must not be left to your wife alone, to society, to school, or even to the Church. . . .

. . . Presiding in righteousness necessitates a shared responsibility between husband and wife; together you act with knowledge and participation in all family matters. (In Conference Report, October 1994, pp. 67, 68.)

This means that the two of you have to be in agreement, or come to an agreement, on how you are going to rear your children. Your being united in your parenting efforts is more important than you think. While it is true that there is more than one way to skin a cat, you can't skin it several ways at the same time! There are also several approaches to child rearing and discipline, but some are better than others. Remember that a child will grow up regardless of the approach you take. If you want your children to become happy, responsible adults, you must agree not only on your goals for them but also on some of the techniques you will use in raising them. For example, it will do little good for one parent to be firm and consistent while the other takes a laid-back, laissez faire approach. Their children will be not only confused but also manipulative as they learn to survive by playing one parent against the other.

Children Do What Works

It is a truism that human beings do what works, and what works will likely be repeated. If one approach does not achieve our ends, we'll try something else until we succeed. It's that simple. Your task as parents is to help your children find positive ways to enjoy and function in their environment. Undesirable behavior often becomes entrenched as a habit when we are rewarded for that behavior. Much of parenting involves identifying a child's reward system; responses which may not appear to be rewards to us may appear to be so to the child. In those cases we will need to change our responses so that the undesirable behavior no longer is paid off. Our child may persist in the old patterns for a while, but if you are patient and consistent, in time the behavior will be extinguished.

Elder Boyd K. Packer, in speaking of behavioral patterns we inadvertently program into our children (and then blame the children for), explained:

Parents, can we first consider the most painful part of your problem? If you want to reclaim your son or daughter, why don't you leave off trying to alter your child just for a little while and concentrate on yourself. The changes must begin with you, not with your children.

You can't continue to do what you have been doing (even though you thought it was right) and expect to unproduce some behavior in your child, when your conduct was one of the things that produced it.

There! It's been said! After all the evading, all the concern for wayward children. After all the blaming of others, the care to be gentle with parents. It's out!

It's you, not the child, that needs immediate attention. (In Conference Report, October 1970, p. 119.)

When we change our own behavior, changes in children's behavior will follow as surely as night follows day. It is not easy to change patterns, however, because so often our responses have become automatic. But with simple guidelines, a little practice, consistency, follow-through, thoughtful planning, and lots of patience, you can do it.

Establish Rules

One of the first ways to clarify your expectations for your children's behavior is in the form of rules. Every home is a microcosm of the larger community, which cannot operate smoothly and efficiently without a semblance of order. One task of family life is to prepare children to live in the larger society, and social relations require certain rules of conduct. A simple rule, for instance, is that we cannot take what does not belong to us without permission from the rightful owner. We cannot assert our needs or desires ahead of the rights of others. We must learn to compromise. Respect for rights and ownership are basic requirements for people to live successfully in a community or in a home. A pleasant environment requires the work and cooperation of all memberswhether we are speaking of the community or our homes. Each citizen has a duty and privilege to contribute to the welfare of the entire group through cooperation, productivity, and service. An important element of self-worth comes from feeling that you are contributing to the well-being and happiness of others. Children feel they are important when they have a unique place and role to play in the family.

All this brings me to the dreaded words family rules. However, they are designed to bless your life rather than frustrate you. Some general rules of thumb are to have only a few rules, to keep them simple, and to be consistent on enforcement until the behavior is established. If you set a lot of long, complicated rules, everyone will be confused and it will be impossible for parents to follow up well. Eight years of age seems to be a good time to begin more formal rules.

The best way my husband and I have found to establish family rulesrules that everybody feels good about and that are essential for cooperationis to gather in a family council at the beginning of the school year. Everyone is expected to voice his or her ideas and feelings about the rules, and we want to be in agreement. (However, in families with very young children, the family council may simply involve the parents.) It is important that we periodically review our rules in an atmosphere of love and cooperation. Some of the primary purposes of a family council are to set family goals, discuss mutual expectations, and decide how goals and expectations are to be met. With young children, Mom and Dad need to decide what values they want their children to acquire, how they expect their children to behave, and how they are going to achieve their goals. Before you can successfully teach your children your goals and values, you two must be very clear about what you wish to encourage or extinguish in their behavior.

Bob and Jane, for instance, feel strongly that little Jimmy should learn to enjoy work, but he's only two years old. What can they do to work on that goal now? Bob and Jane are wise to begin now, for two-year-olds are just beginning to notice what Mom and Dad do and want to mimic their parents. He wants to identify with them by doing what they do. Right now he is not aware that it is work. Together Bob and Jane may decide the following:

When children are older and become part of a family council, they should be allowed to voice their opinions and concerns and to help construct family rules. Children are also good at setting consequences when rules are broken. Parents will find their children much more cooperative when the children have a voice in determining the makeup of the rules and their enforcement. Care must be taken, however, not to allow children to make decisions that sacrifice the parents' core beliefs and values about right and wrong. While children often surprise us with their innate wisdom, they are still children and have not yet gained the experience or wisdom of their parents. Wise parents, guided by core values, can help their children make decisions that all family members are comfortable with.

For example, Steven, age ten, may feel he should be allowed to sleep as late as he wants to on Saturday morning, watch cartoons, and do his Saturday chores at his leisure. Some parents may be comfortable with this schedule, but others may harbor a belief that work should be done before play and that this habit, once developed, will serve the child well all his life. If Steven's parents agree to his wishes but actually feel upset about it, they will have a difficult time living with his behavior, and Saturdays will be filled with unhealthy tension. To further complicate the situation, Saturday is often the only day that all members can participate in family activities. There will be times when Steven will have to sacrifice his personal preferences for the good of the whole family. The point is that if we have this valuework first and play laterwe need to structure rules so that this lesson is taught.

Rules may involve bedtime hours, curfews for weekdays and weekends, church attendance and Sabbath day activities, dating age and frequency, allowances, participation in family activities, and support of individual family members' performances and programs. Underlying values such as honesty, morality, and personal integrity should be the framework for all family goals and rules.

Family rules will need to change from time to time as everyone's needs and ages change. In our home they often changed within the year from what we called "summer rules" to "school time" rules. For instance, in the summer our younger children were to come in from play when the streetlights came on, while the older children had extended nightly curfews. The breakfast hour was moved back an hour to allow for later hours the night before. Since our children had more time during the summer, family household and yard responsibilities were carried out on a daily basis rather than just Saturday, which was often taken up with community sports or band activities anyway. During the school year TV watching was off limits on school nights, which left only Friday night and some Saturday time for program viewing. While we still felt some restrictions were necessary in the summer, our children agreed to read an hour for every hour they watched TV, which helped limit the "glued to the tube" syndrome.

Once rules are agreed upon and individual responsibilities clearly explained, decide how enforcement and follow-up is to take place. Leave family councils on a positive note and assume that everyone will cooperate, but realistically know it just isn't always going to happen that way. Children (and adults) forget, get hurried, and become sidetrackedand every child was programmed at birth to push the limits just as hard as he can at times to see if his parents are really there! He may fuss and fume when his immediate desires collide with a rule he himself agreed to just days before, but he will also be relieved to know what he can and can't depend upon. It's all a part of developing trust in each other.

Now, that brings us to the critical question, how do you discipline an erring child?

Teach Correct Principles and Let Nature Take Its Course

Parents should allow children to learn from natural consequences whenever possible. This is a general rule of thumb and may need to be adjusted on occasion. Obviously, you can't allow a child to run out into the road and be smashed to teach a lesson. But generally speaking it serves as an excellent guide.

Letting children experience the natural consequences of their misbehavior is an important method of preserving order, for two reasons. First, a child may try but he can't seriously blame anyone except himself for his "punishment"; and second, the desired behavior becomes internalized as he practices good and bad choices.

Direct intervention on your part in the form of commands, scoldings, spankings, and so on is external, and a child can logically view this as punishment he can avoid by simply not getting caught. Consequences are acceptable to the innate logic of a child, while punishment at best is only tolerable and is more often resented. Sometimes parents are tempted to intervene in the opposite direction to spare the child the pain of any consequences. This, too, is often a mistake, for the child then learns he will not be held accountable for bad choices and may grow up with the mistaken idea that someone will always be there to act as a buffer between him and reality. He will not learn to accept the need for law and order until he realizes that it is more valuable and satisfying to respect the rules of conduct than to violate them. Do not deny your little one the opportunity to learn from mistakes while such mistakes are still fairly harmless. A toddler will not learn to walk if you do not let go of his hand. A two-year-old may insist on doing things himself and may get his shoes on the wrong foot. The right shoe may pinch the left foot and he'll be a little uncomfortable, but that isn't life threatening. A child who doesn't put his shoes in the right place may not be able to find them when it's time for school, but he won't die if he has to wear an old pair he doesn't like as well for a day or two. He may be late for school while he's searching for them, but again, those consequences are not your concern; they are his. This may sound cruel and unfeeling to some, but it is just the opposite. Part of loving a child is allowing him the opportunity to grow and learn so that he may de-velop an independence from his parents. It is much more cruel to disable a child by making him feel dependent and insecure about his own abilities to handle himself in a variety of social situations.

When a child makes a poor choice, ask yourself before jumping in to save him, What are the natural consequences of this choice? What will he learn from it? Andthis is a biggieCan I live with it? Our five-year-old, David, once left his new Schwinn bike out in the front yard all night, and the next day it was gone. He learned a hard lesson, and we were as sad as he was. But what if we had noticed the bike out there after David had gone to bed? Even though he had been told never to leave it out and warned what might happen, we would have been very tempted to bring it in for himnot because that would have been best for him, but because the bike cost more money than we would have been willing to lose to teach him that lesson. What should a parent do then?

First of all, try not to make a rule you know you can't live with. Second, if in a case like this you feel it necessary to intervenewhen a child wanders out in the busy road, for instanceyou may wish to contrive a "natural consequence." This sounds like a contradiction, but it, too, has some logic.

We could have explained to David that since he isn't responsible yet to take care of a nice Schwinn bike, we have put it away for a while until he demonstrates more responsibility. (Parents and children can work out how to measure responsibility and for how long.) We could make it clear to him that we are sad, too, because we enjoyed seeing him on his bike, but we love him more than the bike.

Eight-year-old Jonathan was almost always late coming in for dinner. We talked to him about how important it was for all of us to be together and how unfair it was for him to make extra work for those responsible for preparing the meal and cleaning up the dishes because he wanted to play a little longer. None of this talking helped. A wise parent knows there is a time to quit talking and actso we did. The next time Jonathan came in an hour after dinner was over, the food was put away, the dishes washed, and, in effect, the kitchen was closed. We explained we were sorry he would have to go to bed hungry, because that's not pleasant for a growing, active boy; and we were very genuine in our sorrow, but we loved him too much to allow him to go on disregarding the rights of others. Once rules and consequences are established it is important that we simply allow them to happen and that we stop talking, explaining, chastising, and postponing the consequences "until next time." Perhaps we can be like Lehi who exhorted his children "with all the feeling of a tender parent, that they would hearken to his words. . . . He bade them to keep the commandments of the Lord; and [then] he did cease speaking unto them." (1 Ne. 8:37-38.)

A few clues may help distinguish the fine line separating natural consequences from punishment. I've already suggested onelogic. Consequences must have an inner logic that is understandable to the child. For example, if you are trying to get your child to eat his lunch, and he happens to be planning on going to a movie, telling him he can't go until he's eaten has no logic. But reminding him that there will be no more meals until dinnertime does, because he knows that if he doesn't have lunch, he will probably be hungry laterespecially if he's not allowed or can't afford to buy candy and snacks at the movie.

Another difference is merely in the way the parents present the consequence. It should not be stated as a form of retaliation with a feeling of "This will show you!" but rather as a result of a choice the child made or will make. A parent might say, for example, "As long as you continue to be rowdy and rude at the table, you will not be allowed to eat with the family." It puts the ball in the child's court. The choice is his. A punishing response might be, "Andrew, I can't stand this noise at the table. Go to your room and stay there!" The results are the same but the feel is different. In the second case the isolation is final and ends the episode but not the problem, while in the first case the child is in controlhe may return as soon as he feels he is ready to behave responsibly. The important thing is to make it clear that it is up to him to change the situation.

Implement a Positive System of Discipline

Often when a child feels discouraged or when his sense of belonging has been restricted, he will seek a false goal to satisfy his unmet needs. In order to gain a sense of self-realization and find a place for himself, he will devote all of his attention to negative behavior to achieve his mistaken goals. It must be remembered that behavior is, in general, purposeful.

It is more appropriate to view undesirable or disturbing behavior as misdirected rather than "bad." Misbehaving children can be viewed as discouraged children.

Here are several steps that are necessary to make discipline more effective:

Child's Behavior

Whining and fussing

Parent's Critical, Discouraging Response

"Stop your whining!"

"You're always whining!"

Encouraging Response

"Ask me in a grown-up voice."

"Can you talk in a more pleasant voice?"

Child's Behavior

Hits another child

Parent's Critical, Discouraging Response

"Stop fighting!"

Encouraging Response

"There is a better way to show Mindy that you did not like what she did." (Demonstrate.) Show that you can talk about your feelings instead of hitting.

Child's Behavior

Arguing

Parent's Critical, Discouraging Response

"Quit your arguing!"

Encouraging Response

"You can probably solve this problem if you talk to each other quietly instead of shouting." "Let's each take a turn talking and see if we can help each other understand." (Some parents like to use a "time out" room where the child can be alone to calm down and think for a few minutes.)

Child's Behavior

Loud, rough play in the living room

Parent's Critical, Discouraging Response

"Stop that loud roughhousing!"

Encouraging Response

"Remember, in the house you need to play quietly." "You can play in the living room as long as you play quietly." "What are our rules about playing in the house?"

Child's Behavior

Not doing chores

Parent's Critical, Discouraging Response

"Why haven't you done your chores?"

Encouraging Response

"What are you going to do about your chores?" "It helps the rest of us so much when everyone does his share." "You'll feel much better about your play if your chores are all done. You may sit here on this chair or you may do your chores."

Child's Behavior

Grouchy teenager bossing a younger child

Parent's Critical, Discouraging Response

"Don't talk to Todd that way!"

Encouraging Response

"Todd responds to you much better when you explain things to him." "If you ask Todd nicely and show him how, you'll both feel better."

Child's Behavior

Makes a mistake

Parent's Critical, Discouraging Response

"That was stupid!" "You are so dumb!" "What did you do that for?"

Encouraging Response

"I'm sorry that happened; what can you do about it?" "It looks like you've got a problem. What do you plan to do now?"

Occasionally Use the Element of Surprise

To stop a child from acting in a particular way, you may catch him off guard by responding in a totally different way than he anticipated, thus helping him see the activity with a new perspective.

My daughter Becky was determined as a five-year-old to run away from home. When she told me her intentions, instead of getting angry and locking her in her room I talked with her about her feelings. She said her brother was a big bully and she didn't want to live with him anymore. I explained that people in families aren't always perfect and that part of the reason we live in families is to learn how to get along with other people. No matter where she lived or whom she lived with, she would always have to adjust to others. She still thought it worth a try to find another family that suited her better, so I agreed to help her pack a bag if that's what she was determined to do. We visited pleasantly while we packed her favorite things. I told her I would miss her very much but wanted her to be happy, and kissed her good-bye. She lugged her heavy suitcase around the block and sat on the front steps of a friend's house in the rain, waiting for someone to come home. No one came home before she tired of sitting there, so she lugged her suitcase back, slipped quietly downstairs to her room, and unpacked. I told her how happy I was to have her home again, and nothing more was said. She never ran away again.

A friend of mine had a similar situation. She used the same prin-ciple but in a different way. When her little daughter got upset about something and announced she was going to run away, her mother said, "Sometimes I feel that way too! Can I go with you?" The daughter agreed, so they took a few silly things with them and had a wonderful afternoon together before they both decided it was time to go home.

Satiation Principle: Let Behavior Run Its Course

Sometimes to stop a child from acting in a particular way, we may allow or even insist that he continue performing the undesired act until he tires of it.

Allowing behavior to run its course is not the same as permissively condoning poor behavior. The Satiation Principle works best when the child discovers for himself that the rewards he receives for poor behavior are not nearly as satisfying as the rewards he would get for better behavior. The adult does not condone or reward poor behavior. He merely allows the child to discover that the anticipated benefits do not usually live up to his expectations.

I used this principle myself when Jonathan refused to help the rest of the family do Saturday cleaning. I said to him, "Okay, if you would rather sit in a chair and watch while the rest of us work, you may do just that. You sit there and watch while we do our jobs and yours." Of course, I made sure that the chair was a hard, straight-backed one and that there was nothing at all nearby to entertain him while he sat there. Then we happily went about our chores untiland I didn't hurry with thisI got around to doing Jonathan's. When I had dragged it out long enough, he tired of sitting with nothing to do and asked to get off the chair and be allowed to do his jobs. This principle operates on the theory that a little bit of something might be fun, but a whole lot of it becomes a punishmentin this case, a self-inflicted punishment.

If you are creative you will find many ways to apply this principle. There are, however, a few guidelines to keep in mind. The Satiation Principle works best when:

a child's actions are not seriously harmfulannoying activities such as throwing spitballs, incessant talking, or refusing to eat anything but one favorite thing.

a child needs to learn the consequences of his actionssuch actions as not wanting to go to bed, playing hooky from school, or running away from home.

a child needs help in identifying mistakes. Actually have the child repeat a mistake over and over again until it is easily recognizable.

The Satiation Principle should not be used when:

the behavior may be harmful.

continuing the behavior results in additional reinforcement. You must be pretty sure it is going to be a negative experience.

the repeated behavior differs from the desired behavior. For example, writing "I won't talk in class" a hundred times on the board does not tire the student from talking, only from writing.

you know you can't make him stick with it long enough to get satiated.

The Extinction Principle: Eliminate Rewards

To stop a child from acting in a particular way, arrange conditions so that no reward is received following an undesirable act. Recall that all behavior is purposeful. While a parent will want to stop a particular behavior by eliminating any rewards a child may receive, Mom or Dad may want to discover the cause of the behavior and offer a more acceptable activity to the child. Simply eliminating a much-desired reward from a discouraged child for one behavior will only cause the child to find another behavior that might be equally as bad, or worse.

Positive Reinforcement: Rewarding Good Behavior

The key to success here is making the desirable behavior yield more positive consequences than the undesirable behavior, and ensuring that both the desirable and the undesirable behaviors can't be done at the same time.

Adults working with troubled teens report great success when they enlist the teens' help in something like an anti-litter campaign, knowing those very same young people were the ones who had previously been litterers. A neighborhood basketball program eliminated a rash of broken streetlights, not because the two were related but because the restless youth couldn't do both at the same time and found playing basketball was more fun and more rewarding than vandalism.

When teaching young children who are more easily controlled than teenagers, a parent might try something as simple as offering praise and small rewards for appropriate behavior and ignoring any inappropriate behavior. We offered a special family night dinner out whenever a child brought home a good report card. We planned a fun activity to anticipate when Saturday jobs were completedbreakfast or lunch out. There was time for a story if everyone hurried and got ready for bed on time. We are not ashamed to admit we even paid our children a small sum for every book they read until they began to enjoy reading so much we couldn't afford to pay them anymore! By that time they were reading for the enjoyment and not the reward. Saying "Thank you for doing such a good job of dusting," "You were a big help to me today," or "I like the way you play with the baby and make him happy while I'm busy fixing dinner" might be sufficient reward for a child to feel good about himself and his place in the family.

Summary

Things for parents to remember and do:

Has he experienced a change in routine? A major event or trauma resulting from a death, marriage, divorce, or birth of a sibling? Have we or a good friend moved recently? Does he or she have a new teacher at school? Is there a threat or challenge at school or home with which he feels unable to cope?

Have we taught him or her ways to deal with situations in a socially acceptable way?

Is our child discouraged? What does his goal seem to be (to get attention, boss Mother, counterhurt, appear disabled)?
