Daniel K. Judd, Douglas E. Brinley, Eternal Families ( 1996)

14 Social Science Research Sustains Prophetic Counsel

Jacqueline F. de Gaston

Years before modern principles of nutrition became well known, the Lord revealed the Word of Wisdom. In 1833 no research had been done showing that tobacco, alcohol, tea, or coffee had negative effects on our physical bodies. Today, of course, the picture has changed, with a dramatic accumulation of scientific evidence to support every aspect of this inspired counsel. Is anyone living today who is not aware of the health problems attributed to these substances? Before scientific studies confirmed the Lord's counsel, however, wise Latter-day Saints preserved their own health by following the counsel of prophets.

There is a parallel to this experience with the Word of Wisdom and counsel relating to marriage and family life. The Lord in our day has warned us of the need to build strong marriages and develop healthy relationships with our children if we want to be happy and successful as parents and to carry out his latter-day work more effectively. At times he has even taken to task Church leaders who forgot their most important priorities. (See D&C 93:39-50, where the First Presidency and bishop of the Church were chastised for neglecting their families.) We have been counseled to teach our children the gospel, to give our time to them in healthy interactions and activities that will build close relationships with them while they are young, and to teach and monitor them as they gain maturity and experience in issues of agency and choice. We are called upon as parents, especially in this final dispensation, to rear a generation of children who love their parents, their God, and their neighbors. The prophets, as usual, have been in the forefront of counsel on this issue; and, as in the Word of Wisdom example, students of social science are now confirming the wisdom of the prophets on family matters. In this chapter I will show how this research sustains the Lord's counsel.

First, we need to have the proper perspective on secular learning and its relationship to what the Lord has given through his servants. Years ago Elder Boyd K. Packer counseled Church members on this issue:

I have come to believe that it is the tendency for many members of the Church who spend a great deal of time in academic research to begin to judge the Churchits doctrine, organization, and leadership, present and pastby the principles of their own profession. Ofttimes this is done unwittingly, and some of it, perhaps, is not harmful.

It is an easy thing for a man with extensive academic training to measure the Church using as his standard the principles he has been taught in his professional training. In my mind it ought to be the other way around. A member of the Church ought always, particularly if he is pursuing extensive academic studies, to judge the professions of man against the revealed word of the Lord. (Packer 1991, 101.)

I believe this to be wise counsel.

Spending Time with Children

A number of years ago President Ezra Taft Benson spoke of the importance of the God-ordained role of mothers in a talk entitled "To the Mothers in Zion" (Benson 1990). He gave counsel on a number of matters including the importance of having children in the first place, and admonished mothers to rear their children the "Lord's way." "Contrary to conventional wisdom," he said, "a mother's calling is in the home, not in the marketplace" (ibid., 29). Though this counsel was not well received by many, even in the Church, there are a number of research studies that confirm the wisdom of his message.

One of the greatest changes in our society in the past decades has been the decrease in the amount of time parents spend with children. The oft-repeated buzzwords in parenting became "quality time." This attitude encouraged some parents to give their children more of their attention, but for some it seemed to justify being away from their children as long as they could spend "quality time" with them in the evenings. The message to parents was that the amount of time spent with their children was not as important as the quality of the time they spent together.

Armed with high intentions, well-meaning mothers went to the workplace with aspirations of "quality time" in the evening compensating for their being away during the day. Reality turned out to be tired mothers coming home from work with very little time or energyquality or otherwiseto spend with their children.

Initial research supported the notion that the children of mothers who worked out of the home were not harmed by this mother absence. However, it is now clear that this early research focused on the aca-demic achievement of children rather than such important things as values, morals, self-concept, character, depression, sexual activity, and peer relationships. Since some of the early exponents of two-career families were highly educated women themselves, it is not surprising that their children did well academically. Thus, this early research comparing children with well-educated working mothers to children with mothers who were homemakers was not a valid comparison.

Further research has demonstrated that "quality time" is not the solution so many hoped it would be. Few family experts now even use the term. In fact, one report on a large sample of young Americans between the ages of eighteen and twenty-nine indicated that the young adult population is a "back-to-basics bunch" who feel that they are the first to experience the downside of the two-income family and who see themselves as being neglected. The subjects of this study reported that they "don't want [their] kids to go through what [their] parents put them through," an ordeal they described as loneliness. Quality time didn't seem to be valuable to them, and this young-adult group had a surprising amount of anger and resentment about their absentee parents. (Gross and Scott 1990.) Other research has shown that both working mothers and their school-age children agree that when a mother works, she has too little time to spend with her children (Gottfried, Gottfried, and Bathurst 1988).

Some Mothers Must Work

The prophets are aware that many mothers must work. That has been my own lot in life as a single mother with eight children (two are married). President Ezra Taft Benson said, "We realize . . . that some of our choice sisters are widowed and divorced and that others find themselves in unusual circumstances where, out of necessity, they are required to work for a period of time" (Benson 1990, 29).

Elder Richard G. Scott, in commenting on President Benson's remarks, added, "You in these unusual circumstances [of having to work outside the home] qualify for additional inspiration and strength from the Lord" (Scott 1993, 43).1

Day-Care Centers

President Benson counseled mothers that they were needed at home to teach and train and receive and love their children into security. Another popular buzzword for working parents has been "quality" day care. Although there are wide institutional differences in the caliber of care given at such centers, there are also basic problems that have been identified in most day-care establishments that are not in harmony with the goals of most parents. Author Penelope Leach reported that day-care centers fail to meet the needs of small children, especially infants, because they cannot provide the "one-to-one attention" that young children require. She concluded that "toddlers . . . require delicate handling . . . [and] patience, both of which are inevitably in short supply in most day care centers." (Leach 1994, 31-48, 68-102.)

The sad fact is that numerous personality and social skill deficiencies are being reported in children who spend their early years in these centersproblems such as an insecure attachment to parents and a premature peer dependencywhich often persist into the adolescent and young adult years. According to author Robert Karen in a 1994 publication, secure mother-child attachments are compromised by day-care arrangements, and the effects of the "insecure" or "anxious" infant-mother attachment are felt not only in later childhood but possibly through adult life as well (Karen 1994). Developmental psychologist Jay Belsky, who at first was a supporter of the day-care movement, became uneasy over the increasing volume of research suggesting there were negative effects of such care for infants. In the 1980s he stopped reassuring the public that infant day care was adequate and began to publicly acknowledge that such out-of-home care was a negative factor in mother-child bonding and was more conducive to outward and aggressive behavior. (Belsky and Rovine 1988.)

There is a substantial amount of research indicating that children in day-care centers are at higher risk for a number of health problems including parasite infestation (Hoelcelman 1994) and gastroenteritis (Mitchell 1993), and the youngest children, especially those under one year, have the greatest health risks (ibid.). Not only are many physicians concerned that serious health problems spread from child to child in these centers, but they have also documented an increased risk of children in day care spreading serious infections to other family members, including unborn babies (Goodman 1994).

Financial Sacrifice

Providing children with a full-time mother becomes a financial sacrifice for many families. There is little question that two incomes provide for more basic physical needs, and certainly any luxuries are limited when a family depends on only one breadwinner. However, the advantages to the spiritual and emotional development of children by having Mother there may be worth the effort in most cases. It can be said that little children who are healthy are rather inexpensive to rear until they reach junior high school, and there is no reason why children at those ages cannot have paper routes, baby-sitting jobs, or similar employment outside the home to pay their own expenses. My own advice to my daughters is, "If you want to stay home with your children, stay out of stores, be thrifty, and support your husband in his work so he can be a better employee and contribute more to his employment." Rather than insisting on training a husband to be a part-time assistant homemaker so the wife can have a career also, I encourage young women to support their husband's career and encourage him to do well in the breadwinner role. Every woman, of course, wants a husband who will help out around the home and assist in caring for the childrenand his efforts are certainly welcome. But if Mom is to be at home with her children, she must understand that he may need to work extra hours to earn an adequate income. The educational level of the husband is important, and if mothers help their sons and daughters read and write in the home before they go to school, there is a greater chance that their children will enjoy the educational process and will seek more educationwhich leads to higher paying professions.

Husbands Are to Honor Their Wives

President Howard W. Hunter, in a general conference priesthood address, encouraged men, "Honor your wife's unique and divinely appointed role as a mother in Israel and her special capacity to bear and nurture children. . . . Help teach, train, and discipline your children." He summarized the counsel of earlier prophets in saying that "effective family leadership . . . requires both quantity and quality time. The teaching and governance of the family must not be left to your wife alone, to society, to school, or even to the Church." (Hunter 1994, 67, 68.)

A father influences his children not only in a direct way, through his efforts at fatherhood, but also as he supports his wife's decision to be a full-time mother. President Benson said, in another priesthood address:

I continue to emphasize the importance of mothers staying home to nurture, care for, and train their children in the principles of righteousness.

As I travel throughout the Church, I feel that the great majority of Latter-day Saint mothers earnestly want to follow this counsel. But we know that sometimes the mother works outside of the home at the encouragement, or even insistence, of her husband. It is he who wants the items of convenience that the extra income can buy. Not only will the family suffer in such instances, brethren, but your own spiritual growth and progression will be hampered. I say to all of you, the Lord has charged men with the responsibility to provide for their families in such a way that the wife is allowed to fulfill her role as mother in the home. (Benson 1987, 60-61.)

Basic decisions regarding the amount of time a mother spends with her children and the spiritual and educational guidance given to them is often influenced by the desires and values of the husband/father. When a man respects his wife and her role and duties as a homemaker and mother, it is more likely that she will feel a greater responsibility and pride in these roles. A man who is critical or demeaning of his wife as a mother, on the other hand, will find her giving less dedication to her divine calling.

Fathers, by working hard and responsibly, can encourage mothers to be with their children. Fathers can increase their own chances for success and promotion or achievement in their employment and thus lessen the need for a second income.

Our society already encourages women to seek paid employment, and husbands should be careful not to add to any cultural pressure on their wives to leave home on their own. It seems apparent from the warning of the prophets that the increased number of women in employment has had an enormous impact on our society. Economist Valerie Oppenheimer reviewed the economic and social history of America and concluded, "Married women's rising employment is increasingly seen as the single most critical factor transforming the family system of American society; for many this signifies the unraveling of America's social heritage." She added that "the deterioration in [the] young men's labor market position is so substantial . . . that its demographic consequences should not be ignored." Such an economic model, she concluded, discourages "specialization and exchange" and encourages a "more collaborative" model of family life. The collaborative model, in turn, encourages low fertility and carries with it "built-in" marital instability. (Oppenheimer 1994.) More simply, the increase in women working outside the home has given men reduced employment opportunities and income, which has resulted in smaller families, yet more divorce!

Encouraging Spiritual Activities in the Home

President Benson counseled parents to pray with their children and gather them at least weekly for a family home evening. He counseled parents to involve children in these prayers and to hold spiritually uplifting family home evenings. The promise was given many years ago by the First Presidency that "if the Saints obey this counsel [of having family home evenings], . . . great blessings will result" (Clark 1965-75, 4:339).

Prophets have also counseled us to read scriptures as a family. Activitiesprayers, family scripture study, and family home eveningstake time, preparation, and dedication on the part of parents. There is a greater chance that these activities will occur when Mother is there to do her important part. She can read to her children throughout the day and teach them lessons and values in teaching moments. Her love and support when they come and go are important elements in the childhood memories of her offspring.

I know from personal experience as a single mother that when I have been involved outside of my homeeven in social and community activities, educational endeavors, or employment seekingthere has been less time to assist my children to develop their spiritual capacities. At the very least I lack calm and unhurried one-on-one time with them, time when I can visit with them and be their friend and counselor.

Spiritual Dimensions

Religion matters in many ways in a child's life. Numerous studies have shown that religiosityattendance at Church meetings and the priority one places on religion as manifested by prayer and reading religious textsstrongly predicts sexual activity or abstinence (de Gaston and Jensen 1994). A study of moral values and behavior among middle school students in Ogden, Utah, showed that religiosity made a remarkable difference as to substance abuse (particularly alcohol), work ethic and achievement orientation, honesty and integrity, stealing, telling lies, rebelliousness, internal or external motivation to do well, vulnerability, susceptibility, and resistance to peer pressure. On all of these measures, the highly religious students exhibited the most so-cially desirable responses. (Flinders and de Gaston 1995.) Likewise, a study of teenagers in Tennessee indicated that high religiosity affected a young person's willingness to obey rules, not fake excuses for absences, not drive without a license, and to rely on their parents for advice. These individuals also felt more guilt when they broke the rules. (Ibid.)

Making Time for Family Activities

Making time for enjoyable family activities is often impossible when parents are overcommitted away from the home, regardless of the source of that time commitment. Even very worthwhile projects that take us away from our children, such as work, recreation, or important community service or political activity, should be carefully monitored by conscientious parents. President Benson counseled us to "take time to do things together as a family" such as "family outings and picnics and birthday celebrations and trips," and "whenever possible, [to] attend, as a family, events where one of the family members is involved, such as a school play, a ball game, a talk, a recital. Attend church meetings together and sit together as a family when you can." (Benson 1990, 34.)

One of the challenges single-parent families face, for example, is the lack of time for family recreation and family vacations. These parents carry on the work of two parents really, and often such activities are not possible because of a lack of time and resources. Harried single parents may feel guilty spending scarce resources of time and money on extravagances such as recreation, yet these activities are important to family unity.

As a single parent myself, I have tried diligently not to eliminate fun activities from our lives. Not only have we tried as a family to attend church and musical programs together, but we have also taken yearly trips to visit relatives. Since my children love camping and I am afraid to do it alone, I have found volunteer male relatives to go with us. Also, I find that my children's recreational interests are not necessarily expensive nor do they need to be out of town. We have made it a point, for example, to swim together with season passes, and we have found ways to do other simple and inexpensive things such as going to the park. I have encouraged my children to participate together in extracurricular activities that include dances, music, sports, and parties, and thus to make their activities family times. Birthdays involve brothers and sisters preparing for and also attending the celebration for the birthday child.

Parents as Teachers

Prophets have counseled us to teach our children both gospel principles and lessons that will prepare them to be well-rounded adults. We have been counseled to monitor what they learn in school. Earlier in this century President Joseph F. Smith warned the Saints to beware of "false educational ideas" (Smith 1939, p. 313). At the time he gave that counsel, few were alarmed about secular trends and influencesmovies were relatively clean and wholesome, while schools were adequate as places of learning and socializing. But times have changed. Now, caring parents are alarmed at the problems their children face in the schools.

President Benson assured mothers, "You are your children's best teacher. Don't shift this precious responsibility to day-care centers or baby-sitters. A mother's love and prayerful concern for her children are her most important ingredients in teaching her own." (Benson 1990, p. 34.)

What are we to teach them? President Benson listed a number of topics: "a love for the gospel, that it pays to be good, that there is no safety in sin, modesty, to respect manhood and womanhood, sexual purity, proper dating standards, temple marriage, missionary service, accepting and magnifying Church callings, a love for work, the value of a good education, the importance of the right kind of entertainment, appropriate books and magazines, the evils of pornography and drugs, and the value of living a clean life (ibid., p. 35).

President Benson promised mothers who taught these principles, "Your children will remember your teachings forever, and when they are old, they will not depart from them. They will call you blessedtheir truly angel mother." Then he concluded, "Mothers, this kind of heavenly, motherly teaching takes timelots of time. It cannot be done effectively part-time. It must be done all the time in order to save and exalt your children. This is your divine calling." (Ibid.)

The question then is not whether parents should teach their children, but what portion of their learning should be delegated to othersincluding church and schools. Many parents have resorted to home schooling to ensure that their children are taught values and morals that went unquestioned in the public sector only a few years ago.

Bend the Twig While It Is Young

President Gordon B. Hinckley related an experience with a twig that got out of control as it grew into a tree because nothing was done to control it when it was young. By the time he took action, the tree required major surgery to extract its limbs which were scraping the side of their home. (Hinckley 1993, 77-78.) Church leaders warn us that the time to influence our children is while they are young; parents must guide their children if they want to shape their behavior for their adult years. Bending the twigor childrequires vigilance, time, determination, and tenacity. Too often we think that letting a child have his own way is teaching autonomy or independence, but rules and loving discipline within an environment of love, trust, and acceptance will be in the best interest of the child and parents in the long run.

Monitor Your Children's Activities

President Ezra Taft Benson gave ten specific suggestions to mothers, stressing the importance of being home and caring for their children. First, he counseled mothers to be at the crossroads when children are coming and going and to avoid the problems of so many "millions of latchkey children who come home daily to empty houses, unsupervised by working parents." (Benson 1990, p. 32.)

A natural consequence of working mothers has been a decrease in the monitoring of children's behavior. Maternal employment in some families is associated with less supervision and monitoring of school-aged children (Crouter and MacDermid 1991), and that "lack of monitoring is associated with especially adverse consequences for boyslower school performance, more behavior problems, and an increase in mother-child conflict" (Crouter and MacDermid 1991). Sampson and Laub (1994) reanalyzed data from 1990 and reported that "employment by mothers outside the home appears to have a significant negative effect on mother's supervision," and "poor maternal supervision can, in turn, lead to juvenile delinquency." This lack of supervision can also lead to violence in the schools (Mushinski 1994).

Current research stresses the importance of teaching and monitoring children. Small and Luster (1994) reported that "sexually experienced teenagersmales and femaleswere more likely than sexually inexperienced . . . peers to come from homes where parents do not monitor closely." Similarly, Metzler et al. (1994) reported that teens engaging in risky sexual behavior more likely experienced "low parental supervision" and "low parental monitoring."

A study of the impact of "self-care" on the after-school behaviors of four thousand adolescent ninth-grade students showed that those involved in self-care were more likely to be involved in substance abuse (alcohol, marijuana, cigarettes), take risks, be depressed, and have lower grades. Those most likely to be involved in problem behavior were those who spent afternoon hours at the homes of others or at a job, and those least likely to act contrary to social values were those supervised by parents at home. (Richardson 1993).

For both boys and girls, lack of supervision is associated with earlier dating behavior, precocious sexuality, and greater peer involvement (Dornbusch et al. 1983). Research on nearly ten thousand adolescents in many different states has shown that full-time employment of mothers is related to higher levels of sexual activity among the youth (de Gaston and Jensen 1994).

Research reveals that most first-time experiences with adolescent sexuality take place in someone's homeeither their own, their partner's, or a friend's (de Gaston, Jensen, and Weed 1995). This research further implicates time spent in an unsupervised home as a factor in teen pregnancy.

To monitor children means to know where they are at the moment, what they are doing, and who they are with, and to enforce reasonable curfews. There are far too many gangs or groups prowling the communities late at nightan obvious indication that parents are not keeping track of their children. Local police and political figures in the county where I live have expressed the view that strict enforcement of curfew laws is one of the keys to lowering undesirable delinquent behavior among youth. Where curfew laws are restrictive and enforcedmeaning that parents are with their childrenthere are fewer out-of-control youth. The efficient enforcement of curfews is not a police responsibility but should be the responsibility of concerned parents.

Care in Choosing Parenting Helps

Books and courses on effective parenting have increased commensurate with the problems arising from deviant children. Unfortunately, as more and more parents run to secular authorities to obtain guidance on "how to parent," societal problems concerning children have escalated rather than decreased. When medicine prescribed for a physical illness does not cure the disease, we usually stop using the medication. However, we often find that when secular medicine prescribed for rearing children does not work, parents often try even larger doses of the same (sex education in the schools comes to mind).

What we genuinely need is a return to the Lord's way of rearing children, with fatherhood, motherhood, and child rearing as our most important priorities! If we are to succeed with the coming generation, and if we desire to "train up a child in the way he should go" (Prov. 22:6), we will have to follow the counsel of the Lord's prophets in guiding our children. The control of one's own children is a God-given responsibility that should not and cannot be successfully delegated to others. Schools, peers, and even children who appear to be sophisti-cated in this age of technology are not up to it either. Secular authorities stress that parents should avoid overcontrolling children; yet one of the most pressing needs today is for parents to monitor even more carefully the influences of the culture and how these influences can negate what they are trying to teach their children.

Many recognize the extent to which we have lost control of this "do your own thing" generation, and newspaper articles ominously predict greater lawlessness and violence in future adolescents. While teachers blame parents and parents blame teachers, few advocate a return to the past, when mothers were wrapped up in the task of motherly duties, fathers were the breadwinners, and both parents were committed to rearing competent and reliable children. Perhaps our greatest need is for a return to the days when children were taught obedience and respect at home, when saying "shut-up" was not allowed, when gum-chewing was the most pressing problem for schoolteachers to deal with. A greater emphasis on monitoring and training up children in "the way they should go" instead of allowing them to do as they please would no doubt benefit all of societyespecially the children.

Rely on Prophetic Counsel for Child Rearing

Parents, may I suggest that there is value in listening to prophets in rearing your children. The answers are steady and sensible and based on an eternal perspective that places family life as our highest priority. Of course, there are good ideas coming from sincere investigators in the world. But when it comes to family life, the Lord is the expert (see Moses 1:39). He knows each of his children better than we do. We must counsel with him as to how to rear his children. We can take counsel from respectable scholars, but primarily the prophets are the ones charged with getting us through these dark and dangerous days (see D&C 112:30-33). It is through spiritually changing our hearts that we are opened to the inspiration of the Spirit and inspired to want to be better companions and parents. Prophets give us spiritual guidelines and teach us how to prepare for specific situations.

The Dangers of Modern Permissiveness

It is even possible that the current emphasis on parent education in secular circles, with all its various theories, has eroded the confidence of parents to be parents, to set rules, and to hold children to gospel standards. Some new ideas of child rearing that include children setting standards and making decisions seem to have been misunderstood by some parents, who are now more fearful to be direct with their offspring. Likewise, stories of rebellious children with parents who were too strict may cause many parents to be indulgent and permissive to avoid such outcomes.

Too, a societal focus on child abusenotwithstanding such abuse being a tragic and pathetic trendmay cause parents to be fearful of doing anything physical with their children that could be misconstrued. Such parents may shrink entirely from physical control or punishment and, even more seriously, may shy away from demonstrating affection.

An Alternative Home-Based Employment

If a second income is a necessity, home-based employment may be a possible answer. I taught as a substitute teacher in school because of economic necessity when I had three children under six at home. It soon became obvious to me that my baby-sitter was making more money than I was, and I hated being away from my children the entire day. It was at that point I realized I needed to find a home-based enterprise myself.

Finding a home-based employment that pays enough to support a family is particularly challenging. Over the past twenty-eight years I have taught college courses part-time and have done most of the preparation and grading at home. I have done a variety of other things including statistical research, technical and newspaper writing, physician recruiting, and curriculum development, and I have also worked as a legal secretaryall from my home.

Though historically women have supplemented incomes by selling produce from vegetable gardens and by sewing, ironing, and baby-sitting, now many full-time professionals are able to stay at home with their children, particularly if they work with computers. In my neighborhood, for example, we have had people who have set up a legal/accounting practice, an insurance agency, a computer consulting firm, a piano studio, a physician recruiting service, and a lawn care company. I also know of a single sister with ten children who started a bakery in her home kitchen. I have neighbors who do crafts and sell snow cones together with their children, and another neighbor owns a recreational business in which the older children all work with their father while their mother does the accounting. Two other families in our neighborhood keep bees and in doing so have supported many of their children on missions.

I have fond childhood memories of my mother working at home. We sewed beads on dresses for Indian dolls, and I really loved the activity and working beside my mom. I'm not sure the employment was very financially rewarding, but it is one of my lasting childhood memories as my mother chose to be home with us.

Home-based employment facilitates parents being "at the crossroads" when their children leave and return home. A recent study of urban poor in Mexico focused on home-based work as a survival strategy. For many women, working at home increased their wealth and well-being significantly and provided a way of breaking out of poverty.

In a study at Brown University, sociologist Hilary Silver investigated the effects of home work (paid work in the home) versus outside work, and found that among working-class women there was less conflict between employment and family life for those involved in working at home. She also found that those doing home work held more traditional gender-role and parenting attitudes, and concluded that "home work is a family affair" (Silver 1993).

Raise Your Children in an Intact Family

Why is a single parent recommending to other parents that children should be raised in an intact family where possible? Because it is true! Prophets have counseled us to love our spouses and stay married. Research comparing children of divorced parents with children whose parents have remained married consistently shows that children living with both parents are the winners.

Children of divorced parents suffer from "lower levels of self-efficiency, self-esteem and social support, and [from] less effectual coping styles" (Kurtz 1994). Other researchers report elevated levels of alcohol use (Duncan et al. 1994), illegal drug use (Denton and Kampfe 1994, Gfellner 1994), premarital conception (Russell 1994), and incarceration for delinquency (Matlock 1994).

A study of 935 children in New Zealand found that those who watched their parents separate were particularly likely to behave disruptively, to fornicate, to use illegal drugs, and to suffer from emotional disturbances (Ferguson et al. 1994). A long-term study of over one thousand children in the United States determined that children who have seen their parents divorce are more likely to drop out of school, engage in premarital sex, and form nonmarital cohabitational unions (Furstenberg and Teitler 1994).

Statistics indicate that children of divorce, whether in stepfamilies or single-parent families or living with Mother or Father, are far more likely to be sexually active as adolescents (de Gaston and Jensen 1994) and likewise are much more likely to cheat, lie, and so on (Flinders and de Gaston 1994).

One researcher, Judith Wallerstein, has made numerous in-depth reports on children from divorced parents. In a study of sixty well-educated families she and other researchers reported unexpectedly large numbers of children on a spiraling downward course one year after the divorce, and five years later they found that only one-third of the children were doing well. Also, the research showed that ten years after the divorce, nearly half (forty-one percent) of the children were still doing poorly. One of the major findings of a longitudinal study of girls was the "sleeper effect" that influenced them at a later time, when they themselves were faced with issues of commitment and love. Wallerstein also reported that an almost universal result of divorce is a diminished capacity to parent childrenand that was true for both men and women alike. She concluded that such parents give less time, discipline, and sensitivity to their children's needsmostly because their own needs go unmet. (Wallerstein 1985.)

Most tragic are the situations of children of redivorcethose who have experienced multiple marital transitions because of their parents. Peterson and Zill (1986) studied children of redivorce and found that few had good relationships with either parent. While only two decades ago many people sought "creative divorces" to end their problems, currently the data strongly indicates that whatever problems the divorce may have solved for parents, the children have generally not fared well.

No-fault divorce laws have contributed to the dramatic increase in divorce. When first suggested and debated by legal scholars, judges, and other policymakers, there was almost no opposition; proponents saw it as a way to end the acrimony of the bitter divorce involving false accusations, heightened emotional states, collusion, and so on. Unfortunately, the acrimony has not decreased, while the number of divorces has increased dramatically. The result is that not only do more than half of today's children experience parental divorce at least once, but many children experience multiple marital transitions. Bitterness is now associated with issues of support and custody, and it is the children who are hurt the most. Women and children have been hurt financially by no-fault divorce because many mothers relinquish financial support to avoid the risk of losing their children.

Research has shown that female employment outside the home can undermine marriage, while female employment at home does not. Researchers Carver and Teachman (1993) reported Puerto Rican data which confirmed studies in the United States showing that "female labor force participation . . . has a positive effect on the propensity to divorce." However, they also found that women working in a family business or in the home were no more likely to divorce than those who did not work.

Admittedly there are some divorces which cannot be avoidedsome parents are abusive to their children or partners, and some spouses simply abandon their families for what they think are greener pastures. But research indicates the wisdom of the prophets to be correct: where possible, parents should stay togethereven if only for the sake of the children. No wonder Elder Boyd K. Packer counseled, "Even a rickety marriage will serve good purpose as long as two people struggle to keep it from falling down around them" (Packer 1982, 291).

Does this mean that there is no hope for divorced parents or their children? No, but those who are married should try their utmost to resolve their conflicts. And those who are already divorced need to make the best of their situation by providing the love and nurturance their children need. It requires considerable self-sacrifice. The reality is that too many children of divorce lose the attention of both parentsFather is no longer around, and Mother is working by day and socializing by night.

However, many single mothers have been able to raise their children wellthe price being the need to focus on building strong relationships with their children that will help the children to adopt the values of the parent in the home.

As we learned from our experience with the Word of Wisdom, the counsel of prophets will usually run contrary to conventional wisdom and practice. Research often lags as much as ten to twenty years behind. But eventually, as with the 1833 revelation, the counsel of the prophets will be proven to be the most important source of help in running our homes and marriages and in rearing a generation that will love parents, each other, and the gospel, and that will keep their own marriages together and thus bless their own children. That is the charge the Lord has given us in this dispensation.

References

Belsky, Jay, and M. Rovine. 1988. Nonmaternal care in the first year of life and infant-parent attachment security. Child Development 57:1224-31.

Benson, Ezra Taft. 1987. In October Conference Report, 59-63.

Benson, Ezra Taft. 1990. Come, Listen to a Prophet's Voice. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co.

Carver, Karen Price, and Jay D. Teachman. 1993. Female employment and first union dissolution in Puerto Rico. Journal of Marriage and the Family 55:686-98.

Clark, James R., comp. 1965-1975. Messages of the First Presidency. Vol. 4. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft.

Crouter, A. C., and S. M. MacDermid. 1991. A longitudinal study of parental monitoring in dual and single-earner families. Paper presented at the meeting of the Society for Research in Child Development, Seattle.

de Gaston, J. F. , and L. C. Jensen. 1994. Sensible Sex Education: A Handbook for Educators and Parents. Unpublished manuscript.

de Gaston, J. F., L. C. Jensen, and S. E. Weed. 1995. A closer look at adolescent sexuality. Journal of Youth and Adolescence 24, no. 4.

Denton, Rhonda E., and Charlene M. Kampfe. 1994. The relationship between family variables and adolescent substance abuse: a literature review. Adolescence 114:475-95.

Dornbusch, S. M., et al. 1983. Single parents, extended households, and the control of adolescents. Paper presented at the Pacific Sociological Meetings, San Jose, Calif.

Duncan, Terry E., Susan C. Duncan, and Hyman Hops. 1994. The effects of family cohesiveness and peer encouragement on the development of adolescent alcohol use: a cohort-sequential approach in the analysis of longitudinal data. Journal of Studies on Alcohol 55:588-99.

Ferguson, David M., John Horwood, and Michael T. Lynsky. 1994. Parental separation, adolescent psychopathology, and problem behaviors. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 33:1122-31.

Flinders, N., and J. F. de Gaston. 1994. Creating a Moral School: A Compass for People of the School. Unpublished manuscript.

Furstenberg, Frank F., Jr., and Julien O. Teitler. 1994. Reconsidering the effects of marital disruption: what happens to children of divorce in early adulthood. Journal of Family Issues 15:173-98.

Gfellner, Barbara M. 1994. A matched group comparison of drug use and problem behavior among Canadian Indian and white adolescents. Journal of Early Adolescence 14:24-48.

Goodman, Richard A., et al., eds. 1994. Proceedings of the international conference on child day care health: science, prevention, and practice. Supplement to Pediatrics 84:986-1020.

Gottfried, A. E., A. W. Gottfried, and K. Bathhurst. 1988. Maternal employment, family environment and children's development: infancy through the school years. In Maternal Employment and Children's Development, ed. A. E. Gottfried and A. W. Gottfried, 11-53. New York: Plenum.

Gross, David M., and Sophronia Scott. 1990. Proceeding with caution. Time (July 16):56-62.

Hinckley, Gordon B. 1993. In October Conference Report, 75-80.

Hoelcelman, R. A. 1994. Parasites in pediatric practice. Pediatric Annals 23:389-90. (Cited in New Research Supplement to Family in America. Rockford, Ill.: The Rockford Institute.)

Hunter, Howard W. 1994. In October Conference Report, 66-70.

Karen, Robert. 1994. Becoming Attached. New York: Warner Books.

Kurtz, Linda. 1994. Psychosocial coping resources in elementary school-age children of divorce. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry 64:554-62.

Leach, Penelope. 1994. Children First: What Our Society Must Doand Is Not Doingfor Children Today. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. (Cited in New Research Supplement to Family in America. Rockford, Ill.: The Rockford Institute.)

Matlock, M. Eileen, et al. 1994. Family correlates of social skill deficits in incarcerated and nonincarcerated adolescents. Adolescence 29:119-30.

Metzler, Carol W., et al. 1994. The social context for risky sexual behavior among adolescents. Journal of Behavioral Medicine 17:419-37.

Mitchell, Douglas K., et al. 1993. Outbreaks of astrovirus gastroenteritis in day-care centers. The Journal of Pediatrics 123:725-31.

Mushinski, Margaret. 1994. Violence in America's public schools. Statistical Bulletin (April-June):2-8. (Cited in New Research Supplement to Family in America. Rockford, Ill.: The Rockford Institute.)

Oppenheimer, Valerie Kincaid. 1994. Women's rising employment and the future of the family in industrial societies. Population and Development Review 20:293-336.

Packer, Boyd K. 1982. "That All May Be Edified." Salt Lake City: Bookcraft.

Packer, Boyd K. 1991. Let Not Your Heart Be Troubled. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft.

Peterson, James L., and Nicholas Zill. 1986. Marital disruption, parent-child relationships, and behavior problems in children. Journal of Marriage and the Family 48 (May): 295-307.

Richardson, Jean L., et al. 1993. Relationship between after-school care of adolescents and substance use, risk-taking, depressed mood and academic treatment. Pediatrics 92:32-37.

Russell, Stephen T. 1994. Life course antecedents of premarital conception in Great Britain. Journal of Marriage and the Family 56:480-92.

Sampson, Robert J., and John H. Laub. 1994. Urban poverty and the family context of delinquency: a new look at structure and process in a classic study. Child Development 65:523-40.

Scott, Richard G. 1993. In April Conference Report, 40-43.

Silver, Hilary. 1993. Homework and domestic work. Sociological Forum 8:181-202.

Small, Stephen A., and Tom Luster. 1994. Adolescent sexual activity, an econological risk-factor approach. Journal of Marriage and the Family 56:181-92.

Smith, Joseph F. 1939. Gospel Doctrine. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co.

Wallerstein, Judith S. 1985. The overburdened child: some long-term consequences of divorce. Social Work 30:116-23.

_____

Jacqueline F. de Gaston was born and raised in Southern California. She received a B.S. degree in education from Brigham Young University in 1961 and served a mission to Uruguay. She received an M.S. degree in child development from BYU in 1967 and taught elementary school and college courses in Utah, California, Virginia, and Texas. She is the mother of ten children. In 1994 she received a Ph.D. in family science from BYU. She currently teaches child development and related family courses at Salt Lake Community College and has been working on curriculum development at BYU. She has coauthored six professional publications in the field of sex education and has assisted with a book on moral education.
