Daniel K. Judd, Douglas E. Brinley, Eternal Families ( 1996)

15 Parents Builders of Men and Women

Jack R. Christianson

Parenthood is one of our most effective schools in this life. As a young person I really had no idea what it took for my parents to raise us five kidstwo boys and three girls. I knew that I learned from my parents, but it never occurred to me that they might be learning from us kids too. Mom and Dad made us feel that each of us was their favorite child. But I was not aware of the sacrifice, tears, prayers, work, inconvenience, time, or energy it took for a construction worker and a devoted full-time homemaker to be such wonderful parents. Neither did it dawn on me that there was both joy and pain in parenthooduntil I became a father.

Now, as one who daily lives with teenagers, my love for my mother and father has never been deeper. I think most people find, as I did, that it takes parenthood for us to appreciate what our folks went through. Now I understand why Elder Boyd K. Packer could say, "I cannot express the depth of my devotion to my wife and children. . . . I have learned more by far from them than they from me. That learning comes in ordinary experiences, the joy and the pain of everyday life." I know what he meant when he said, "The ultimate purpose of every teaching, every activity in the Church is that parents and their children are happy at home, sealed in an eternal marriage, and linked to their generations." (In Conference Report, April 1994, pp. 24, 26.)

On the other hand, Elder Packer reminded us that "the ultimate purpose of the adversary . . . is to disrupt, disturb, and destroy the home and the family. Like a ship without a rudder, without a compass, we drift from the family values which have anchored us in the past. Now we are caught in a current so strong that unless we correct our course, civilization as we know it will surely be wrecked to pieces." (Ibid., p. 24.)

If the tide of evil is to be turned back and our civilization kept from being totally wrecked on the shoals of permissiveness and violence, effective parenting is the answer. We must be parents who build young minds, bodies, and spirits, rather than parents who tear down and destroy. As Elder Neal A. Maxwell said, "There are no perfect families, either in the world or in the Church, but there are many good families" (in Conference Report, April 1994, p. 119). There are many things we can do to develop a strong home life. Our parental challenge is to build strong family membersindividuals who can attract mates and build eternal family units of their own. Family relations continue as long as we draw breath. We must keep building and lifting, never giving up or yielding to the adversary; for we know, as Elder Maxwell has told us, that "as parenting declines, the need for policing in- creases. There will always be a shortage of police if there is a shortage of effective parents! Likewise, there will not be enough prisons if there are not enough good homes." (Ibid.)

As children we learned to build, didn't we? Things like sand castles, a wooden hut or tree house, an underground bunker, a secret hideout of blankets thrown over tables or chairs. I know that I built all of these, plus a special fort on top of a neighbor's horse stall. It was great fun to create and build and pretend we were kings or princes or rulers.

Then, after we worked so hard to construct forts and castles, we suffered pain and personal loss when they were destroyed or taken down by our "enemies" who would attack and destroy our creations. But we always rebuilt. I think the joy came in the rebuilding process. I worry sometimes that this childlike joy in building and creating stops when we become parents, even though we have something greater to create: faithful and strong sons and daughters of God. But I think we were born to build, for is not that the work of God and his Son? (See Moses 1:39.) Thus, it becomes our work as parents. We are in the business of building men and women of character who can lead this kingdom to its eventual victory in this final dispensation.

The Savior was a builder of men and women, and he invites and encourages us to rise to our tallest spiritual stature. We rely so much on him to build and remake our souls so we can be individuals of worth, acceptable to our HeavenlyFather. His life is our best example of one who built and lifted others.

President Howard W. Hunter explained God's method of building. He remarked:

God's chief way of acting is by persuasion and patience and long-suffering, not by coercion and stark confrontation. He acts by gentle solicitation and by sweet enticement. He always acts with unfailing respect for the freedom and independence that we possess. He wants to help us and pleads for the chance to assist us, but he will not do so in violation of our agency. . . .

To countermand and ultimately forbid our choices was Satan's way, not God's, and the Father of us all simply never will do that. He will, however, stand by us forever to help us see the right path, find the right choice, respond to the true voice, and feel the influence of his undeniable Spirit. His gentle, peaceful, powerful persuasion to do right and find joy will be with us "so long as time shall last, or the earth shall stand, or there shall be one man upon the face thereof to be saved" (Moro. 7:36). (Ensign, August 1994, back cover.)

Building and lifting others' self-esteem must be considered an art, a sometimes difficult one requiring great effort and sacrifice on the part of the builder. In creating spiritual men and women, we may in the process suffer hurt and rejection, as did the Master Builder. At times we must stand alone against cultural messages that destroy rather than build. But a builder gives life, hope, and purpose to creation, and so must we if we are to maximize self-esteem and personal happiness in our children.

Self-Esteem

Have you noticed that self-esteem is a hot topic these days? There are a multitude of books on the subject. Seminars abound telling us how to like ourselves and feel good about who we are. You would think that low self-esteem exists in epidemic proportions by the attention it gets. And it is not just a topic addressed to youth, but to adults as well. Apparently many of our Father's children are unaware of their divine nature and their infinite worth to him. In spite of all the seminars and books on this topic, however, I feel we have missed a very important component of true self-esteemthat which comes from building others up. For it is through the process of lifting others that our own self-worth increases.

Before discussing how to strengthen our children's view of themselves, I think it is vital to differentiate between self-esteem and self-confidence. Self-esteem comes from an internal monitor, a feeling that is based on an understanding of our divine nature as sons and daughters of God. The knowledge of who we are and our potential as his children, with the opportunity to become as God is, brings an inner peace and spiritual perspective that can be gained in no other way.

Self-confidence, on the other hand, is generated from external sources. It generally originates from feedback we receive from others and is usually tied to how well we perform tasks. It is easy to confuse the two, but I believe it is essential to separate them. It is possible, for example, for an individual to have a high level of self-confidence in performing athletic or musical talent and yet to feel little worth as a human being.

I learned this lesson playing college football, where many players had self-confidence but not self-esteem. I noticed that these players were self-deprecating and did not seem to like themselves because of an inability to overcome a particular weakness, such as drinking. But on game day, when they walked onto the playing field, when they had to use their athletic prowess, confidence oozed from every pore. They knew their football, and they had confidence in their ability to perform.

In my case I learned the difference between these two terms in a different way. I knew from my upbringing that I was a son of God, that he loves me and knows that I existhence, my self-esteem was adequate. On the other hand, I have absolutely no self-confidence when it comes to using a sewing machine. Let me explain. I took homemaking as a senior in high school. We were learning how to put a drawstring into a pair of swimming trunks, when I had a very unfortunate accident. I was working the machine with a foot pedal while guiding the top part of the trunks under the fast-moving needle. I have no idea how it happened, but before I could take my foot off the pedal, my right forefinger made its way underneath the little metal foot, and the needle went through the flesh of my skin next to the bone three or four times.

I tried not to make a scene, because I knew my buddies would harass me if they knew what I had done. So, very calmly, I raised my left hand and asked Miss Greene to come to my table. I informed her that I had a slight problem. I still remember the look on her face and what she said. "Oh my," she laughed, "we do have a problem!"

With those words she quickly twisted the wheel on the side of the machine, pulling the needle out of my finger. She then snipped the thread below the needle and very carefully removed it from my finger.

Unfortunately, the mishap did not remain a secret, and the hassle was unrelenting and unmerciful. I honestly don't care to ever touch a sewing machine again! But I'm comfortable with me as a person. Though my confidence in sewing is nonexistent, my self-worth remains intact because I know who I am and I know that "with God nothing shall be impossible" (Luke 1:37). I must admit that there are times when I feel as Nephi did: "If God had commanded me to do all things I could do them. If he should command me that I should say unto this water, be thou earth, it should be earth; and if I should say it, it would be done." (1 Ne. 17:50.)

I have faith in my Heavenly Father, in his Son, and in the plan of life. I possess self-esteem because I understand my divine nature and potential. I identify with the writer of Proverbs, who wrote, "For as he thinketh in his heart, so is he" (Prov. 23:7).

It was President Ezra Taft Benson who explained the world's view of self-esteem:

The proud depend upon the world to tell them whether they have value or not. Their self-esteem is determined by where they are judged to be on the ladders of worldly success. They feel worthwhile as individuals if the numbers beneath them in achievement, talent, beauty, or intellect are large enough. Pride is ugly. It says, "If you succeed, I am a failure." If we love God, do His will, and fear His judgment more than men's, we will have self-esteem. (In Conference Report, April 1989, p. 5.)

Helping Our Children Develop Self-Esteem

Helping our children feel good about themselves because of their divine nature takes time and attention on our part, for cultural influences often counter our efforts. Obedience is based on understanding our relationship with our Heavenly Father. That, of course, is the motivation of gospel doctrine, principles, and covenants. As we learn of the divine plan of salvation and the place of marriage and family in that eternal scheme, we sense the responsibility to lift and build our children. This is not to say that there are not fine examples of building others by wonderful models in our culture, but there is also much to challenge our way of life.

Mother Teresa is a builder, a lifter. She demonstrates the art of building others at a basic level through simply caring for their needs, something parents know about. A newspaper article reported, "Mother Teresa, 81, a cotton veil rimming her wrinkled face, told . . . about sheltering a dying derelict crawling with worms. ÃIt took three hours to pick from his body all the worms,' she related in mellow tones. She said the emaciated man murmured gratefully that he had lived like Ãan animal' but now could die Ãlike an angel.' He went Ãhome to God' with a Ãjoyful heart' because he had received Ãtender love and care,' she said. ÃGod was with him. . . . We must thank God for the beautiful way in which we sense God in the poorest of the poor.' " (Daily Herald, Provo, Utah, 16 August 1992, p. C-1.) One way we strengthen others, then, is by serving them.

As parents, we too can strengthen the self-esteem of our children by loving them and caring for their basic necessities. We can also bless them by teaching them correct principles. Let me share some of my favorite principles of parenting:

Why do we make fun of others? Elder Neal A. Maxwell suggested that criticism is fatiguing when contrasted with blessing and lifting people's spirits. "When at length we tire of putting people down, this self-inflicted fatigue can give way to the invigorating calisthenics of lifting people up" (Men and Women of Christ [Salt Lake City:Bookcraft, 1991], p. 28). If we spent as much time lifting our children as we do criticizing them, how effectively we could help them to see themselves in a more positive light! Looking for honest ways to lift one another would also be more beneficial to our own self-esteem, for we would see more good in ourselves. We would cease to be so critical of our weaknesses and would find ways to allow our weaknesses to become strengths with God's help (see Ether 12:27).

A conscious effort to lift children up rather than put them down requires a genuine love on the part of parents, for parents must be able to separate their children's behaviors from their worth as individuals. Admittedly, it is not easy for most of us to do. It requires an appreciation for who our children are (sons and daughters of God), some on-the-job training, and a genuine love for the often innocent motives of our little ones. This is not to say we do not correct children or discipline them. Even the Lord chastened his children on occasion because he loves them. To the early Saints of our day, the Lord explained: "Verily, thus saith the Lord unto you whom I love, and whom I love I also chasten that their sins may be forgiven, for with the chastisement I prepare a way for their deliverance in all things out of temptation, and I have loved youwherefore, ye must needs be chastened and stand rebuked before my face" (D&C 95:1-2).

The Lord is able to make this separation between people and their actions, and it must become our goal as well. He said: "For I the Lord cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance; nevertheless, he that repents and does the commandments of the Lord shall be forgiven; and he that repents not, from him shall be taken even the light which he has received; for my Spirit shall not always strive with man, saith the Lord of Hosts" (D&C 1:31-33). The Lord's stern counsel and chastisement have nothing to do with his not liking or loving us. His atonement is proof of that. He is able to separate us, as children of infinite worth, from our behavior that offends his Spirit.

As a seminary principal I occasionally had to confront students who misbehaved and disrupted the learning of others. I tried to help them understand that I loved them as individuals, but that some of their behaviors were unacceptable in a seminary setting. Sometimes because of their youth they would think, He just doesn't like me, though nothing was further from the truth. In reality, I loved them and wanted them to be happy and successful in their lives. That's why it was essential that they learn which behaviors are not acceptable and would not be tolerated, and that in the future, someone who perhaps didn't love them as much as I did might physically or emotionally harm them.

Suppose a child hits a baseball through the front room window. The last thing he needs is to hear is, "You idiot! You just hit a ball through our front window!" Rather, he needs a loving arm around him, and guidance for a plan to repair the window. A teenager who makes a foolish calculation and crunches the front end of her father's car does not need a lecture on driving carefully but an understanding dad who knows something about mistakes himself. A dutiful housewife who, while cleaning up her husband's mess on the bedroom dresser, unknowingly throws away an important business paper does not need a tirade by her husband. She needs help in trying to recover the paper. There is a difference between an honest mistakesomething we mortals are prone toand the person who makes it. Of course, youth need correction. The Lord explained that sometimes we must help, but it must be done wisely:

No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the priesthood, only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned;

By kindness, and pure knowledge, which shall greatly enlarge the soul without hypocrisy, and without guile

Reproving betimes with sharpness, when moved upon by the Holy Ghost; and then showing forth afterwards an increase of love toward him whom thou hast reproved, lest he esteem thee to be his enemy;

That he may know that thy faithfulness is stronger than the cords of death. (D&C 121:41-44.)

After we have "reproved betimes with sharpness," do we show the offender "an increase of love" so that he knows we still love him? Do those we reprove know without question that our "faithfulness is stronger than the cords of death"? They can know of our faithfulness if, after receiving a commitment from them to not let it happen again and ensuring that they make plans to take care of any restitution, we follow the Lord's advice to show forth love after reviewing errors in judgment.

Another part of this principle is the need to stop calling children names and labeling them with damaging verbal barbs. In my opinion, one of the worst forms of child abuseyet one we don't always notice in our own behavioris to verbally tear down others. Why? Because "as he thinketh in his heart, so is he" (Prov. 23:7). We become what we think about most of the time. Actions grow out of our thoughts. How can children "let virtue garnish [their] thoughts unceasingly" or "let [their] bowels . . . be full of charity towards all men" if they are constantly being called names that degrade or that damage their abil-ity to see themselves as sons or daughters of God? How can their "confidence wax strong in the presence of God" if they must hide in order to escape the pain of verbal abuse? (See D&C 121:45-46.)

To build self-esteem in our children, we should keep in mind the following truths written about children but which can apply to people of all ages:

Children learn what they live and children live what they learn.

If children live with criticism, they learn to condemn.

If children live with tolerance, they learn to be patient.

If children live with ridicule, they learn to be shy.

But if children live with encouragement, they learn confidence.

If children live with security, they learn to have faith.

If children live with fear, they grow up standing at the end of every line.

But if children live with praise, they learn to stand alone and lead their parade even if it's raining.

If children are spoiled with indulgence and permissiveness, they grow up full of compromise and greed.

If children are given challenges and responsibilities, they grow up with values and goals.

If children live with depression, they'll need a drink, a puff, a sniff, a shot, a pill to get them high.

But if children live with optimism, they'll grow up thinking they were born to fly.

If children live with hate, they'll grow up blind to beauty and true love.

But if children live with love, they'll live to give their love away, and become blind to hate.

If children are reminded of all the bad in them we see, they'll become exactly what we hoped they'd never be.

But if we tell our children we're so proud to wear their name, they'll learn to win, believing they'll achieve their highest aim

Because children live what they learn and children learn what they live.

(As heard in Denis Waitley, 2005: A Child's Odyssey [Rancho Santa Fe, Calif., 1982], audiocassette.)

I feel it is important to suggest in our discussion of names and labels that parents use their children's names in addressing them, and use them often. There is nothing as beautiful as the sound of your own name. The Lord knows each of us individually and he often uses people's names in communicating with them. I think we ought to do the same.

Elder Maxwell explained:

What seems so plainkeeping the commandments in one's daily lifeis "it!" There is not something else of a higher order which we are supposed to be doing instead.

This spiritual reality may seem unspectacular, even ordinary, especially if one assumes that some more important and more glamorous chore awaits beyond the horizon. To keep the commandments and to honor our covenantswhether one is a cashier at a grocery checkout counter, a neurosurgeon, an automotive mechanic, or a government officialis what matters, daily and eternally (see Luke 9:23). Each individual is to give away his sins, to deny himself, to lose himself, and then to find himself and full and everlasting joy.

When other things push away or prevent the doing of these simple, seemingly ordinary things, we are in deep troubleespecially when we no longer realize what the real things are! (A Wonderful Flood of Light [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1990], p. 103.)

On another occasion Elder Maxwell taught that "worshipping, serving, studying, praying, each in its own way squeezes selfishness out of us; it pushes aside our preoccupations with the things of the world" (Men and Women of Christ [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1991], p. 98).

"After all we can do." Obviously some people can do more than others. If we are always comparing ourselves with others' achievements and abilities, we will end up being disappointed for much of our lives; for there will always be someone who is a little better, a little faster, a little smarter, a little stronger, or a little bigger than we are. This should not throw us, however, or cause us to lose confidence in our own strengths and talents. It simply means that we are individuals with our own unique set of strong points. Perhaps that is why those who possess charity "envieth not," are "not puffed up," and "seeketh not [their] own" (Moro. 7:45).

The Lord told Samuel, who was searching for the one to lead Israel, "Look not on his countenance, or on the height of his stature; because I have refused him: for the Lord seeth not as man seeth; for man looketh on the outward appearance, but the Lord looketh on the heart" (1 Sam. 16:7). It is what we are deep down inside that the Lord cares about, not our outward appearance.

Some years ago my wife and I took our children to a Special Olympics track meet where this principle was evident. We wanted our children to gain an appreciation and love for those less fortunate than they. We knew that the Special Olympians were people with great spirits who had outward mental or physical handicaps, yet who, despite their limitations, were real people with real feelings and real needs. Though none of these athletes would ever be famous or go down as champions in the world's record books, they were champions because they were doing their best.

We wanted to teach our children this vital lesson about life. We wanted them to know that the motto for Special Olympics was not just for Special Olympians, but it applied to everyday life as well: "Let me win. But if I cannot win, let me be brave in the attempt." We may not always be the very best or always win, but we can always be brave.

I was reminded of Joshua, who had the humbling task of following Moses as the leader of Israel. The Lord counseled him: "Have not I commanded thee? Be strong and of a good courage; be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed: for the Lord thy God is with thee whitherso-ever thou goest." (Josh. 1:9.) Like Joshua, we must be strong and courageous many times in our lives.

The track meet proved to be the teacher we hoped it would be. Our children loved the events as they got used to the open shows of affection and the athletes' mannerisms. They watched the "huggers" hug every participant after each event. They felt the love and warmth of athletes and volunteers. However, the most significant lesson came with the women's one-hundred-meter dash.

One of the participants was a woman in her twenties with Down's syndrome. She was big-boned and heavysetnot what you would think of as a sprinter. We noticed that she had split her pant seam and had a large safety pin to fasten the front of her pants; yet it appeared to be a futile attempt.

When the starting gun was fired, the runners took off. The woman with the safety pin was dead last. It was difficult for her to run, but she did the best she could. Then it happened. The safety pin popped, her pants fell to her ankles, and she ran two more difficult steps before falling flat on her face.

I wanted to jump from the stands and help her. Before I could move, however, she stood up, pulled up her pants, held them together in front with one hand, and hobbled to the end of the race. When she crossed the finish line she fell into the outstretched arms of a hugger. Everyone cheered for her as if she had won the race. Tears welled up in my eyes as I witnessed her courage. I knew that if that had happened to me I would have found a place to hide rather than finish the race.

The story does not end there, however. When the medals were awarded, she stood on the platform still holding her pants together with one hand. When they presented her with a medal, she bent over so they could place it around her neck. As she stood up, the excitement of having a medal was evidently too much for her to bear. She raised both arms above her head in triumph to wave excitedly to the crowd, forgetting her pants predicament. Her pants fell to her ankles again. But she didn't seem to mind that she stood before the large crowd in her underwear. The important thing was that she had done her best! She had been brave, and that was what really counted.

I hope I never forget the feelings of that day. I knew I had watched a true championone who did the best she could even though she wasn't the winner.

Our children need to realize that they will not always be victorious or come out on top in everything. There will always be those who are more talented. This is a reality of life. Let me illustrate.

Every workday for seven years I lost a Ping-Pong match to the same man. Now, losing at Ping-Pong may not seem like a big deal to you. But if you knew my competitive spirit, getting crushed every day and having to listen to my opponent talk about it for seven years was tough. Each day at lunch we would play one or two games. Each day at lunch I lost. Every time I lost I would remind him that these failures were mere stepping-stones to my eventual success. He would then remind me that I could build the wall of China with all my stepping-stones! But I never quit. In fact, I never believed that I would lose. I knew I wasn't a failure just because I was defeated in this one thing, even if it was every day.

The day finally came when I became a fairly decent Ping-Pong player and could beat him on occasion. Though I failed routinely at first, I became better and better with time and practice. Life is like that. We can become better individuals, better fathers and husbands, wives and mothers, even better children, if we persist in reaching our goals. In my opinion, the concept of teaching our children not to fear failure is a critical element in building their self-esteem.

Change is an interesting creature. It is frightening at times, but it is essential to our personal growth and it plays an important part in the growth of God's kingdom. We face it all the time. The Lord changes leaders in various ward and stake organizations. From time to time he even changes general Church organizations and programs in an effort to accommodate growth in the kingdom. Change often causes us to stretch ourselves and forces us to leave our comfort zone. But is not that stretching the very process that so often brings us to our knees, humbling our hearts and providing opportunities for growth? "And if men come unto me I will show unto them their weakness. I give unto men weakness that they may be humble; and my grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me; for if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them." (Ether 12:27.)

Change is a spirit-strengthening process. Change is not to be feared, for surely it is the one thing in life we can count on! Circumstances are always in a state of flux. When we learn to accept change without fearing it, something happens inside us. We learn that making adjustments and being flexible is a vital part of successful living; we feel better about ourselves and our circumstances.

Strange but true, the fear of success is almost as frightening as the fear of failure. I remember watching an NCAA college basketball championship game on television one year. The coach of the underdog team was doing all he could to inspire his players to a victory. During a time-out he gathered his team around him. His team was several points behind, and the situation did not look promising. The TV crew put their microphone near the huddle. As the coach talked, his players listened intently. I hope I never forget his wisdom: "Gentlemen! Don't be afraid to win!" It was so simple, yet profound. He sensed that they were afraid to win because very few expected it of them. They came back to win. When their fear of winning was eliminated, they put themselves in a position to win.

As we teach our children to not fear success, we allow them to succeed at life. Success has a way of bringing opportunities for further growth. If we can encourage our children to keep success (and failure) in the proper perspective, their self-esteem will increase. We can do this by helping them view their successes for what they really areopportunities to serve our Father in Heaven. In the Sermon on the Mount, Christ taught: "Ye are the light of the world. A city that is set on an hill cannot be hid. Neither do men light a candle, and put it under a bushel, but on a candlestick; and it giveth light unto all that are in the house. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven." (Matt. 5:14-16.)

The Lord wants us to succeed, and he will help us to do so, but we must remember to be grateful and appreciative to him for our success. "In nothing doth man offend God, or against none is his wrath kindled, save those who confess not his hand in all things, and obey not his commandments" (D&C 59:21). Teach your children to return thanks to God.

Another dimension of this principle is to help children be unafraid of truth. This is another way to build self-esteem. Remember the line from the Church video Man's Search for Happiness"Only if we are unafraid of truth will we ever find it." Jesus taught that "ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free" (John 8:32). The freedom to see ourselves as we really are can come to us if we do not fear the truth. Truth is hard on us because it requires us to admit we are often wrong. It requires us to be humble, to eliminate pride from our lives, and to accept those things we cannot change. If we are afraid of truth, our lives will be restricted. For example, fearing the truth can keep us from praying, because we may not want answers to come that may require change on our partas every missionary knows. Such fear can also keep us from searching the scriptures with a sincere heart, with real intent. Fear affects how we view most things in our lives. As our children learn to not fear the truth in any setting, they can learn to walk with confidence, knowing the road on which they travel is a safe one. Thus, self-esteem is nurtured and strengthened. As the Apostle John voiced for all parents, "I have no greater joy than to hear that my children walk in truth" (3 Jn. 1:4).

James taught: "And the tongue is a fire, a world of iniquity: so is the tongue among our members, that it defileth the whole body, and setteth on fire the course of nature; and it is set on fire of hell. . . . Therewith bless we God, even the Father; and therewith curse we men, which are made after the similitude of God. Out of the same mouth proceedeth blessing and cursing. My brethren, these things ought not so to be." (James 3:6, 9-10.)

Consider what you do when good friends come to dinner at your house. Do you speak to them the way you speak to your children? How would you tell them to wash their hands before eating, for example? Would you be rude, sharp, or impatient? Our children are also guests in our home, and we will not have them very long before they will leave us. How we treat them affects their feelings toward us and provides a model for how they, in turn, will treat others. The way we talk to our children can indeed make a difference in how they feel about themselves.

Feigning modesty or denying a compliment is counterproductive. For some reason we often feel that we need to put ourselves down in order to be built up. Even if we don't believe the compliment is true, a simple "thank you" expresses sincere appreciation.

It has been interesting to me that Christ was not offended by very many things. The exceptions were ingratitude, disobedience, and hypocrisy. He simply counseled us to give thanks when we are blessed, and told us that we show our gratitude by obeying his commandments. When someone sends a compliment our way, we also ought to give thanks and be appreciative to them. By teaching our children this simple concept, they can learn to be gracious as well as enhance their self-esteem.

At times it can be very discouraging to be a teacher. My desire to help, teach, and inspire my students is great, but often I find a student who doesn't want to be helped. Usually such an individual is struggling personally with a problem or concern, and his or her behavior is, in reality, a cry for help. I've seen this kind of situation many times.

If a person doesn't want spiritual food, there is usually a deeper reason. Often the reason is sin. The Savior said: "And the whole world lieth in sin, and groaneth under darkness and under the bondage of sin. And by this you may know they are under the bondage of sin, because they come not unto me. For whoso cometh not unto me is under the bondage of sin." (D&C 84:49-51.)

I remember a young man who I thought hated me and my children, yet I had no idea what I had done to warrant his wrath. One day I asked him what was troubling him, and I was shocked at his response. I can't write everything he said, because it would not be appropriate to print. But the gist of it was that we had everything he desired: a happy family with a dad and mom at home, where peace reigned. His anger towards me and my family came from an inner pain. Once we talked and cleared the air and he felt I understood, things began to change.

One day he came to me in the bishop's office and asked if we could talk. His eyes filled with tears as he asked if it was possible to be forgiven for having sworn at his bishop. He honestly thought that he was going to hell for swearing at me and manifesting such a hatred for me and my family. As he began to better understand the gospel and repent of his anger, his behavior improved and we became quite close friends. When problems are cleared, many times the undesirable behavior is eliminated and self-esteem improves.

Most individuals want desperately to be loved by those close to them, especially other family members and peers. But so many people feel lonely, unwanted, and unimportant and become involved in self-destructive behaviors. From my observation, we all need to be loved, to have a sense of belonging. And even though our Heavenly Father loves us as a part of his familya concept that should encourage all of uswe have so many who feel such little love from those around them.

If we are to be like Jesus Christ and Heavenly Father, we must love every other human being, even if we have little hope that their negative behaviors will change to positive ones. We love Christ "because he first loved us" (1 Jn. 4:19). I am convinced that one of the major reasons I love my parents so much today is because they first loved me. Words cannot express how I felt as a young man when I would look up into the stands at a ball game and see my number one fansmy parents. It didn't really matter how I played; I knew they loved me and that I belonged to them. After the game I knew I was wanted at home. I knew there would be love and acceptance waiting for me. How could I feel anything but good about myself? It wasn't the game that mattered after all, it was me!

Please send love messages to your children so that they are not starved in their need for affection and acceptance. Sometimes I see that it is hard for fathers to put their arms around their sons and daughters, but it is absolutely crucial if they want to develop relationships that will meet the needs their children have for Dad's love and approval.

Currently in our home there are three teenage daughters. You guessed itit can be quite an emotional roller coaster! In fact, I have learned how hard it is at times to practice what I preach. My wife is continually reminding me, however, that it wasn't that long ago that I was going through that same sensitive time in life. (She thinks I have a short memory!) It is not always helpful to be reminded of the principle that when hormones run wild, the brain seems to shut down. But we can remember how it felt when it seemed that no one understood. We must remember how unsure we were about so many things as we passed through adolescence. It is a difficult time for many, but an adolescent is a human being with sensitive feelings and usually a rather fragile ego. We must see clearly that distinction.

Again, wise counsel from a modern Apostle: "In the healthy family, first and best, we can learn to listen, forgive, praise, and to rejoice in the achievements of others. There also we can learn to tame our egos, work, repent, and love. In families with spiritual perspective, yesterday need not hold tomorrow hostage. If we sometimes act the fool, loving families know this is not our last act; the curtain is not run down." (Elder Neal A. Maxwell, in Conference Report, April 1994, p. 121.)

Even though as a young person I did not understand all that my parents endured in raising our family, I knew that I had wonderful, caring parents. Yes, we were far from perfect, but each child in our family felt loved no matter what we did. May each of us provide that security for our children. If we fail at everything else, let us not fail at loving our children so that they will experience us as builders rather than destroyers.

_____

Jack R. Christianson was born in Payson, Utah, and reared in the Orem area. He attended Dixie College and graduated with a B.A. degree in English from Weber State, where he was a quarterback on the football team. He received an M.Ed. from Brigham Young University. He has taught in the Church Educational System for many years and is presently a faculty member at the LDS institute at Utah Valley State College in Orem. He has authored several books and recorded numerous talk tapes. He has twice served as a bishop. He is married to Melanie Harris, and they are the parents of four daughters.
