Daniel K. Judd, Douglas E. Brinley, Eternal Families ( 1996)

16 The Greatest Joy

Richard L. Judd

John of old declared, "I have no greater joy than to hear that my children walk in truth" (3 Jn. 1:4). Of course, Satan does not want us to experience this happiness. In fact, "he seeketh that all men might be miserable like unto himself" (2 Ne. 2:27). His ultimate purpose "is to disrupt, disturb, and destroy the home and the family" (Elder Boyd K. Packer, in Conference Report, April 1994, p. 24). As parents we have the stewardship to teach our children "to walk in the ways of truth and soberness" and "to love one another, and to serve one another" (Mosiah 4:15). If we do, we can help our families overcome the adversary and we too can experience what John described.

The scriptures are replete with examples of the sorrow that comes to families when loved ones go astray. Remember the haunting cry of David upon learning of his wayward son's death? "O my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom! would God I had died for thee, O Absalom, my son, my son!" (2 Sam. 18:33.) And think of Alma's words to his sinful son Corianton: "And now, my son, I would to God that ye had not been guilty of so great a crime" (Alma 39:7).

As a bishop I remember too well the cries of parents as they poured out their hearts concerning children who had broken serious commandments. I also remember the tears of joy that were shed as children participated in the holy ordinances of the temple.

Likewise many scriptures illustrate the joy that comes into a parent's heart when the decisions children make are wise. Think of the prophet Mormon, who couldn't recommend his fellow Nephites to God but could recommend his faithful son Moroni to God (see Moro. 9:21-22) or Alma, who said to Shiblon, "My son, . . . I have had great joy in thee already, because of thy faithfulness and thy diligence, and thy patience and thy long-suffering" (Alma 38:3). Who among us has not delighted in the good works of our offspring?

How can we teach our children to walk in the paths of truth? How can we anchor our family to the time-tested principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ and receive of his joy?

A few years ago the Church Correlation Department's Evaluation Division conducted two studies involving young men. The findings indicated:

The young men in the Church most likely to receive the Melchizedek Priesthood, go on missions, and marry in the temple come from homes where they were born in the covenant or later sealed to their parents.

And whether young men take these critical steps in life depends far more on the amount and kind of religious practice and observance they have had with parents in the home, their agreement with their parents' religious values, and their own private religious experiences than it does on participation in any particular programs as they grow up. ("Key to Strong Young Men: Gospel Commitment in the Home," Ensign, December 1984, p. 66.)

Another factorthe contact a young man had with his priesthood adviserwas found to have significant influence on a young man, but the religious activity in the home and the agreement with parents on values and on goals for the future were found to have the greatest influence.

A more recent study found that when "adolescents internalize religious values and . . . feel religious experiences, they are significantly less likely to be involved in delinquent activities" (Brent L. Top and Bruce A. Chadwick, "The Power of the Word: Religion, Family, Friends, and Delinquent Behavior of LDS Youth," BYU Studies 33, no. 2 [1993]:308).

These studies serve as reminders to all of us of the importance of the temple and of religious practice and observance in the home, when we may foster agreement with parents on religious values and encourage private religious experiences. Let's consider each of these factors.

Reverence for the Temple

President Howard W. Hunter, in the opening session of his first general conference as President of the Church, invited Latter-day Saints "to look to the temple of the Lord as the great symbol of [their] membership." He stated that the Lord would be pleased if "every adult member would be worthy ofand carrya current temple recommend." He further instructed members to attend the temple frequently and to keep a picture of the temple in their homes so that their children would see it. He instructed parents to teach their children about the purposes of the temple and to "have them plan from their earliest years to go there and to remain worthy of that blessing." (In Conference Report, October 1994, p. 8.)

At the conclusion of this same general conference President Hunter issued a challenge to "make the temple, with temple worship and temple covenants and temple marriage, our ultimate earthly goal and the supreme mortal experience." He also counseled us as parents to "share with our children the spiritual feelings we have in the temple" and to make the temple experience "an even greater highlight than receiving the mission call." He taught that we should "plan for and teach and plead with our children to marry in the house of the Lord." (Ibid., p. 118.)

When our two oldest boys were very young, my wife and I took them to the open house held prior to the rededication of the St. George Temple. After completing the tour, we paused at the top of the massive steps right outside the east doors of the temple. As we took one last look inside that house of the Lord, our oldest son, who was about five, said, "Daddy, I wish we could live here." I held him in my arms and said, "I wish we could live here too, son." The words of the Prophet Joseph when he offered the dedicatory prayer of the Kirtland Temple came to mind: "Holy Father, we ask thee to assist us . . . that thy holy presence may be continually in this house; and that all people who shall enter upon the threshold of the Lord's house may feel thy power" (D&C 109:10, 12-13). Years later we were able to feel some of this power and to experience deep joy when we witnessed our sons kneel at the altar with their sweet companions as they were married for time and all eternity.

As parents teach their children of temple covenants, plus show how they feel by attending the temple regularly, families will be fortified against the great wickedness of today. They will have great power and will experience the blessings which the Lord has "ordained to be poured out upon those who shall reverence [him]" in his holy house (D&C 109:21).

Religious Practice and Observance in the Home

In one of the Church studies previously mentioned, young men were asked about their religious activity. Their answers were examined in conjunction with responses from their parents and leaders. Two factors were identified which seemed to have the greatest influence on whether a young man would desire to live a clean life, serve a mission, or marry in the temple. "These were religious activity in the home (family prayer, family home evening, family scripture study), and agreement with parents on values and on goals for the future." ("Key to Strong Young Men," p. 66.)

For years Church leaders have given members counsel regarding prayer, family home evening, and family scripture study. Not only were members taught what to do, but they were also promised specific blessings that would be theirs if they were obedient to the direction given.

Prayer

Elder James E. Faust told the following story:

A few years ago, Bishop Stanley Smoot was interviewed by President Spencer W. Kimball. President Kimball asked, "How often do you have family prayer?"

Bishop Smoot answered, "We try to have family prayer twice a day, but we average about once."

President Kimball answered, "In the past, having family prayer once a day may have been all right. But in the future it will not be enough if we are going to save our families." (In ConferenceReport, October 1990, p. 41.)

Remember the prayers that Alma the elder offered as he tried to help his son Alma? The angel who appeared to this wicked son said, "Behold, the Lord hath heard the prayers of his people, and also the prayers of his servant, Alma, who is thy father; for he has prayed with much faith concerning thee that thou mightest be brought to the knowledge of the truth" (Mosiah 27:14). Through the power of the prayers of others and through his own prayer and fasting (see Alma 5:45-46), Alma the Younger was able to turn his life around.

As parents we must pray not only with our families but also individually, and we must teach our children the importance of personal prayer; for "a lack of deep personal prayer and deep genuine worship also erodes our faith" (Elder Neal A. Maxwell, in Conference Report, April 1991, p. 118). The old saying comes to mind: "The family that prays together stays together." Surely this has eternal ramifications as well.

Family Home Evening

As parents and leaders, we need to become more committed to holding family home evenings. In 1915 the First Presidency stated:

We advise and urge the inauguration of a "Home Evening" throughout the Church, at which time fathers and mothers may gather their boys and girls about them in the home and teach them the word of the Lord. . . .

If the Saints obey this counsel, we promise that great blessings will result. Love at home and obedience to parents will increase. Faith will be developed in the hearts of the youth of Israel, and they will gain power to combat the evil influence and temptations which beset them. (James R. Clark, comp., Messages of the First Presidency, 6 vols. [Salt Lake City:Bookcraft, 1965-75], 4:338, 339.)

We have been taught that "Monday night has been set aside as an evening for families to be together. No Church activities or social appointments should be sponsored on this night." (Elder L. Tom Perry, in Conference Report, April 1994, p. 49.) I know the frustrations that have come to my wife and me as some of the stakes and wards we have lived in have sponsored activities on Monday evenings. Sometimes children are involved in school activities such as football or basketball practices, and perhaps our children can't be excused from these required things, but families and Church leaders should do all they can to preserve Monday night as family night.

Parents seem to find it increasingly difficult to hold effective home evenings, yet those who are faithful to the counsel of the Brethren testify of the spiritual blessings that have come to their families. One father I know considers home evening the most important event his family participates in outside of sacrament meeting. As we gather as families, home evening can become "a refuge from the storm, and from wrath when it shall be poured out without mixture upon the whole earth" (D&C 115:6).

Scripture Study

Scripture study is another important factor that will help our children with religious activity in the home and with their private religious experiences. When President Ezra Taft Benson gave us the clarion call to make the Book of Mormon a more central part of our lives, he seemed to raise the study of the scriptures to a new level. He said, "When individual members and families immerse themselves in the scriptures regularly and consistently, . . . other areas of activity [sacrament meeting attendance, increased numbers of missionaries, temple marriages] will automatically come. Testimonies will increase. Commitment will be strengthened. Families will be fortified. Personal revelation will flow." ("The Power of the Word," Ensign, May 1986, p. 81.) Saints throughout the world can testify to the truthfulness of President Benson's promises.

President Marion G. Romney gave a challenge and promise that our family has really come to appreciate as well. He declared:

I feel certain that if, in our homes, parents will read from the Book of Mormon prayerfully and regularly, both by themselves and with their children, the spirit of that great book will come to permeate our homes and all who dwell therein. The spirit of reverence will increase; mutual respect and consideration for each other will grow. The spirit of contention will depart. Parents will counsel their children in greater love and wisdom. Children will be more responsive and submissive to the counsel of their parents. Righteousness will increase.Faith, hope, and charitythe pure love of Christwill abound in our homes and lives, bringing in their wake peace, joy, and happiness. (In Conference Report, April 1980, p. 90.)

When our children were very young, my wife and I made the decision that we were going to study the scriptures together as a family. Even before our children could read, they were given a paperback copy of the Book of Mormon and a red pencil. As we read to them they would try to mark what we parents had marked in our scriptures. At first their copies of the Book of Mormon looked more like coloring books, but over time they became more proficient at marking. Their first attempts at reading came in family Book of Mormon study. At first they often could only read one or two words, but gradually their reading skills improved as did their understanding of this marvelous record.

We feel that our family scripture study has been one of the best things we do with our children. Oh yes, we have plenty of times when we're tired and some grumbling takes place, but it has become a great blessing to our family. There have been times that we have missed days in our reading, but we have come to realize the value of consistency in reading the scriptures. We have also come to know that when things aren't quite right in the home, we probably have not read our scriptures or said our prayers.

In Lehi's vision of the tree of life, his wife, Sariah, and his sons Sam and Nephi came and partook of the fruit on the tree that was desirable above all other fruit (see 1 Ne. 8:15-16). Laman and Lemuel did not partake of the fruit. Lehi "exceedingly feared for Laman and Lemuel; yea, he feared lest they should be cast off from the presence of the Lord" (1 Ne. 8:36).

In the vision Lehi also saw four other groups of people. The first group "did come forth, and commence in the path which led to the tree," but a mist of darkness arose and "they wandered off and were lost" (1 Ne. 8:22-23). Despite the mist of darkness, a second group made it to the tree by "clinging to the rod of iron," but after partaking of the fruit "they were ashamed, because of those that were scoffing at them; and they fell away into forbidden paths and were lost" (1 Ne. 8:24, 28). President Benson indicated that this group consisted of members of the Church because they came and partook of the fruit (see Ensign, May 1986, p. 79).

A third group, also apparently Church members, "came and caught hold of the end of the rod of iron; and they did press their way forward, continually holding fast to the rod of iron, until they came forth and fell down and partook of the fruit of the tree" (1 Ne. 8:30). A fourth group of people were never on the path, nor did they ever grab hold of the iron rod. They made their way toward the great and spacious building and "were drowned in the depths of the fountain; and many were lost . . . , wandering in strange roads" (1 Ne. 8:32).

I have been intrigued by this vision, especially by the two groups of people who actually caught hold of the iron rod. I have wondered why one group fell and the other group remained at the tree partaking of the love of God. Could it be that the way each grabbed hold of the rod offers the reason? The group of people who were "clinging to the rod of iron" (1 Ne. 8:24) eventually were lost even though they had tasted of the fruit, while the group of people who were "continually holding fast to the rod of iron" (1 Ne. 8:30) partook of the fruit of the tree and apparently remained faithful.

It's interesting to note Nephi's later comments about holding on to the rod of iron:

And [my brethren] said unto me: What meaneth the rod of iron which our father saw, that led to the tree?

And I said unto them that it was the word of God; and whoso would hearken unto the word of God, and would hold fast unto it, they would never perish; neither could the temptations and the fiery darts of the adversary overpower them unto blindness, to lead them away to destruction. (1 Ne. 15:23-24, italics added.)

Families who hold fast to the rod of iron have consistent scripture study. It is a daily part of their lives.Families who cling to the rod of iron probably just read when they have a real need at the moment. Perhaps it's like falling off a cliff and grabbing a branch on the way down. You're clinging on, but eventually you will let go and fall. Scripture study that is irregular and infrequent will not bring the blessings that come from a daily "feast upon the words of Christ" (2 Ne. 32:3). President Howard W. Hunter said, "It is certain that one who studies the scriptures every day accomplishes far more than one who devotes considerable time one day and then lets days go by before continuing" (in Conference Report, October 1979, p. 91).

From the teachings of Samuel the Lamanite we see that if we believe the scriptures we will be led "to faith on the Lord, and unto repentance, which faith and repentance bringeth a change of heart unto [us]" and we will be "firm and steadfast in the faith" and we will be free from the bondage of sin (Hel. 15:7-8). This is the formula we should teach our families: scripture study = faith on the Lord = repentance = change of heart = firm and steadfast families = greater freedom from sin.

Conclusion

As LDS families we are involved in many activities, and we are often pulled in many different directions. However, we must realize that as important as some activities might be, we must focus our families on the importance of the temple, family home evening, family and personal prayers, and family and personal scripture study. Our homes need to be holy places in order for us to feel the Spirit of the Lord as families and as individual members.

Sometimes children do go astray despite the best efforts of their parents. But parents must never give up! Elder Boyd K. Packer gave these insights:

It is not uncommon for responsible parents to lose one of their children, for a time, to influences over which they have no control. They agonize over rebellious sons or daughters. They are puzzled over why they are so helpless when they have tried so hard to do what they should.

It is my conviction that those wicked influences one day will be overruled. (In Conference Report, April 1992, p. 94.)

Elder Packer then went on to share some enlightening doctrine that was taught by the Prophet Joseph Smith, as reported by Orson F. Whitney:

"The Prophet Joseph Smith declaredand he never taught a more comforting doctrinethat the eternal sealings of faithful parents and the divine promises made to them for valiant service in the Cause of Truth, would save not only themselves, but likewise their posterity. Though some of the sheep may wander, the eye of the Shepherd is upon them, and sooner or later they will feel the tentacles of Divine Providence reaching out after them and drawing them back to the fold. Either in this life or the life to come, they will return." (Orson F. Whitney, in Conference Report, April 1929, p. 110; as quoted in Conference Report, April 1992, p. 94.)

Ultimately it is the mercy of the Savior that will make it possible for families to be together forever. We can't do it without him.

I once had an assignment to speak in a priesthood leadership meeting. In preparation for my talk I called my two married sons, who are returned missionaries, on the phone and asked them, "What factors helped you go on a mission?" My oldest son talked about the positive influence of his family, quorum leaders, and friends. My second oldest son replied, "My own personal prayers and study of the Book of Mormon." I hope these values are being passed on to the rest of our children. I hope that as a family we are striving to come unto the Lord Jesus Christ. If we follow him and do the things the prophets have asked us to do, then we as parents will "have no greater joy than to hear that [our] children walk in truth" (3 Jn. 1:4).
