“Who’s your hero, Jason?”

Jason Shaw looked away from his teacher. “I don’t know.”

“Do you know anyone you want to be like?” she asked.

Jason shrugged.

“Well, you still have a little time to think about it before you write your paper.”

Jason listened as his classmates named their heroes. None of them interested him. He didn’t want to be a police officer, a lawyer, or even the president of his country.

After school as he walked home, the wind blew off his cap. He raced after it, thinking, I wonder if I would like to be an Olympic athlete.

He pictured himself running around a track, pushing his legs harder and harder until he crossed the finish line ahead of his competitors.

“Jason! Jason!” the crowd in his thoughts cheered.

Someone grabbed his arm.

“Jason, didn’t you hear me?”

“Uh, no, Tony. What’s up?”

“Nothing. I just thought I’d ask you to walk home with me.”

“Sure. Come on. Who are you going to write your paper on?”

Tony grinned. “My great-grandpa. He won a medal in World War II. He saved a lot of lives. How about you? Think of anyone yet?”

“No. A war hero, huh?”

“Yep. He was a pilot in the air force.”

Jason looked up and imagined himself flying through the clouds. Maybe he would like to be in the air force and save lives. Or … or he could be a doctor. He imagined himself in an operating room.

“How’s his heart rate, nurse?”

“Good, doctor.”

“And his blood pressure?”

“Perfect! You’ve done it again. You’ve saved his life.”

Jason felt warm inside. It would be nice to save lives.

When he got home, he went to his room, pulled out a clean piece of paper, sharpened his pencil, and wrote: “My hero is someone who saves lives. He is a doctor.”

Looking down at his words, Jason didn’t feel as good about them as he had before. He didn’t really want to be a doctor. He didn’t know what he wanted to be. He pushed his paper aside and worked on his spelling lesson.

“How was school today?” Mom asked as she peeked into the room.

“Fine.”

“I see you’re busy with your homework. Is there anything I can help you with before I start supper?”

“No, thanks.”

“OK. I’ll be in the kitchen if you need me. Oh—I talked to your Primary teacher today. She said you’re always reverent and that you’re a good example to your classmates. She really appreciates you.”

Jason felt happy. He loved his teacher. She made Primary fun, and he learned a lot about Jesus in her class. And she—a teacher—appreciated him! He took out his paper and started again: “My hero is a teacher. A teacher helps people learn and shows them how to be happy.”

He smiled. A teacher was perfect. Now what else could he say? After thinking about it for a few minutes, he couldn’t think of anything, so he put his paper away again.

After dinner everyone gathered in the living room for family home evening.

“What song would you like to sing, Jason?” Mom asked.

“‘Jesus Once Was a Little Child.’” It was his favorite song.

“Karen, would you say the prayer, please?” Dad asked.

Jason’s little sister folded her arms, and Dad helped her pray.

“Thank you, Karen. Your mother and I have planned a special lesson for tonight,” Dad said. “We are going to play a game called ‘I Can Try to Be like Jesus.’”

Jason listened closely. He liked games.

“We have some paintings of Jesus Christ and His life on earth,” Mom said. “We’ll talk about each painting and think of things we can do to be like Him.”

As he listened to Mom and Dad and talked with them about the Savior and how they could try to be like Him, a warm, strong feeling grew in Jason’s heart. He wanted family home evening to last forever.

When family night was over, Jason ran to his room and took out a fresh piece of paper.

He wrote: “My hero is someone who saves lives. He is a healer, a teacher, and a friend, and I love Him very much. I want to be just like Him. My hero is Jesus Christ.”
