Charles D. Tate, Larry E. Dahl, Lectures on Faith in Historical Perspective ( 1990)

Lecture 1

ON FAITH

Questions and Answers for Lecture 1

Answer—It is that revealed science which treats the being and attributes of God, his relations to us, the dispensations of his providence, his will with respect to our actions, and his purposes with respect to our end (Buck's Theological Dictionary 582).

A—Faith (Lecture 1:1).

A—Because it is the foundation of all righteousness. "Without faith it is impossible to please him [God]" (Heb 11:6). "Little children, let no man deceive you: he that doeth righteousness is righteous, even as he [God] is righteous" (1 John 3:7; Lecture 1:1).

A—First, it should be shown what faith is (Lecture 1:3); secondly, the object upon which it rests (Lecture 1:4); and thirdly, the effects which flow from it (Lecture 1:5).

A—It is the "assurance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen" (JST Heb 11:1); that is, it is the assurance which we have of the existence of unseen things, it must be the principle of action in all intelligent beings. "Through faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God" (Heb 11:3; Lecture 1:8-9).

A—First, by duly considering the operations of your own mind; and secondly, by the direct declaration of scripture. "By faith Noah, being warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved with fear, prepared an ark to the saving of his house; by the which he condemned the world, and became heir of the righteousness which is by faith. By faith Abraham, when he was called to go out into a place which he should after receive for an inheritance, obeyed; and he went out, not knowing whither he went. By faith he sojourned in the land of promise, as in a strange country, dwelling in tabernacles with Isaac and Jacob, the heirs with him of the same promise" (Heb 11:7-9). By faith Moses "forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the king: for he endured, as seeing him who is invisible" (Heb 11:27; Lecture 1:10-11).

A—It is.

A—"Without faith it is impossible to please him [God]" (Heb 11:6). "He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved" (Mark 16:16). "Therefore it is of faith, that it might be by grace; to the end the promise might be sure to all the seed; not to that only which is of the law, but to that also which is of the faith of Abraham; who is the father of us all" (Rom 4:16; Lecture 1:12-13).

A—It is.

A—It is the principle of power also (Lecture 1:13).

A—First, it is the principle of power in the Deity as well as in man. "Through faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God, so that things which are seen were not made of things which do appear" (Heb 11:3:Lecture 1:14-16).

Secondly, it is the principle of power in man also. Book of Mormon, page 264: Alma and Amulek are delivered from prison (Alma 14:27). Page 421: Nephi and Lehi, with the Lamanites, are immersed with the Spirit (Hel 5:43-45). Page 565: The mountain Zerin, by the faith of the brother of Jared, is removed (Ether 12:30). "Then spake Joshua to the Lord in the day when the Lord delivered up the Amorites before the children of Israel, and he said in the sight of Israel, Sun, stand thou still upon Gibeon; and thou, Moon, in the valley of Ajalon. And the sun stood still, and the moon stayed, until the people had avenged themselves upon their enemies. Is not this written in the book of Jasher? So the sun stood still in the midst of heaven, and hasted not to go down about a whole day" (Joshua 10:12-13). "Then came the disciples to Jesus apart, and said, Why could not we cast him out? And Jesus said unto them, Because of your unbelief: for verily I say unto you, If ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye shall say unto this mountain, Remove hence to yonder place; and it shall remove; and nothing shall be impossible unto you" (Matt 17:19-20). "And what shall I more say? for the time would fail me to tell of Gedeon, and of Barak, and of Samson, and of Jephthae; of David also, and Samuel, and of the prophets: Who through faith subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the armies of the aliens. Women received their dead raised to life again: and others were tortured, not accepting deliverance; that they might obtain a better resurrection" (Heb 11:32-35; Lecture 1:16-22).

A—It is the first great governing principle which has power, dominion, and authority over all things (Lecture 1:24).

A—By it they exist, by it they are upheld, by it they are changed, and by it they remain, agreeable to the will of God. Without it there is no power, and without power there could be no creation nor existence! (Lecture 1:24).

Footnotes
