Charles D. Tate, Larry E. Dahl, Lectures on Faith in Historical Perspective ( 1990)

Lecture 3

ON FAITH

Questions and Answers for Lecture 3

Answer—It was shown how the knowledge of the existence of God came into the world (Lecture 3:1).

A—It lays the foundation for the exercise of faith in him (Lecture 3:1).

A—It is (Lecture 3:1).

A—By Romans 10:14 (Lecture 3:1).

A—Three (Lecture 3:2).

A—First, that God does actually exist; secondly, correct ideas of his character, his perfections and attributes; and thirdly, that the course which we pursue is according to his mind and will (Lecture 3:3-5).

A—It would not. For without the idea of them all, faith would be imperfect and unproductive (Lecture 3:5).

A—It would. For by the idea of these three things, faith could become perfect and fruitful, abounding in righteousness unto the praise and glory of God (Lecture 3:5).

A—By revelation (Lecture 3:6).

A—They could not.

A—By the scriptures (Job 11:7-9; 1 Cor 2:9-11; see Lecture 3:7).

A—We learn the six following things: First, he was God before the world was created, and the same God that he was after it was created. Secondly, he is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, abundant in goodness, and he was so from everlasting, and will be so to everlasting. Thirdly, he does not change, neither does he vary, and his course is one eternal round. Fourthly, he is a God of truth, and cannot lie. Fifthly, he is no respecter of persons. And sixthly, he is love (Lecture 3:12-18).

A—In the Bible and the Book of Commandments [the Doctrine and Covenants], and they are quoted in the third lecture (Lecture 3:9-11).

A—It would prevent him from exercising faith in him unto life and salvation.

A—Because he would be as the heathen, not knowing but that there might be a being greater and more powerful than he, and thereby he would be prevented from fulfilling his promises (Lecture 3:19).

A—It does. For persons having this idea are enabled thereby to exercise faith without this doubt (Lecture 3:19).

A—It is (Lecture 3:20).

A—Because of the weakness and imperfections of human nature and the great frailties of man. For such is the weakness of man, and such his frailties, that he is liable to sin continually. And if God were not long-suffering, full of compassion, gracious and merciful, and of a forgiving disposition, man would be cut off from before him; consequently, he would be in continual doubt and could not exercise faith. For where doubt is, there faith has no power. But by man's believing that God is full of compassion and forgiveness, long-suffering and slow to anger, he can exercise faith in him and overcome doubt, so as to be exceedingly strong (Lecture 3:20).

A—It is. Because without this, he would not know how soon God's mercy might change into cruelty, his long-suffering into rashness, his love into hatred. In consequence of this doubt, man would be incapable of exercising faith in him. But having the idea that he is unchangeable, man can have faith in him continually, believing that what he was yesterday he is today, and will be forever (Lecture 3:21).

A—It is. For unless men have this idea, they cannot place confidence in his word. And not being able to place confidence in his word, they could not have faith in him. But believing that he is a God of truth and that his word cannot fail, they can rest their faith in him without doubt (Lecture 3:22).

A—He could not. Because without this idea, he could not certainly know that it was his privilege so to do, and in consequence of this doubt his faith could not be sufficiently strong to save him (Lecture 3:23).

A—It would not. Man could not love God unless he had an idea that God was love; and if he did not love God, he could not have faith in him (Lecture 3:24).

A—It is calculated to lay a foundation for the exercise of faith in him, as far as the knowledge extends among all people, tongues, languages, kindreds, and nations, and that from age to age, and from generation to generation (Lecture 3:25).

A—It is. In all his revelations, whether to the Former-day Saints, or to the Latter-day Saints, God's character is uniform so that they all have the authority to exercise faith in him and to expect, by the exercise of their faith, to enjoy the same blessings (Lecture 3:26).
