Charles D. Tate, Larry E. Dahl, Lectures on Faith in Historical Perspective ( 1990)

Lecture 5

ON FAITH

Questions and Answers for Lecture 5

Answer—The being, perfections, and attributes of the Deity (Lecture 5:1).

A—The perfections which belong to his attributes.

A—Two: the Father and Son (Lecture 5:1).

A—By the scriptures. "And I, God, said unto mine Only Begotten, which was with me from the beginning, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness; and it was so" (JST Gen 1:27; see also Moses 2:26; Lecture 2:6). "And I, the Lord God, said unto mine Only Begotten, Behold, the man is become as one of us, to know good and evil" (JST Gen 3:28; see also Moses 4:28). "And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self with the glory which I had with thee before the world was" (John 17:5; see also Lecture 5:2).

A—He is a personage of glory and of power (Lecture 5:2).

A—First, of glory. "The sun shall be no more thy light by day; neither for brightness shall the moon give light unto thee: but the Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy glory" (Isa 60:19). "Thine, O Lord, is the greatness, and the power, and the glory" (1 Chr 29:11). "The voice of the Lord is upon the waters: the God of glory thundereth" (Ps 29:3). "Help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy name" (Ps 79:9). "And changed the glory of the uncorruptible God into an image made like to corruptible man" (Rom 1:23).

Secondly, of power. "Thine, O Lord, is the greatness, and the power, and the glory" (1 Chr 29:11). "Ah Lord God! behold, thou hast made the heaven and the earth by thy great power and stretched out arm, and there is nothing too hard for thee" (Jer 32:17). "And because he loved thy fathers, therefore he chose their seed after them, and brought thee out in his sight with his mighty power" (Deut 4:37). "God is my strength and power" (2 Sam 22:33). "He stretcheth out the north over the empty place, and hangeth the earth upon nothing. He bindeth up the waters in his thick clouds; and the cloud is not rent under them. He holdeth back the face of his throne, and spreadeth his cloud upon it. He hath compassed the waters with bounds, until the day and night come to an end. The pillars of heaven tremble and are astonished at his reproof. He divideth the sea with his power, and by his understanding he smiteth through the proud. By his spirit he hath garnished the heavens; his hand hath formed the crooked serpent. Lo, these are parts of his ways: but how little a portion is heard of him? but the thunder of his power who can understand?" (Job 26:7-14).

A—First, he is a personage of tabernacle (Lecture 5:2).

A—"Jesus saith unto him, Have I been so long time with you, and yet hast thou not known me, Philip? he that hath seen me hath seen the Father; and how sayest thou then, Shew us the Father? Believest thou not that I am in the Father, and the Father in me? the words that I speak unto you I speak not of myself: but the Father that dwelleth in me, he doeth the works. Believe me that I am in the Father, and the Father in me" (John 14:9-11).

Secondly, and being a personage of tabernacle, the Son was made or fashioned like unto man, or being in the form and likeness of man (Lecture 5:2). "Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus: who, being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God: but made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men: and being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross" (Philip 2:5-8). "Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same. . . . For verily he took not on him the nature of angels; but he took on him the seed of Abraham" (Heb 2:14, 16).

Thirdly, he is also in the likeness of the personage of the Father (Lecture 5:2). "God, who at sundry times and in divers manners spake in time past unto the fathers by the prophets, hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he hath appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds; who being the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person" (Heb 1:1-3). Again, "Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus: who, being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God" (Philip 2:5-6).

A—It was. "Who is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of every creature: for by him were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers: all things were created by him, and for him: and he is before all things, and by him all things consist" (Col 1:15-17). "In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth" (Gen 1:1). "[God] hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he hath appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds" (Heb 1:2).

A—He does. "For it pleased the Father that in him should all fulness dwell. . . . For in him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily" (Col 1:19; 2:9). "Which is his [Christ's] body, the fulness of him that filleth all in all" (Eph 1:23).

A—Because of the flesh. "That holy thing which shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God" (Luke 1:35). "And Jesus when he was baptized, went up straightway out of the water; and John saw, and lo, the heavens were opened unto him, and he [John] saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove and lighting upon Jesus. And lo, he heard a voice from heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased" (JST Matt 3:45-46; see also KJV Matt 3:16-17).

A—He was. "Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversation received by tradition from your fathers; but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot: who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world, but was manifest in these last times for you" (1 Peter 1:18-20). "And all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him [the beast], whose names are not written in the book of life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world" (Rev 13:8). "But we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden wisdom, which God ordained before the world unto our glory" (1 Cor 2:7).

A—They do. "I [Christ] [^1] can of mine own self do nothing: as I hear, I judge: and my judgment is just; because I seek not mine own will, but the will of the Father which hath sent me" (John 5:30). "For I [Christ] [^2] came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me" (John 6:38). "I [Christ] [^3] and my Father are one" (John 10:30).

A—The Holy Spirit. "But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, which proceedeth from the Father, he shall testify of me [Christ]" (John 15:26). "And because ye are sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts" (Gal 4:6).

A—They do (Lecture 5:2). Let the student commit this paragraph to memory.

A—They do. "Neither pray I for these [the apostles] [^4] alone, but for them also which shall believe on me through their word; that they all may be one; as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us: that the world may believe that thou hast sent me" (John 17:20-21).

A—It does.

A—By Lecture 5:3. Let the student commit this also.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Having treated the ideas of the character, perfections, and attributes of God in the preceding lectures, we next proceed to treat the knowledge which persons must have that the course of life which they pursue is according to the will of God, so they may be enabled to exercise faith in him unto life and salvation. Bracketed material in 1835 edition, but without brackets.
[^2] This knowledge supplies an important place in revealed religion; for it was by reason of it that the ancients were enabled to endure "as seeing him who is invisible" (Heb 11:27). It is essential for any person to have an actual knowledge that the course of life which he is pursuing is according to the will of God to enable him to have that confidence in God without which no person can obtain eternal life. It was this that enabled the ancient Saints to endure all their afflictions and persecutions and to take joyfully the spoiling of their goods, knowing (not believing merely) that they had a more enduring substance (Heb 10:34). Note: This lecture is so plain and the facts set forth so self-evident that it is deemed unnecessary to form a catechism upon it. The student is, therefore, instructed to commit the whole to memory [1835 footnote].
[^3] Having the assurance that they were pursuing a course which was agreeable to the will of God, they were enabled to take not only the spoiling of their goods and the wasting of their substance joyfully, but also to suffer death in its most horrid forms, knowing (not merely believing) that when this "earthly house of this tabernacle [was] dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens" (2 Cor 5:1).
[^4] Such was and always will be the situation of the Saints of God. Unless they have an actual knowledge that the course they are pursuing is according to the will of God, they will grow weary in their minds and faint. For such has been and always will be the opposition in the hearts of unbelievers and those who know not God against the pure and unadulterated religion of heaven (the only thing which ensures eternal life). They will persecute to the uttermost all who worship God according to his revelations, receive the truth in the love of it, and submit themselves to be guided and directed by his will. And they will drive them to such extremities that nothing short of an actual knowledge of their being the favorites of heaven and of their having embraced that order of things which God has established for the redemption of man will enable them to exercise that confidence in him necessary for them to overcome the world and obtain that crown of glory which is laid up for them that fear God.
