John Henry Evans, Joseph Smith, an American Prophet ( 1946)

Preface to Classics in Mormon Literature Edition

John Henry Evans, the grandson of both George A. Smith and Lorin Farr of pioneer fame, once wrote a series of character sketches on leading figures in Mormondom, which he entitled "Some Men Who Have Done Things." (Improvement Era, Nov. 1909-Feb. 1914.) Although most of the present generation, and even some of his own contemporaries, have not known of his exceptional accomplishments, John Henry Evans is himself a most apt subject for such a sketch. We need to see him in his true character as one of those men who have done things.

Born in Llanarthney, Carmarthenshire, Wales, in 1872, Evans emigrated with his family to Utah when he was six years of age. Settling first in Logan, Utah, they became pioneer settlers in Idaho Falls, Idaho. Evans helped on the family farm near that community until he was called on a two and one-half year mission to England and Wales at age eighteen.

After he returned from England, he first taught school in Idaho and then moved to Salt Lake City in 1900 to teach English at the Latter-day Saints' College. In June of that same year he married Amy Jane Whipple of Salt Lake City in the Salt Lake Temple. They were blessed with five children, three boys and two girls.

The Latter day Saints' College became the Latter day Saints' University in 1901 and offered high school, normal, business, and college courses of study. John Henry Evans is identified in the 1901-1902 catalogue as an "Instructor in English Language and Literature, Ph.B." The LDS University campus then included such buildings as the Lion House, Social Hall, Barratt Hall, Brigham Young Memorial Building, and the Business College Building.

[Joseph Smith: An American Prophet: Preface to Classics in Mormon Literature Edition, page x] John Henry Evans

While he was employed at LDS University, he continued his personal studies, graduating from the University of Utah with an A.B. degree in 1906. He subsequently spent two summers at the University of California at Berkeley. At the Latter-day Saints' University, Evans served as secretary to the faculty, president of the alumni association, and chairman of the English department. He was a valued faculty member there for approximately two decades under the leadership of presidents Joshua H. Paul, Willard Young, and Guy C. Wilson.

Evans's Church callings included being a member of the Salt Lake Stake Sunday School board when the stake comprised the entire county. He was likewise a member of the General Board of Religion Classes and participated on the LDS Church Correlation and Social Advisory committees, where he performed major service in preparing courses of study and writing manuals for the priesthood and auxiliary organizations of the Church. Many of these works are considered classics: The Ancient Prophets (1903), written in conjunction with Nephi Anderson for the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association; Black Gipsy and Other Stories (1907), written for the Primary Department; The Spoken Word: A Manual of Story Telling and Public Speaking, Including Debate (1916), prepared at the suggestion of the Mutual Improvement Associations; Our Church and People (1924) and Children of the Promise: Stories of the Old Testament (1926), written for the Deseret Sunday School Union; The Heart of Mormonism (1930), for the senior seminaries of the Church; Leadership of Joseph Smith (1936) and Leaders of Zion (1936), written for the Mutual Improvement Associations.

Volumes written for a general audience include One Hundred Years of Mormonism (1905), also used as a Sunday School manual; Message and Characters of the Book of Mormon (1929); Joseph Smith, an American Prophet (1933); The Story of Utah (1933), widely used as an instructional text in the state public schools; Charles Coulson Rich: Pioneer Builder of the West (1936); Step a Little Higher (1937); and Ezra T. Benson, Pioneer—Statesman—Saint (1947), a biography completed by Minnie Egan Anderson after John Henry Evans died in 1947.

More than sixty of his articles were published in such Church periodicals as the Juvenile Instructor, Improvement Era, Young Woman's Journal, Liahona, Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine, and the Deseret News (the Deseret News articles are primarily the texts of addresses he gave in the Salt Lake Tabernacle). These articles are well-formulated, articulate, and substantive sources on a wealth of gospel subjects.

None of the twenty-eight published works and more than sixty articles have enjoyed the popularity of his most famous writing, Joseph Smith, an American Prophet, first published by the Macmillan Company in 1933. Calling it an impartial biography of the founder of Mormonism, a Deseret News review of the book suggested that "probably no more complimentary description of the life and attainments of Joseph Smith, the 'Mormon' prophet, has ever been published by the non-Mormon press for the consumption of non-members of the Church." (Deseret News, 8Apr. 1933.) Although identified in the press as being written for a non-Mormon audience, the volume was immediately recognized as an invaluable resource on the Prophet Joseph Smith and enjoyed an even wider circulation among Church members.

John Henry Evans divided Joseph Smith, an American Prophet into three major sections. The first part is a biography of the Prophet. The second part is directed toward Joseph Smith's religious philosophy and principal doctrines, and the third part is concerned with the Prophet's explanation of himself, giving an account of his visions and heavenly manifestations. A key to Evans's overall approach to the work may be found in his personal philosophy of what constitutes the moving force behind the truly great men of the earth:

"Very great men are men of ideas. In the long run it is not emotion that rules the world, for emotion is always short-lived and generally non-creative; nor is it even personal character, since this operates only while a man is alive; but the force that in the end gives shape, direction, and push to things is ideas, thoughts....

Inasmuch, however, as ideas, thoughts, must of necessity filter to each of us through the mind of some individual person, the real measure of a man lies in the number and importance of his ideas, the firmness with which he grasps them, the clarity and vigor with which he expresses them, and his application of them to his own life and that of others.

"Now Joseph Smith, when he reaches his niche in the Hall of Fame, as he assuredly must some day, will do so as a man of ideas primarily. For it is doubtful whether any one before him (excepting of course Jesus) has laid down so complete and perfect a pattern of life as the Mormon prophet." (Improvement Era, Jan. 1935, p. 9.)

Evans said in his preface that his design in writing the volume on the Prophet was to "give an impression of Joseph Smith and his work and thought, rather than pile facts upon facts." Joseph Smith, an American Prophet is rich in the thoughts and ideas that distinguished the unique character and ministry of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Evans gives us both the details of the Prophet's authentic experiences and an enlightening exposition of his religious philosophy.

John Henry Evans died in Salt Lake City on March 24, 1947, at the age of seventy-four. President Stephen L Richards penned a eulogy of this man of rare talents that was printed on the jacket of his last book, Ezra T. Benson, Pioneer—Statesman—Saint:

"The works and memory of John Henry Evans live on. Few writers have contributed more in Latter-day Saint literature than did he. His devotion to the lofty ideals of the Church, his deep-seated regard for its arresting history and his industrious and fluent pen amply qualify him to set the stage whereon moved the great figures of its early beginnings."

Larry C. Porter

Professor of Church History and Doctrine

Brigham Young University
