John Henry Evans, Joseph Smith, an American Prophet ( 1946)

Preface

In this book I have tried to give a scientific treatment of Joseph Smith, the Mormon prophet—that is, to present the available facts, without smothering these facts in opinion. This, I believe, has never been done before.

For a hundred years now a controversy has raged over everything Mormon, not only in America, but also in Europe. Of necessity it has centered in the character of Joseph Smith. For religious faiths must perforce take their color largely from those who bring them forth. But the spirit of this conflict was so bitter and unrelenting that it is small wonder if the truth was often lost sight of by both sides. Especially is this the case, I think, with those who deemed it their duty, for whatever reason, to attack Mormonism at any point. As a result the Joseph Smith of the popular imagination is no more a reality than Santa Claus or Uncle Sam.

Now, however, things have changed—so far at least as the public is concerned. Bitterness against the Mormons has all but disappeared, and the scientific spirit is beginning to make itself felt even here. Besides, there is a greater interest nowadays than ever before in the human personality. And certainly no more spectacular, or strange, or dynamic, or fascinating personality can be found in modern history than that of the Mormon prophet. And so, the facts being far more surprising and interesting in the case of the Mormon leader than the wildest fiction, I am venturing upon this biography of probably the most uncommon of our countrymen.

Not that this book was conceived or written in the cold atmosphere of the laboratory. No one can write about Joseph Smith coldly. At least, he will experience the feelings of astonishment and sympathy in the situation—if he follows facts instead of opinions. Hence I have studied the Prophet and written of him, with sympathetic interest, rather than in hate or contempt. As a matter of fact, ill-will never got any one anywhere in unraveling the tangled web of human character. Only a desire to understand has been of any service here. Nevertheless, I trust that my sympathy has done no violence to the truth.

All through the work, moreover, I have followed only what is called source material. This, too, in the case of the Prophet, is a departure from the beaten path, although it has long since been the practice everywhere else in historical writing. Perhaps ninety-five per cent of what has been written about Joseph Smith consists of opinion, and opinion, too, by those who could not, and did not, have any first-hand knowledge on the subject. This is the unpardonable sin in historical work. But, while I have gone to the sources, I have endeavored to evaluate this material; for, in the case of the Prophet particularly, there was a strong tendency on the part of those who knew him in life to love him or to hate him overmuch. His acquaintances were never neutral. If I have erred on the side of those who thought well of him, it is because love is always less likely to be wrong than hate.

In addition, I have sought to make an interesting book and to give an impression of Joseph Smith and his work and thought, rather than to pile facts upon facts. This is not a "Life" of Joseph Smith. To this end I have included as much human interest material as I could; have left out a good many things that people acquainted with the subject might expect; and, wherever possible, have given an interpretation of his teachings in terms of present-day thinking and conduct. In a word, I have tried to give such a picture of the Prophet as one of his contemporaries would see, who was interested, but had no axe to grind.

Whether we view the Prophet of Palmyra as a fascinating personality, as a revealer of truth, as the founder of a church, or as the exponent of a large body of religious thought, there can be no doubt that his figure as times go on will bulk larger and larger against the background of history.

J.H.E.

Salt Lake City, Utah.

March, 1933.
