John Henry Evans, Joseph Smith, an American Prophet ( 1946)

PART ONE

The Prophet's Extraordinary Career

CHAPTER I

Introductory—Joseph Smith and His Contemporaries

A man's life is that accorded him in the thoughts of other men by reason of respect or natural love.—JOSEPH CONRAD.

One day, in the early summer of 1844, Josiah Quincy, the sophisticated mayor of Boston, with his cousin, Charles Francis Adams, visited Nauvoo, Illinois. Nauvoo was then the largest town in the state. It had been built on a bog by the Mormons, and was at this time occupied by some twenty-five thousand of them. The famous visitors were shown the sights by Joseph Smith himself, who also explained to them the Mormon faith.

Quincy observed the Prophet closely. He noted his size and looks, his dress, his language, his mannerisms, the play of his features as he talked, his way with people, how these regarded him, his ideas on religion and public questions—everything, in short, that an educated observer of men would be likely to notice in one of whom he had heard strange things. He even fished out of a waste-paper basket some letters from English converts—which he read.

From that interview Josiah Quincy went home and wrote an essay on the Mormon prophet, which he later published in his book, Figures of the Past. The beginning and the end of this paper are interesting as showing the impression made by Joseph Smith on one who was an adept at sizing up his contemporaries.

"It is by no means improbable," he begins, "that some future text-book for the use of generations yet unborn will contain a question something like this: 'What historical American of the nineteenth century has exerted the most powerful influence upon the destinies of his countrymen?' And it is by no means impossible that the answer to that interrogatory may be thus written: 'Joseph Smith, the Mormon prophet.' And the reply, absurd as it doubtless seems to most men now living, may be an obvious commonplace to their descendants. History deals in surprises and paradoxes quite as startling as this."

And here is his ending: "Born in the lowest ranks of poverty, without book-learning, and with the homeliest of all human names, he had made himself at the age of thirty-nine a power upon earth. Of the multitudinous family of Smith, none had so won human hearts and shaped human lives as this Joseph. His influence, whether for good or evil, is potent to-day, and the end is not yet."

"This Joe Smith," says a writer in the New York Herald of September 4, 1843, "must be set down as an extraordinary character, a prophet-hero, as Carlyle might call him. He is one of the great men of this age, and in future history will rank with those who, in one way or another, have stamped their impress strongly on society.

"It is no small thing, in the blaze of this nineteenth century, to give to men a new revelation, found a new religion, establish new forms of worship, to build a city with new laws, institutions, and orders of architecture,—to establish ecclesiastical, civil, and military jurisdiction, found colleges, send out missionaries, and make proselytes on two hemispheres. Yet all this has been done by Joe Smith, and that against every sort of opposition, ridicule, and persecution."

Stephen A. Douglas knew the Prophet well. They had been together in courts of law—the one as judge or lawyer, the other as prisoner at the bar or client. In 1844 the "Little Giant" was thirty-one years old and already in Congress. Evidently, as he himself grew in political power, he watched interestedly, yet not altogether without envy, the rapidly developing influence of the Mormon prophet since his arrival in Illinois.

"If I could command the following of Joseph Smith," Douglas told a Mormon apostle in Washington in 1844, "I would resign my seat in Congress and go to Oregon. In five years a noble state might be formed, and if they would not receive us into the Union, we would have a government of our own."

This was said apropos of the appeal of the Prophet for Congressional consent to move his people into what was then foreign territory.

Quincy, Douglas, and, the Herald writer were of course outsiders. They did not subscribe to the prophetic claims or the peculiar tenets of Joseph Smith. Indeed, they looked upon some of these—his visions and miracles, for instance,—as anachronisms. They were interested only in the man, measured by what he had done against great odds. He piqued their curiosity. He was an interesting personality. Under certain conditions he might become a dangerous personality. For was he not called in many quarters a second Mohammed? Already he had gotten himself nominated for President of the United States, had issued and distributed throughout the country a pamphlet containing some striking views, and had induced scores of men to stump for him in all the Eastern states. He had what the press would call nowadays high news value, and (from his surprising utterances and sudden turns of fortune) would be every now and then on the front page.

It was on his followers, however, that Joseph Smith made the deepest impression. This was only natural, in view of the circumstances. These looked upon him, not merely as a superman, but as a veritable seer and prophet in the biblical sense. Probably no other person since the Christian Era began, certainly no other American, has called forth such homage by his followers and been held by them in such esteem as Joseph Smith.

"Although there was nothing strange or different from other men in his personal appearance," says one of the Prophet's early disciples, Amasa Lyman, "yet, when he grasped my hand in that cordial way known to those who have met him in the honest simplicity of truth, I felt as one of old in the presence of the Lord. My strength seemed to be gone, so that it required an effort on my part to stand on my feet.

"But in all this there was no fear. The serenity and peace of heaven pervaded my soul, and the still, small voice of the Spirit whispered its living testimony in the depths of my being that he was a man of God."

John Taylor, another of those early disciples, set this down in his journal on the death of the Mormon leader in 1844: "I felt a dull, lonely, sickening sensation at the news. When I reflected that our chieftain, the prophet of the living God, had fallen, it seemed as though there was a void in the great field of human existence for me. Oh, how lonely that feeling! How cold, barren, and desolate!

"In the midst of difficulties he was always the first in motion; in critical positions his counsel was always sought. As our prophet he approached our God, and obtained His will. But now our leader was gone, and amid the fiery ordeal that we then had to pass through, we were left alone without his aid. He had spoken for the last time on earth!"

And the last words of Brigham Young, thirty-three years after the Prophet's death, were concerning him. Thrice he repeated the Prophet's name on his death-bed—the name of the man whom he had succeeded in the leadership of the Mormon church and around whose fundamental utterances the great pioneer had endeavored to build up that organization.

Lyman, although self-taught, was a strong-minded, independent man, who preferred to lose his apostleship in later years rather than recant some views he held that were deemed to conflict with those taught by the Prophet. Taylor, who subsequently became head of the Mormon Society, was perhaps, after Joseph Smith and Brigham Young, one of the most forceful and courageous, as well as one of the most intelligent, spirits that Mormonism drew into its net during its first hundred years. And Brigham Young, as is generally known and admitted, was a hard-headed business executive and organizer of the first rank—an outstanding, virile Western pioneer. These three men knew the Prophet intimately.

The feeling of these three for Joseph Smith was common to all the converts to Mormonism in the life-time of the Prophet, and this without regard to age, sex, wealth, position, education, nationality, and distance from him. And the church counted among its members such men as Sidney Rigdon, Edward Partridge, Dr. Frederick G. Williams, and John Corrill, who were from eight to eighteen years older than the Prophet; Orson Spencer, a graduate of two colleges and a man who had been a widely known and popular clergyman in New England; and Orson Pratt, one of the great mathematicians and philosophers of his time.

But Joseph Smith dead is far more potent in Mormondom than Joseph Smith alive. To this day, eighty-nine years after his death in Carthage, Illinois, hundreds of thousands of intelligent men and women, scattered throughout every civilized nation on earth, link the name of the founder of Mormonism with that of God and Christ in their public testimonies. Upward of a million people now living look upon Joseph Smith as a greater leader than Moses and a greater prophet than Isaiah.

Here is the official declaration of the church he established on the relative standing of the Prophet and all others whatsoever who have essayed to speak for Jehovah: "Joseph Smith, the Prophet and Seer of the Lord, has done more, save Jesus only, for the salvation of men in this world, than any other man that ever lived in it."

This declaration is accepted by all devout Latter-day Saints everywhere as a statement of fact. It is published in a collection of revelations and visions the Prophet is believed by his followers to have received direct from heaven—one of the official text-books on Mormonism.

Such, then, is the impression—an impression of greatness—which Joseph Smith appears to have made upon both the stranger and the disciple. It is the impression of men who knew him personally, and had met him. The views of those who did not know him—and hundreds of these have been published in books and magazines—are purposely omitted here as without historical value.

Just what was there about the founder of Mormonism that created this impression of a great personality on those with whom he came in contact during the last fourteen years of his short life?

First of all, it was himself. Joseph Smith looked great. That is the testimony of all who knew him.

Physically he was a large man. In his full maturity he stood exactly six feet without shoes and weighed two hundred and twelve pounds. But somehow he appeared even larger than he was. This was due, perhaps, to his bearing. For Quincy says that, of all the men he ever met, Joseph Smith was one of two that "seemed best endowed with that kingly faculty which directs, as by intrinsic right, the feeble or confused souls who are looking for guidance." And an artillery officer of the United States Army, who visited Nauvoo in 1842, wrote to his superior in Washington, "Joseph, the chief, is a noble-looking fellow, a Mahomet, every inch of him."

Then, too, the Mormon prophet had some attractive personal traits. He was fond of sports—pitching coits, pulling sticks, vaulting, jumping at a mark, and especially wrestling. Wilson Law says he could throw the Prophet; but if so, he was the only one that ever did.

Always he was frank and open. And he loved people. He was good company. Boldness and physical daring characterized him throughout his life. No matter what the personal danger, he leaped to the defense of his friends. His courage was proverbial. Alone he faced a hostile world without flinching. Yet he was never obstinate or contentious.

Joseph Smith was a good hater,—none better. Indeed, this is one of the most interesting things about him. He was as busy as Theodore Roosevelt after him, filling up his Ananias Club. Only, the Mormon prophet, identifying himself even more than the strenuous president with the moral forces of the universe, called the members of that organization "enemies of all righteousness." He was fighting for, and they were fighting against, The Cause. His opponents were not only vindictive and unrelenting, but murderous as well, and in the end they "put him on the spot."

Second, there was a driving force in the man, which enabled him to turn even a defeat into another rung of the ladder up which he was climbing. From Palmyra to Nauvoo was a long road. Also it was a hard road to follow, upgrade all the way and beset with bowlders, sharp turns, and pitfalls.

The Prophet's life was full of handicaps. Quincy noticed this. He lacked the schooling that disciplines the intellect and puts it into shape to thread difficult situations. His early environment was not conducive to culture and social standing. There was no one in his ancestral background that stood out above the crowd. Even his name was a bit in his teeth, for half the world were named Smith, and Josephs were as plentiful as trees in a forest.

Yet, as both Quincy and the writer in the Herald suggest, he created a new religion, founded a university, planned and built cities, organized and trained militias, covered the earth with missionaries, started a wide stream of immigration to Western America, and, most of all, put into men's hearts something of idealism and faith, of which they had not believed themselves capable. And who is there today in all the world, nearly a century after his death, that does not know whom you have in mind when you say Joseph Smith?

Joseph Smith was a fighting prophet. He thrived on opposition. All his life he swam upstream against a strong current full of eddies, underwashes, and rapids. At every stroke some obstruction sprang up to block his way. He experienced more than one defeat. But he was never disheartened to the point where he gave up. "Never be discouraged," the Prophet said once to his cousin, George A. Smith: "if I were sunk in the lowest pit of Nova Scotia, with the Rocky Mountains piled on me, I would hang on, exercise faith, and keep up good courage, and I would come out on top." This battling spirit in Joseph Smith, prophet though he claimed to be, never failed to leave its secret thrill in the heart of every American who knew of it.

Third, perhaps the Prophet's greatest appeal, to his disciples particularly, came from his ideas. For his mind gave off ideas as thick and fast as an emery stone gives out sparks under the pressure of the blade. We shall see, in another section, just what these were.

Nothing was too trivial or too big to occupy his thoughts. He talked about tea, coffee, and tobacco; about the hours one should sleep and work; about whether the human epidermis changes every seven years; about laying out a city that would give a town and a country effect in one; about how to eliminate both poverty and riches from our present economic system; about the arrogance of those who come into power too soon; about the "planet that is nearest the throne of God"; about the much mooted question of his day as to whether the earth and man were created out of nothing or out of pre-existing matter; about the freedom of the will; about heaven and hell and whether there is a devil; about God and the true immortality of the soul.

"Whence do we get our intelligence, and knowledge of the laws, ordinances, and doctrines of the kingdom of God?" asked a convert from Toronto, Canada, of some defecting members in Kirtland, Ohio, in 1837. "Who understood even the first principles of the doctrine of Christ? Who in the Christian world taught them? If we, with our learning and intelligence, could not find out the first principles, which was the case with myself and millions of others [John Taylor, who said this, had been a Methodist preacher], how can we find out the mysteries of the kingdom? It was Joseph Smith, under the Almighty, who developed the first principles, and to him we must look for further instructions."

Back of Joseph Smith's dynamic personality, back of his splendid fighting spirit, back of his ideas, back of everything was something indefinable—but that, as Kipling would say, is another story.

Perhaps the best way to get a definite idea of the Mormon prophet's status as a religious leader in America is to stand him beside Jonathan Edwards of a preceding generation and Mary Baker Eddy of a later period. Then we shall have before us the three most influential and striking personalities in the religious history of our country.

If the New England divine was anything, he was intellectual. In America Jonathan Edwards is the high-water mark of the religious intellect. He was a theologian and philosopher—a theologian first and a philosopher next. He made no claim to any special divine illumination; he sought no particular reform in anything; he founded no church or institution; he had no peculiar power to handle men. His supreme gift was theological exposition. And his influence in religious circles extended far into the nineteenth century.

Yet Joseph Smith showed a greater familiarity with theological questions than did Jonathan Edwards, although in quite a different way.

The puritan clergyman was a scholar. His mind was disciplined. When, therefore, he talked of God, of immortality, of the freedom of the will, he did so as a student. And he discussed these abstruse questions with such penetration and power as to fix men's ways of theological thinking for two generations.

The Mormon prophet, on the contrary, had no scholarship. True, after setting up his organization, he engaged men to teach him Greek, Hebrew, and German; but there is no evidence that he ever possessed more than a smattering of these languages. His handling of scriptural doctrines was therefore on an entirely different basis from that of Edwards. He appears to have been wholly ignorant of the great body of exegesis that had been accumulating for hundreds of years in Christian literature.

Nevertheless, Joseph Smith's grasp of the doctrines of the Bible is one of the amazing things about him. It is as if a native of pre-Christian Palestine had come to life and explained certain biblical passages in their setting. One can imagine what a flood of light such a person might throw upon the Scriptures. With like ease does the Prophet handle biblical themes. He goes through both the New Testament and the Old Testament with a sure-footedness that is surprising under the circumstances. His style, whether or not one agrees with his interpretation, is clarity itself—which is more than can be said in truth of the average commentator.

Mrs. Eddy's work was in striking contrast with that of Jonathan Edwards. Her gift lay in developing a scheme of things that have a wide appeal. It does not matter whether her fundamental idea was original with her or not. There is so little that is really original anyway. What does matter is that a woman of her time should be able to impress her teachings upon so many intelligent people in so many different parts of the world and in so short a time.

But the Mormon prophet surpassed Mrs. Eddy in that which was her specialty. Mrs. Eddy worked out a body of thought around the idea of healing. Joseph Smith's system of beliefs covers the whole range of human life, practical and theoretical, including the idea of healing. The founder of Christian Science established a great church, but it does not compare in efficiency with that created by the founder of Mormonism. Mrs. Eddy's Society, after twenty-five years, numbered sixty thousand, all told. Joseph Smith, after only fourteen years, could count more than fifty thousand disciples.

Mrs. Eddy was full of years and experience when she began her religious career—she was past fifty. When the Mormon prophet's work was finished, he was in his thirty-ninth year. The Mother, for many years before her death, was never seen except by a chosen few of her disciples. Joseph Smith lived on free and intimate terms with his followers to the very end of his life. It might have been good psychology for him, too, to have kept himself in the background.

Mary Eddy had comparatively smooth sailing from the beginning. But the Prophet's bark encountered nothing but breakers during those fourteen years. Thirty-nine times he was arrested; six months he spent in filthy Missouri jails; on several occasions he was mobbed, and once he was tarred and feathered and left for dead; three times he and his people were driven from their homes and from the state in which they lived; and in the end he was murdered while awaiting trial on a false charge.

His followers, in response to his teachings, gathered with alacrity to one place in America, and that place on the very fringes of civilization, next door to the wilderness, where were wild beasts and wilder men. One wonders what would have happened to Christian Science if the Mother had made such a demand of her followers.

Mrs. Eddy died worth millions; Joseph Smith, who might also have died a millionaire, was as poor at the end of his career as at the beginning.

One of the early critics of the Mormon prophet coined the phrase "the Enigma of Palmyra" as descriptive of Joseph Smith under the microscope of the biographer and historian. This phrase has been repeated scores of times by writers who have honestly and squarely faced the problem of this baffling personality.

Josiah Quincy was similarly at sea. "If the reader does not know what to make of Joseph Smith," he says after setting down the results of his interview with the Prophet, "I cannot help him out of the difficulty. I myself stand helpless before the puzzle."

It is easy enough in the Prophet's case, to put one's finger on the source of bewilderment. But it is extremely difficult, as a matter of fact, to arrive at any satisfactory conclusion respecting his individuality.

There is, first of all, the wide disparity between Joseph Smith's boyhood in the backwoods of New York State, with its intellectual, its social, and, above all, its spiritual barrenness, and his last years in Nauvoo, where he was at once the mayor of the biggest town in the state—a town of his own creation,—the commander of the largest trained military body in the country, outside of the army, and the active head of the most virile, dynamic church in America.

There is the even wider discrepancy between the religious atmosphere in which Joseph Smith was brought up in Palmyra and that which he virtually created for himself and his people years later. More than one traveler has remarked upon the peculiar civilization that is to be found in Utah—a civilization which is the product of Mormonism, as Mormonism is the product of Joseph Smith. Some think this a drop, others a lift. But however that may be, it is different. And this difference, whatever its character, is due to the Mormon prophet's ideas.

Where did he get these ideas? From his early Palmyra environment? Or did he weave them from his own bowels, like a spider his web? Somehow the Prophet managed to make a mold for a new style of religious thinking, and therefore, brought into practice a new way of behavior in all those who accepted wholeheartedly the faith he taught them.

Finally, there is the tremendous power of this man over others—even from the great distance in time and of space. Men and women did willingly, eagerly, whatever he wished them to do. Long-cherished traditions counted for nothing against his desire. At his behest his people—both sexes alike—adopted the practice of polygamy. They even wore an undergarment designed by him. From the rough plainsmen, Porter Rockwell and Lyman Wight, to the high-spirited John Taylor, the strong-willed Brigham Young, and the scholarly Orson Spencer and Orson Pratt—all of whom did their own thinking otherwise—hardly a Mormon, but would voluntarily have given his life to save the Prophet. As a matter of fact, thousands of them, both men and women, suffered more than death in Missouri, in Illinois, and afterwards on the Great Plains, rather than be false to him and to his teachings. To-day, Joseph Smith's utterances and wishes are still the highest law to more than nine hundred thousand intelligent people.

Of course, there have been many attempts to explain the puzzling individuality of the Mormon leader.

One of the explanations—the earliest, the harshest, the easiest to understand, and the most persistent—has its feet on moral grounds. It is, in a word, that Joseph Smith was a liar, a crook, and a religious fraud. According to this theory the Prophet had no visions; he did not even believe that he had visions; he fabricated all of his visions. A vagabond by nature, he looked about for a means of subsistence without having to work, and, at the same time, get a little notoriety. He found it in what afterwards came to be called Mormonism. And since there are men and women in every community who are more or less credulous, he had no difficulty in attracting followers, for he possessed natural shrewdness, not to say cunning, and certain winning ways—for all agree that he was good-natured.

This theory, as will be noted, is not at all complimentary to Mormons in general, either during the Prophet's life-time or since.

That this explanation of Joseph Smith's personality and work has not proved altogether satisfactory is evident from the industrious search that has been going on meanwhile for one with more promise in it. Accordingly the latest explanation came with the advent of modern psychology, with its related branches in the prolific field of pathology. On this theory Joseph Smith, like Paul, Julius Caesar, Napoleon, and Peter the Great, was an epileptic. He had fits, and in these seizures he saw visions.

The idea was worked out with considerable ingenuity some thirty years ago, by a graduate student in Yale University—I. Woodbridge Riley. It was published later in book form. One gathers from the prefatory introduction by Professor Ladd that the theory was too fine spun for him to accept it as satisfactory, in view of what came out of the Prophet's "epilepsy"; for the most he can say for the treatise is to hope that the "value of the services rendered by the author" would be properly appreciated. Very obviously Dr. Riley was embarrassed by a dearth of psychological data.

The idea that Joseph Smith conspired with other men to deceive the world disregards the fact that the conspirators broke up, disregards the rather substantial character of the deceived, and disregards the element of time; the theory of self-hypnosis disregards what has come out of the illusion, and the fact that it is too technical for the untrained mind, requiring that most people shall take it on trust; and the explanation of Joseph Smith himself involves the acceptance of the miraculous element in modern life—a thing which is hard for the scientifically trained mind to do.

So there we are. One falls back on the phrase, "the Enigma of Palmyra."

During the first century of Mormonism no attempt was made by any one, either within or without the church, to write a biography of Joseph Smith for the general public. The only accounts of him—and these run into the hundreds, if not into the thousands—were in connection with the faith he established.

Yet the Mormon prophet is the most compelling personality in the religious history of America, and one of the most fascinating in our entire history. He had a more spectacular rise to power than Lincoln, lived a more strenuous life than Roosevelt, knew more theology than Jonathan Edwards, and built up a greater church than Mrs. Eddy. Why, then, have not writers been attracted to him sufficiently to write his life?

The answer is not far to seek.

Joseph Smith was a religious leader. This fact very naturally limited the number of writers who otherwise would look upon him with designing eyes. Besides, theology, time out of mind, has been regarded as a technical subject, calling for special information.

The case of Joseph Smith is complicated by the miraculous element. He claimed to be a prophet in the same sense that Moses and Isaiah were prophets. That is, he affirmed that he was divinely inspired, that God spoke through him to his generation, that he received visions and revelations and performed miracles. Now since the miraculous in modern life, even with those who accept the miracles of the Bible, has fallen into disfavor, attention has very naturally been directed to Mormonism, the product, rather than to Joseph Smith, the producer. The Prophet has entered the picture only incidentally, if one may say so. The man has become lost in the seer. It has, therefore, been taken for granted that the man was nil.

Strangely enough, even his followers of the present generation are inclined to view Joseph Smith as a sort of divine pipe-line. And soon, it would appear, the founder of Mormonism will cease to be as an individual and will escape, like Buddha and Confucius, into cloudland. To his early disciples, though, Joseph Smith was a man as well as a prophet. Indeed, to a few of them—John Corrill and the Law brothers, for instance—the man was too much in evidence.

As a rule, accounts of the Mormon leader by unfriendly critics (which means most of his critics) have certain features in common.

First, these critics apparently take no pains to be accurate. The most pretentious secular history of the Mormons, for example, says that the father of Joseph Smith "and several of the boys could not read." The statement is simply untrue. This sort of carelessness, to put it charitably, is to be seen on almost every page of the work in question. The author, a college professor, would not think of turning out a treatise on, say, Abraham Lincoln, so honeycombed with basal misstatements.

Second, these accounts are undiscriminating. They were written, it would seem, in blissful ignorance of the fact that all evidence must be carefully weighed, so that what is true shall be set apart from what is not true. Most of the information concerning the Prophet's life in Palmyra, to illustrate, is to be found in certain affidavits by old neighbors. In any other case than Joseph Smith's, writers would deem it necessary to ask such questions as these: Who were these old neighbors? At whose instigation were they induced to make affidavits against the Prophet? What was his probable motive? How much in the affidavits is direct testimony and how much hearsay?

But writers on the subject who make use of these statements almost uniformly take them at their face value. Besides, they have formed the habit of quoting one another, instead of going to the sources for their information, so that yesterday's volume is but a rehash of Howe and other early writers on Mormonism and contain a minimum of fact and a maximum of opinion.

In the third place, nearly always there is an attempt to defend a thesis. This is as true of Mormon as of non-Mormon writers. Only, the former attempt to sustain the proposition that Joseph Smith was a true prophet, the latter that he was a religious fraud. To this end the material is first carefully selected and then as carefully marshaled. This is not to write biography; it is to plead a case in open court. Joseph Smith was neither an angel nor a devil, but a very lovable human being, who made mistakes like the rest of mankind, and had his faults.

On the whole, these accounts of the Prophet by his critics are conceived in a common spirit of unfriendliness. Sometimes writers become facetious, as if they were depicting the antics of a clown. Sometimes they grow impatient, petulant, as of one who is bored with his subject. But often they are bitter, vengeful, as of a man who cherishes a personal grudge. Surely one who had molded the thoughts and lives of millions of his fellows is deserving of more consideration at the hands of those who undertake to form the judgment of others.

The biographer who would paint a truthful portrait of the Mormon prophet must follow certain clearly defined paths. For one thing, he must stick to the facts—not only those facts which fit in with a preconceived purpose, but all the facts that are available and that bear evidence of being such. Moreover, facts in the outer life of the Prophet should be segregated from those of his inner life—that is, his religious philosophy and his visions, revelations, and miracles. For, after all, his actions were all that could be known with certainty to others.

Not that this miraculous element, as the Mormons understand it, should be neglected. But it ought to be portrayed by itself, as the Prophet's explanation of his own life and work. It should be dealt with in the same spirit of fairness and honesty that marks the best biographies of Paul, the Apostle—whom the founder of Mormonism resembled in some important respects. The Prophet's religious philosophy should not be intermingled with the events of his life, but reserved for separate treatment. Thus the lines of Joseph Smith's figure would be kept in the clear, as would also his teachings and his motives.

Nor is this all. In the biography of the Mormon leader, as of every other person, it is necessary to give those more intimate details which reveal the inner soul. Of these there is an abundance, but they are never set down in any account of Joseph Smith by his critics. His tender solicitude for his family while away from them, his long and anxious vigils by the bedside of his sick mother, his great love for his brother Hyrum, his tear-stained face as he came out of his home for the last time, his frequent expressions of hope that his feet might not stray from the right path—these reveal a different Joseph Smith from that of popular imagination.

Any approach to the Mormon prophet, if we are to understand him at all, must be through sympathy and fellow-feeling, not through antagonisms. This ought to go without saying, but it does not in the case of Joseph Smith.

How could a Britisher of Washington's time, and for many years thereafter, write a fair biography of the father of his country; or a Southerner of Lincoln's day give a truthful picture of the great emancipator; or, not to be irreverent, an ancient pharisee tell the significant facts in the life of Jesus Christ? To do so would have been a psychological impossibility.

Similarly no one who takes it for granted that Joseph Smith was a religious gangster can ever get at the heart of the Prophet. That is the wrong approach. One must come to him with an open mind, or at least, with a desire to understand—just as one comes to every other historical character (or a living character, for that matter). It is to the open-minded that the Mormon leader presents a conundrum. For, after all, Joseph Smith may have been an honest seeker after truth.

The key, then, to the riddle of Joseph Smith's personality lies, not in going after the Prophet with hammer and tongs, but in a frank facing of the facts of his outer life, the facts of his inner life so far as these are revealed to us in his words and work, the facts in his motives as he himself explains them, and, most of all, the facts in that secret, indefinable something back of everything, which eludes analysis.

If that does not yield the key to this strange, unique individuality, then nothing will, and one may as well give up.
