John Henry Evans, Joseph Smith, an American Prophet ( 1946)

CHAPTER II

Joseph Smith's Forebears

There is a great deal more in genealogy than is generally believed at present. I never heard tell of any clever man that came entirely of stupid people.—CARLYLE.

In the year 1638 there landed in Boston harbor a boy by the name of Robert Smith. This lad was the first American ancestor of the Mormon prophet.

Robert was English. He came here direct from London, although, most likely, he was born in Willoughby, Lincolnshire, in 1626. Just what a boy of twelve was doing so far away from home or how it came about that he undertook the voyage in the first place, no one has ventured to tell us. Those were days of adventure. Anyway, there he was.

He must have stayed in our Boston for some years, for it is recorded that he built "the third house there with a cellar in it." Whether or not it was his own, we are not informed. Most probably he carried on in the town his trade of tailoring. Presently, however, we find him, a married man, in the township of Boxford, as it is now called, and in possession of two hundred acres of land there. Since part of this farm lay in Topsfield, and since his son Samuel built himself a home there, and the next three generations were born and lived on the place, this branch of the family came to be known as the Topsfield Smiths.

Robert's wife was Mary French. She was the daughter of Thomas French. It is believed by genealogists that he is the one mentioned by John Winthrop, son of the Massachusetts governor of that name, as a "schollar" of his and also that Thomas came to America with him in the good ship "Lion." The Frenches, originally perhaps from the land of the Parisian, entered this country from Scotland. The father of Mary was an ensign, and, when he died in 1680, left some property in a will—as the Essex probate record informs us. Mary was accounted in the registered list of Topsfield church membership as "in full communion."

One of Robert's ten children was Samuel. He was born in 1666 and lived till he was eighty-two. His father died at the age of sixty-seven. This is the Samuel that went to live on the Topsfield side of the Smith farm and established there the domicile of the Smith family. By trade he was a carpenter, although no doubt he did some farming. According to the town record, Samuel was known as a "gentleman." This is thought by some to mean that Robert, his father, was the youngest son of a nobleman.

Samuel married into the Curtis family. The Curtises, like a good many other families of that period in New England, boasted a coat of arms. Rebecca's father was a corporal in the militia.

Samuel Smith, Junior, was one of nine children. He became somewhat of a public character in the Topsfield district. A granddaughter of the Prophet says she gained admission to three American patriotic societies on showing her connection with Samuel alone.

In him the Smiths and the Goulds united. The Goulds, descended from a thirteenth-century crusader named John Gale, were an old Normandy family. One of their number, while Mayor of Exon, England, refused to receive for the city the proclamation of Oliver Cromwell on his victory over the forces of Charles the First—with what results the historian does not say.

Zaccheus Gould, Priscilla's father, was an outspoken man, who insisted on his civil and religious rights at all hazards, and continued to "entertain Quakers" in the face of a prohibition by the authorities. He had extensive land holdings in Topsfield. His son, a chip off the old block, was deprived of his office of ensign for some reason, and later got into "trouble" for saying to the magistrate, "You are no judge of ye court," and at another time, for uttering "treasonable and seditious words" against the King.

Besides being a "gentleman" like his father, Samuel was also a captain in the militia. One year he was grand-juryman, and another year supervisor of roads; five years he served on the committee of public safety; eight years he was assessor and selectman; three times he was town clerk, and could have been elected a fourth time had he wished; twice he was a delegate to the Provincial Congress at Concord; and for some eight years, though not consecutively, he represented the Topsfield district in what we should now call the House of Representatives.

His death was considered of enough importance to warrant an obituary notice in the Salem Gazette for November 22, 1785, in which "Esquire Samuel Smith" was declared to be an "amiable and worthy character," a "sincere friend to the liberties of the country," and a "strenuous advocate for the doctrine of Christianity."

The legacy left by his grandfather, Robert Smith, of one hundred and eighty pounds had increased in passing through his father's and his own hands to more than five hundred and forty-four pounds.

Asael Smith, son of the second Samuel, was born in 1744. He died in 1830, when he was eighty-six. He was one of five children by a first wife. After his marriage to Mary Duty, Asael lived for some years in Windham, New Hampshire, the home of his wife's family. His name appears on the tax lists of Derryfield, now Manchester—which is the southern part of Windham. On the death of his father he returned to Topsfield to settle the estate. Later he moved to Tunbridge, Vermont, with his family.

Physically, Asael Smith is said to have been a powerfully built man, capable of handling two men of average size with little difficulty. There must have been some muscular prowess, too, in the Duty family. For, according to Dr. Alfred Poore in his History of the Visitation, Mary's sister Eunice could ''take up a barrel of cider and drink out of the bung." Among his neighbors Asael was sometimes referred to as "Crooked-neck Smith." This was because he walked with his head a little to one side. Early in life, it is explained, his neck was burned, and in consequence the cords on that side had shrunk somewhat.

He was very positive in his views and in his ways of expressing them.

Although he himself did not belong to any religious organization (the Smiths, as a rule, did not take kindly to the churches), he nevertheless allowed some of his children to be baptized into the Congregational Society. By nature he was religious, however, with a leaning to Universalism—a faith which was being effectively preached in the New England towns by John Murray, an English divine, just before and after the Revolution. Asael's reasons for keeping aloof from the churches, as he himself gives them and as they are quoted in the Topsfield record, are that he "could not reconcile the teachings of the denominations with scripture and reason"—the "two witnesses" by which he tested everything religious.

"Any honest calling," he says in a letter to his family at one time when he thought he would pass on—"any honest calling will honor you, if you will honor that. It is better to be a rich cobbler than a poor merchant. . . . Never trouble nor trust friends unless there is a necessity. . . . Give your children, if possible, a good education. . . . I make no doubt but you will hear divers opinions concerning me, both before and after I shall sleep in silence; but do not be troubled about that. I did what in my circumstances seemed best for me for the present; however, the extent hath not, in some points, answered my expectations; yet I have learned to measure things by another rule than events, and satisfy myself in this—that I did all for the best as I thought."

Here is what Asael writes to J. Perkins Towne, clerk of Topsfield for many years. He is writing from Tunbridge in the year 1796:

"For my part I am so willing to trust the government of the world in the hand of the Supreme Ruler of Universal Nature, that I do not, at present, wish to try to wrest it out of His hands; and I have so much confidence in His ability to teach our senators wisdom, that I do not think it worth while for me to interpose with the little stock of knowledge that He has favored me with, in the affair, either one way or the other.

"He has conducted us through a glorious Revolution, and has brought us into the promised land of peace and liberty; and I believe that He is about to bring all the world in the same beatitude in His own time and way."

This is the man concerning whom a petulant critic of the Mormon prophet says, with more smartness than truth, "His views were as crooked as his neck"; and a 1931 copyist varies this pert remark by substituting the word "religion" for "views."

Of an altogether different temperament was Asael Smith's son Joseph, father of the Prophet. Joseph Smith, Sr., was born on the old homestead in Topsfield, in 1771. At twenty years of age we find him with his father in Tunbridge, Vermont, clearing land for a farm. Just why Asael moved there with his family, is not known—unless it was because the country was virgin and because he wished to provide opportunity for his seven sons and his five daughters.

An upstanding man of six feet two, Joseph was quiet and unobtrusive, and deeply religious, although not a member of any church. His wife, Lucy Mack Smith, in her book on the ancestry of her widely known son, says that her husband was given to visions and inspired dreams. That the first Joseph had had some of that "good education" which Asael recommended for his grandchildren, is evident from the fact that, later on, he taught school in the village. In 1796, when he was twenty-five, Joseph married into the Mack family—which brings us to a consideration of the other line of the Prophet's forebears.

Thirty-one years after the arrival in Boston of Robert Smith, there landed in the same harbor another youth in quest of adventure or wealth in the New World. His name was John Mack.

He was sixteen years old, and he came from Inverness, Scotland. It is thought by Sterling, a genealogist, that the young man brought with him only a half or maybe only a fourth, of his name, the rest of it having been dropped for religious reasons. There is no doubt, however, that he had, stowed away somewhere, a family crest, on which was inscribed the motto, "In hope and labor I go."

Although young Mack ran down the gangplank in Boston, he does not seem to have stayed there long. Instead, he went to Salisbury, Massachusetts. At thirty-eight he married Sarah Bagley, daughter of Orlando and Sarah Colby Bagley.

Orlando Bagley was at one time a constable in Amesbury. While holding this position, he arrested a certain Susannah Martin, a neighbor, who had bewitched some cows in the neighborhood, so that they lost either their milk or their calves. The stern Puritan took her to Salem, where she was tried and executed. The incident was later celebrated in one of Whittier's poems.

After the birth of the first child, John and Sarah moved to Concord. In 1696 they again changed their habitat, this time to Lyme, Connecticut. Here and in Concord twelve children were born. Lyme became the proving-ground for the Mack family for generations.

The eighth of these children was named Ebenezer. He was born in 1697, and lived to become the Reverend Ebenezer Mack, pastor of the Second Congregational church in Lyme. When John Mack died at the age of sixty-eight, Ebenezer, who was twenty-four, inherited the estate. At thirty-one he married Hannah Huntley, daughter of Aaron and Deborah de Wolf Huntley.

The Huntleys were a notable family. In 1774, so we are informed by the New England Chronicle, thirteen Huntley brothers, sons of one woman, went to the war. They were all six-footers and "very brave men." What happened to them in the war we are not told. But when one of them died, he bequeathed his "soule to God that gave it, and his body to the earth to be decently buried."

Ebenezer "departed this life in 1777," says his son Solomon. "He went to the door to fetch in a back-log, and returned after a forestick, and instantly dropped down dead on the floor." Solomon assures us that his parents "had large property, and lived in good style," till "various misfortunes" overtook them, and they became destitute and their children "scattered."

Solomon is the most interesting character among the Macks, whether one is thinking of his strange career, his adventures by sea and land, his Bunyan-like wrestlings with the invisible powers, or the large number of accidents he met with in his eighty-eight years of ups and downs.

He wrote his own biography. It is entitled: "A Narrative of the Life of Solomon Mack, Containing an Account of the many severe Accidents he met with during a Series of Years, together with the extraordinary Manner in which he was converted to the Christian Faith."

When financial reverses came to Ebenezer and Hannah Mack in 1736, the five children "were obliged to disperse and throw themselves upon the mercy of an unfeeling world." Solomon, who was but four, was "bound out" to a neighboring farmer, who mistreated him. On reaching his majority, he left for the French and Indian War, without religion or education. Six years he served as a soldier, garnering experience and accidents.

After his discharge from the army he married Lydia Gates, the daughter of Daniel and Rebecca Dutton Gates. Daniel was a deacon in the church. The Gateses lived in East Haddam, Connecticut.

On their marriage, the couple took up residence in a place called Marlow, "a desolate and dreary wilderness" with only four families within forty miles. Here Solomon learned the value of his school-keeping wife. For, having been a school teacher, she "instructed the children in the various branches of ordinary education" and taught them to pray night and morning.

Solomon, in his Narrative, regards his conversion to religion as the crowning event of his checkered life. As a matter of fact, it was a missionary impulse that led him to write of it and publish it.

In his childhood and youth he knew no religious influence. His later associations with soldiers and sailors had not improved his mental or his spiritual state. Yet all the time, as he assures us, God was endeavoring to attract his attention through numerous accidents, sickness, and Lydia. But he continued to "live in sin, an enemy to God."

When he became a very old man, he prayed "that the Lord would deliver him from the horrible pit of sin." This would doubtless be a hard thing for God to do, because he was "such a vile wretch," in spite of His many "warnings," and because he had "so abused the Sabbath."

One night, however, he saw "a bright light in the dark," in consequence of which he "literally watered" his pillow. After that, when his rheumatism became so bad that his wife was "obliged to help me to bed and up again," he requested a sign. "As I was sitting one evening by the fire, I prayed to the Lord, if he was with me, that I might know by this token, that my pains might all be eased for that night." His prayer was answered, for "blessed be the Lord, I was entirely free from pain that night, and I rejoiced in the God of my salvation."

Mack had an experience once (there is no reason to believe that he had more than one), which has been made to do prodigious duty of late years as an explanation of how Mormonism originated. It was nothing other than an epileptic fit. The Narrative says:

"I was taken with a fit, when travelling with an ax under my arm, on Winchester hills. The face of the land was covered with ice. I was senseless from one till five P.M. When I came to myself, I had my ax still under my arm. I was all covered with blood and much cut and bruised. When I came to my senses, I could not tell where I had been, nor where I was going; but by good luck I went right and arrived at the first house. I was under the doctor's care all winter."

This was prior to his conversion.

By the year 1773 Solomon and Lydia had found their way to the town of Gilsum, New Hampshire. Here they lived the rest of their lives, and here, at least two of their children were born.

Meanwhile, Stephen, who was married, had made his home in Tunbridge, Vermont. Tunbridge, by this time, also was the home of Asael Smith, with his seven sons and five daughters. It was in this place that the lines of the Macks and the Smiths came together in Joseph Smith, son of Asael, and Lucy Mack, daughter of Solomon.

A death in the family was the occasion for two great changes in Lucy's life.

In 1788 Lovina, her sister, died. This event so affected Lucy that for a time her health was endangered. So she was persuaded to make a visit to her brother, Stephen—which lasted a year and was repeated. On a second visit she met Joseph Smith.

About the same time, too, she was overcome by a desire to join one of the churches. For, in spite of her mother's teachings (her father was not yet converted), none of the household belonged to any religious society. She spent "much time in reading the Bible and praying," she says, "but notwithstanding my great anxiety to experience a change of heart, another matter would always interpose in all my meditations—if I remain a member of no church, all religious people will say I am of the world, and if I join one of the different denominations, all the rest will say I am in error." The result was that she continued to remain aloof from the churches.

Joseph and Lucy were married in January, 1796, at the ages of twenty-five and twenty, respectively.

In Tunbridge, it seems, Joseph Smith owned "a handsome farm," on which the couple, after a visit to the bride's parents in Gilsum, took up their residence, in a house which had been furnished apparently with some means that Lucy had at her disposal. Her brother, Stephen, and his partner in business, between them, had given her a wedding present of a thousand dollars in cash, but this amount, with characteristic Scotch thrift, she laid aside for a rainy day—which came all too soon. Almost from the day of their marriage ill-fortune dogged the heels of the pair.

Not for long did the couple reside in Tunbridge. Renting the farm, which Lucy says was worth fifteen hundred dollars, they moved to Randolph. Here they set up in "the mercantile business," which probably means keeping a small store in the village. On the side, however, the husband laid in a stock of pulverized ginseng, which he heard was bringing a good price in China.

A certain Mr. Stevens in the neighborhood offered him three thousand dollars for the product, so Mrs. Smith says in her book. But Smith determined to ship it to the Orient himself—this he did, and lost everything through the dishonesty of Stevens's son.

Meantime, creditors in Boston pressed the merchant for an eighteen hundred dollar indebtedness for merchandise. He had expected to pay this off with the profits on the ginseng. That source failing, he was compelled to sell the farm for eight hundred dollars, which, with the wedding present to his wife, just met the obligation.

Penniless, the Smiths, with an addition now of two sons to the family, moved to Royalton, where they stayed but a short time. Their next home was in Sharon, from which place they again went to Tunbridge, but presently shifted their domicile once more, this time to Lebanon. These towns are all close to the line separating New Hampshire and Vermont. At Lebanon nearly all the family fell sick of a fever and some came near dying. Their last home in this locality was Norwich. Here they rented a farm, experienced three crop failures in succession from drouth and frost, and made up their mind to go to Western New York, where "wheat was raised in abundance."

These were years also of spiritual wrestlings. While the family lived in Randolph, Mrs. Smith was taken down with "a hectic fever." She continued to grow weaker and weaker till she "could scarcely endure even a foot fall." It was feared that she would die, since the doctors had given her up.

After "meditating on death" one day, she "looked to the Lord" and made a solemn covenant with God that, "if he would let me live, I would endeavor to serve him to the best of my abilities." Shortly after this she heard a voice say to her, "Seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. Let your heart be comforted." In a few moments she appeared to be better, and before long she recovered completely.

Then she sought instruction in religion. A deacon, who had a reputation for piety, proved more concerned over her physical comfort when she called to see him for spiritual guidance, than over her soul's state. And in the Presbyterian church, which she visited one Sunday, she found that the minister "neither understood nor appreciated the subject upon which he spoke." Thereupon she said to herself, "There is not upon earth the religion I seek." So she fell back upon her Bible. At length, however, she was baptized—but not into any church.

Before long Lucy's anxiety extended to her husband's spiritual condition. For Joseph, too, remained aloof from religious societies in any form. He may have come to share the liberal views of his father about the churches. The upshot of some conversations between the couple on religion was that they began to attend Methodist services. But this was put a stop to by Joseph's oldest brother, Jesse—for what reason, does not appear.

This unchurchliness, however, seems to have been no hindrance to the reception of inspired leadings given to both Lucy and Joseph. In fact, it was a dream by Mrs. Smith that led to her anxiety about her husband. For he experienced what she calls visions. One of these—set down by Mother Smith in her book as the first,—was about the "inanimate and dumb" state of the religious world. Another was more extensive. It told about a tree and a spacious building. These have figured in recent explanations of certain passages in the volume which the son was to publish.

It is possible, however, that the account of these and other "visions" of the elder Smith is couched in Lucy's own language and written in the light of Lehi's dream of the "tree whose fruit was desirable to make one happy" and the "great and spacious building, which stood, as it were, in the air."

It was in the year 1816 that the removal to New York State took place. The future prophet was then about ten years old. Father Smith went there first, with a Mr. Howard, to prepare the way for the rest of the family. In a few weeks these put in an appearance, "with a small portion of our effects," Mother Smith says, "and two cents in cash." The "larger portion" of those effects had gone to satisfy creditors and to pay a man and team for hauling the family to Palmyra.

Palmyra was at this time a new settlement, although it had emerged from the log cabin period into that of the frame building. According to the census reports for the year 1810 there were two thousand, one hundred and eighty-seven inhabitants in the town, and these were distributed among three hundred and fifty families. Already there were a gristmill, a tavern, a printing press, a distillery, and a "household manufacturing" establishment, which, in that year, turned out nearly thirty-four hundred yards of cloth. Twenty-five years before this the whole region in which Palmyra was situated was a howling wilderness—the Philips and Gorham Purchase—mostly covered with trees and underbrush. The town was not incorporated till 1827, and not until the following year was there a fire department.

"Arrived in Palmyra," says the historian of Wayne county, "the elder Smith opened a 'cake and beer shop,' as his sign indicated, and the profits of the shop, combined with occasional earnings by himself and eldest sons at harvesting, well digging, and other common employments, enabled him to provide an honest living for the family. The shop, with its confectionery, gingerbread, root beer, and such articles, was well patronized by the village and country youth, and on public occasions did a lively business.

"For two and a half years [the Prophet says four years] the family resided in the village, and in 1818 settled upon a wild tract of land located about two miles south of Palmyra. Anticipating a removal thither, a small log house had been built, and in this they made their home for a dozen years. The cabin contained two rooms on the ground floor, and a garret which had two divisions. Some time after occupation a wing was built of slabs for a sleeping-apartment. The Smiths obtained a livelihood from this lot by the sale of cordwood, baskets, birch-brooms, maple sugar, and syrup, and on public days resumed the cake and beer business."

That, however, was only at first. Later, according to Mrs. Smith, they made arrangements to purchase a one hundred acre farm in Manchester. After the log house was built and while the husband and the older boys were clearing the land, the mother, who is credited with "a strong, but uncultivated intelligence," furnished the house and provided the immediate necessities of the family by making oilcloth coverings for household furniture. The first year they nearly made the initial payment on the land and cleared several acres.

The second instalment was met by Alvin, who had earned enough money for the purpose, doing odd jobs in the neighborhood. By that time more acres were made ready for the plow. "The hand of friendship," says Mother Smith appreciatively, "was extended on every side. Not only temporal blessings were bestowed upon us, but spiritual as well."

This house of logs, with its four rooms and a lean-to (counting the attic) served the Smiths till a new one of larger proportions was erected across the line separating the townships of Palmyra and Manchester. After 1821 the family comprised eleven. The new house, however, had been in anticipation for a long time, but was not completed till after the death of the oldest son, Alvin, in 1824.

The Smiths, though, do not appear to have gotten on any too well in a worldly way. What with the father and the older boys working and the mother aiding in the family maintenance, they nevertheless found it difficult to make ends meet. The farm, which was heavily wooded, required not a little labor. More cash than came in from all sources was demanded for taxes and the mortgage. And so presently they found it impossible to meet the final instalment, and the farm reverted to the original owner—the despised "land agents."

This removal took place in 1830. The new home was in Fayette, sometimes called Waterloo.
