John Henry Evans, Joseph Smith, an American Prophet ( 1946)

CHAPTER III

The Book of Mormon

Over that book [the Book of Mormon] and its origin there hangs yet a mystery which many able men and women have sought to solve, which some have solved to their own satisfaction, but which none have removed altogether from the region of doubt.—KENNEDY.

It was while the Smith family lived in Sharon that the future prophet was born. Sharon is in Windsor county, Vermont. This event occurred on December 23, 1805.

At Lebanon, when an epidemic of typhus fever raged in the community, Joseph was taken down with it, along with other members of the family. After two weeks' sickness a fever sore broke out on his leg, which necessitated the extraction of some bone. His mother says that he refused to take whisky—the only anesthetic of the period—to deaden the pain, and to be tied down during the clumsy operation. As late as the year when the family took up their residence in New York State the boy seems to have suffered a lameness in consequence.

With a single exception, to be noted hereafter in this book, Joseph appears to have been a normal youth. His family was poor, as we have seen. But so was almost every other family in that part of Western New York. And everybody had to work hard to make a livelihood—Joseph Smith included. For, with the other boys in the family, he did his share of whatever work was to be done. He himself says in his History This agrees with what has already been quoted from Turner, the historian of Wayne county. By "we" the Prophet presumably means himself and his brothers.

Now we find him hauling cordwood into Palmyra or working on his father's farm in Manchester; now in the service of a Mr. Joseph Knight in the field or gristmill in the neighboring town of Colesville; now digging a well for a woman in Macedon, a village not far away; and now helping a Mr. Josiah Stoal, who had taken a gang of men to Harmony, Pennsylvania, to dig for silver in an abandoned mine there.

In his everyday attire (we do not have any details respecting his Sunday and holiday dress—if any) there was nothing to boast of, if we may credit a description of him by Daniel Hendrix, who was connected with the printing office in Palmyra.

"I can see him now in my mind's eye," says Hendrix, "with his torn and patched trousers held to his form by a pair of suspenders made out of sheeting, with his calico shirt as dirty and black as the earth, and his uncombed hair sticking through the holes in his old battered hat. In winter I used to pity him, for his shoes were so old and worn that he must have suffered in the snow and slush."

No doubt the picture is touched up a bit, to satisfy some enterprising writer (for Hendrix made this statement in extreme old age to a reporter), though on the whole it has the air of truth. Most probably, Joe Smith, as every one called him, was not the only one of the boys so attired on week days. Only, attention has been attracted to him in those Palmyra years on account of his later fame—just as we observe more closely a stick we have picked up from among its fellows.

By nature Joseph was a friendly boy. His mother says he was "remarkably quiet and well disposed." Pomeroy Tucker, part owner of the Palmyra Sentinel, tells us that he was "proverbially good natured, very rarely, if ever, indulging in any combative spirit toward any one, whatever might be the provocation, and yet he was never known to laugh."

Doubtless he did laugh whenever there was occasion, but in his quiet way. This was remarked upon by those who came to know him in later life. (It is curious to note that he made a rule against "much laughter" afterwards.) But his smile was frequent in the company of friends—at least, later on. "Joe had a jovial, easy, don't-care way with him," Hendrix adds, "that made him a lot of friends." At thirty-three the Prophet spoke of himself-having "a native cheery disposition," and pointed to his acquaintances as proof of it.

Joseph Smith's technical education was as limited as his father's "worldly circumstances." In Vermont he had attended the "common schools," as his mother tells us, where he learned to read, to write, and to cipher. If the family had not moved to New York State and if their funds had not given out, he might have gone to Hanover Academy, now Dartmouth College, as did his brother Hyrum. That he attended school in Palmyra is certain, for there is still in existence three of his text-books. One of these is entitled, The First Lines of Arithmetic,"for the use of Young Scholars, adapted to the capacities of children." Published in Hartford, Connecticut, it bears the clear autograph of Joseph, with the date January 31, 1818. The Prophet would then have just passed his thirteenth birthday. Another of the books is called The English Reader. It contains "pieces" in both prose and verse—narrative, didactic, descriptive, conversational, and promiscuous. There are selections under the captions: "The Pious Sons," "Filial Sensibility," "Cruelty to Insects Condemned," "Tenderness to Mothers," "Respect and Affection Due from Pupils to Their Tutors," and "To a Young Woman with a Watch." The third book is a religious Reader. In this interesting volume, which runs to two hundred and sixty-four pages, are scores of "Gospel Sonnets" arranged in six parts, all in verse—the "Believer's Espousals," the "Believer's Jointure," the "Believer's Riddle," the "Believer's Lodging," the "Believer's Soliloquy," and the "Believer's Principles." These books were given by the Prophet to a fifteen-year-old boy—Richard Bush—who worked for him on his farm in Nauvoo.

Neither at this time nor at any other in his life does the Prophet appear to have been much of a reader. Rather, his mother assures us, "he seemed much less inclined to the perusal of books than any of the rest of the children, but far more to meditation and deep study." There is said to have been in Palmyra a public reading room with a small library. If so, Joseph would probably have had little use for either. Also there was a bookstore in connection with the town paper, but the Smiths were too poor to buy books. The family did, however, own a Bible, and, what is more, they read it—especially the third son. In Nauvoo the Prophet did not impress Quincy as being well read.

In those Palmyra days, when the Prophet was in his adolescent years, the boys of the town had a debating club. Young Smith belonged to it. Says O. Turner, in his Pioneer History of the Philips and Gorham Purchase, which included Wayne county, where Palmyra was situated: "He used to solve some portentious moral or political ethics in our general debating club, which we moved down to an old red school house on Durfee Street, to get rid of the annoyance of critics that used to drop in upon us in the village; and subsequently, after catching a spark of Methodism in the camp meeting, away down in the woods, on Vienna Road, he was a very passable exhorter in evening meetings." Turner was printer's devil then.

Joseph Smith was always ready of speech. This is one of the characteristics on which both critics and admirers are of one opinion. "He was a good talker," says Hendrix, "and would have made a fine stump speaker, if he had had the training." After he had announced his second religious experience, the Prophet would, of a winter afternoon or evening, form one of a group of men and boys round the stove in the village store, and on such occasions hold forth in so fluent and earnest a manner as almost to convince his auditors—almost, but not quite, for such things as he related were not to be found outside the Good Book.

And Parley P. Pratt, a disciple of a later period and one who knew him intimately, says of the Prophet: "I have known him to retain a congregation of willing and anxious listeners for many hours together in the midst of cold or sunshine, rain or wind, while they were laughing at one moment and weeping the next. Even his most bitter enemies were generally overcome, if he could once get their ears."

The Prophet lived in Palmyra and vicinity from the time he was about ten years old till he was twenty-one. During these years, however, he was "abroad," as he puts it, part of the time—at Colesville and at Harmony. Also it was during these adolescent years—not to exceed eleven years in all—that the people of the neighborhood came to know him and the Smith family—Turner, Tucker, Hendrix, and others who have left details, more or less accurate, concerning him. These knew him for good or ill—mostly for ill, it would seem, although they do not say that he ever did any one a wrong.

He was then a big-bodied, flaxen-haired youth, with small hands for his size, large feet, prominent frontals covered with a heavy growth of very light hair, and striking blue eyes, half hidden by long light lashes. Even then he was considered handsome. To everybody he was known as "Young Joe Smith," to distinguish him from his father, who was "Old Joe Smith."

One wonders what those villagers would have thought and said if they had known that, almost before their century was out, a granite shaft would shoot up high into the sky directly over the site where this same uncouth, quiet, low-speaking, unlaughing boy was born, and that it was to be reared there by hundreds of thousands of people in all lands, who looked to his teachings as in the same class with the teachings of Jesus Christ.

One day he disappeared from the village that had known him for eleven years, and rumor had it that he was engaged in writing a book about the ancestors of the American natives before there was any history that any one knew of.

Three years later Joseph turned up in Palmyra with a wife on one arm and under the other a bulky manuscript, which, when published, was to puzzle learned critics and historians for more than a hundred years. Both the bride and the manuscript, it seems, he had come by in the neighboring state of Pennsylvania.

In 1825, as already noted, Joseph Smith went with Josiah Stoal and some laborers to Harmony across the border. The Prophet was just out of his teens. Stoal was a friend of the family. It was rumored that in a hill nearby there was silver to be found, which had been dug for by Spaniards. On this occasion he boarded with a family in Harmony by the name of Hale.

The Hales were among the first settlers in Harmony—the Hales and the Lewises. The two families (Mrs. Hale and Mrs. Lewis were sisters) had gone there about forty years before. A yoke of oxen had pulled thither a cart, in which were all the belongings of both families and in which were two young brides, atop of the load, happy in the thoughts of their adventure into the wilds and in the two stalwarts who walked beside the animals. One of the men—Hale—acquired in those pioneer days the reputation he always retained of being a mighty hunter. For on more than one occasion his sure aim and trusty carbine had saved his own and the others' lives. They settled in Harmony (now Oakland), and here Isaac Hale brought to manhood and womanhood his nine children.

[Joseph Smith: An American Prophet Lucy Mack Smith Emma Smith

At the time Joseph Smith went to this place it was a settlement of between two and three hundred inhabitants. Its twenty-odd houses, widely spaced, formed a group by themselves, within a huge forest. Just over the Susquehanna river from Harmony was the larger town of the same name as the stream.

One of Hale's children—one of three girls—was Emma. She was the only daughter then unmarried. Emma is reputed to have been very beautiful, with large, dignified body and bewitching dark eyes, and also exceptionally intelligent. A painting, made of her at this time or a little later, bears out this reputation.

When the young "money-digger," who had fallen in love with Emma Hale, asked the stern old pioneer for the hand of his daughter, he was met with a prompt and decided refusal. Nor were the reasons kept back. Joseph was a stranger, for one thing, and, for another, he had no steady, remunerative employment. Besides, he had the reputation of looking into peep stones and hunting for treasures with a witch-hazel.

So Joseph and Emma eloped. He had just turned twenty-one, and she was approaching her twenty-third birthday. He "carried off my daughter into the state of New York," was the way Isaac put it in an affidavit against his son-in-law in 1834, "where they were married without my approbation and consent." This is the ground for the statement, a thousand times repeated in sermon and book, that the Mormon prophet kidnapped his wife.

Hale, although somewhat reconciled to his misfortune, as he always looked upon it, never forgot the affront to his family tree. Peter Ingersol, who once moved the Prophet and Emma from Palmyra to Harmony, represents the old man as saying to Joseph on the return of the couple, "You have stolen my daughter and married her. I had much rather have followed her to her grave." This we can easily believe in the light of that affidavit.

As for the manuscript, that is a longer story, and aroused greater concern in Palmyra. For a youth of twenty-three to come back home with a wife, even one so attractive as Emma, was not surprising, though how he could have been so lucky might be a matter for speculation. But that a youth of Joe Smith's social standing and lack of opportunity for learning should actually write a book—and a big book at that, from all accounts—was something to set all the town agog.

It was not the Prophet's plan, however, to seek a printer in Palmyra. He had had enough of Palmyra. During at least five of the eleven years he had lived there, he had been set upon by the villagers on account of his strange beliefs, and in the end he had been compelled to go elsewhere for peace of mind. And so he had sought a publisher for his manuscript in Rochester. A printer there had indeed given him a bid, but had not been willing to take the risk of putting out a book on the mere hope that it would sell. He may not have liked the style or the subject matter of the manuscript. Or, quite likely, there was no guarantor handy. In any event, the author found it necessary to apply to the printer in Palmyra.

At the Wayne Sentinel Pomeroy Tucker was editor and E. B. Grandin business manager. The paper was owned by them jointly. Grandin hesitated about taking the job, on account of the money chances. Martin Harris, however, a rich farmer in the neighborhood and both well and favorably known, guaranteed the amount—three thousand dollars. With this assurance, the firm took the job.

The manuscript was not in the handwriting of Joseph Smith. It was in that of a young Palmyra school teacher, Oliver Cowdery. The Prophet had dictated it to Cowdery, and Cowdery had written it down on sheets of foolscap. Later he copied the entire manuscript, which was carried to the printers in "takes." The author was taking no chances. Till the Prophet gained confidence in the typesetter, these "takes" were brought back every evening.

As events proved, Joseph's suspicions were not altogether without grounds.

It happened that just at this time a man named Cole published a paper there. It was called the Dogberry, and was printed on the press of the Sentinel. Its purpose was "to instruct and amuse." One of the ways in which it endeavored to entertain its readers was by "ironical castigation"—whatever that means. The sheet expired in less than two years.

One Sunday Hyrum Smith, Joseph's brother, went to the printing office. He suspected that all was not well there—which proved to be the case. By rights no one should have been working in the composing room. But somebody was there. It was Cole, with his helper. Before them were some proof-sheets of the forthcoming book. Apparently they were making one of their "ironical castigations." It was a garbled account with a humorous turn of the contents of the sheets. Already they had set up in type an announcement for the next number, in which its readers were promised a rich treat at the expense of the new Palmyra author. Only by threatening to invoke the copyright law could Cole be made to desist.

As the printing of the book neared the end, a meeting of some interested citizens of the town was held. Here those present bound themselves neither to buy nor to read the work by their fellow townsman. The only effect of this resolution, however, was to frighten Grandin into stopping work on the book temporarily, so that it was necessary for Harris to reassure him that the money would be forthcoming whether the book sold or not. After that there was smooth sailing for the publication.

In the Wayne Sentinel for March 26, 1830, appeared an advertisement of the new book. The Book of Mormon (for that was its name) was declared to be on sale, "wholesale and retail, at the Palmyra Bookstore by E. B. Grandin." It contained "six hundred pages, large duodecimo." The price was not given, but we know from other sources of information that it was two dollars and fifty cents. There were five thousand copies in the edition.

In structure the story of the Book of Mormon, which is all that we shall be concerned with here, is complex rather than simple. There are numerous digressions, and the narrative is frequently interrupted by excursions into the field of doctrine.

The reason for this complexity arises from the avowed purpose of the book—"to convince Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ, the eternal God, manifesting himself unto all nations." This theme is developed through action, characters, setting, exposition, and direct statement. The aim, therefore, is not primarily to amuse with a story, but to instruct, although the story is in reality the backbone of the volume.

Six hundred years before Christ a group of men and women, numbering perhaps twenty in all, left Jerusalem for what has since come to be called America. To them, however, it was the Promised Land, because they were guided here by divine power.

Their nominal leader was Lehi. Hence the whole colony may be termed Lehites, although they did not call themselves by that name. Their real leader was Nephi, fourth son of Lehi. After eight years of wandering in "the wilderness" they crossed the ocean in a vessel of their own make, landing on the shores of what we call South America.

The land, however, was already occupied, though they did not know it. These older inhabitants were Jaredites. The Jaredites, a thousand years before this, had come here from the neighborhood of the Tower of Babel, under the leadership of two brothers, Jared and Moriancumr. Here they had set up a kingdom, cultivated the soil, mined and smelted ore, built houses and churches, experienced the joys of religion and the sorrows of sin, fought bloody wars over the usual griefs of kings, and shortly after the arrival of the Lehites went noisily off the stage in the bloodiest of these wars. The spectacular rise and fall of this mighty nation is covered in thirty-two pages of narrative that fairly sweeps one off one's feet.

Before long the little colony divided into two groups. The occasion of the break up was the death of Lehi, who had been the sole tie that bound together the members of the colony. The cause of it was jealousy between the two brothers, Nephi and Laman. Laman, the oldest son of Lehi, believed that Nephi had usurped his right to "rule"—which was probably true in view of the law of primogeniture. But Nephi's right to leadership rested on the more substantial ground of natural ability. While the Lamanites stayed where they were, the Nephites, apparently the smaller group, penetrated farther into the huge forests.

The Nephites took with them what they called Brass Plates. These were equivalent to our Hebrew scriptures down to Jeremiah, but does not include that prophet. The Lamanites had no literature. Hence another, and deeper, cause of cleavage between the two peoples. For, while the Nephites had both a religion and a literature, traditional and original, the Lamanites, lacking this powerful means of civilization, degenerated intellectually, morally, and spiritually. And so, every now and then, the two nations flew at each other's throats—the lower, as usual, being the aggressor.

One of their periodical changes of habitat—changes made through fear of their enemy—the Nephites came upon another people. These were the Mulekites. They numbered more than the newcomers. Like the Lehites, they had come here direct from Jerusalem, shortly after the departure of that people from Palestine. Their leader was no less than a son of a king. They called their new home Zarahemla. The two peoples united under the leadership of the superior people. Thus, according to the Book of Mormon, the ancestors of at least some of the present natives were a compound of Nephites, Lamanites, and Mulekites.

This discovery of the Mulekites came after the Lehites had been here about a century and a half.

During the next eight hundred and fifty years or so the two nations went on in the usual course. The Nephites, as the Mulekites and the people of Nephi were called, tilled the soil, raised domestic animals, dug for ore and worked it up into useful articles, educated their children, wrote history as well as made it, cultivated religion, were instructed and warned by prophets, and defended themselves from their traditional enemies. The Lamanites roamed the woods and plains, lived on the fruits of the chase, and sought diversion in preying upon their more enlightened neighbors. Once, however, through the influence of religion, the two nations became one.

It was then that the Christ visited them. This was after the Resurrection. Jesus taught them the doctrines of the Sermon on the Mount, as he had the Jews in Palestine; he organized the church among them, with apostles and other officers, with the rite of baptism, of confirmation, of ordination; and he appears to have instructed them in the socialistic system that prevailed for a time among the early Christians, for the Nephites lived for nearly two centuries in an order where "they had all things common."

In the course of time, however, dissension arose, and in con sequence, the former division into Nephites and Lamanites was revived, with an additional note of discord in an ever increasing band of thugs known as the Gadianton robbers. At last a war occurred between the two divisions, which resulted in the extermination of those calling themselves Nephites. This was at the close of the fourth century, A.D.

Among the Nephites of this period was a man named Mormon. In addition to being a military prophet, he was also given to writing. One of the things he wrote was an abridgment of the entire history of his people from the beginning. This history was written on plates of gold. When he had finished his literary task, Mormon handed this book to his son, Moroni, with instructions to make such additions as he saw fit and then to bury it.

It was this book of golden plates, according to the story, that Joseph Smith obtained from a hill, where Moroni had placed it. The Book of Mormon thus derives its name from the man who is supposed to have written it anciently.

While the spirit of the Book of Mormon is primarily theological, there are some interesting bits of narrative in it which involve characters that are not particularly religious. One of these is an arch-villain, Amalickiah.

Amalickiah was a Nephite by birth and education. He lived in the first century before Christ. One of your restless, ambitious spirits, his first act was to head a rebellion. He would alter the form of government from a sort of republic to a kingdom, with himself as king. Thwarted in this scheme by a Nephite Patrick Henry, Amalickiah escaped to the Lamanites.

Among this primitive people he practiced his arts of deception with great success. First, he got himself appointed division officer. That accomplished, he brought about the death of the general, succeeded to his place, and betrayed the king into the hands of his murderer. The rest of the way was easy. He took the king's place, both on the throne and in his bed. Finally he marched his hordes of half armored barbarians against his own people. He would now be king of both nations. But, one night while he was asleep in his tent, an enemy javelin found its way into his heart. That is the story of a Nephite Iago.

The following bit of narrative is religious in intent, but it may serve to show the kind of thing we often meet with in the Book of Mormon. Enos, a grandson of Lehi, is speaking:

I will tell you of the wrestle which I had before God, before I received a remission of my sins.

Behold, I went to hunt beasts in the forests; and the words which I had often heard my father speak concerning eternal life, and the joy of the saints, sunk deep into my heart.

And my soul hungered; and I kneeled down before my Maker, and I cried unto him in mighty prayer and supplication for mine own soul; yea, and when the night came I did still raise my voice high that it reached the heavens. And there came a voice unto me, saying:

"Enos, thy sins are forgiven thee, and thou shalt be blessed."

And I, Enos, knew that God could not lie; wherefore my guilt was swept away.

And I said: "Lord, how is it done?"

And he said unto me: "Because of thy faith in Christ, whom thou hast never before heard nor seen. And many years pass away before he shall manifest himself in the flesh. Wherefore, go thy way, thy faith hath made thee whole."

Now, it came to pass that when I had heard these words, I began to feel a desire for the welfare of my brethren, the Nephites; wherefore I did pour out my whole soul unto God for them. And while I was thus struggling in the spirit, the voice of the Lord came into my mind again, saying:

"I will visit thy brethren according to their diligence in keeping my commandments."

And after I, Enos, had heard these words, my faith began to be unshaken in the Lord; and I prayed unto him with many long strugglings for my brethren, the Lamanites. And it came to pass that after I had prayed and labored with all diligence, the Lord said unto me:

"I will grant unto thee according to thy desires, because of thy faith. If the Lamanites shall not be destroyed, I will preserve a record of thy people, to be brought forth at some future day, that they might be brought to salvation."

And now it came to pass that I, Enos, went about among the people of Nephi, prophesying of things to come, and testifying of the things I had heard and seen.

If Joseph Smith planned to organize a church, as appears to have been his intention, the publication of the Book of Mormon as the initial step in his plan was a master stroke. He could not have used better psychology.

For one thing, he thus was enabled to capitalize the interest already existing in the origin of the American natives. Every one knew that, when Columbus came to the New World, he found a people here. Where did they come from? Of what race were they? How did they get here? Were they indigenous to the country? Was their present condition the peak of an ascent or the bottom of a decline? The new volume answered these questions.

And then, for another thing, the Book of Mormon was something to look at, to hold in the hand, to feel with the fingers. It was not an abstract idea hard to get your mind around, but a tangible thing. It could be bought and read. Two dollars and fifty cents would put it on your bookshelf, to be taken down any time and looked into.

But the Book of Mormon did more than appeal to the sense of sight and touch. It found a ready response in the religious mind. Especially did it appeal to the Christian. Did you believe in the miracles of the Bible? And would you have miracles to-day? Very well, here was a miracle at your door. The sun shone again. An ancient American, after having died and been raised from the dead, had appeared in vision to a young man in Western New York and made known the whereabouts of some gold plates, from which the book in your hand was translated "by the power of God." Here, surely, were selling points to satisfy the most exacting salesman.

The new author might have made money out of his venture. Like Mrs. Eddy after him, he could have made continual changes in his work (and from a literary point of view it stood in sore need of them), and then have required every disciple to buy a copy of each new edition as it came from the press-for soon the book was in the class of "best sellers." This would have insured a steady stream of revenue, even if thin, into his private treasury.

But the Prophet seems to have had a strong aversion to making money out of his book, in spite of the belief of his father-in-law that he published it for purposes of speculation. After Martin Harris was paid off—Martin appears to have owned and retained possession of the whole edition meanwhile—the price of the work fell. Today the Book of Mormon—of which more than thirty-five thousand copies were disposed of last year alone (1932)—is sold at actual cost.

We do not read that Joseph Smith, himself, went out with the book. Whether this was from natural delicacy or from lack of confidence in his sales ability, is left to conjecture. Yet he was in great need of money just then, and the commissions would have yielded him a little income. But his disciples had no such scruples. They went everywhere trying to sell or give away copies of the new publication.

Perhaps the first of these religious book agents was the Prophet's brother, Samuel Harrison. Samuel's experiences are interesting as showing what happened.

Samuel himself had been converted through the book, before its appearance in print. Joseph had read him a few passages from the manuscript, and these had greatly impressed him. He was then only nineteen. But he did not yield his judgment till after he had "wrestled with the Lord." When the book was published, Samuel put several copies of it into a knapsack and walked in the direction of a town named Livonia, in an adjacent county. The first day he covered twenty-five miles. Probably he wished to go as far as possible from his own town. On the way he tried to interest people in the volume, but with only indifferent success.

In the late afternoon he reached a tavern, where he intended to put up for the night, should he sell a copy to the hotel man. Not only did that gentleman refuse to buy one, but, on learning that it was connected with Joe Smith, of whom he had heard, he ordered the agent out of the house. Thereupon Samuel, in true biblical fashion, went out to a stream on the edge of town and washed his feet against the recalcitrant landlord in testimony. Two weeks later, when he passed that way again, he saw a sign "Small Pox" tacked up on the door. The man had died of the disease. God had taken a summary vengeance on him.

Five miles farther on lived a widow. Smith called on her. She was too poor to buy a book, but she gave him a good meal, in return for which he presented her with a copy of the history with his compliments.

In Livonia the next day he knocked at the door of a preacher's home. This was some thirteen miles from where the widow lived and more than forty from Palmyra. The Reverend John P. Greene invited him in. Mr. Greene did not care to purchase a book himself, but, since he was just starting out on his regular circuit, he would be glad to take with him a subscription paper and set down the names of all those who wished to buy. Samuel accepted the offer, left a copy of the volume for inspection, and promised to call in two weeks for it.

At the end of the fortnight the minister, who was not at home to receive the salesman, had had no luck with the subscription paper, but Mrs. Greene, who conveyed the message to Samuel, had read the book and liked it so much that she requested him to pray with her over it—which he did. As he was about to leave, the "Spirit whispered for him not to take the book away." So he left it. That his impression was a good one is shown by the sequel—Mr. Greene himself read it and later with his wife became a Mormon. This same copy also was the means of bringing Brigham Young into the Mormon church.

Samuel Smith's experience was typical. Many copies of the new book, for one reason or another, were given away. But they appear to have been wisely placed.

It was a borrowed copy that converted Parley P. Pratt, who was to become one of the twelve apostles of the faith. It had been left at a home by Samuel Smith or some one else on the same errand. Pratt, a Campbellite preacher, was on his way from Ohio to his old home in New York State. After reading the book, he was baptized and ordained an elder; and, having thus the authority to preach and baptize, he went off in search of his brother Orson, whom he converted.

The same thing happened to Willard Richards. Richards was a practicing physician in Richmond, Massachusetts. The book he read was borrowed. It had been left by Brigham Young at the home of Richard's cousin, in Southborough. In answer to his inquiry concerning the volume, he was informed that "a boy named Joe Smith, somewhere out west, had found a gold bible." He took up the book and began to read it. Before he had gone a full page (he had not begun at the beginning), he remarked earnestly, "either God or the Devil wrote this book." When he had read it through, he must have decided God was its author, for he became a Mormon. He read the book twice in ten days. That, however, was five years after the young Smith went to Livonia with his knapsack full of books.

Even before the Book of Mormon was published and while it was still on the press, it proved an effective missionary for the cause. There was, for instance, the case of Thomas B. Marsh. Marsh lived in Boston, where he was in business. In the summer of 1829 he went on a visit to New York. At Lyonstown he heard of the strange book. His curiosity was at once aroused. Thereupon he went straight to Palmyra, obtained at the printer's, through Martin Harris, the first form-proof of the history, and had a long conversation with Oliver Cowdery and others. When he got home, he read those sheets to his wife. Early in the following year the two moved to Fayette and joined the church there.

Not only in its beginnings, but throughout the first century of its existence, Mormonism was to find in the Book of Mormon its greatest missionary tract.

Women, to whom it particularly appealed, sometimes hid copies of the work in the trunks of their spiritually unregenerate husbands, when they contemplated a journey or a voyage, and these same husbands often returned home converts to the new religion.

A certain artist in early Utah—George Ottinger—was told when he was a youth in Pennsylvania and an art student interested in South American scene and characters, that the Book of Mormon would give him plenty of good subjects for his art. He bought a copy. But as he read, he forgot all about his art, in its theology. The upshot was that he went to Utah, embraced the faith, and became a professor in the university there.

Even to-day one often meets men and women whose interest in Mormonism was awakened by the Book of Mormon.

It is not at all difficult to believe that, in consequence of the situation created by the publication and distribution of the Book of Mormon, Joseph Smith of a sudden rose to a kind of colossus in Western New York, irrespective of whether his book was accepted at its face value. For, if he were divinely inspired to produce the work, he was more than a superman, and if he were not, he was a superdevil to get by with so prodigious a deception.

To those who "rejected" the Book of Mormon the very name of Joseph Smith was enough, for some strange reason, to throw them into fits of rage. That innkeeper was content to call Samuel Smith "a damned liar," when the youth began to talk about his brother's connection with the volume. But others were not satisfied with mere words. Howe spent money to publish a book against the Prophet. Seventy-three "respectable citizens," as Howe assures us, signed affidavits against his character. Alexander Campbell, a learned preacher, carried on in an unwonted manner in the pulpit and with the pen in an effort to stay the Prophet's inroads into the Church of the Disciples in Ohio and elsewhere. And certain men in Colesville, a few miles from Palmyra, resorted to violence and the law.

And then, on the part of those who accepted the new bible, there was a great eagerness to set eyes on the man who was spoken of as a prophet.

The Pratt brothers, as soon as they were converted, hurried to where he was. So, too, did Brigham Young. Thomas B. Marsh and Willard Richards hastened from the Bay State, Sidney Rigdon and Edward Partridge from Ohio, John Taylor from Canada, and others from other parts of this country and the Dominions.

As time went on and the number of disciples increased, "elders" went everywhere—all talking about the new prophet. Orson Pratt, a youth of nineteen, walked four thousand miles through half a dozen states, preaching the Book of Mormon. He converted a hundred persons. Others did the same-Parley Pratt, Brigham Young, Sidney Rigdon, Oliver Cowdery, and many more. And everywhere they proclaimed a new religious day brought on by a new prophet. It was not long therefore till most of the towns in the United States had heard the strange tidings.

Friends and foes alike made out to spread his fame. It was as if there were a huge campaign to advertise his arrival, a general conspiracy to make him known the country over. In pulpits, particularly, Joseph Smith was attacked and defended. At first the press was silent, but as soon as it appeared that the people were interested, newspapers took up the matter. Columns were devoted to the "false prophet." So, in the end, everything came back to the author of the book and the man who made such extravagant claims.

What effect all this had on the Prophet himself is not specifically known. He has told us nothing. But Joseph Smith was not lacking in the human weakness of liking to be talked about by his friends. No one has ever accused him of having had an inferiority complex.

As early as 1823, when he was not yet eighteen, he confided to his family and a few friends that his fame would go round the earth. In 1838 he set down in his Autobiography just that as a prophecy. His exact words are: "In consequence of the work I was destined to do, my name will be had for good and evil among all nations, kindreds, and tongues; it will be both good and evil spoken of among all people." And this was before his name had gone outside the United States—except for one or two towns in Canada, and a few places in England.

There is no doubt that, during these first years around Palmyra, he felt that his destiny was in the way of being realized.
