John Henry Evans, Joseph Smith, an American Prophet ( 1946)

CHAPTER IV

New Recruits

The man who willeth to do well, we should extol his virtues, and speak not of his faults behind his back.—JOSEPH SMITH.

Meanwhile, a new church was in process of making. The organization was created in a log house—one like the Smiths' in Manchester, with an attic—which belonged to Peter Whitmer, a farmer in the little settlement of Fayette, Seneca county, New York.

That a youth of twenty-four, with no education or theological training whatever, should imagine that he could bring into existence an organization that could compete with the long-established and powerful churches of the Catholic and Protestant bodies, not to speak of altogether displacing them, if you gave it time enough was a piece of audacity quite out of the general run of things. Yet, that is exactly what Joseph Smith apparently had in mind as the destiny of the church he formed on April 6, 1830. That organization, for good or ill, has continued now, as a matter of fact, for more than a hundred years, with steadily increasing membership.

Before he was fifteen the Prophet informed his family that he would some day organize a church. He said the same thing to a Methodist minister, who, of course, ridiculed the idea. Only, Joseph Smith did not express it precisely that way. God was to organize the church through him. For the true church was not among the Christian denominations then prevailing—neither Protestant nor Catholic. Not only his family and the preacher, but the neighbors generally, knew of his intentions in this matter. No wonder he acquired the reputation of being imaginative.

For ten years he had cherished this ambitious project. In 1823, when he was approaching his eighteenth year, he was surprised and disappointed that God had not moved him before now to set up the church. But he had had no divine leadings to do so. And then had come his work on the book. This had taken him the better part of seven years, from the time the idea came to him. In 1830, after the history was out of the way, he materialized his thought concerning the new church.

One would think, from the youth's reputation, that his mind would on an occasion like this run to display and ostentation. But it did not. Experience had taught him how little the popular will might be trusted. Time and again it had endeavored to thwart him in his main purpose. In this situation his imagination was not allowed to run away with his judgment.

And so the ceremony inaugurating the new institution was simplicity itself.

Six men were gathered under the low ceiling of the Whitmer home. There were three Smiths, two Whitmers, and Oliver Cowdery, a school teacher. They were all young men. Hyrum Smith, brother of the Prophet, was the oldest, and had just turned thirty; David Whitmer, son of Peter Whitmer, in whose home the meeting was being held, was twenty-five; Joseph Smith had had his twenty-fourth birthday the December previous; Oliver Cowdery was twenty-three; Samuel Smith, he of the knapsack filled with copies of the new book, had recently turned twenty-one; and Peter Whitmer, Jr., was not yet twenty. The average age of the six was twenty-four. They were all farmers, except Cowdery, who had taught the district school in Palmyra for one year. There were a few others in the room, but they were mere lookers-on. Among these were the elder Whitmers, Joseph's parents, and perhaps Martin Harris. It was a Tuesday.

The first thing done, after the invocation, was to find out whether the men were "satisfied," as the Prophet puts it, that he and Oliver should proceed with the organization at this time. They were. It was then ascertained that they were also willing that these two should be the first and the second elder, respectively, in the proposed church. The Prophet then ordained Cowdery an elder, and Cowdery in turn ordained his companion to the same priesthood.

After that, wafers were procured from Mrs. Whitmer's breadbox and wine from somewhere else, and these the two elders proceeded to consecrate and distribute. The six men, having already been baptized, were confirmed members of the new society. This brief ceremony included the words, "Receive ye the Holy Ghost."

Of this meeting and its proceedings the Prophet says, "The Holy Ghost was poured out upon us to a very great degree—some prophesied, whilst we all praised the Lord, and rejoiced exceedingly."

Thus was ushered into existence the "Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints."

Two innuendos lurked in the long title of this new organization. It was not to be the church of Joseph Smith. Luther had a church named for him; so had John Wesley—as if these organizations were theirs, and not Christ's or God's. Nor was the new society to be named on account of some peculiarity in it. There was the Baptist church, so called because its communicants believed in adult baptism by immersion; and there was the Episcopal church, so named because it had bishops instead of elders merely. It should not be thus with the new church. It should bear the name of its real Founder! That was good psychology.

And then there was that word "saint." People had gotten into the habit of believing that whoever aspired to the title of saint ought to have a special degree of holiness. Such was not the case at all. The members of the primitive church were called saints, and there was no reason to believe that they were any better than people to-day, who strove to live a godly life. Besides, the men and women canonized by the Catholic church had no monopoly on sainthood. As a matter of fact, many of them were not accounted particularly saintly by their contemporaries.

Therefore, the new church should be like the primitive church. It should have saints. Whoever became a member of the organization should be looked upon as a saint—unless and until he showed undoubted signs to the contrary. The presumption, at least, should be in his favor. The word should be a prophecy of what might be made of him by the creative forces operating within the order. And this, too, was a bit of good psychology.

From the time of his marriage till now in the autumn of 1830 the Prophet's place of residence had been Harmony, the home of his wife's folk. That would include the years lying between 1825, when he went to Pennsylvania the first time, and the time of his removal to Fayette permanently. Only for brief periods had he been in New York State, living part of the time with his parents in Manchester and part of the time with the Whitmers. Now, however, he sold his farm in Harmony and went to a temporary residence with Peter Whitmer.

Two reasons led to this move. All the members of the church were in Fayette, and it looked as if, for the immediate future at least, prospects would be better here than elsewhere. In Fayette were his parents, his brothers and sisters, and all the Whitmers. And these were organized into a church—the first one—with the Prophet himself as its presiding officer. In Colesville, not far away, were the Knights, who were investigating the faith. Moreover, opposition in Harmony had come to a head, it seems. Peep-stone rumors had spread there. The Prophet and companions, first Harris and then Cowdery, had acted mysteriously and would not take any one into their confidence. Father Hale, who had become reconciled somewhat to his son-in-law and stood up for him, now lost patience with him for his everlasting dictation from behind a curtain and because the young man's bread-box was being replenished by a man in Colesville.

At the time the church organization was effected, nine persons had been baptized, although only six of these had taken part in the ceremony. This was the number required by the laws of incorporation in the state. Right after the meeting, however, several others were initiated. Among the number were the Prophet's father and mother.

On the following Sunday the first religious services in the new movement were held. The sermon was preached by Cowdery. After the meeting six persons were baptized. These included a young itinerant doctor, Hiram Page, son-in-law of Peter Whitmer. The following week another group of seven came into the organization. All these had been baptized by Oliver.

Thus converts multiplied. Besides the Smiths and the Whitmers we now have the Rockwells, the Jollys, the Thayres, the Poormans, the Baldwins, the Durfees, and, presently, the Knights. In less than two months there were thirty men and women in the new church, with baptisms taking place every week. By the first of the year Joseph Smith's following numbered between two and three hundred, more than half of whom were men.

This rapid growth of the movement very naturally aroused opposition. In the town of Colesville, where the Knights lived, the alarm appears to have been the greatest—perhaps because there were more inquirers there than anywhere else.

In June, the Prophet, with his wife, Cowdery, and two of the Whitmer boys, went to Colesville. It was their second visit. On their first visit they had converted several persons, and these were now to be baptized. To this end a creek nearby was dammed. The ordinance, which was to be by immersion, was to take place on a Sunday.

When the Prophet and his companions, with their converts dressed for the occasion, reached the place, they found that the dam had been tom out and that a crowd of men were waiting to witness their discomfiture. Nothing daunted, however, Joseph and others preached to the men on the necessity of baptism and the divine origin of the Book of Mormon.

The next morning the rite was administered, as the Prophet says, "before our enemies were aware of the proceedings." Thirteen were thus initiated—four Knights, three Stringhams, two Culvers, two Pecks, one of the Hales, and Emma Smith, wife of Joseph.

When the "enemies" learned what had happened, they "raged with anger," and determined that a meeting appointed for the confirmation of these thirteen should not take place. Accordingly, on that occasion, the Prophet was served with a writ by a constable from Chenango county. The plan, as Joseph afterwards learned from that officer, was to kidnap him. But the constable saved him from a possible coat of tar and feathers.

On the morrow the court convened in South Bainbridge. The Prophet slept in jail the night of his arrest, under guard. The charge preferred against him does not appear to have been very definite. Prosecution attempted to show that the prisoner had tried to use his priestly powers on credulous men, to get their property away from them—in particular, a horse and a yoke of oxen, which he had bought for his Harmony farm. But as those men were his friends, although not members of his society, little headway was made by the State in this direction. The prisoner was found not guilty.

His troubles, however, were by no means at an end. No sooner was the trial over and he on his way home than he was served with another writ, returnable this time in Broome county. Another night in jail; bread and water for his meals; harsh treatment from his custodian; ridicule the next day in court—such was the measure meted out to him. His case seems to have turned on whether he had exercised the power of casting out devils, as was rumored. The person on whom he had operated was Newel Knight, who appeared in court. Here is a sample of the examination of a witness:

Attorney: Did the prisoner cast the devil out of you?

Knight: No, sir.

Attorney: Why, have you not had the devil cast out of you?

Knight: Yes, sir.

Attorney: Had not Joe Smith some hand in it?

Knight: Joseph Smith was the instrument in God's hands on that occasion.

Attorney: Are you sure it was the devil?

Knight: Yes, sir.

Attorney: Pray, what did he look like?

Knight: It would be of no use for me to tell you what the devil looked like, because it was a spiritual sight, and according to your own admission you do not understand things of the Spint.

That is the sort of thing that was soberly carried on in the court room where the Prophet was tried. As before, the case ended with a verdict of not guilty.

Joseph Smith's comment on the two trials is caustic: "Thus were we persecuted on account of our religious faith—in a country the Constitution of which guarantees to every man the indefeasible right to worship God according to the dictates of his own conscience; and by men, too, who were professors of religion, and who were not backward to maintain the right of religious liberty for themselves, though they could thus wantonly deny it to us."

In both trials, the Prophet was defended by two lawyers, engaged and paid for by his friend Joseph Knight. They were James Davidson and John Reid, local attorneys, who farmed on the side. The latter, in May, 1844, while on a visit to Nauvoo, addressed a gathering of Mormons there. On that occasion he related the circumstances connected with the two trials of his now famous client.

The first trial, which continued from ten o'clock in the morning till midnight, was held before a justice, Joseph Chamberlain. Those responsible for the prosecution, we are told, "ransacked the town of Bainbridge and the county of Chenango for witnesses that would swear hard enough to convict the prisoner." It required but a few minutes for the court to arrive at a decision.

The second trial was held before three justices of the peace—to make sure, Reid says, that there would be no slip up in the case. "Twenty or thirty witnesses were examined before dark" on the first day. "Runners were sent out" to round up witnesses. Men were gathered from "the hills and valleys, from grog shops and ditches," and these looked "as if they had come from hell and been whipped by the soot-boy." Although these witnesses, under the grilling of the lawyers, "wrung and twisted in every shape," we are informed, "nothing whatever was proven against" the prisoner. It was two o'clock in the morning when the words, "Not guilty," were pronounced, and the Prophet was free again to go about his business. Meanwhile, great excitement prevailed throughout the two counties. The only purpose served was to advertise Joseph Smith and Mormonism beyond anything it could otherwise have hoped for.

Joseph Smith possessed natively two fundamental qualities of great leadership. First, he was a good judge of men. Always he picked out and placed men with an eye on their natural ability. Occasionally he misplaced his confidence, as in the case of John C. Bennett and the Law brothers, but, even then, it was his feelings, not his judgment of their ability, that were at fault. With unerring skill he could put his finger on men's strong points, and if they had any weakness, as most of them did, he could place his finger on that, too.

Oliver Cowdery, the two Pratts, Sidney Rigdon, Edward Partridge, Frederick G. Williams, Orson Hyde, and John Corrill in the earliest group, and Brigham Young, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, Heber C. Kimball, the two Spencers, and many others of lesser light in the second group were an asset to any cause. The Prophet never had confidence in the trustworthiness of men like John C. Bennett, although he sometimes used them to accomplish his ends.

[Joseph Smith: An American Prophet Left to right, top to bottom: Oliver Cowdery, Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, Sidney Rigdon, and Edward Partridge

Second, Joseph Smith had, somehow, the unusual ability to wind up men so that they would keep running as if on their own power. He knew how to inspire them with the greatness of a cause. Once he had charged their batteries, that was the end so far as he was concerned; after that each man charged his own, whenever it threatened to run down. It would be difficult to name any great leader in history who could do this more effectively than Joseph Smith.

"How do you manage to control so heterogeneous a people?" some one asked the Prophet in Nauvoo. And he answered simply, if with some show of egotism, "I teach them correct principles, and they govern themselves."

And this was literally true of his lieutenants in the new movement. These aides de camp, like Enos in the Prophet's book, no sooner caught the spirit of the work than they became aggressive in infecting others with the same fever.

Churches had now been established in Fayette, the home of the Whitmers and also of the Smiths, and in Colesville, where the Knights lived with a large circle of friends. The success, therefore, which the Prophet had met with thus far, in spite of opposition, served to whet his desire for larger fields. If disciples could be had in his own community, there was no reason to believe that they could not be got elsewhere. But the missionary work would have to be done by others, for obviously the Prophet could not be everywhere.

Fortunately three men of outstanding ability were available at this particular moment. They were Oliver Cowdery, Parley P. Pratt, and Orson Pratt. There were other men in the church at this time—for instance, David Whitmer, John Whitmer, Ziba Peterson, and Ezra Thayre—but they were not in the class of those three, and the Prophet was keenly aware of the fact.

Oliver Cowdery was of old American stock. A forebear of his, in 1304, owned and occupied Cowdary Castle in Midhurst, England. The first American of the line came here in 1630 and settled in Massachusetts.

Oliver was born in Vermont, in 1806. He was, therefore, a year younger than his chief. He became acquainted with the Smiths when he taught school in Palmyra. After the custom of "boarding round" at various homes, Cowdery had stayed for a time at the Smith home, some of the children being in his school. In the spring of 1829 he paid a visit to Joseph in Harmony, and remained to help him, as amanuensis, with the Book of Mormon, which he wrote at the Prophet's dictation.

The two parted company in 1838, when an attempt was made in Missouri, not by the Prophet but by some officials in inferior places, to tell Oliver what he should do with the land he owned in Jackson county. Thereupon, he went to Michigan, where he was elected to the office of district attorney—for he had studied law after leaving the school room. Ten years he remained out of the church and resumed to the fold in 1848, when his people were in sore straits on the Plains. This is the best possible voucher for his sincerity. He died in 1850.

"Constancy" and "steadfastness" are the two words the Prophet sets down in his Journal as the qualities that stood out in Cowdery. He might have added the spirit of independence. Joseph also says that Oliver had "two evils" in his nature, which he advises him to get rid of—what they are he does not mention—if he is to "escape the buffetings of the adversary."

Parley P. Pratt also was of old American stock. And this of course holds true for his brother, Orson. Six generations back from him a certain William Pratt immigrated to the New World, making his home in Connecticut. Parley, however, was born in New York State, in 1807.

How he came to embrace Mormonism has already been mentioned. Prior to this he was a preacher of the Reformed Baptist church. When he came upon the Book of Mormon, he was on his way East to continue his study of theology in New York. Already he had a keen interest in the American natives, which probably led him to read the Prophet's book on the Nephites.

Abounding in vital energy and, one gathers, enjoying his meals not a little, Parley possessed a vivid imagination, was addicted to the Popean couplet and florid prose, had a vocabulary equal to his fancy, wrote the first tract for the new faith, the Voice of Warning, which has been distributed by the millions, kept himself always on the frontiers of life and thought, and, in the end, was shot to death at fifty by an enraged husband, whose wife, after she had left him, had been baptized by a Mormon elder.

Orson Pratt was four years younger than his brother and six years younger than the Prophet. He represents the high tide of intellectualism in the Utah church during its first century. A philosopher and mathematician, he was also a surveyor, an inventor, and, most of all, a theologian.

When he went to England, after the Prophet's death, he was offered a thousand pounds to deliver a series of addresses before the Royal Society of London—an offer which he declined to accept because he could not spare the time from his preaching. In those days he set all England by the ears. At the University of Paris his book, Quadratic Equasions, a "new solution," was used as a textbook. He anticipated the principle of the wireless transmission of sound on which the radio is based. Also he invented a device for measuring the distance between the Missouri and Salt Lake City, and he laid out that town in '47. Professor Proctor, when he was in Utah in the eighties, said Pratt was one of the four greatest mathematicians in the world.

It was as a preacher and theologian, however, that Orson Pratt came to be known best. Here he was unexcelled by any Mormon of his generation, whether in depth of thought, the logic of his conclusions, or his pellucid expression. After the Prophet's death he went on a mission to England, where, with a handful of missionaries, he converted eighteen thousand, and crossed swords with the best scholars in the three kingdoms. In the late seventies he debated polygamy with the chaplain of the United States Senate—Dr. J. P. Newman—and won praise from the nation's press for his knowledge of Hebrew and for his logic. He was an apostle of the faith from the time he was nineteen till his death fifty-two years later.

Orson Pratt tried out his ability as a missionary in the country around Palmyra. What success he met with there we have no means of knowing. At any rate, he presently went on a four thousand mile jaunt through the states of New York, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, New Hampshire, Connecticut, and Vermont. As already stated, he baptized one hundred persons.

Cowdery and Parley Pratt, with two others, went to the western border of the United States, to see what might be done with the Indians there.

One wonders at the courage of these four men. Western Missouri, whither they were bound, was some fifteen hundred miles distant. Much of the way was covered with heavy timber; there were few roads, and these were mere wagon tracks, more or less rutted; and the country was but sparsely inhabited. Besides, the missionaries were to walk the entire distance, carrying knapsacks filled with clothing, bread and bacon, and copies of the Book of Mormon. None of them knew the route across the wild country. They knew only their destination and what they were to do when they reached it.

The journey arose out of the new book by the Prophet. Ever since its publication in the beginning of the year, the disciples had looked forward anxiously to the time when the American Indians, on learning of this history of their ancestors, would flock to the new standard. For was it not one of the objects of the volume to reclaim this wandering, restless people? There is no evidence, however, that Joseph Smith shared in the illusion that there would be an immediate, wholesale conversion of the "Lamanites." On the contrary, there is evidence that already he dlearned of a city in Missouri, which would form the center of his migrating disciples.

Mormonism, during the first century of its existence, resembled a snow-ball rolling down hill and gathering momentum as it went. The hundred-odd members in New York State became five thousand in Ohio, twelve or fifteen thousand in Western Missouri, twenty-five thousand in Illinois, and half a million in Utah and the Great West.

Always they hung together—partly, one may suppose, as Franklin advised the colonists, to avoid hanging separately; for the fires of persecution everywhere burned furiously. At any rate, they gathered. And the idea became distinctive of Mormonism. This great movement of a people was already in the mind of the twenty-five-year-old prophet at the time he sent Cowdery and Pratt to the western boundary line of the nation. Was he thinking also of his religion as a complete society instead of a mere church?

Those who adhered to Mormonism should be known as the "elect." But the elect should have a "gathering place," not be scattered about. The eagles were where the carcass was. Every missionary, going out from Fayette, should return "with sheaves on his back." The word "sheaves" was used by the Prophet in allusion to the ripeness of the wheat field and its readiness for the Mormon "sickle."

So Cowdery and his friends were to go to the western border, not to decide whether that was a good place for the "gathering," but rather to blaze the trail, to lead the way, there. Incidentally they were to preach as they went.

There was, therefore, a great to do when, one morning in October, the four started on their long journey, good clothing having been made for them by the women of the little society "out of raw material." Great things were in Time's womb.

Two months after the departure of the Cowdery-Pratt mission to the Indians a couple of strangers knocked at the Prophet's door in Fayette. They were Sidney Rigdon and Edward Partridge, from Mentor and Kirtland, Ohio, respectively. They had come to see the founder of the new movement of whom the elders had said so much.

Rigdon was then thirty-seven years old. Up to a few days before, when he had been converted by his friend Parley Pratt, he had been one of the ablest and most widely known ministers of the Church of the Disciples. Born and reared in Pennsylvania, he had worked successively on the farm, in a printing office, and in a tannery. But his nature and disposition had led him out of these vocations into the ministry. In Pittsburg he built up, in the Baptist organization, a large congregation out of almost nothing. But in spite of a rapidly growing popularity he suddenly resigned his pastorate and resumed to his trade of tanner. The reason he gave was that he could not reconcile his creed with the teachings of the Scriptures.

After that he fell in with Alexander Campbell and Walter Scott, founders of the Church of the Disciples, who followed the Bible rather literally. Rigdon joined them in what then appeared to him a creed in strict harmony with the teachings of Christ. At least, it was an improvement on that of the Baptist articles of faith. He proclaimed his newly found religion with such power as to win for him the title "the Great Orator of the Mahoning Association." As in the case of George Whitefield, crowds followed him wherever he went and hung upon his words.

In 1826 he accepted a call to the pastorate of the church in Mentor, a town a little way out from Kirtland, Ohio. Here his congregation presented him with a small farm, on which they had erected a dwelling and outhouses suitable to his family and position. Rigdon did not, however, confine his ministry to the Mentor congregation, but continued to preach in other parts of the state with his usual success. His sister was a wife of Adamson Bentley, one of the prominent clergymen of the Campbellite faith.

In 1833, after a close association with Rigdon, the Prophet wrote with his own hand in a private diary that Sidney had in his nature too much "selfishness" and "independence," and that he was "not capable of pure and steadfast love." Notwithstanding these defects of character, however, Joseph believed him "a very great and good man, a man of great power with words, and able to gain the friendship of his hearers very quickly." And he adds, "Brother Sidney is a man whom I love."

This was a bit of keen insight in a young man not yet twenty-nine. It agrees with what we know of Rigdon from other sources of information.

The "fall" of Sidney Rigdon created a profound sensation in the Reserve. It was a great shock to the Church of the Disciples and a notable asset to Mormonism, for the co-worker with the two Campbells and Scott became a powerful influence in the new movement.

Edward Partridge was a different sort of man. Of the same age as Rigdon, he was born in Massachusetts, of Scotch parents. A hatter by trade, he went to Ohio in early youth and set up business at Kirtland. Like Sidney and most of the early Mormons he had become "disgusted" with the sectarian teachings, which he thought "unscriptural." Rigdon had baptized him and his wife into the Campbellite faith. Not yet converted to Mormonism, Partridge had been sent to Fayette to investigate, with the understanding that he would report on his return.

In character he was mild and unaggressive, with an abundance of Scotch caution. The Prophet thought him "one of the Lord's great men" and, like Nathanael of old, "without guile." And one of the group that sent him to see the Prophet said of him, "He would not lie for his right arm." He is one of the few men in the early Mormon church concerning whom anti-mormon animus has nothing bad to say.

Such were the men who had come all the way from Kirtland in December to talk with the Mormon leader.

Lucy Smith says that, before he called on the Prophet, Partridge went round among the old neighbors of the Smiths and took a look at the farm they used to own. She states that these old neighbors had told him the family had had an "unimpeachable" reputation till they "deceived us relative to the Book of Mormon."

At any rate, Partridge had come to get an impression of the new teacher. He was willing to trust to his Scotch power of discernment to guide him in the making up of his mind. That he was satisfied with what he found, is evident from the fact that he was baptized by the Prophet himself in Seneca River the day after his arrival—December weather though it was.

As for Rigdon, he, too, appeared to be satisfied with his errand. He busied himself, the next few weeks (for the visitors did not go home till February), with talking about his new-found faith with people in Fayette and the neighborhood.

One of these was a man by the name of William W. Phelps, an intelligent investigator in Canandaigua. In answer to an inquiry from E. D. Howe, the author of the very first anti-mormon book, Phelps wrote: "I have had ten hours' discourse with a man from your state [Ohio], named Sidney Rigdon, a convert to the Book of Mormon's doctrines, and he declared it was true, and he knew it by the power of the Holy Ghost. He appeared to be a man of talents, and sincere in his profession."

Some time in this month of December the Prophet made up his mind to abandon New York State. Whether or not the two visitors had anything to do with this decision, is not known. He continued, however, to send out missionaries to various parts of the state, with a last "warning"; he visited the church in Colesville, and then issued instructions for the faithful to "assemble together at the Ohio against the time that Oliver Cowdery shall return."
