John Henry Evans, Joseph Smith, an American Prophet ( 1946)

CHAPTER V

Opening Vistas

How goodly are thy tents, O Jacob, and thy tabernacles, O Israel! As the valleys are they spread forth, as gardens by the rivers side, as the trees of lign aloes which the Lord hath planted, and as cedar trees beside the waters.—BALAAM.

On a crisp afternoon in February, 1831, a sleigh with four persons in it—three men and a woman—drew up in front of a store in Kirtland, Ohio. The occupants of the sleigh looked up at the sign on the store front, which read "Gilbert & Whitney—General Merchandise."

One of the men, young and good-looking, got out of the rear seat, where the woman was, sprang lightly up the steps on to the platform, and went into the store. Going up to a round-faced man behind the counter, he said in a low, soft voice, at the same time extending his hand:

"Newel K. Whitney, thou art the man!"

The store-keeper stared blankly at the stranger, but took the proffered hand and held it mechanically. "I'm sorry, sir," he said, "but I don't seem to be able to place you, although you appear to know me."

"I'm Joseph the Prophet," was the answer. "You've prayed me here. Now what do you want of me?"

Thereupon the two fell to shaking hands in real earnest, talking and smiling agreeably.

Leaving the place in charge of a clerk, Whitney went out with the Prophet to greet the other members of the party. These were Emma Smith, Rigdon, and Partridge. Joseph and his wife were taken to the Whitney residence just across the street, where they remained for several weeks.

Such was the entrance of Joseph Smith into the town from which, after having lived there for seven years almost continuously, he was to flee for his very life.

It did not take long for the Prophet to gather the details of what had happened in Kirtland and vicinity as the result of the missionaries' visit. Everywhere along the way through Ohio, wherever they had stopped to preach, the Mormon elders, headed by Cowdery, had created a sensation.

At Ashtabula, John Corrill says, they stopped only a single night, but that was long enough to send him off after them to Kirtland in a state of perturbation. And John Corrill, as students of Mormonism know, was one of the coolest-headed men that ever joined the church. He wanted to see what Sidney Rigdon thought of the new faith. But Rigdon had already embraced Mormonism, with almost his entire congregation.

Corrill then sought to engage the preacher in argument. Sidney, however, replied, "I am now beyond the land of contention, and have got into the land of peace."

After that Corrill talked with Cowdery. Presently he went home more disturbed than when he came, and without any prospects for the peace that had come to his friend Rigdon. Everybody was excited over the new prophet that had arisen in Western New York and the strange book he had written. So John Corrill returned to Kirtland. The following month he cast his lot with the Mormons.

The missionaries had left for the border. Rigdon and Partridge had gone to see the founder of the new faith. Excitement prevailed everywhere. Men were coming to Kirtland from outlying towns for information concerning the religion of Joseph Smith.

A man in Orange—a Campbellite preacher, John Murdock—had embraced Mormonism and, leaving his family to the care of a friend, had gone out to Warrensville and baptized between seventy and eighty. Another—Simeon Carter, whose home was in Amherst, sixty miles west of Kirtland—came to inquire about the book which the missionaries had left at his house. He was baptized, ordained an elder, and, returning home, converted sixty of his neighbors.

Two "branches" of the church had been established in the neighborhood—one in Kirtland and one in Mentor. Sidney Rigdon was the presiding elder in the latter; John Whitmer, whom the Prophet had sent there for the purpose, presided over the former. All told, there were one hundred and twenty members in Ohio when the missionaries left there; this number was soon increased to about two hundred and fifty. In the spring of 1831 all the Mormons in New York State migrated there.

In this new group of disciples were some very able men, who were to become useful in the cause of Mormonism. Of Sidney Rigdon and Edward Partridge we have already spoken. Besides these, there were Frederick G. Williams, John Corrill, Newel K. Whitney, Orson Hyde, Luke S. and Lyman E. Johnson, brothers, John F. Boynton, Lyman Wight, John Murdock, Isaac Morley, and Caleb Baldwin.

Williams was a practicing physician in Kirtland and owned a farm on the outskirts of the town. His conversion to Mormonism must have been whole-hearted, for, when the Cowdery-Pratt delegation continued its trek westward, Dr. Williams accompanied them. He was then forty-three, and eighteen years older than the Prophet.

Williams was given a paragraph in the Autobiography. "Brother Frederick G. Williams," it reads, "is one of those men in whom I place the greatest confidence and trust, for I have found him ever full of love and brotherly kindness. He is not a man of many words, but is ever winning, because of his constant mind. He is perfectly honest and upright, but wants confidence in himself."

After his return from Missouri Williams was made third in rank in the new church.

John Corrill was one of those exceptional men. Like Bishop Partridge, he won the esteem of every one with whom he came in contact. Even anti-mormon writers respect him.

Born in 1794, in Massachusetts, he was, therefore, the Prophet's senior by eleven years. At the time of his conversion to Mormonism, as we have seen, he lived in Ashtabula. He was deeply religious, though of the kind that attempts to reach a decision through the head rather than the heart. Also, he preferred to do his own thinking always. The thing that appealed to him in the new faith, he says, was the scriptural character of its teachings.

Corrill never occupied a major position in the church. The highest place he reached was counselor to Bishop Partridge. This was not because the Prophet did not have the highest regard for him. Proof of this is found in the fact that no document passed from the Mormons in Missouri to the local or state authorities but had on it the signature of John Corrill. Like every one else, Joseph Smith respected Corrill for his calm, reasoned judgment and the uniformly favorable impression he made on others, whether in the church or out of it. There is a strong probability, however, that the Prophet detected in him the same defect that he did in some other men—lack of whole-hearted surrender of the will which that religious leader demanded of his lieutenants.

Newel K. Whitney was a business man of marked ability. So was his partner, Sidney Gilbert. These men supplied a quality which the Prophet lacked. Ten years older than the Mormon leader, Whitney had come to Ohio from Vermont, after acting as a sutler in the War of 1812, fighting a land battle under General Macomb, and trading with the Indians in Michigan. In his business ventures he was unusually successful, no matter in what specific department. On coming to the Buckeye State he joined A. S. Gilbert in Painsville first, and then in Kirtland.

When the Cowdery-Pratt mission passed through Kirtland, Newel's wife embraced the new faith as soon as she heard it, but the husband, with characteristic caution, delayed his baptism till he could investigate. Before this they had been members of the Disciples' church. Whitney became bishop in Kirtland after the departure of Partridge for Missouri. The bishopric is a "temporal" office with the Mormons.

Orson Hyde was born in the same year as the Prophet. One of nine children, his mother died when he was seven and left him in the care of a friend of the family. At eighteen he walked the six hundred miles from Derby, Connecticut, to Kirtland, Ohio, where he found employment as a clerk with the firm of Gilbert & Whitney. A religious revival in the neighborhood drove him into Methodism; but a little later he became a Campbellite, through the preaching of Sidney Rigdon. Deciding upon the ministry as a vocation, Hyde studied theology under Rigdon, and, in 1830, he received orders. In his capacity of pastor of a congregation in Lorain, Ohio, he was asked to preach against the golden bible. It was while gathering material for a series of addresses against that volume that he became a convert to Mormonism.

Sagacious, tactful, diplomatic, as well as intelligent and courageous, Hyde made a good impression on the Mormon leader. Perhaps no other man in the church was employed by the Prophet on so many special missions. With Hyrum Smith he traveled among the Campbellites in Ohio; with Gould he went to Missouri to negotiate peace between the expelled Saints and their neighbors; with Parley P. Pratt he went to the Missouri capital to arrange with the governor for the protection of the exiles after their return to their homes; with Orson Pratt he went to Washington to induce the Congress to approve and authorize the movement of the Mormons to the Rocky Mountains; and alone he made the journey to Palestine, to dedicate that land for the return of the Jews. He had been an apostle since 1835.

Four others in this group of converts—Wight, Boynton, and the two Johnsons—were to become members of the second presiding body in the Mormon church, the "quorum" of twelve apostles.

Of Wight, we shall speak elsewhere. Boynton was for twenty years to lecture throughout the United States on natural history, and, in the early seventies, was to be appointed by the Federal government to make a survey of some geological lands in California. Luke and Lyman Johnson were men of less ability than any we have mentioned, but they served the church efficiently as missionaries.

In this group should be placed another man, who was not an Ohioan but a New Yorker, who embraced Mormonism at about the same time. This is William W. Phelps. Phelps was thirteen years older than the Prophet. He was born in New Jersey, but moved to New York State in his early manhood. While the Book of Mormon was on the press, he lived in Canandaigua, not far from Palmyra. In 1830 he would be thirty-eight. He had been active politically in the State—so much so, and partly on account of a partisan paper he published, that his friends tried to get him nominated for lieutenant-governor of New York. That he had a good education, which included the Greek and Latin classics, is evident from his numerous writings.++++

This versatile man had been extremely cautious about joining so humble a faith as Mormonism. In a letter to E. D. Howe, in 1831, he tells of his inquiries concerning the character of Joseph Smith, Martin Harris, and others, and of a ten hours' conversation he had had with Sidney Rigdon. He had not then, it seems, made up his mind to cast his lot with the Mormons. As soon as he had been baptized he moved to Ohio. From that time on, with interludes of coolness, he was active in the church till his death. For a long period he served as secretary to the Prophet, where his ability showed to good advantage.

[Joseph Smith: An American Prophet Left to right, top to bottom: Hyrum Smith, John Taylor, Brigham Young, Orson Hyde, Wilford Woodruff

William W. Phelps was a man of undoubted talents. He wrote both prose and verse; the former slightly bombastic. His hymns, of which there are many in the L. D. S. Psalmody, are still sung by the Mormons in their religious assemblies. Of a rather emotional temperament, he was inclined to be unstable in his religious devotion—which, no doubt, interfered with his rise in Mormonism.

It was during the first months of 1831, when Mormonism was less than a year old, that the missionary system, which has spread its network over thirty nations, had its beginnings. And these beginnings were by no means so humble as might be expected from the circumstances.

To be sure, missionaries had gone out from Fayette—Samuel Smith, Orson Pratt, Oliver Cowdery, Parley P. Pratt, the Whitmer brothers, and a very few other men. But their short trips, mostly voluntary, were more or less informal by comparison. Now, however, the thing was to be done on a scale commensurate with the importance that was attached to the new movement. Forty men went out at once from Kirtland, and the system was organized around some very definite principles.

To meet the situation created by the need for disseminating the doctrines and message of Mormonism, Joseph Smith instituted a different order of ministry from any with which he was acquainted in the other churches, Catholic or Protestant.

In these religious societies the congregation was presided over by a minister or priest, with perhaps a deacon as helper. What missionary work was done by groups of churches, was carried on by men selected for the purpose,—and always they went to the heathen.

The Prophet would do differently. First, there should be no men specially set apart for the ministry. That savored too much of class distinction. Besides, it lent itself too easily to priestcraft. And this word "priestcraft" had a peculiar odium on the lips of Joseph Smith. That was what was wrong with the religious world—too much priestcraft. As a matter of fact, it was the clergy that later gave the Prophet cause to use the word "persecution" with truth. Already, in New York State, he had had a taste of their penchant for making trouble. Often they were "black rods in the hands of Satan." At all events, Mormonism should have no trained, paid ministry to do its work.

Second, every worthy man should have a degree of priesthood. He should be his own priest. Not only so, but he might, if he chose, be a priest to others as well. Mormonism should be a great democracy, where all men, so far as their standing before God was concerned, should be equal. In adopting this idea, it should be remarked, he but harked back to the New Testament. For in the primitive form of Christianity priesthood was widely distributed among its male membership. Not only did Jesus have twelve apostles, but he had a larger body of men called "seventy." So there was a precedent, if one was needed, for the adoption of this idea by the Prophet.

Third, the message of Mormonism should be carried principally to Christian peoples. They were not really Christian—thanks to the priests, who were only false priests. The ordinances had been changed and the covenant with God broken. They were blind leaders of the blind and, unless something were done about it, both would inevitably fall into the ditch. There were plenty of honest in heart among the membership, but the clergy—here was another source of conflict.

And so, in those days, almost as soon as a man was baptized he was ordained an elder, so that he might be more closely in touch with the divine will, and that he might be in a position to preach the new gospel to his neighbor and administer the ordinances to him.

On the day the church was organized, as we have seen, some ordinations to the priesthood were effected—Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery for certain, and, probably, the other four men. Later the Pratts, Rigdon, Partridge, Corrill, Murdock, and others received the office of elder.

To this day in Mormondom every male member of the church, from twelve years old and up, is supposed to hold one of the six degrees of priesthood—deacon, teacher, priest, elder, seventy, and high priest. There are at least seventy-five thousand young men under twenty-one years of age who are either deacons, teachers, or priests in the Mormon church.

This was certainly a radical departure on the part of Joseph Smith from anything to be found in Christendom. It raised the question as to whether the young man from Palmyra could make it work. Also it proved another source of friction between him and religious teachers everywhere—especially that part which assumed that Christians were not Christians, and therefore needed preaching to.

Two other suggestions from the New Testament were incorporated into the missionary system established by the Mormon leader. The missionaries were to travel two by two. This answered more than one purpose. It gave the elders congenial companionship; it supplied two witnesses, for had not the Master said, "In the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established"? And then each would be a check on the other in case of temptation to leave the Way. Furthermore, the elders were to travel "without purse and scrip." That is, they were supposed to depend upon those among whom they visited for whatever they required by way of food and a bed. "Elder Lyman E. Johnson and myself," says Orson Pratt, who was one of this group of missionaries, "started on our eastern mission, traveling, as usual, on foot, without purse or scrip, and carrying our change of clothing in our hands." Truly the laborer was worthy of his hire.

As stated, about forty men were called on these missions, and the manner in which some of them were appointed to the work is interesting.

"Brother Amasa," said the Prophet to Amasa Lyman one day, "the Lord requires your labors in the vineyard."

Lyman was a recent convert, under eighteen years old. His grandfather, with whom he was staying in New Hampshire, had objected to his being baptized. He was baptized anyway. Then he left home. All his belongings in a pack, he walked seven hundred miles to Hiram, Ohio, where he found a job with Father Johnson, whose son, with Orson Pratt, had converted him. Amasa had heard but five sermons in all on Mormonism. But, as he says himself, "being strong in the conviction of our honesty," he promptly answered, "I will go."

Rigdon and Luke Johnson preached in New Portage, Ohio, and baptized between fifty and sixty; Orson Pratt and Lyman Johnson journeyed through six states and converted more than ninety; Boynton and the former Reverend Greene brought between seventy and eighty into the fold; Orson Hyde and his companion "raised up" several branches; two men named Strong and Miller, in three months, baptized ninety-three; another pair, in one month, initiated some eighteen; Corrill and Wight journeyed through Michigan and Indiana, baptizing everywhere. In one place they converted a hundred.

And so it went. There are no statistics to show just how many were converted by these indefatigable men on this drive for members, but the figure would probably run up into the thousands.

One of the surprising things about this first effort on a large scale to spread Mormonism is that neither the Prophet nor the missionaries gave any consideration to the question of their knowledge of the new gospel or to the length of time they had been in the church. No consideration, either, seems to have been given to the financial ability of the elders who were thus making a sacrifice. The only question thought of what this: How firm was their "conviction of honesty"?

When the missionaries, at the Prophet's request, arrived home, they found the atmosphere highly charged with anticipation concerning the spot in Missouri to which Oliver Cowdery had led his little band of spiritual pioneers. A great Mormon city was to be built there, to which the faithful were to come from over all the world.

To that astounding conception we must now give our attention.

In March, 1831, Parley P. Pratt returned to Kirtland from the border. He had been delegated by his companions to confer with the leader respecting the situation there. An almost incredible tale of hardship and privation he had to tell the Prophet.

The five missionaries had made the journey in the dead of winter. Most of the thousand miles they had covered on foot. For whole days together they had trudged on, knapsack on their backs, against a bleak northwester that threatened to take the very skin off their faces, sometimes wading knee-deep in the snow, often having to eat raw bacon and frozen bread because there was no wood with which to make a fire. All the way the cold was intense. They reached their destination some time in January.

On arriving at Independence, Cowdery, Pratt, and Williams crossed the boundary line to preach to the natives, while Whitmer and Peterson remained behind to earn some money at tailoring. The trio were in the act of making clear to the Delawares the message of the Book, when their plans were nipped in the bud by "Universalists, Atheists, Deists, Presbyterians, Methodists, Baptists, and all the devils from the infernal pit." That is the way Oliver put it in a letter to the Prophet in May. According to Pratt, the Indian agent also had something to do with it. The elders had labored among the whites, too, and with more success, for they had baptized a few.

It was not, however, the visit of Pratt to Joseph Smith that attracted general attention to Western Missouri. Interest had already been aroused in that region. For, as already noted in a preceding chapter, the Prophet, at least six months before this, had conceived the idea of "gathering" his people into one place, and the plan of taking them near the boundary line was but a corollary of this idea. Obviously, if the Mormons were to collect at all, it would have to be at a point where there was room enough to grow. Western Missouri, by all accounts, answered to this description.

The Mormon leader never seems to have wavered in the belief that his following would increase till, in his own phrase, they "would become a mighty people." This is why, when trouble began to brew for him in Illinois, he turned his eyes to the Rockies. The region appealed to him because it was then unoccupied, and his disciples could grow there without let or hindrance. Just now, though, Western Missouri looked very attractive to him as a gathering place. The great Mormon city should rise there.

Later the Prophet made a plan for the city. It was to be called "Zion." Zion meant "the pure in heart." It should be four-square, like the New Jerusalem mentioned in the Apocalypse. The streets should be wide and cross one another at right angles. Each home was to have enough ground for lawns in front and a garden in the rear, with shade and fruit trees of every variety. In the midst of the city there should stand a magnificent temple. No barns or outhouses should mar the beauty or the health of the place, but these should be on the outskirts, where the farms and the animals were. "When this square is thus laid off and supplied," says the Prophet enthusiastically, "lay off another in the same way, and so fill up the world in these last days; and let every man live in the city."

As soon as the plans for the proposed home became generally known, there was great enthusiasm, not to say excitement, among the Saints. Not a Mormon but looked forward to the time when he should go to Missouri.

Mrs. Knight, wife of Joseph Knight, and son Newel furnish us with an instance of this eagerness to possess the land to the west. In the summer of the year 1831 the Colesville "branch," in which were the Knights, went in a body to "Zion." Mrs. Knight took sick on the way. She was so desperately ill that Newel "went on shore and bought lumber to make her coffin in case she should die before we arrived at our place of destination—so fast did she fail." It was only anticipation that kept her alive. "She would not consent to stop traveling; her greatest desire was to set her feet upon the Land of Zion, and to have her body interred in that land." Soon after reaching "Zion," she died.

Toward the middle of June the Prophet, with Sidney Rigdon, Martin Harris, Edward Partridge, and Mr. and Mrs. Sidney Gilbert, left Kirtland for Missouri. A large number of other men also went there. But these were missionaries—for the Mormon leader could not miss an opportunity to spread the faith. They traveled two by two, and preached on the way. Moreover no two pairs took the same route to Zion.

Everywhere the missionaries spread enthusiasm. At one place Samuel Smith and his companion spoke at a meeting which had been arranged for by a young man named McLellin. Presently McLellin quit his job in a store there and hurried after them, being baptized before he got to Missouri. There were many conversions here and there along the routes taken by the elders.

Joseph and his fellow travelers went by wagon partly, and partly by canal boat to Cincinnati. Here he met Walter Scott, co-originator with Alexander Campbell of the Church of the Disciples. Scott did not impress the Prophet very favorably; he "manifested one of the bitterest spirits I ever witnessed." Evidently they had had an engaging argument. A steamer took the party to St. Louis. From there most of them walked to Independence, their destination. The journey occupied a month.

Joseph Smith liked the looks of the country around Independence, but not of the people he found there.

It was a huge rolling prairie, covered with flowers "so gorgeous as to exceed description." Timber was scarce, except along the water courses, where there were twelve varieties by actual count. The names went down in the description, written by Rigdon. The richness of the soil, varying from three to ten feet in depth; the kinds of tame animals that would thrive there, and the wild ones to be found on the bottoms; the climate, "mild and delightful nearly three quarters of the year"—all these items, and many others, found a place in the Journal.

Also he notes the favorable location of the region. It was situated, the Prophet observes, "at about equal distances from the Atlantic and Pacific oceans, as well as from the Alleghany and Rocky mountains." When "the curse is taken from the land," he adds, "it bids fair to become one of the most blessed places on the globe." It was emphatically "the center place." The only drawbacks were the lack of mills, schools, the refinements of society, and the "polish of science."

As for the people, they were a contrast to those in the East. "How natural it was," he goes on, "to observe the degradation, leanness of intellect, ferocity, and jealousy of a people who were nearly a century behind the times, and to feel for those who roamed about without the benefit of civilization, refinement, or religion." At a meeting held there the first Sunday after the arrival of the newcomers, there were present "specimens of all the families of the earth." Ham was there in the Negro, Shem in the Indian (for the red man in the Prophet's racial chart is a descendant of Abraham), and Japheth in the white man.

On this sacred soil there was a joyous meeting of all who had come from Kirtland—Oliver Cowdery, Dr. Williams, whom the Prophet was meeting for the first time, Whitmer, and Peterson; the men who had come here from different routes, some with converts they had baptized on the way; and, especially, the Colesville branch, which numbered about sixty persons in all and which contained the Knights, dear friends of the Prophet. "The meeting of our brethren," he says with feeling, "was a glorious one, moistened with many tears." Joseph was always strong on the social side of his nature.

The choice of Independence, Missouri, thus centrally located with respect not only to what was to be the larger United States, but also to that vast and unbelievably fertile area, the Mississippi valley, reveals in Joseph Smith a practical genius and an imaginative reach that fairly takes one's breath, especially when we couple with it his plans for a city of such proportions, orderliness, and beauty in the prospect.

The more one studies the whole situation—the blueprints, the location, the opportunities—the more one is amazed at the audacity and the foresight of this Palmyra youth. It is the most brilliant conception of its kind in the entire history of the New World. Nor is there any doubt that the Prophet, just past his twenty-fifth milestone, knew exactly what he was about when he outlined this grand scheme for a new commonwealth. No wonder that enthusiasm ran high among his disciples everywhere. And it speaks well for his gifts that he could thus energize them.

If, now, fortune would only be kind to him!

With the arrival of the company of men and women from Kirtland, the time had come for a settlement to be formally effected.

The place chosen was twelve miles west of Independence. A log for the first house was put into position by twelve men, representing the tribes of Israel. Sidney Rigdon offered the dedicatory prayer. But before doing so, he exacted a pledge from all those who were intending to stay.

"Do you receive this land," he asked, "for the land of your inheritance, with thankful hearts, from the Lord?"

"We do," came a chorus of voices.

"Do you pledge yourselves to keep the law of God on this land, which you have never kept on your own lands?"

"We do."

"Do you pledge yourselves to see that others of your brethren who shall come hither do keep the laws of God?"

"We do."

Then Rigdon prayed, after which he solemnly said: "I now pronounce this land consecrated and dedicated unto the Lord, for a possession and inheritance for the Saints, and for all the faithful servants of the Lord to the remotest ages of time—in the name of Jesus Christ, having authority from him. Amen."

This was on the second of August. Next day the Prophet, with a number of others, selected at Independence a site for a temple, and dedicated it. And on the following day a conference of the church was held in Kaw township, where the first house was going up.

Before leaving for Kirtland, which he did on the ninth, the Prophet explained the conditions under which the new settlement was to be built, so that there should be no misunderstanding in the matter.

First: This whole region was to be known as the "Land of Zion." The Saints should, therefore, strive to be "pure in heart," as an ancient people were. It was just as much a land of promise to them as Palestine was to the Israelites. Here the faithful should gather and have their "inheritance."

Second: To this end the land should be bought in the usual way, and it should be bought as fast as money could be obtained for the purpose. If possible, all the lands westward to the border should be purchased.

Third: The land agent was to be Sidney Gilbert. For it had been decided that all purchases of land should be through a trusted agent. Whoever had money with which to buy land should make the purchase through him.

Fourth: The "law of consecration"—a sort of communistic system, to be explained in another part of this work—was to prevail here, under the direction of Bishop Partridge. All the Saints were required to become members of this "United Order." For the present, Bishop Partridge was to have spiritual charge also.

Fifth: Every one would, of course, be expected to obey the laws of the county, the state, and the nation. Membership in the "United Order" did not release any one from obedience to civil law. No one who kept the law of God would find himself at cross purposes with the law of the land.

Sixth: In order that the Saints should be properly represented to outsiders and at the same time have a means of information about their faith, there was contemplated a periodical, which would be in the charge of William W. Phelps and Oliver Cowdery.

"Inasmuch as you keep these things in mind and do them," the Prophet concluded, "not with much laughter, for this is sin, but with cheerful hearts and countenances, the fatness of the earth will be yours—the beasts of the field, the fowls of the air, and all things that come from the earth, which shall bring forth abundantly for your sakes."

Thereupon the Prophet, with a number of others, returned to Kirtland. Most of those who were present at the dedication, however, remained in Missouri to make their permanent homes.

The cause of Mormonism received a fresh impulse by what had taken place in Missouri that August day.

It is impossible for us now, at this distance, to imagine the feelings of elation which the Mormons of this period experienced at the thoughts of "Zion." Those humble ceremonies of dedication and that little band of settlers were associated in their minds with the purposes of the Almighty in the "last days."

For the simple truth is that they were under the same illusion respecting the immediacy of the Second Coming of Christ as were the Christians of Saint Paul's time, and there is no evidence to suppose that Joseph Smith did not, to some extent, share these illusions. At all events, the Prophet, on more than one occasion, had referred to the city and the temple in Jackson county so glowingly as to awaken in his disciples everywhere a feeling that that important event was on the eve of arriving.

On the occasion of his first visit to Missouri, the Prophet asked these questions of himself: "When will the wilderness blossom as the rose? When will Zion be built up in her glory, and where will thy temple stand, unto which all nations shall come in the last days?"

And the answers were at hand. Not wholly, however, for he never appears to have satisfied himself as to the time. But other phases of his query became clear enough.

The city of Zion was to be called the New Jerusalem, to distinguish it from the Palestinian town, and from it should go "the law of the Lord." That was one thing. And then the temple to be erected there was the one to which, as foretold by Malachi, the risen Jesus should come "suddenly." As a matter of fact, the time when it was erected was approximated by the Prophet. For it should be built before all those who were alive then should "pass away." And on its completion "a cloud should rest upon it, even the glory of the Lord." But Joseph added, prophetically if vaguely, that "these things" would not happen till "after much tribulation."

Nevertheless these Mormons were not fanatical—neither leaders nor followers. They were devout believers in the prophecies of the Hebrew scriptures. In truth, most of them had been attracted to Mormonism in the first place because it answered better than any of the prevailing faiths to the teachings of the Bible. And one of these teachings pertained to the Second Coming of Christ.

As soon as the Prophet returned to Kirtland from the western borders, a commercial enterprise was launched to take care of business interests at both points—Kirtland and Zion. It went under the name of Gilbert & Whitney, successful merchants in the Ohio town. The junior member of the firm remained in Kirtland; the senior member opened a store in Independence. Fifteen thousand dollars was borrowed to float the concern. And thereby hangs a tale.

In Zion was established a monthly periodical, called The Evening and Morning Star. It was in charge of the only men in the organization with any literary ability and experience—Phelps and Cowdery. It was characteristic of the Prophet to select in the public interest the best talent available for the job, and to ignore a matter of mere friendship. He certainly did so in this case. If Oliver, who had been with him from the very beginning, felt slighted in being given second place on the Star, he did not show any resentment.

This was the first periodical in the new society. The Prophet believed whole-heartedly in representing himself, in order to avoid, if possible, being misrepresented by others. The subscription price was one dollar a year.

During these Ohio-Missouri days new members were added constantly to the organization in almost all the states of the Union and in parts of Canada. Among them appeared some men of ability—Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, Lorenzo Snow, and others—who were set immediately to preach. And this increased force of preachers and workers brought more men and women into the church. Thus it went.

At the close of 1831 there were churches in twenty states, and in sections of Canada contiguous to the United States. Probably ten of these divisions were added by the missionary drive of that year. During his missionary tour, which covered a wide area, Sylvester Smith says he visited many churches whose membership went to a hundred. Ohio, very naturally, was covered in detail. Here there were churches in a large number of towns, which were within easy reach of Kirtland.

After the establishment of Zion in Missouri there was a strong tendency on the part of the Mormon people to migrate to the "center stake." By the middle of the year 1833, according to a letter from Rigdon to the officials in Zion, there were left in Kirtland only one hundred and fifty members of the church. All the others had gone to Missouri. By that time, too, between twelve and fifteen hundred Mormons had "gathered" in Jackson county, Missouri.

The Prophet had instructed his followers everywhere not to go to Zion in "haste" as if in "flight," but to take counsel of their means as well as their faith. It was one thing, however, to arouse enthusiasm in the movement Zionward and quite another to control that enthusiasm once it had been awakened.

"The church got crazy to go up to Zion, as it was then called," says John Corrill in his Brief History."The rich were afraid to send up their money to purchase lands, and the poor crowded up in numbers, without having any places provided for them, contrary to the advice of the Bishop and others."

Corrill was himself in Missouri at this time, acting as counselor to Bishop Partridge.

It is interesting to note the genesis of organizations in the Mormon church, which is credited with being one of the most efficient in the world. It shows what a number of the Prophet's critics have observed in him—a talent for meeting every emergency as it came up with promptness and effectiveness.

Some of Joseph Smith's critics speak of him as inferior to Brigham Young in executive ability. If executive ability means the ability to handle men, then the Mormon Prophet was a past master at that. Few men of whom we have any record had this quality in a higher degree. The truth is that Joseph Smith created the organization used by Brigham Young in the westward trek of the Mormons and in the settlement of Utah.

But Joseph Smith's method differed from Brigham Young's. Brigham Young had a driving power that Joseph Smith lacked; he used the big stick with frequency; his people often feared him. The Prophet depended more on persuasion, on love, on the power of ideas. After planting an idea in the mind of another, he trusted to the nature of the idea and of the mind for results. Sometimes he showed an exasperating indifference as to what came of his ideas, once they had been fully grasped by others. In Nauvoo, as we have already suggested, he was asked how he governed so large and heterogeneous a people. His answer was characteristic: "I teach them correct principles, and they govern themselves."

At first, as we have seen, the government of the church reposed in two "elders"—Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery. Presently there appeared another office, but not another officer—the office of clerk, filled by Cowdery. This simple organization sufficed till there arose a need for other offices, and these came without any to do.

Early in 1831 the Colesville "branch" moved in a body to Ohio. For some reason—perhaps sentimental—it was deemed advisable to keep them together, to settle them temporarily in one place. The place chosen was Thompson, a little way out from Kirtland, and Edward Partridge, a successful business man, was asked to make the necessary arrangements. The Prophet made no secret about his lack of ability in handling finances. His "gift" lay elsewhere. It was not necessary that a man should be able to do everything.

Thus originated the office of "bishop," an office concerned primarily with business affairs. Bishop Partridge was required to give up his occupation on assuming this position. Presumably he was compensated, but, if so, we do not know how much nor where the funds came from. Later he was transferred to the Missouri church, and Newel K. Whitney became bishop in Kirtland. To-day the men who occupy this position are termed "presiding bishops."

Up to June, 1831, the office of "elder" was the highest in the organization. But in this month the office of "high priest" was created by the Prophet. In a conference of the church this higher degree of priesthood was conferred upon about twenty men. Since this group required a presiding officer, very naturally Joseph Smith became its president. About a year afterwards the Prophet chose Sidney Rigdon and Dr. Williams as his counselors. It was not long till this presiding body of three became the "first presidency of the church."

In this way Mormonism came to have at its head, not a pope or an archbishop, but a presidency of three. The number "three" has a special significance to the Mormons.

As it became more and more evident that special attention would have to be given to the dissemination of Mormon ideas, two more bodies of men were brought into existence.

The first of these was a "quorum" of twelve apostles. The members of this first group were: Thomas B. Marsh, David W. Patten, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Hyde, William E. McLellin, Parley P. Pratt, Luke S. Johnson, William Smith, Orson Pratt, John F. Boynton, and Lyman E. Johnson.

This was an arrangement of the men according to their age, the oldest coming first. Marsh was then thirty-six and Lyman E. Johnson twenty-five. They were chosen by a special committee, consisting of Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris.

The second body was known as the "seventy." This name was derived from the number of men in the "quorum." It was presided over by seven presidents, one for each ten. These presidents were included in the organization and were of the "quorum." Later, as the church grew, other "quorums" were created, till now [1933] there are one hundred ninety. The seventy were directly under the jurisdiction of the apostles, as the apostles were directly amenable to the first presidency.

Both the apostles and the seventy were intended to oversee the missionary work. Not only were they to go on missions themselves, but they were to direct the labors of such outfielders as did not belong to either organization.

As one might have supposed, difficulties arose between members of the Society. One of these occurred in the branch known as Eugene. This was in 1834. The Prophet on this occasion authorized the calling of a conference of the branch members for the purpose of trying the case. It may be that this and other similar instances suggested the advisability of having a separate court to handle difficulties between members of the church.

At all events, such a court was created. It was called a "high council." The high council consisted of twelve men. The only cases coming before it were those involving religious issues. "No man," said the Prophet at the first session, "is capable of judging a matter in council unless his own heart is pure." And it would be a good thing, he thought, if no one whispered or left the room during a trial, but gave his whole mind to the case in question.

Mount Pleasant, Canada, in those days, was the home of the Nickerson brothers—Freeman and Moses. Originally from the United States, they had gone to Ontario, had engaged in business there, and had become wealthy.

In the home of Freeman Nickerson was a young woman of twenty-one. Her name was Lydia Bailey. She had been born a Goldthwait, in Sutton, Massachusetts, where her parents still lived. Her husband, a drunkard and gambler, had abandoned her with a baby, which had died. In consequence of her griefs the young mother had grown melancholy and was now a guest of the Nickersons, friends of the family, trying to recover her health and spirits.

One afternoon, toward the middle of October, a wagon pulled up in front of the Nickerson home. Four men got out and went into the house. One of them was Freeman's father, also named Freeman; another was his brother, Levi; the remaining two the family had never seen before. Lydia made mental note of the strangers, and later on told the story set down here.

One of them was a middle-aged man of medium height, stout, rather good-looking, but not at all distinguished in his bearing. His companion was considerably younger—somewhat under thirty, she guessed. Tall and handsome, he had light brown hair and sharp, penetrating blue eyes. His countenance was striking, his bearing inclined to stateliness, and his manners gentle and dignified. Yet he was exceedingly pleasant.

"Freeman," said Father Nickerson on entering the house, "I want you to meet my friends, Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon."

The son stiffened at once, and his face took on a look of anger—which did not escape attention.

"Father," he said, with inexcusable rudeness, "of course, I shall welcome these men for your sake. But I had just about as soon you had brought into my home a nest of scorpions and turned them loose upon us."

"Freeman! These men are—"

"I know all about Joe Smith," Freeman broke in; "the papers are full of him and his works, and I want none of either—if you ask me. But, as I said, I'll welcome them for your sake."

The truth is that Father Nickerson had brought the Prophet and Elder Rigdon here to see what they could do toward converting his sons. He himself had joined the Mormons in Dayton, New York, although his home was now in Perrysburg, in the same state. One needs no great imagination to understand the general embarrassment caused by Freeman's sudden outburst of feeling. However, in a little while, the effects of the strange scene wore off, and things went on as tolerably as could be expected under the circumstances.

Two days passed. Relations between the host and the guests gradually became cordial. Freeman showed the visitors around the country. Also he took them through the new store, which the firm was building and into which they expected to move before long. Meantime, no allusion had been made by any one to the religion of the newcomers, although there had been conversation on almost every other topic.

On the evening of the second day Freeman invited the entire party, including the family of his brother Moses, upstairs into the living-room. As soon as the company were seated, he threw the family Bible on to the table in the center of the room, with the challenging remark:

"There! Now go to it!"

The truth is, Lydia says, Freeman, who prided himself on his knowledge of the Scriptures and his prowess in debate, was fairly itching to match learning and wits with the Prophet, and had been boasting to his wife as to how he would handle Joe Smith.

The Prophet, in his usual low, soft voice, took up the challenge. But he did not "go to" the Bible, as Freeman had expected. Instead, he related his own dramatic experiences in religion. It was a long story, told with the utmost simplicity, but with great earnestness. Occasionally the host interrupted the narrative to question the correctness of the Prophet's interpretation of certain passages of scripture. But these interruptions presently ceased altogether, and Freeman listened with the rest.

This changed the atmosphere entirely. Thereafter only the best of feelings prevailed. Freeman apologized for his first rudeness. He also helped to get a congregation in the new building, where benches were improvised for the occasion; and both the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon preached to several hundred people. With the aid also of Freeman's influence meetings were held in several outlying towns, at which the two Mormons preached to large gatherings. Before the Prophet and his companion left the town, fourteen persons, including the two Nickersons, were baptized by Joseph.

Of this trip into Canada the Prophet kept a private journal. It is in his own handwriting. And, as is thoroughly characteristic, no mention is made of Freeman's discourtesy nor of the Prophet's own part in the conversion of these fourteen persons. It is characteristic also that he mentions Rigdon's part as "spokesman" on this occasion.

Hereafter the preacher's relation to Joseph was to be that of "spokesman." The Prophet was to bear "testimony." This was an allusion to the practice in early Mormonism, where two elders traveled together preaching, for one of them to deliver the sermon and the other to testify. Thus Joseph Smith conceded to his companion a superior technical ability as a public speaker. Jared Carter, an early disciple, says that the Prophet "was not naturally a talented speaker."

In his private diary, which has never been published, several pages cover this trip to Canada. From it we get glimpses of Joseph Smith's inner life.

"Oh, may God grant," he says on the first page, "that I may be directed in all my thoughts. Oh, bless thy servant." Just before he crosses the border, he sets this down: "The Lord is with us, but have much anxiety about my family." So he prays—after which his anxiety ceases. He has had assurance that they are well. On his return home he makes this remark: "Found my family all well, according to the promise of the Lord, for which blessing I feel to thank Him."

[Joseph Smith: An American Prophet Facsimile of Joseph Smith's Diary, 1832-34 (Note the improvement in penmanship and the mechanics of style.)

After one of the meetings in Nickerson's unoccupied store he says, "The Lord gave his Spirit in a marvelous manner, for which I am thankful to the God of Abraham." Of another, he remarks: "Had a good meeting. The Spirit was given in great power to some, and the rest had great peace. May God carry on his work in this place till all shall know him. Amen." And he notes also, on still another occasion, that "the people were very tender" to him.

Egoist as the Mormon leader is always supposed to be, there is not in this whole Journal anything to lead one to think that he had himself in mind at all.

Intensive missionary enterprises carried on during these years netted the new movement another group of very able men—Brigham Young, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, Heber C. Kimball, Amasa M. Lyman, Willard Richards, Lorenzo Snow, and many others of only lesser ability. These were absorbed at once into the organization and put to work, through the selective judgment of the Prophet.

Brigham Young was a Vermonter, although at the time of his conversion to Mormonism he lived in New York State. By trade he was a joiner, painter, and glazier. At sixteen, with only eleven days of schooling, he had launched out for himself. It was thoroughly characteristic of this self-reliant man that he investigated the new religion for almost two years before he could make up his mind to break with Methodism and cast his lot with the Mormons.

When he and his bosom companion, Heber C. Kimball, who had also embraced Mormonism, came to Kirtland to see the Prophet, they found him, with some of his brothers, out in the woods, chopping down trees and hauling them to town. It is said that the Mormon leader told friends that night that some day Brigham would succeed to the leadership of the church.

Of medium height and build, with square-cut jaw and the driving energy of a locomotive, Young was a typical example of the efficient modern executive. On the defection of Marsh and the death of Patten, he was to become ranking apostle—which meant the first lieutenant of the faith. In that fateful exodus of the Mormons from Missouri he was to be the guiding genius, and later, after the demise of the Prophet, he was to lead his people to the Rocky mountains, where he was to get the reputation—deserved in both cases—of being the husband of nineteen wives and the greatest of the Western pioneers. America has produced no greater practical statesman than Brigham Young.

A very different type of man was John Taylor. One of the most intellectual of the early Mormons, he was dignified in his bearing, esthetic in his tastes, and abnormally sensitive on questions of his rights. On one occasion he said, "I would not be a slave to God Almighty!"

By birth Taylor was English. He was born in Milnethorpe, in 1808. His parents owned a small estate in Hale, Westmoreland county. Curious genealogists have traced his lineage back to a certain Lady Whitington. When he was in his twenty-first year, he followed his father to Canada, where he became a preacher in the Methodist church. But he must not have proved a very orthodox Methodist, for he says, himself, that he ignored the creed and taught whatever seemed to him to be right.

In Toronto, in 1836, when the apostle Parley Pratt discovered him, Taylor was deeply immersed, with a number of other intellectuals, in applying the measuring-rod of the Scriptures to the various churches in Christendom, including Methodism. All but one of this society embraced Mormonism when Taylor did.

On joining the church he moved his residence to Missouri, after paying one or two visits to the Prophet in Kirtland. One of the first things he did on one of these visits was to defend his leader against a savage attack by a powerful group of apostates in the temple.

Wilford Woodruff was as different from Brigham Young and John Taylor in his disposition and talents as they were from each other. When two obscure Mormon elders came to his brother's home in Richland, Oswego county, New York in 1833, where Wilford was staying, he was in the field harvesting. On unhitching his team that night, he was informed by his sister-in-law that the missionaries, of whom he had heard, were holding a meeting in the school house. Without waiting to eat or to change his clothes, he hurried to the place, which was packed with his neighbors.

The message of the elders was like a drink to a thirsty man. For, prior to this, his fundamentally religious nature had been groping, like the blind, for something to hold to spiritually, without finding it. He was baptized in mid-winter in a stream, from which the ice had to be removed with an axe before the ordinance could be performed.

Woodruff's "call" to the ministry was unique. He yearned to go on a mission, but was too modest to show it. So he prayed about the matter. Coming out of the woods in Missouri, where the incident happened, he was met by a local elder, who said to him: "Brother Wilford [those early Mormons always called one another by their first names], the Spirit of the Lord tells me that you should be ordained to go and preach the gospel."

Here is how he first met Joseph Smith: "I found him and his brother Hyrum shooting at a mark with a brace of pistols. When they stopped shooting, I was introduced to Brother Joseph, and he shook hands with me most heartily. He invited me to make his habitation my home while I tarried in Kirtland. This invitation I most heartily accepted, and was greatly edified and blessed during my stay with him. He asked me to help him tan a wolf-skin, which he said he wished to use on the seat of his wagon on the way to Missouri. I pulled off my coat, stretched the skin across the back of a chair, and soon had it tanned—although I had to smile at my first experience with the Prophet."

Woodruff was to become Mormonism's most effective missionary, with the single exception of Orson Pratt. There was something appealing in his simple ways—something that got next to one. In Herefordshire, England, he converted eighteen hundred persons in six months and baptized them in a pool which he had himself dug out and filled with water for the purpose.

He was Joseph Smith's Boswell—and Mormonism's, too, for that matter. Everything was written down in his daily journal, which is a treasure-house of early Mormonism. He lived to be ninety-one.

Perhaps the most colorful personality in early Mormonism was Heber C. Kimball. Standing six feet in height, with a chest that measured the same from back to front as from side to side, he was powerfully built. More than any one else in his day he resembled Walt Whitman in native originality. And he possessed a keen sense of humor—in which the men who projected Mormonism are, mistakenly, supposed to be woefully deficient. At family prayers once (this was in the Utah period, when polygamy was in vogue there) he suddenly burst into laughter; but, recovering himself, he apologized to God, explaining that it amused him to have to pray for some people.

Lacking the rugged strength of Brigham Young, the fineness of John Taylor, or the mental qualities of Orson Pratt, Heber C. Kimball was yet a leader in his own original way. His intelligence was of the practical sort, and he had a mother wit that saved him in many a situation. Intending to become a blacksmith, he worked at the trade for a time, but switched to that of potter at the suggestion of his older brother. He was a Mason of the third degree when he embraced Mormonism. With Brigham Young he had preached the new faith successfully before seeing the Prophet.

During this period there arose an institution that was peculiarly smithsonian. It was known as the "school of the prophets."

The genesis of this idea is interesting. One day in December, 1832, a few elders met at the home of the Prophet in Kirtland. Apparently they had come together for the purpose of being instructed by him in their missionary undertaking. On this occasion "Brother Joseph," as he was familiarly called, gave out an astonishing bit of theology, which is now embodied in a five-thousand-word document and which, for some reason, he termed "the Olive Leaf." It is undoubtedly one of the profoundest utterances he ever made, dealing, as it does, with the fundamental law by which "all things are governed," spiritual as well as physical, the hereafter no less than the now.

Without going into the details of this amazing document, which we shall do in another connection later on, we may just mention the different topics covered by it, to show its scope and depth. Here the Prophet deals with "the light which proceeds from the presence of God, to fill the immensity of space"; the varying "degrees of glory" in the next world, and the laws by which they may be enjoyed; the question as to whether other planets than ours are inhabited; the necessity of the elders informing themselves concerning "things both in heaven and in earth"; the "testimony" of natural forces to be given after the missionaries have been rejected by the "wicked"; and, finally, the need for a "school" where the elders might be "endowed" and taught prior to going on missions, with a suggestion that the proper place for these things to be done was in "the house of the Lord" to be erected for that purpose.

Four years passed before this dream of a school and a special building to house it was to be fully realized. "Great preparations are making," says the Autobiography under date of June 1, 1833, "to commence a house of the Lord." The idea had gathered interest among the Mormons everywhere, till, on this date, the building committee issued a circular letter, urging contributions toward the erection of the building. "Unless we fulfill this command to establish an house in which the leaders may gather into a school of the prophets," said this circular, "we may all despair of obtaining the great blessing promised to the faithful."

Toward the end of the following month the corner stones were placed. It was not till March, 1836, however, that the building, later known as the "temple," was dedicated with elaborate ceremonies. The astonishment of outsiders at the erection of such a costly building (seventy-five thousand dollars—a large sum for those days) by a people who were comparatively poor, is shown by this unfriendly comment in the New York Evening Star:

"That bold faced imposter, Joe Smith, of Gold Bible and Mormon memory, has caused his poor fanatic followers to erect on the shores of Lake Erie, near Painesville, Ohio, a stone building 58 by 78 feet, with dormer windows, denominating the same 'The Temple of the Lord.' We should think this work of iniquity extorted out of the pockets of his dupes, as it reflects its shadows over the blue lake, would make the waters crimson with shame at the prostitution of its beautiful banks to such unhallowed purposes."

Other papers had similar comments. If a building of this sort were put up to-day in any part of the country, involving proportionate cost and sacrifice, the booster spirit would at once broadcast the fact and capitalize it commercially.

This religious structure was more than a chapel or "meeting house." It was preeminently the "house of the Lord." It focused the eyes of every Mormon, much as the temple in Jerusalem did anciently and as Mecca still does to the Mohammedan. It stood for something sacred.

The main floor was so arranged that, with the lowering of curtains cross-sectioning the space, four meetings could be held at the same time, each with a pulpit and choir seats. Upstairs there were rooms in which the "prophets" were to be instructed and "endowed." Washing of feet was introduced among the leading men, to remind them that they were truly "servants."

As we shall have occasion to say more fully in another section of this work, the word "prophet" had a different meaning to the founder of Mormonism than to other Christian people. With him, whoever had the "testimony of Jesus," in the language of the ancient apostle, was a "prophet"; for "the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy." And so, according to this definition, not only Joseph himself, but others, too, might be prophets.

Thus the "prophets" were organized into a school in the temple, where they could learn both "the things pertaining to earth and things pertaining to heaven"—particularly the latter. Some of the text-books studied at this school, George A. Smith tells us, were: Whelpley's Compend of History, Kirkham's Grammar, Olney's Geography, and Jacob's Latin Grammar.

There was more formality connected with the school of the prophets than was customary with the Mormon leader. The president, or teacher, of the class was to be the first to appear. This would set an "example" to others. Also, whenever he spoke, it was not to be "with loud speech." Moreover he was to "offer himself in prayer upon his knees before God." When any one entered the room, he was to rise and, "with uplifted hands to heaven," salute his brother thus:

"Art thou a brother? I salute thee in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, in token of the everlasting covenant, in which covenant I receive thee to fellowship, in a determination that is fixed, immovable, and unchangeable, to be thy friend and brother through the grace of God in the bonds of love, to walk in all the commandments of God blameless, in thanksgiving for ever and ever. Amen."

If any one were found "unworthy of this salutation," he was to have no "place" in the school. Otherwise the house would be "polluted." The one entering was to salute the president, or teacher, in the same language or by saying "Amen."

The ceremony of "washing the feet" was to be performed by the presiding officer, after all present had partaken of the Lord's Supper. Only those who had served faithfully in warning the people to "repent" were worthy of having their feet washed.

Of course, the leading spirit here was the Prophet. It was to him that all the members of the school looked for guidance and instruction. The situation is puzzling to an outsider. For here were such men as Sidney Rigdon, Oliver Cowdery, the two Pratts, Brigham Young, John Taylor, Frederick G. Williams, and John Corrill, sitting at the feet of this unschooled country youth but thirty years old, as of a great teacher. Most of these men, too, were his seniors anywhere from four to eighteen years, and were better educated, scholastically. But, strangely enough, they regarded him as their superior in one respect. This was in a knowledge of God.

It is illuminating to contrast the ideas and method of Joseph Smith with those of Sidney Rigdon as brought out in their discussions of theological questions at this school.

A course of lectures was given here by Elder Rigdon. It was for a long time printed with the Prophet's utterances in one of the sacred books of the Mormons, under the title, "Lectures on Faith." A thoroughly commonplace treatise, it was as unlike anything Joseph Smith ever wrote as was Ralph Waldo Emerson's writing different from that of his contemporary, Margaret Fuller. "Uninspired" is the only word that properly describes the pamphlet. It begins with a definition taken from Buck's dictionary, proceeds to tell us how our knowledge of God is derived, and goes on to describe the qualities of God as shown in the Bible. The treatment is just what any one of a thousand theologians of Rigdon's time could produce. It is said that Oliver Cowdery also aided in the composition of this document.

The Prophet, on the contrary, in his pronouncements on the subject, altogether ignores what his predecessors and contemporaries say, including the seers of the Old and the New Testament. As a matter of fact, he never quoted from any biblical writer, except when it was necessary to place him and his hearers on the same common footing. Always he spoke as of one who drew on his own experience, tapping his own private springs of wisdom. His utterances lacked the literary qualities that Rigdon's had—grammatical and rhetorical accuracy, connectedness, logical arrangement, finish—but they were convincing. He struck out boldly; he was positive. This it was that impressed the school.

Occasionally some one of the members, as did William E. McLellin, attempted to belittle these utterances, saying they could be said by any one. McLellin, an apostle, large of frame and pleasing in his personality, but lacking intellect, said he could do as well. Joseph merely said, "Try it." McLellin did. The result brought him into ridicule with the school. He had the form, but not the substance.

On a certain Sunday in June, 1837, Heber C. Kimball sat in one of the pulpit seats in the Kirtland temple. By his side was the Mormon leader.

"Brother Heber," said Joseph before the service began, "the Spirit of the Lord whispers to me, 'Let my servant Heber C. Kimball go to England and open the door of salvation to that nation.' "

Kimball says the idea staggered him. And well it might. For, of all the apostles, he was perhaps the crudest in speech and manners. And the English people, as he himself says, were noted for their culture, learning, and piety. There was something incongruous in the thought.

There was another reason for his depression at the notion of a mission to England. It was his family. What would they do while he was away? He would have to leave them "almost destitute." During the last year or so his time had been divided between preaching and the pottery business in Kirtland.

But Heber C. Kimball was never a man to shirk what he regarded as his duty. And his duty in this case was clearly to do whatever the Prophet directed, and at any cost. So he said he would go. But he had one request to make: Could Brother Brigham go with him? That stalwart would be a good man to lean on. But there was other work for Brother Brigham to do nearer home. And so the matter rested for the time being.

Heber was not to go alone, however. That was not the Mormon way. Dr. Willard Richards asked permission to accompany the apostle, for the curious reason that he had promised to go with him, if ever he went on a foreign mission. Permission was granted. Dr. Richards was then thirty-three, and domestically unencumbered. And, presently, Apostle Orson Hyde and a recent convert from Canada, named Joseph Fielding, were called—the latter, most probably, because he had relatives there from whom he had not been separated long; one of them, a brother, was a minister and had a chapel at his disposal.

And a good thing it was for Heber that Dr. Richards went with him. For, on the way to New York, the pair ran out of funds, and it looked as if they would have to stay where they were for a while. But the physician remembered that some money was owing him in his old home town in Massachusetts, and so they went there to collect it. Having done so, the two continued on their way to the coast city, for embarkation.

Here the four missionaries were joined by three others from Upper Canada—Isaac Russell, John Snyder, and John Goodson.

Both Kimball and Richards, however, in spite of the collections in the Bay State, landed in Liverpool without so much as a farthing. This was either enormous faith or enormous foolishness—depending on how the adventure turned out.

As a matter of fact, the way had been prepared to some extent for this religious delegation from America. About a year before this, Parley P. Pratt had gone to Toronto alone for the purpose of seeing what could be done in that part of the Dominions to establish Mormonism there.

It will be remembered that, in 1833, Joseph Smith himself, with Sidney Rigdon, had preached in the neighborhood of Mount Pleasant, with some success. The truth is that the Canadian mission had been "opened" by that indefatigable rounder-up of disciples, Orson Pratt, even prior to the Prophet's trip up there. After these three missionary expeditions to Canada the harvesting of disciples was an easy matter. John E. Page alone converted six hundred in as many months, and Orson Hyde, about the same time, created a great stir there.

[Joseph Smith: An American Prophet Left to right, top to bottom: Heber C. Kimball, George A. Smith, Orson Spenser, Willard Richards, and Newel K. Whitney

But to return to Parley Pratt. This wary apostle made converts wholesale. He laid siege to that body of inquirers to which the Reverend John Taylor and other preachers, with their wives, belonged.

It so happened that, on the first visit of the missionary to the society, Taylor was class-leader. The subject under discussion was baptism. "Where," asked Taylor, "is our modern Philip? Where are our preachers to-day authorized of God to baptize with water for the remission of sin?"

That was the apostle's cue. He was here to answer this very question. Invited to speak, he begged off because the hour was late. Besides, it would take three sermons to tell what he had to say. They gave him the time. With admirable knowledge of the law of suspense, Pratt talked first on how Christianity had departed from the Way; second, on the biblical prophecies predicting the apostasy from the primitive faith and the New Movement; and in the final address he told how these prophecies had actually been fulfilled in the coming of Joseph Smith, the modern prophet.

What he said on this and other occasions proved effective for, with one exception, every member of the society embraced Mormonism. After that the new religion had easy going in Canada, though not without considerable opposition. It was at this time that Page and Hyde went to Pratt's aid, to help reap the harvest of converts.

Among the proselytes made at this time in the Dominions were Fielding, Russell, Goodson, and Snyder, who had only within recent years come to Canada from England. They and other converts had written to friends and relatives back home telling of the rise in the United States of a prophet.

There is no doubt that the Mormon leader knew about all this before he called Kimball and his companions to the land of Alfred, Cromwell, and John Wesley. The missionaries, however, for some reason, were instructed not to say anything about the "gathering."

On landing in England, the elders went to Preston, in Lancashire. Here lived the Reverend James Fielding, brother of one of the missionaries. He was pastor of Vauxhall chapel. At first he received the elders with open arms, but quickly drew in those arms when he found that he was losing his congregation.

Presently the mission broke up into pairs, each pair going a different way. Kimball, Hyde, and Fielding stayed in Preston, using the "Cockpit" for an auditorium, because it proved large enough to hold the crowds that came to hear the apostles from America. The Cockpit was a place where the sport lovers of Preston went to see a cock-fight.

The head of the mission was exceptionally successful. Undoubtedly Joseph Smith had made no mistake in selecting this big boned man with sloping shoulders, laughing eyes, and a heart full of sympathy to lead the group of elders. Somehow he ingratiated himself with young and old, men, women, and little children. When he left, eleven months later, the people he had baptized broke down and cried at the thought of parting.

For he had made converts by the hundreds. It was a common thing for him to go into the water three and four times a day to perform the rite of baptism to as many as twenty-five at one time. In one place he converted all the young people in a congregation to whom he preached, and many of the older ones. In eleven months he himself had baptized fifteen hundred; the others among them had performed the ordinance for five hundred.

Thus Mormonism secured a foothold in England, from which more than a hundred thousand men and women were to emigrate to the New Zion in America.

The story that Kimball and his companions had to tell the Prophet, on their return home in May, 1838, must have heartened him not a little for the conflict that lay ahead of him in Missouri.

Joseph Smith had now some achievements that any man, let alone a man of his meager opportunities and training, might look back upon with pride. By sheer force of character he had pushed his way through obstacles that would have crushed an ordinary man.

He had, first of all, created an organization that was an efficient machine for the purpose it was expected to serve. Almost at call it could be spread out, a perfect network, over the United States, Upper Canada, and England.

He had, secondly, a group of lieutenants around him eager to do his bidding at whatever cost to themselves—men of energy, of enthusiasm, of intelligence, of self-effacement, who, at the crook of his little finger, as Brigham Young would say, would drop their work, leave their families, and go to the ends of the earth to proclaim the merits of the new prophet and the gospel he had brought into existence.

He had, thirdly, a temple in Kirtland, built at incredible sacrifice and hazard, in which to train these lieutenants in the mysteries of the faith and which, at the same time, served as a beckoning hand to the faithful of two continents.

He had, fourthly, a place of rendezvous in the West, a Mecca, a New Jerusalem, with a nucleus for the largest single movement ever undertaken, and a printing establishment to turn out books, pamphlets, and periodicals that would make the faith known to all the world.

At this particular moment, therefore, the Mormon prophet might be said to have reached the summit of a high mountain very difficult of ascent. Not content with that, however, he began at once to scan the horizon for another, and still higher mountain peak. It was there in the dim distance, and his eyes rested upon it and lusted for its thin air.

As a matter of fact, he did actually make the top of that higher crest. But he had first to grope his way through the deep, wide valley that stretched out between, with its black shadows, its fierce, beating storms, and its wild hurricanes.
