John Henry Evans, Joseph Smith, an American Prophet ( 1946)

CHAPTER VI

The Valley of the Dark Shadows

And Elijah said to his servant, "Go up now, and look toward the sea." And he went up, and looked, and said, "There is nothing." And he said, "Go again seven times." And it came to pass at the seventh time, that he said, "Behold, there ariseth a little cloud out of the sea, like a man's hand." And he said, "Go up, say unto Ahab, 'Prepare thy chariot, and get thee down, that the rain stop thee not.'" And it came to pass in the mean while, that the heaven was black with clouds and wind, and there was a great rain.

An instance of brutality in Hiram, Ohio, to which the Mormon leader was subjected in 1831 was, if he had only known it, a forecast of the suffering and defeat that awaited him before long.

From February till September of that year the Prophet, with Emma, lived in Kirtland, presumably at the home of Newel K. Whitney. But in the year named he moved his family to Hiram, as also did Sidney Rigdon. Hiram is about twelve miles from Kirtland.

Joseph and Emma, with their twin babies, were living with the Johnsons there. The children had been adopted, to take the place of their own, which had died. They had been born to Mrs. Murdock, the wife of John Murdock, who had passed away in giving birth to them. The Rigdons were in another part of the town.

Here is Joseph's own story of what happened on this particular occasion:

On the 24th of March the twins, which had been sick of the measles for some time, caused us to be broken of our rest in taking care of them, especially my wife. In the evening I told her she had better retire to rest with one of the children, and I would watch with the sicker child. In the night she told me I had better lie down on the trundle-bed, and I did so.

Soon after I was awakened by her screaming murder, and I found myself going out of the door in the hands of about a dozen men. Some of them had their hands in my hair, and some had hold of my shirt, drawers, and limbs.

I made a desperate struggle, as I was forced out, to extricate myself, but only cleared one leg, with which I made a pass at one man, and he fell on the door steps. I was immediately overpowered again; and they swore by G—, they would kill me if I did not be still, which quieted me.

They then seized me by the throat, and held on till I lost my breath. After I came to, as they passed along with me, about thirty rods from the house, I saw Elder Rigdon stretched out on the ground, whither they had dragged him by the heels. I supposed he was dead.

I began to plead with them, saying, "You will have mercy and spare my life, I hope." To which they replied, "G— d— ye, call on yer God for help; we'll show no mercy."

The people began to show themselves in every direction. One coming from the orchard had a plank, and I expected they would kill me, and carry me off on the plank.

They had turned to the right, and went on about thirty rods further; about sixty rods from the house, and thirty from where I saw Elder Rigdon, into the meadow, where they stopped. One said, "Simonds, Simonds, pull up his drawers, he'll catch cold." Another said, "Ain't ye going to kill 'im?"

When a group of mobbers collected a little way off, one of them said, "Simonds, come here." "Simonds" charged those who had hold of me to keep me from touching the ground (as they had done all the time), lest I should get a spring upon them.

They held a council, and as I could occasionally overhear a word, I supposed it was to know whether or not it was best to kill me. They returned after a while, when I learned that they had concluded not to kill me, but to beat and scratch me well, to tear off my shirt and leave me naked.

One cried, "Simonds, Simonds, where's the tar bucket?" "I don't know," answered another, "where 'tis Eli's left it."

They ran back and fetched the bucket of tar, when one exclaimed with an oath, "Let's tar up his mouth." And they tried to force the tar-paddle into my mouth. I twisted my head around, so that they could not; and they cried out "G— d— ye, hold up yer head and let us give ye some tar."

They tried to force a vial into my mouth, it broke against my teeth.

All my clothes were torn off me, except my shirt collar. One man fell on me and scratched my body with his nails like a mad cat, and muttered out, "G— d— ye, that's the way the Holy Ghost falls on folks."

They then left me.

I attempted to rise, but fell again. I pulled the tar away from my lips, so that I could breathe more freely. After a while I began to recover, and raised myself up. Whereupon I saw two lights.

I made my way towards one of them, and found it to be Father Johnson's. When I came to the door, I was naked, and the tar made me look as if I were covered with blood; and when my wife saw me, she thought I was crushed to pieces, and fainted. During the affray the sisters of the neighborhood had collected at my room. I called for a blanket; they threw me one, and shut the door; I wrapped it around me, and went in.

My friends spent the night scraping and removing the tar, and washing and cleansing my body, so that by morning I was ready to be clothed.

The next day being the Sabbath, the people assembled for meeting at the usual hour for worship. Among them came also some of the mobbers.

With my flesh all scarified and defaced, I preached to the congregation as usual, and in the afternoon of the same day I baptized three individuals.

The next morning I went to see Elder Rigdon, and found him crazy, and his head highly inflamed; for they had dragged him by the heels, and those, too, so high from the ground that he could not raise his head from the rough, frozen surface, which lacerated it exceedingly.

During the mobbing one of the twins contracted a severe cold, continued to grow worse until Friday, and then died.

The mobbers were composed of various religious parties, but mostly Campbellites, Methodists, and Baptists, who continued to molest and menace Father Johnson's house for a long time.

Elder Rigdon removed to Kirtland with his family—then sick with the measles—the following Wednesday; and on account of the mob, he went to Chardon, the county seat of Geauga county. I started for Missouri, with Newel K. Whitney. After we left Hiram I wrote to my wife to go to Kirtland and tarry with Brother Whitney's family.

When Joseph Smith designated Western Missouri as the place of rendezvous for his people, he must have known that he was laying a mine that would some day explode. Certain things point in this direction.

He appears to have known, for one thing, the kind of people that had already settled Jackson county.

Attention has been called in another place to his references to the "degradation, leanness of intellect, ferocity, and jealousy" which he noticed in those whom he met there on his first visit. On his second visit to "Zion" he says: "We transacted considerable business for the salvation of the Saints, who were settling among a ferocious set of mobbers, like lambs among wolves."

These are strong words. But, since they were not written till after 1833, it is not improbable that they were colored by what took place there in that year.

While this picture may be overdrawn somewhat, there is reason to believe that the old citizens in the country were inferior as a class, not only to the Mormons who went there, but also to the general run of Western pioneers.

Jackson county was on the boundary line. It was therefore infested by "lawless resolutes," who had fled there from Eastern law and who, in an emergency, could outwit the arresting official by stepping across the border into foreign territory. And then, since men are always to be judged by their acts, the lower character of the older residents is evident in their treatment of the Mormons in 1833. It was in sharp contrast with that accorded the Saints in the adjacent county of Clay under almost exactly the same conditions. That there were some "skilled pens" among them is no extenuation of the circumstances.

And, for another thing, the Prophet must have known that the beliefs of his people would be obnoxious to these earlier settlers, as indeed they had been everywhere else.

One of the sources of possible conflict between the two elements, as he must have seen, was social. The Mormons were from the North; their neighbors from the South. They had different opinions, therefore, on the question of slavery—which was coming more and more to the front then.

Another cause of difference was the political situation. If the Mormons continued to flood the county as they had been doing—and this was highly probable because of their doctrine of "gathering"—it was only a matter of time till they would be in the majority, and therefore in possession of all the county offices.

A third source of possible trouble lay in religion. That this was a major source is evident from the large place it occupied in the minds of both parties. The newcomers, besides believing in the miraculous, had the idea that God had given them Jackson county, much as Jehovah had assigned Palestine to ancient Israel.

That the Prophet actually anticipated difficulties in "Zion" is shown in the precautions he took in the situation.

As we have seen, he put his people under a solemn covenant to observe the laws of God there. And he added this notable phrase: "Let no man break the laws of the land, for he that keepeth the laws of God hath no need to break the laws of the land."

Then, too, every once in a while, either he or some one inspired by him warned the Saints in Missouri of what would surely happen to them if they broke their pledge. "Seek to purify yourselves," he wrote in January, 1833, "lest the Lord's anger be kindled in fierceness." And he signed himself, "Your brother who trembles for Zion."

In the same month Hyrum Smith and Orson Hyde wrote: "We feel more like weeping than rejoicing over Zion, for we know that the judgments of God hang over her and will fall upon her unless she repent and purify herself before the Lord. We say unto Zion, this once, in the name of the Lord, Repent, repent! before you are made to feel the chastening hand of Him whose anger is kindled against you."

This was evidently an attempt to induce the Mormons in Jackson county to live on a higher plane than their neighbors, on account of their greater responsibility.

And then in September of the same year, after some difficulties had appeared between his people and the old settlers, Joseph said in a letter to one of the Saints there, "I am not at all astonished at what has happened to you, and I could tell the whys and where fores."

The Prophet had organized his movement toward Missouri on two assumptions. One was that his people there would be accorded their rights as American citizens. Practically all of them were not only American born, but also of old American stock. The second assumption was that they would observe the conditions under which they had settled there—that is, their vow.

Early in August Oliver Cowdery arrived unexpectedly in Kirtland. He bore evil tidings from Zion.

In the July previous a mass meeting of the older residents in Jackson county had been held in Independence. A document had been signed at this meeting, pledging those present "to rid our society, 'peacably if we can, forcibly if we must,' of all those styling themselves Mormons."

This document had made no charges of law-breaking against the Saints—except by innuendo. The Mormons, it complained, had "tampered with our slaves and endeavored to sow dissensions and raise seditions amongst them." Indeed, it admitted that "the arm of the civil law does not afford us a guarantee, or at least a sufficient one, against the evils which are now inflicted upon us." The Mormons were obnoxious, partly because they were "lazy, idle, vicious," and poor, and partly because they "pretended to hold personal communication and converse face to face with the Most High God."

Several hundred names were attached to the document—mostly of mere citizens, but also some of county officials.

Cowdery explained that an article in the July Star, under the title "Free People of Color," had been construed to mean the very opposite of what it said plainly. For, after quoting two sections of the Missouri law prohibiting the bringing in of free people of color, it went on to say, by way of warning to its readers, "We are opposed to having free people of color admitted into the state; and we say that none will be admitted into the church."

Immediately after this meeting of July 20, Oliver said, the instigators of the movement against the Saints had called on the Mormon leaders. They demanded that the store be closed permanently, that the printing establishment be discontinued, and that all mechanical labors cease. To this demand the Mormons had said no.

Whereupon a mob forcibly ejected Mrs. Phelps, with a sick infant in her arms, threw the press and all the important papers and books out of the upper window, and demolished the building completely. This done, they took Bishop Partridge and another Mormon named Allen to the public square and covered them with a coat of tar. After that they began to destroy the store of Gilbert & Whitney, but desisted on a promise by the proprietor to box up the goods and not to reopen for business.

Three days after this, Cowdery told the Prophet, another mass meeting had been held at the same place. On its adjournment a memorandum agreement was presented to the leading Mormons for their signature.

This document demanded: (1) That Cowdery, Phelps, Partridge, Wight, and others named leave the county by January the first next; (2) that they use their influence with all the other Mormons there to do the same things—"one half, say, by the first of January and all by the first of April"; and (3) that they advise, and endeavor to persuade, other Mormons not to settle in the county. Corrill and Gilbert were graciously permitted to remain "to wind up the business of the society."

Such was the report made to the Prophet by Oliver Cowdery, special messenger from Zion. And now what was to be done about it?

Orson Hyde and John Gould were despatched to Missouri with the advice for the Mormons there to stand by their guns. They were to petition the governor of the state at once—lay before him the situation in Jackson county and ask for protection from further violence.

Meanwhile, it was decided in Kirtland to organize a publishing firm under the name of F. G. Williams & Company, to issue the Star there "until it is transferred to its former location," and to issue a new periodical, to be known as the Latter-day Saints' Messenger and Advocate. Meanwhile, too, Bishop Partridge was given full control of affairs in Missouri and ten high priests were placed in charge of the ten "branches" of the church there.

During the interval of waiting the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon went on that trip into Upper Canada, which we have detailed in another chapter.

It was not until the latter part of November that Hyde and Gould returned to Kirtland. They bore far worse tidings concerning Zion than Oliver Cowdery had conveyed. What they said but confirmed and amplified the contents of a letter the Prophet had already received from Missouri.

On reaching the border settlements Hyde and others had addressed a communication to Governor Dunklin. It gave particulars concerning the recent actions of the older citizens against the Mormons in the county. With this letter were inclosed copies of all the documents in the case, including a copy of the Star with that article about "Free People of Color," which the leaders of the mob had twisted out of its obvious intent.

The governor's answer had been both prompt and satisfactory. "No citizen," he said, "nor number of citizens, have a right to take the redress of their grievances, whether real or imaginary, into their own hands." He advised the Mormons to swear out complaints against the mobbers and to attempt to have them prosecuted. If the courts failed in their duty, the governor would then "take such steps as will enforce a faithful execution" of the laws.

With this advice in mind, the Mormons engaged a firm of lawyers—Wood, Reese, Doniphan, and Atchison. The attorneys, in order to play safe, required a retainer and a guarantee of a thousand dollars. Their letter, when he heard of it, drew this sarcastic comment from the Prophet: "The brethren in Zion received from the four lawyers a letter, which I will copy entire, that the principles by which the lawyers of this generation are actuated may be recorded." The cause of human rights was at stake, and he had only contempt for any one who would let a question of money stand in the way.

But the older citizens, seeing the memorandum agreement about to be broken and not regarding it evidently as having been obtained under duress, proceeded to take the law into their own hands in a manner that made their previous efforts in this respect pale into insignificance. Here, in brief form, is the story of what happened:

Upwards of five hundred armed men suddenly fell upon the Mormon settlements in the county. In some places there was a feeble resistance—by that daring frontiersman, Lyman Wight, for instance. In the end more than twelve hundred men, women, and children were driven from their homes at the point of the gun. These fled in all directions, chiefly toward the river bottoms. No one was allowed to take anything, except what he could hastily pick up and carry with him. Most of them left not only their land and houses, but also their animals, their vehicles, and their personal property. The manner in which this expulsion was carried out is shown by particular acts of the mob.

Parley P. Pratt was hit over the head and knocked down with a gun barrel. Philo Dibble was severely wounded. Andrew Barber, another Mormon, was killed. Corrill, Gilbert, and some others were jailed, because they had sworn out a complaint against a mobber caught in the act of stealing goods from the store. Women and children were terrified, even after the Mormons had surrendered all their arms.

Newel Knight says that "in one settlement were four families of very old men, infirm, and very poor." Trusting to their age and infirmities, they remained till "the mob went into their homes, broke their windows and doors, and hurled great stones into their rooms." One of these men, says Knight, who was on the ground, had been a bodyguard of General Washington.

And Lyman Wight later testified under oath that he "saw one hundred and ninety women and children driven thirty miles across the prairie in the month of November, with three decrepit men only in the company; the ground was thinly crusted with sleet, and I could easily follow on their trail by the blood that flowed from their lacerated feet on the stubble of the burnt prairie."

Does any one need to be told after that what kind of people the older settlers in Jackson county were?

Two hundred and three houses were destroyed in this expulsion, which, with other property lost, amounted to one hundred and seventy-five thousand dollars.

Smucker, in his History of the Mormons, says that Lieutenant-governor Boggs was "a disinterested observer" of these barbarous events. But the Mormon prophet declared that Boggs was an active participant in the atrocities. "He had only to wink, and the mob went from maltreatment to murder." Joseph represents that official as going to Phelps, Gilbert, and Partridge early on the morning of the expulsion and telling them to "flee for their lives." And the Prophet concludes, rather illogically, that the expulsion would not have been attempted "unless he [the lieutenant governor] had given the order."

In her book on the Prophet Mother Smith says that her son, on first hearing of what happened in Missouri, burst into a flood of tears. "O my God," she represents him as exclaiming, "what shall I do?"

This was not the first time he had given way to his feelings under stress. Back in the early spring of 1828 there had been a similar outburst of emotion. It was in connection with a bit of perfidy on the part of his trusted friend, Martin Harris.

Martin was the Prophet's first scribe. He had come to Harmony, Pennsylvania, from Palmyra, with the intention, it seems, of staying until the entire book was finished. When the first one hundred and sixteen pages of foolscap was completed, Harris, who contemplated a visit to his home, besought Joseph to let him take the manuscript with him to show his family. To this the Prophet gave a reluctant consent, but not till he had exacted from Martin a solemn promise to show it to certain persons only, whom he named.

Harris was to return in a few days to continue the work of amanuensis. But day after day passed and he did not come. So Joseph went to Palmyra to see what had happened to his friend.

He set out with but one other passenger in the coach on the first stage that left for Palmyra. Haggard and pale from loss of sleep, the death of his first born child, the present serious illness of his wife, and anxiety over the manuscript, the Prophet attracted the interest and sympathy of his fellow traveler, so that, when he got off the stage at the point nearest his old home, the stranger insisted on accompanying him the rest of the way—a distance of twenty miles through the woods, every step of which he walked in a half daze, the last mile or so on his friend's arm. He reached his father's house at daybreak.

The scene in the Smith home is thus described by the mother in her biography:

When Joseph had taken a little nourishment, he requested us to send immediately for Mr. Harris. This we did without delay. And, when we had done so, we commenced preparing breakfast for the family; for we supposed that he would be there, as soon as it was ready, to eat with us, for he generally came in such a haste when he was sent for.

At eight o'clock we set the victuals on the table, as we were expecting him every moment. We waited till nine, and he came not—till ten, and he was not there—till eleven, and still he did not make his appearance.

But at half past twelve we saw him walking with a slow and measured tread towards the house, his eyes fixed thoughtfully on the ground.

On coming to the gate he stopped, instead of passing through, and got upon the fence, and sat there some time with his hat drawn over his eyes. At length he entered the house. Soon after which he sat down to the table with us.

He took up his knife and fork as if he were going to use them, but immediately dropped them. Hyrum, observing this, said,

"Martin, why don't you eat? Are you sick?"

Upon which Mr. Harris pressed his hands upon his temples, and cried out in a tone of deep anguish, "Oh, I have lost my soul! I have lost my soul! "

Joseph, who had not expressed his fears till now, sprang from the table, exclaiming, "Martin, have you lost the manuscript? Have you broken your oath, and brought down condemnation upon my head as well as your own?"

"Yes; it is gone," replied Martin, "and I do not know where."

"Oh, my God," said Joseph, clenching his hands, "all is lost! What shall I do? How can I return with such a tale as this? I dare not do it. I have sinned. Of what punishment am I not worthy?"

He wept, and groaned, and walked the floor continually. He continued pacing back and forth, meantime weeping and grieving, until about sunset.

The next morning he set out for home.

The situation, now confronting the Prophet, of the expulsion of his people from Jackson county was pregnant with vastly greater consequences than the loss of a few sheets of manuscript.

In the Harris episode the material lost, if it could not be entirely duplicated, could at least be replaced, and no one be the wiser for it, except the few persons in the secret. But here was an altogether different situation, one fraught with big consequences to the faith. It was a situation that involved the very leadership of the Prophet. Moreover, it was really the first test of that leadership on a large enough scale to count one way or another. It was a situation that would lay a heavy tax on whatever resources he may have had at his command.

He had told his followers that the Land of Zion had been pointed out by the finger of God as the gathering place of the faithful in the "last days." He had described to them colorfully the city and the temple that would rise out of the prairie there in "this generation." And in the most complete belief that this was the voice of God to them, the Mormons had begun to gather to their Zion on the "borders by the Lamanites." More than twelve hundred of them had established homes in Jackson county, in the firm conviction that they would die and come forth there on the "morning of the first resurrection." And hundreds of other Mormons in the East and in Canada were making hasty and enthusiastic preparations to join their fellow religionists in Missouri.

And now all the Mormons there—men, women, and little children—had been driven out by brute force, with regard for neither the rights of property nor the rights of human life. In a battle between God and the Devil, the Devil had apparently won out.

Just how did the Prophet meet the situation?

His first reaction, naturally enough, was surprise and grief. Apparently he had looked for something to happen in Missouri. We have already spoken of his warning to his people there, should they not observe "the commandments." After the expulsion he wrote: "I have always expected that Zion would suffer some affliction, from what I could learn from the commandments which have been given." But evidently he did not look for complete frustration like this.

His heart went out to his disciples in their distress. "When we learn your sufferings," he said in a letter to them, after all the details had reached him, "it awakens every sympathy of our hearts; it weighs us down; we cannot refrain from tears; and I often hear the brethren saying they wish they were with you, that they might bear a part of your sufferings. And I myself should have been with you, had not God prevented, that the yoke of affliction might be less grievous upon you."

One looks in vain, however, for a suggestion by the Prophet implying the least doubt on his part as to the inspiration back of the "gathering" or the selection of Missouri for the place of rendezvous. On the contrary, he proceeded on the assumption that the idea was not his, but God's, and issued new instructions that the movement Zionward was to continue unabated, in spite of what had happened there.

His next reaction was one of momentary confusion of mind over the situation. Two things, he wrote, puzzled him. One was, why had God suffered so great a calamity to come to Zion; the other, by what means the Saints were to be restored to their homes in Jackson county. "These two things, brethren," he went on to say, "are kept back that they are not plainly shown unto me." He was certain, however, that "Zion, in the due time of the Lord, will be redeemed," although he confesses ignorance as to "how many will be the days of her purification, tribulation, and affliction" before then.

That was unusual frankness on the part of a leader, especially of a leader who laid claims to being a prophet directly sent of God. It was characteristic, however.

Gradually, though, his mind became settled on both of these points. There had been "jarrings, contentions, envyings, strifes, and lustful and covetous desires" among the Mormons in Zion. In this way they had "polluted their inheritances." Also they were "slow to hearken unto the voice of the Lord," who in consequence was "slow to hearken to their prayers." And he added, "In the day of your peace, you esteem lightly the counsel of God; but in the day of your trouble, you feel after Him."

That was plain speaking.

But why should the innocent suffer with the guilty? That was clear, too. It had always been so. That was what Jesus meant when he said, "If thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee." The Saints in Zion had not cast out their offending eye, but had retained it as if it were a good eye. Besides, things here below were so organized that when "any of the members of our body is disordered, the rest of the body will be affected with it, and then all are brought into bondage."

And now, as always where others were concerned, Joseph Smith was the fighting prophet. His expelled disciples were to contend for their rights as American citizens. They were to appeal to the courts of Missouri. If they failed to receive justice there, they should appeal to the governor of the state. If that source proved unavailing, they were to take their cause to the President of the United States. And if they could not get redress from him, God Almighty would "come out of his hiding place and vex the nation with a sore vexation."

In the next section we shall see the Prophet becoming aggressive in the defense of his people.

It was not the nature of Joseph Smith to remain inactive when he was confronted by a major problem, like the one involved in the expulsion of his people from their homes in Jackson county, Missouri. As soon, therefore, as he could recover from the first shock of the news, he bestirred himself in his own peculiar way.

But the remedy he suggested must have surprised his disciples not a little, to say nothing of his "enemies." For he proposed to raise an army from among his own followers, and go to the rescue of the Missouri refugees.

A volunteer army it was to be. Also it was to consist of young and middle-aged men, drawn from the various Mormon organizations in Ohio and the Eastern states. Furthermore, there must be no fewer than one hundred and no more than five hundred men.

In addition, "wise men" and men of means in the church were to go to Zion with the army, for the purpose of purchasing all the available land in Jackson county and in adjacent counties. And when these lands had been bought, the Saints were to move upon them—not only those who had been driven from their homes, but those also who were of a mind to "gather" there.

Joseph Smith never shied at a plan. Nor did he ever lack one.

Enlistment in this strange army was carried on through the usual channel in the church—the missionary system. Men were sent out eastward to ask for volunteers and money. They were headed by the Prophet himself and Sidney Rigdon, and traveled in pairs. Joseph took Parley Pratt as his companion. They recruited in Western New York. "As we journeyed day after day, and generally lodged together," says Pratt, speaking of this trip, "we had much sweet communion concerning the things of God and the mysteries of the kingdom, and I received many admonitions which I shall never forget."

This drive for recruits and money seems not to have been so successful as one might imagine from the habit of the Prophet to succeed. Joseph mentions money twice in his narrative-once the sum of two hundred dollars and another time the sum of one hundred.

As for men, a hundred and fifty of them left New Portage, fifty miles west of Kirtland early in May, 1834, with twenty wagons loaded with clothing for the distressed in Missouri and tents and provisions for the army. But this number was increased on the way to two hundred and more men and twenty-five baggage wagons, mainly through the tireless energy of Parley Pratt, who made detours on horseback to various towns along the road, where there were Mormons. On one occasion he brought in twelve men.

A nondescript army it was, to be sure. The men varied in age from Dr. Williams, who was forty-seven, to George A. Smith, cousin of the Prophet, who was not yet seventeen. The Prophet was in his twenty-ninth year. They wore no uniforms, but were dressed in whatever they may have stood in when they enlisted. But all of them were armed after a fashion, with muskets, pistols, swords, and dirks—the weapons of the period.

And they were well organized. The Mormon leader saw to that. The men were divided into groups of twelve, each with a captain chosen by the group, and two cooks, two firemen, two watermen, a runner, two wagoners, two tent-men, and a commissary, appointed by the captain. Lyman Wight was general and the Prophet himself commander-in-chief—not "treasurer," as those would have us believe who make out that the Mormon leader always looked out for the money bags. The commander-in-chief had twenty men as life guards. Only once during that entire journey was his identity made known to outsiders; that was when the army reached Missouri and negotiations were to be carried on with the enemy.

Much of the road taken by "Zion's Camp," as it has come to be called, lay in the first part of the journey through a sparsely settled and heavily wooded country, and, in the last part, through great stretches of vacant prairie land. Dayton in Ohio, Indianapolis in Indiana, Springfield and Jacksonville in Illinois, across the Mississippi River into Missouri—that was the route followed. The distance was a full thousand miles.

Great curiosity was aroused along the way, and all sorts of devices were adopted by the villagers to find out the purpose of the expedition.

As the army reached the end of their journey, they found that they had been followed several days by men on horseback, who changed their appearance each day. On one occasion some men came into camp feigning drunkenness, in the hope of getting some information. The most common expedient, however, was to draw aside one of the marchers, usually one of the youngest, and question him. About the only information that any one got, however, was that the company came from the East, that they were going to the West, and that sometimes they were led by one man and sometimes by another.

Like Cromwell's covenanters, this was a praying army. Every morning at four o'clock and again at night before they went to bed, the men fell on their knees. And on Sundays the Camp stopped to wash up and hold religious services, usually near some town where they could have local listeners. Generally the Prophet so arranged it that former clergymen, of whom there were several in the company, did the preaching—ex-Baptists, ex-Methodists, ex-Campbellites, and ex-Restorationists. As no allusion was ever made in these discourses to Mormonism, an outsider was no wiser when he left than when he came concerning the identity or the purpose of the army.

Not that there were no dissensions in Zion's Camp. There were many of them. Most obstreperous of the men was a certain Sylvester Smith (not related to the leader). He was forever fomenting trouble. And often others fell in with him. Now the food was either short or bad, now a better route could have been taken, and now one of the Camp canines barked at the wrong time. For one reason or another this group of miscellaneous men thrown together thus, in what Rousseau would have called the state of nature, was always getting out of hand. Certainly the Mormon prophet did not show at his best at the head of an armed body.

The following, from an unpublished diary by George A. Smith, gives us a picture of the Camp as well as of Joseph Smith:

The Prophet took a full share of the fatigues of the entire journey. In addition to the care of providing for the Camp and presiding over it, he walked most of the time and had a full proportion of blistered, bloody, and sore feet, which was the natural result of walking from twenty-five to forty miles a day, in the hot season of the year.

But during the entire trip he never uttered a murmur; while most of the men in the Camp complained to him of sore toes, blistered feet, long drives, scanty provisions, poor quality of bread, bad corn dodger, frowzy butter, strong honey, maggoty bacon and cheese, etc. Even a dog could not bark at some men without their murmuring at Joseph. If they had to camp with bad water, it would nearly cause a rebellion. Yet we were the Camp of Zion, and many of us were prayerless, thoughtless, careless, heedless, foolish, or devilish, and we did not know it. Joseph had to bear with us and tutor us like children. There were many, however, in the Camp who never murmured and who were always ready and willing to do as our leaders desired.

It was not till they neared the end of the journey that a drill master appeared. This man was no less a person than a former British dragoon, named William Cherry. Cherry, an Irishman, had spent twenty years in the English army before he joined the Mormons and emigrated to Michigan, and might therefore justly be regarded, as the Prophet terms him, "an expert drill master."

"This was our first sword practice," Joseph remarks. Quite evidently so; for one of the men, in a sham battle following a drill, took the skin off his palm when he grabbed an opponent's blade in an effort to disarm him. Still, as the Prophet says, "much credit" must be given to Cherry "for his unwearied exertions in imparting all he knew to the brethren." It might be useful later on.

A good many inane things have been said about the purpose of Zion's Army, by both Mormon and non-mormon writers. The facts, however, are clear, if we are not trying to justify or to condemn the expedition.

While the army was in Missouri, a certain Colonel Sconce, with two other men from Ray county, dropped into Camp, to learn what were the intentions of the men there. Says the Prophet: "I arose and, addressing them, gave a relation of the sufferings of the Saints in Jackson county, and also our persecutions generally, and what we had suffered by our enemies for our religion; and that we had come one thousand miles to assist our brethren, to bring them clothing, etc., and to reinstate them upon their own lands."

One of the objectives of Zion's Camp, then, was to take material assistance to the distressed Mormons in Missouri—a purpose that did credit to the hearts of those who engaged in the movement.

The expulsion of the Saints from Jackson county, as we have seen, had taken place in November, as winter was approaching. The people had not been given time to take with them anything but what they could carry in their hands. They had been as completely stripped as if a natural catastrophe had occurred. Hence they were desperately in need of help.

This objective was only partly realized. The Eastern Mormons, for one thing, had failed to visualize the sufferings and destitution of their fellows in Zion, and, for another thing, as the Prophet himself suggests, some of them had expected God to do what it was obviously their duty to do themselves.

After it was all over, the Prophet paid his respects, in biting phraseology, to those who "did not impart of their substance, as became saints, to the poor and afflicted" in the church. Zion could not be redeemed nor built up on the principle of self-interest and discord. "There has been a day of calling," he said, "but the time has come for a day of choosing, and let those be chosen who are worthy."

Another objective, as stated by the leader of the undertaking himself, was to reinstate the Missouri Mormons. But it failed utterly, because of the timidity of Governor Dunklin.

In February the Governor had written to the leaders of the Mormon church in Missouri: "If, upon inquiry, it is found that your people were wrongfully dispossessed of their arms, then an order will be issued to have them returned; and should your men organize according to law and apply for public arms, the executive could not distinguish between their right to have them and the right of every other description of people similarly situated. As to the request for keeping up a military force to protect your people, it would transcend the powers with which the executive of this state is clothed."

Already he had promised to use force in returning the people to their homes, and now they were advised to arm so as to protect themselves thereafter. He had moved in this direction after a full investigation of the circumstances of the expulsion. "A more clear and indisputable right does not exist," he wrote to Colonel J. Thornton, "than that of the Mormon people, who were expelled from their homes in Jackson county, to return and live on their lands; and if they cannot be persuaded, as a matter of policy, to give up that right, or to qualify it, my course, as chief executive of the state, is a plain one." This letter was dated June 6, 1834.

Yet ten days afterwards, when Zion's Camp was nearing its destination, Governor Dunklin informed Orson Hyde and Parley P. Pratt, who had been sent from the Camp to Jefferson City to consult with the executive over the situation, that he would be unable to lend them any assistance, owing to the "impracticability" of the plan.

There was, therefore, nothing for the Prophet to do but to disorganize his small army—which he did. Had Governor Dunklin been as courageous as he was clear-sighted, Zion's Camp might have succeeded in its main purpose. As it was, all that the men got out of it was experience.

This expedition to Missouri throws an interesting spotlight on the Mormon leader. In an enterprise of this sort, as already remarked, Joseph Smith does not show to the best advantage. This is evident in his inability to control some of the men in the Camp. He had no ability to lead an army, even though small, as this one was. Theologically he was the superior of any one there, but here he and they were on common ground. Of military matters he knew no more than they did—less, in fact, than some of them. Hence the recalcitrancy.

Later he turned their insubordination against them. He declared it to have been not only a major cause of the failure, but the source also of the breaking out of the cholera on Fishing River, which took thirteen of their number. For he seems to have thought the principal objective of the expedition could have been attained in spite of the governor's reversal of himself—if the men in the Camp had been single-minded and "obedient." Indeed, he went further than that. The army never would have been needed in the first place—if the Saints in Jackson county had kept the higher law of God.

As a matter of fact, though, the lack of discipline in the Camp may have been due, in part, to the softness of its commander-in-chief.

A little west of Springfield, Ohio, in a "beautiful country," a sentry fell asleep at his post. The Prophet, passing by, took his sword and left him to his slumber. What had happened, ofcourse, became known, and, when it did, there was nothing to do but court-martial the offender. Joseph, however, secured the man's acquittal on the ground that he was overcome with fatigue. The sentry got off with a "warning" not to do it again. The incident afforded the Prophet an opportunity "to give the brethren much useful instruction."

The inveterate propensity ofthe Mormon leader always to seek the eternal in the temporal—the true function of the mystic in all ages—is very evident here.

At various places of encampment snakes abounded. The "brethren" were inclined at first to get rid of these dangerous pests in the customary way—by killing as many of them as possible. Against this practice Joseph protested.

"Let them alone," he said, "don't hurt them. How will the serpent ever lose its venom, while the servants of God possess the same disposition, and continue to make war upon it? Men must become harmless before the brute creation; and when men lose their vicious dispositions and cease to destroy the animal race, the lion and the lamb can dwell together, and the suckling child can play with the serpent in safety."

He urged his men not to kill a serpent, a bird, or an animal of any kind during the journey unless driven to it.

On this expedition, too, the Prophet made use of practical psychology.

Toward the end of June, on Fishing River, he issued a manifesto. By this time the failure of the main purpose of the expedition was apparent. Cholera had hit the Camp with disastrous effect, and the army was about to disband. The situation was not heartening.

Yet the Mormon leader put both heart and purpose into his men by pointing their eyes forward, instead of letting their minds dwell on hardship and defeat. It was sufficient for them and for him to know that they had had "a trial of their faith." Already God had shown his favor and power by sending a furious storm to scatter the enemy. (A large force of men from Jackson county had in fact been dispersed by a terrific storm of wind, hail, and rain, as they were about to pounce upon the Camp.) And now, if the men were "faithful" and would "hearken" to God, great spiritual blessings and an "endowment" were in store for them in the House of the Lord in Kirtland, when it was finished. But meantime every effort must be put forth to bring the structure to completion.

After disbanding the army and reorganizing the church in Missouri, the Prophet returned to Kirtland, where he arrived about the first of August. There he found a situation that called for much more ingenuity than he had ever required up to this time.

On his arrival in Kirtland "from the midst of enemies, mobs, cholera, and excessively hot weather," the Prophet, as he declared in a letter to church leaders in Missouri, "was met in the face and eyes with a catalogue of charges as black as the author of lies himself."

The fact is, a formal complaint had been lodged with the high council by Sylvester Smith, the fire eating hotspur of Zion's Camp, charging the Mormon leader with "criminal conduct during his journey to and from Missouri this spring and summer." This was the first of a series of blows by "false brethren" that the Prophet was called upon to deflect during the remainder of his stay in Ohio.

In this particular case, however, the council, after carefully hearing the matter, exonerated the Mormon leader of all blame. "He has acted in every respect worthy of his high and responsible station in this church," they found, "and has prudently and cautiously preserved the good of this society at large, and is still worthy of our esteem and fellowship."

There is no doubt that the charges originated in a grudge against the Prophet for having on more than one occasion reprimanded Smith for selfishness and swaggering arrogance.

During the trial Sylvester admitted that he had been wrong in lodging the charges, and promised rather humbly to publish an explanation and apology in the local paper, the Messenger and Advocate—which he did.

This affair, however, was only a precursor of the rain of opposition and charges that beat upon the Prophet for a time, both from within and without the church. They were due for the most part, it would seem, to financial difficulties in which the church became involved in Kirtland, although the failure of plans respecting Missouri probably had something to do with it.

Material affairs, as we have had more than one occasion to remark, were not the Mormon prophet's special "gift." No one realized this more than he did. And so he early surrounded himself with men who had both natural ability and experience in what he termed "temporal things"—Partridge, Whitney, Gilbert, Corrill, and others. To the judgment of these men, as a rule, he yielded his own.

Yet, in spite of every precaution, he found himself, as the leader of the organization, plunged into a veritable maelstrom of money troubles, which threatened not only his own leadership but the very existence of the society over which he presided.

First, some commercial ventures brought about part of the trouble. In 1831 the mercantile establishment of Gilbert & Whitney, with stores in both Kirtland and Zion, had borrowed fifteen thousand dollars. Then had come the expulsion from Jackson county, in which nearly everything in the Missouri store was lost. After the expulsion a press was set up in the Ohio town, to replace the one which had been destroyed in Independence, and it was set up mainly on borrowed capital.

Second, the erection of the temple in Kirtland was a heavy drag financially. Seventy-five thousand dollars was an enormous sum for so small an organization to raise. Members all over the church area had contributed liberally to this undertaking, but, even so, there had to be large borrowings. A certain Noah Packard, for instance, as the Prophet tells us, "loaned the committee one thousand dollars to assist in building the House of the Lord," for which the Mormon leader prays fervently for "God to bless him for this righteous act." And there were many others who also lent money.

Third, considerable sums of money had been raised for the relief of the people who had been expelled from their homes in Missouri and who, in consequence, were in distress there, for practically everything in the way of property belonging to them had been destroyed or stolen outright. Besides, it had required money to raise and equip Zion's Camp.

Very often, therefore, in this Kirtland period the Prophet speaks of debts. In September, 1835, for instance, he writes in his Journal, "My heart is full of desires to-day to be blessed of the God of Abraham with prosperity, until I shall be able to pay all my debts, for it is the delight of my soul to be honest." And a few days later he records that he and eight other leaders prayed "with one voice that the Lord would give us means sufficient to deliver us from all our afflictions and difficulties wherein we are placed by reason of our debts."

No doubt some of these obligations were personal—at least so far as the Prophet was concerned. It would be strange if they were not. For he was kept so busy with the affairs of the church that he had no time whatever to earn a livelihood for himself. Besides, as the leader of an ever-increasing number of followers he was called upon to entertain disciples and strangers in his home. It must, therefore, have required no small amount for household expenses. Where was the money to come from? He did not have any stipulated salary from the church for this purpose. He depended almost wholly on what he received as gifts from others. Sometimes he drew on the community store, and sometimes his disciples made him gifts of money.

That, however, which contributed most to the Mormon prophet's troubles at this time was the failure of a bank in Kirtland, which the church leaders had established.

In November, 1836, articles of incorporation for the "Kirtland Safety Society Bank" had been drawn up, and Orson Hyde had been sent to ask the legislature for permission to organize. Meantime, in the belief that permission would be granted, Oliver Cowdery had gone to Philadelphia to procure plates for the paper money that was to be issued by the bank.

The legislature refused to charter the proposed institution. This, the Prophet says, was because its organizers were Mormons. However that may be, the bank was set up anyway, but under the name, "Kirtland Safety Society Antibanking Company." In the bills issued by this organization the prefix "anti" and the suffix "ing" appear in small letters, as if printed in after the plates had been prepared, evidently to save the expense of reengraving. The Prophet was treasurer, Rigdon secretary.

[Joseph Smith: An American Prophet Left to right, top to bottom: Joseph Smith's store in Nauvoo, Carthage Jail, The Mansion - Residence of Joseph Smith in Nauvoo, Kirtland Temple, and Nauvoo Temple

That there was no fraud intended is evident from one of the provisions in the articles of incorporation as first drawn up. "All notes given by said society," it reads, "shall be signed by the treasurer and secretary thereof, and we, the individual members of said firm, hereby hold ourselves bound for the redemption of all such notes." This was made irrevocable—the only one of the sixteen articles.

The bank failed. Not having been organized under the law, its paper was not accepted generally outside the community. This was one of the contributing causes of the failure; another was the general economic situation throughout the country.

The bank failure was in 1837, and 1837 was the year of the great financial panic. During the two years preceding, speculation had been rife, of which the harvest was now being reaped. Bank failures were everywhere. In New York City alone they amounted to more than a hundred million dollars. Conditions became so bad that President Van Buren called a special session of Congress to see what could be done to remedy the situation. It met in September, and remained in session for six weeks. An issue of notes for ten million dollars by the treasury was authorized.

The Kirtland Safety Society, in addition to its own peculiar difficulties, was thus swept into the current of financial rapids. With the exception of some crookedness on the part of Warren Parrish, one-time trusted secretary of the Prophet, there seems to have been nothing reprehensible in connection with this failure.

Of course, the blame fell mostly on the Prophet. Was he not one of its managers—probably the originator of the scheme? Had he not, over his own signature, issued a formal invitation to his disciples to take stock in the venture? And had not the institution been organized outside the law? It was of no consequence that the bottom had dropped out of everything throughout the nation, that bank failures were common in the country just then, that land values, in which the bank had large securities, had suddenly declined, and that the crisis had hit business generally, not only in Kirtland but elsewhere.

The Prophet was sued for his private and his official debts; he was hailed into court for violating the state banking law; his very life was threatened, till, like Milton's hero, which way he turned was hell. It should be added that any one who complained that the state banking law had been violated shared equally with the government in whatever fine was imposed by the court. This furnished a motive for enemy suits.

It was now that large defections occurred in the organization, not only in Kirtland but in Missouri as well. Apostasy there had been almost from the beginning, and for various reasons.

There was, for one instance, the defection of Simons Ryder, a former Campbellite preacher, who had lost his faith in Mormonism because its head, who was supposed to be inspired, in a license to proclaim the Word, had spelled his last name with an "i" instead of a "y."

And then there was Ezra Booth, a former Methodist preacher, who had been converted by a miracle, as he tells us himself, but who had become "disillusioned" respecting the faith on that trip to Zion at the time the land and the temple site were dedicated. On reading his exposures of his new-found faith in a series of nine articles for the Ohio Star, one somehow gets an impression that a contributing cause of his defection lay in the fact that he, with nearly all the men, was required to walk all the way to Independence, whereas the Prophet and Rigdon rode part of the distance there. Besides, he was not given the attention that he, a former minister of the gospel, felt he deserved.

It appears that a considerable number of those Mormons who were driven from their homes in Jackson county turned against the church and the Prophet in consequence. Nor is there any great cause for astonishment in that fact, considering human nature and all the circumstances. "I feel thankful," wrote the leader soon after the expulsion, "that there have no more denied the faith; I pray God in the name of Jesus that you may all be kept in the faith unto the end; let your sufferings be what they may, it is better in the eyes of God that you should die, than that you should give up the land of Zion."

That was a hard doctrine.

But the great apostasy took place in this period, when the causes of dissent had become cumulative. Oliver Cowdery, as stated elsewhere, had considered his personal liberty infringed at the time he was ordered to explain before the high council the sale of his "inheritance" in Zion. There were other complaints, but he chose this as the principal one. He was excommunicated. David Whitmer had given dissatisfaction as the presiding officer in Missouri, and was in consequence deposed. His answer was to withdraw from a church that had altered its name and was now headed by a "fallen prophet." Martin Harris did not formally leave the church; in strict truth, the church left him, since, when Kirtland was abandoned by the Mormons, he continued to live there. Both he and Oliver Cowdery rejoined their people.

Of the twelve apostles, the second "quorum" in the organization, six left the church—Marsh, Hyde, McLellin, Boynton, and the two Johnsons—and a seventh-Parley P. Pratt—was on the point of doing so. Frederick G. Williams, second counselor of the first presidency, also forsook the cause at about the same time. Some of these defections occurred in Kirtland and some of them in Missouri.

And then, of course, there were many apostasies of a minor nature. As usual in such cases, some of these men became violently embittered at the Prophet. They denounced him in the very temple; they openly called him a "fallen prophet"; they made threats upon his life.

It was on one of these occasions that John Taylor, a recent convert, denounced these enemies to their face. As for Joseph, he told them he would far rather be a "fallen prophet" than never to have been a prophet at all.

In the end—January, 1838—he and Rigdon in the night fled the town for Missouri.

If the Mormon prophet, as he himself tells us, was forced to flee from "apostasy, persecution, confusion, and mobocracy" in Kirtland, which "strove hard to bear rule" in that town, he was received by his people in Missouri with a joy that must have considerably heartened him.

A hundred and twenty miles out from Far West, the new gathering point of the Mormons, he was met by a delegation, with money and teams, which escorted him to the settlement. And on approaching the town he was met by many who, "with open arms, welcomed him to their bosoms." To all appearance, he was not here looked upon as a "fallen prophet" by the majority of his followers—at least not yet.

Two full months he had been on the way between here and Kirtland, and he had had some unique experiences. As already stated, he and Rigdon had left the Ohio town after dusk. They traveled on horseback, the Prophet tells us, "to escape mob violence, which was about to burst upon us under the color of legal process to cover the hellish designs of our enemies." All night they rode, reaching Medina the next morning at eight. Here they "tarried" a couple of days, till their families could catch up with them in covered wagons.

At Dublin, Indiana, the Prophet found himself "destitute of money." He sought a job cutting wood, but without success. In desperation he went to Brigham Young for advice, with the remark, "I believe I shall throw myself upon you." Brigham, who had himself fled out of murderous hands, replied, "If you take my counsel, it will be that you rest yourself, and be assured you shall have money in plenty to pursue your journey." His loyal friend, the apostle, was doing some prophesying on his own account.

But the prediction was fulfilled. Brigham saw to that. A disciple there at this moment sold his farm. "Brother Tomlinson," said Brigham, "the Lord did it, that you might help Brother Joseph out of his trouble." Whereupon "Brother Tomlinson" gave the Prophet three hundred dollars.

On the way, says Joseph, "we were obliged to secrete ourselves in our wagons, sometimes, to elude the grasp of our pursuers, who continued their pursuit of us more than two hundred miles from Kirtland, armed with pistols and guns, seeking our lives. They frequently crossed our track, twice they were in the houses where we stopped, once we tarried all night in the same house with them, with only a partition between us and them."

Before reaching their destination the two church leaders parted company, for safety in traveling; each entered Missouri by different roads and at different times.

On being driven from their homes in Jackson county in the fall of 1833, the Mormons had fled across the river into Clay county. Here, in a scattered condition, they had remained, pending a settlement with the enemy by which they would be permitted to return. But that same enemy, fearing just such an agreement, proceeded to set every Mormon dwelling in Jackson county on fire—more than two hundred in all.

Meanwhile, the Saints had petitioned first the Governor and then the President, the two hundred armed Mormons had come from Ohio under the Prophet and gone again, and the Mormon families in Clay county had made such adjustments as they could in what they believed at first was to be a temporary home. Meanwhile, also, there was an almost continuous stream of immigrants pouring into the State to join the refugees. For, despite what had happened in Jackson county, there was no let-up in the gathering of Mormons to Missouri. The doctrine was preached as vigorously as ever.

Thereupon the older citizens in Clay county, like their neighbors over the river, became alarmed, but, unlike those neighbors, they determined not to deal with the problem by violence, but by peaceful means. They looked around them for some humane way of settling the difficulties which they saw approaching. The difference between the Jackson county way and the way in Clay county was largely a matter of leadership.

By this time it was 1836. In June of this year a mass meeting of the older citizens was held. There a petition was drafted, asking the Mormons to move from the county. Wisconsin was suggested as a good place. Wisconsin had but recently been wrested from the gallant and stately Black Hawk and only this year had been organized into a Territory. The request to move frankly conceded to the Saints the right to live where they pleased, but as frankly pointed out what might happen if they continued to live in Clay county. At a mass meeting of their own the Mormons agreed to leave as soon as they could arrange their affairs.

Northeast of Clay county was a wild, desolate prairie, mostly uninhabited. It was then Ray county. In the summer of '36 William W. Phelps and Bishop Partridge visited the place for the purpose of determining its availability for the new home.

Here are some phrases descriptive of it from a letter by Phelps to Cowdery in Kirtland: "A sort of road to Busby Fork"; "naked prairie, patches of scrubby timber, deep-banked creeks and branches"; "some tolerable mill sites" on Shoal Creek; "old clearings peeping over one another, as far as the eye can glance"; a "land of desolation," where you felt lost as at sea; yet in places "pinks variegating these wide-spread lawns," with bees from a "thousand groves" sipping "unobserved the honey-dew of heaven."

The Prophet, after his arrival there in March, 1838, took a trip into the "north country." This is what he says of the district he covered: "We passed though a beautiful country, the greater part of which is prairie and thickly covered with grass and weeds. There is plenty of game, such as deer, turkey, and prairie hen. We discovered a large, black wolf, and my dog gave chase, but he outran us. We have nothing to fear in camping out, except the rattlesnake, which is native to this country, though not very numerous.

Here the Mormons decided to settle — not because they wanted to, but because it was near their beloved Zion. The tenacity with which those Mormons clung to thoughts of Zion and the sadness of heart which overcame them when they were compelled to turn their footsteps away from it, is one of the mysteries of Mormonism and something that is quite impossible for the uninitiated to understand.

The first Mormons to arrive in this region pitched their tents on Shoal Creek. This settlement was later named Far West, and became the main town in the new home. Other settlements, as time went on, were made — one, Diahman, in Daviess county, twenty-five miles north of Far West; another, Gallatin, in the same county; a third, Haun's Mill, in Caldwell county, a fourth, De Witt in Carroll County; and still others elsewhere in these three counties. At the request of the Mormon leaders the counties of Caldwell and Daviess were created by the legislature out of Ray county.

Meantime, a steady stream of immigrants poured into this part of upper Missouri, till many Eastern and Canadian towns were emptied of their Mormon population. At one time between five and six hundred people arrived in a single company from Kirtland. In a short time, comparatively, fully fifteen thousand Saints had settled in the region. They bought land, they planted and harvested crops, they built private and public houses, and they looked forward hopefully to a period of peace and prosperity.

Yet, by the end of October, 1838, a thunderbolt struck the community out of what looked like a clear sky. It came in the form of an order by the governor to the effect that the Mormons were to be "exterminated" or "driven in a body from the state." No drama ever moved more swiftly or certainly to its dÃ©nouement.

August 7, 1838, word came to the Prophet that, at an election in Gallatin, "two or three of the brethren had been killed and left upon the ground, and not suffered to be interred; that the brethren had been prevented from voting; and that a majority of the inhabitants of Daviess county were determined to drive the Saints from the county."

With characteristic decision the Mormon leader undertook an investigation. Taking upwards of twenty men, including his brother Hyrum and Rigdon, he put them under the command of George W. Robinson, and proceeded to Gallatin. This action was in accord with a policy of self-defense adopted in the new home.

In a Fourth of July oration, just before this, Rigdon had announced the Mormon policy. "Our cheeks," declared the orator, "have been given to the smiters—our heads to those who have plucked off the hair. But from this day and this hour we will suffer it no more. We take God and all holy angels to witness, this day, that we warn all men to come on us no more forever. That mob that comes on us to disturb us, it shall be between us and them a war of extermination."

The Prophet was equally emphatic. He called this address of Sidney's a "declaration of independence from all mobs and persecutions which have been inflicted upon us time after time, until we can bear it no longer." A little later he added this strong phrase: "In the name of Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God, we will endure it no longer, if the great God will arm us with courage, with strength and with power to resist them in their persecutions. We will not act on the offensive, but always on the defensive; but our rights and our liberties shall not be taken from us, and we peaceably submit to it, as we have done heretofore."

Investigation proved that there had indeed been a fracas at Gallatin, but that only a few "Missourian skulls had been cracked." The Prophet was glad of this, for he says, "Blessed be the memory of those few brethren who contended so strenuously for their constitutional right against an overwhelming force of desperados." The "brethren" had defended their right to vote.

There followed a rain of affidavits. In a sworn statement by Peniston, now a defeated candidate, who tried to prevent the Mormons from casting their ballot, the small body of men under Robinson swelled into five hundred; and another affidavit by Adam Black, a justice of the peace, accused the Prophet of having intimidated him into signing a statement against his will. This Black statement, which is still in existence, declares that he was not one of any mob, that he did not intend to be, and that he stood for the laws of the State and the United States—nothing that should need any compulsion or coercion, one would think.

Joseph Smith, too, made an affidavit. He denied that the company with which he went into Daviess county comprised more than "fifteen or twenty" men, and he denied that any of the men had intimidated Black, but that Black had voluntarily written the statement with his own hand.

Nevertheless the Mormon leader, with Lyman Wight, was arrested and placed under bonds. Pretty soon the whole of Upper Missouri, as the Prophet states, was "in an uproar and confusion." Both parties proceeded to arm for a conflict—the Mormons under Wight and the non-mormons under a preacher named Austin.

Meantime the governor called out the militia, as he said, to take care of "Indian disturbances on our immediate frontier and the recent civil disturbances in the counties of Caldwell, Daviess, and Carroll." The state executive of this period was Lilburn W. Boggs, the man who, as lieutenant-governor, had stood on the sidelines in Jackson county in 1833 and watched "disinterestedly" the tarring of Bishop Partridge and Allen and the destruction of the Mormon press, and who had said afterwards to the Mormon leaders, "Now you see what our Jackson county boys can do, and you must leave the county." The order was issued to General Atchison. Three thousand men were called out.

General Atchison, in September, reported to the Governor that, although the Mormons had taken both prisoners and arms, they had given them up "with promptness" and held themselves amenable to the law for any wrongdoing on their part. Their military leader, Lyman Wight, he described as "bold, brave, skillful, and I may add, a desperate man." General Parks wrote the governor that "whatever may have been the disposition of the people called Mormons before our arrival here, since we have made our appearance they have shown no disposition to resist the laws, or of hostile intentions." On the other hand, even General Doniphan had been unable to induce Dr. Austin, the military preacher, to disband his forces.

Things went from bad to worse. De Witt was besieged, and when messengers (some friendly non-mormons) went to the governor for help, that official said, "The trouble is between the Mormons and the mob; let them fight it out." A battle on Crooked river resulted in the killing of one of the apostles, David W. Patten. And at Haun's Mill some nineteen Mormons were shot down and their bodies thrown into a well. Presently the governor issued his famous exterminating order. "The Mormons," he said, "must be treated as enemies and must be exterminated or driven from the state."

After that the end was in sight. Seeing themselves opposed by the State instead of by what started out as a mob, although the mobbers had been absorbed into the militia, the Mormons surrendered at Far West, whither all of them had fled for safety.

Joseph Smith, with a number of other leading men, were taken into custody. Since it was deemed unnecessary or undesirable now to "exterminate" the Mormons, there remained only their expulsion. As soon as possible, therefore, arrangements were made by the Mormons to leave the state. This was in the winter of 1838-39.

On the last day of October, 1838, the Prophet was visited by Colonel George M. Hinkle. Hinkle was at the time in command of the Mormon forces at Far West.

That town, in which were practically all the fifteen thousand Mormons then in Missouri, had been hurriedly fortified with earthworks, and the men had been armed as far as possible and organized under Hinkle. All around the place were the armed forces of the State—several thousand of them—including the men who had but lately been armed mobs. In this army was a large array of militia officers—General Lucas, General Atchison, General Doniphan, General Clark, General Wilson, and others of lower rank.

"President Smith," said Colonel Hinkle, as he came into the room, "one of the peace terms is that you, Sidney Rigdon, Parley P. Pratt, Lyman Wight, and George W. Robinson shall give yourselves up as prisoners of war, the understanding being that you will be released just as soon as things can be arranged."

The five persons named went with the Colonel. On approaching the camp of the general, the party was met by Lucas himself, with a guard of several hundred men, all armed.

"General Lucas," said Colonel Hinkle, stepping out in front and pointing to the men, "these are the prisoners I agreed to deliver up to you." Whereupon the General ordered his troopers to surround the party and take them in charge—which they promptly did.

Joseph and his companions were thunderstruck. They had understood that they were merely prisoners of war to be held as hostages, and would be treated accordingly. But instead, they found themselves prisoners of the ordinary sort. The fact is, as they were to find out, Colonel Hinkle had agreed to deliver them up for trial and punishment as common violators of the law. And such they were now considered. For this betrayal the Mormons have never forgiven the colonel.

The Prophet complains that he was treated with contempt from the first. None of the officers would talk with him, and the soldiers, "almost to a man," were allowed to insult him "as much as they felt disposed" to do.

Parley Pratt, in his picturesque language, describes the scene thus:

"We were marched into camp surrounded by thousands of savage-looking beings, many of whom were dressed and painted like Indian warriors. These all set up a constant yell, like so many bloodhounds let loose upon their prey, as if they had achieved one of the most miraculous victories. If the vision of the infernal regions could suddenly open to the mind, with thousands of malicious fiends, all clamoring, exulting, deriding, blaspheming, mocking, railing, raging, and foaming like a troubled sea, then could some idea be formed of the hell which we had entered."

All night they lay out on the ground in a heavy rain, without shelter and under a strong guard. By this time their number had been increased to seven by the addition of Hyrum Smith and Amasa Lyman. The guards were peculiarly offensive. They taunted the prisoners; they ridiculed their faith; they told obscene stories; they challenged the leader to show them an angel, give them a revelation, and perform a miracle for them.

Meantime a court-martial was going on in one of the tents. The Mormons were being tried for their "crimes." They were not asked to be present; the most of them, especially the Prophet, had not lifted a gun during the entire conflict, much less said or done anything against the government; and in that assembly, besides the regular officers, were seventeen clergymen of various denominations.

At midnight General Doniphan, who had not gone to the court-martial, was handed this order, which came from General Lucas:

"You will take Joseph Smith and the other prisoners into the public square of Far West, and shoot them at nine o'clock to-morrow morning."

General Doniphan, a lawyer, was beside himself with indignation. "It is cold-blooded murder," he wrote to the commanding officer, Lucas. "I will not obey your order. My brigade shall march for Liberty to-morrow morning at eight o'clock; and if you execute these men, I will hold you responsible before an earthly tribunal, so help me God."

The prisoners were not executed, nor was General Doniphan ever called upon to account for his flagrant insubordination.

All told, the Prophet was in custody for five and a half months—from October 31, 1838, to April 16, 1839. From Far West he was taken, with his fellow prisoners, to Independence, thence to Richmond and Liberty, and finally to Daviess and Boone counties.

But first they were permitted to take a hasty leave of their families. Joseph found his wife and children in tears. They had supposed him killed. Mother Smith says that, when she and Father Smith, the night before, had heard frightful screams and the sound of shooting from the direction of the camps, her husband fell back on the bed, sobbing, "My God! my God! They have killed my son." Emma and the children had probably heard the same sounds and come to the same conclusion. The Prophet was denied a private interview with his family, and he was allowed only to press the hand of his mother from under the wagon cover. He did not see his father at all.

Pratt's case was even more pathetic. His wife was prostrate with a fever, a three-months' old baby at her breast and another of five years toddling around helplessly. Across the foot of the bed lay a neighbor woman prone in the pangs of child-birth, with no one to help her. She had sought protection with the Pratts. Parley, in tears and anxiety, went to General Wilson and begged him for time to arrange his affairs, but the calloused officer only laughed derisively.

An incident that happened on the night of October 31 throws an interesting sidelight on this man Wilson, and on two other characters. Wilson was hunting for testimony against the Prophet on the occasion of the trial by court-martial. He went to Lyman Wight. "Wight," he said, "we have nothing against you, only that you are associated with Joe Smith. He is our enemy and a damned rascal, and would take any plan he could to kill us. You are a damned fine fellow. If you will come out and swear against him, we will spare your life, and give you any office you want; and if you don't, you will be shot to-morrow at nine."

"General Wilson," the redoubtable Colonel answered, "you are entirely mistaken in your man, both in regard to myself and Joseph Smith. Joseph Smith is not an enemy to mankind. He is not your enemy. In fact, he is as good a friend as you have. For had it not been for Joseph Smith, you would have been in hell long ago, and I would have sent you there myself by cutting your throat, and no other man but Joseph Smith could have prevented me. You may thank him for being alive. And now, if you will give me the boys I brought from Diahman yesterday, I will whip your whole army."

Wilson was silent for a moment. Then he said, "Wight, you're a strange man. But if you do not accept my proposal, you will be shot to-morrow morning at nine."

And Lyman answered, "Shoot, and be damned."

The prisoners, under a heavy guard, were conducted to Independence. There was an unpleasant rivalry among the officers for possession of the Mormons. "That old bigot, Clark," General Wilson is represented as saying to Pratt, "would shoot you down any minute, but all I and Lucas want is to let the people of Jackson county have a look at you to see what a damned set of fine fellows you are."

And they were exhibited to the curious everywhere. Joseph thought this a good opportunity to explain the doctrines of Mormonism. For, when one woman at Independence asked to have pointed out to her the man the Mormons worshiped, the Prophet not only disclaimed such a high honor, but preached her a discourse as a "servant of the Lord." On other occasions he did the same thing, thus allaying, as he thought, much prejudice and winning over "the populace in our favor."

At this time neither the prisoners nor the officers conducting them knew of what crimes they were charged, but General Clark said he would know in a few days.

From Independence the Mormon party was taken to Richmond. Here an incident occurred which has been made famous by the vivid pen of Parley P. Pratt:

In one of those tedious nights we had lain as if in sleep till the hour of midnight had passed, and our ears and hearts had been pained, while we had listened for hours to the obscene jests, the horrid oaths, the dreadful blasphemies and filthy language of our guards, Colonel Price at their head, as they recounted to each other their deeds of rapine, murder, robbery, etc., which they had committed among the Mormons while at Far West and vicinity. They even boasted of defiling by force wives, daughters, and virgins, and of shooting or dashing out the brains of men, women, and children.

I had listened till I became so disgusted, shocked, horrified, and so filled with the spirit of indignant justice that I could scarcely refrain from rising upon my feet and rebuking the guards; but had said nothing to Joseph, or any one else, although I lay next to him and knew he was awake. On a sudden he rose to his feet, and spoke in a voice of thunder, or as the roaring lion, uttering, as nearly as I can recollect, the following words:

"Silence, you fiends of the infernal pit! In the name of Jesus Christ I rebuke you, and command you to be still. I will not live another minute and hear such language. Cease such talk, or you or I die this instant!"

He ceased to speak. He stood erect in terrible majesty. Chained, and without a weapon; calm, unruffled and dignified as an angel, he looked upon the quailing guards, whose weapons were lowered or dropped to the ground; whose knees smote together, and who, shrinking into a corner or crouching at his feet, begged his pardon, and remained quiet till a change of guards.

I have seen the ministers of justice, clothed in magisterial robes, and criminals arraigned before them, while life was suspended on a breath, in the courts of England; I have witnessed a Congress in solemn session to give laws to nations; I have tried to conceive of kings, of royal courts, of thrones and crowns, and of emperors assembled to decide the fate of kingdoms; but dignity and majesty have I seen but once, as it stood in chains, at midnight in a dungeon, in an obscure village in Missouri.

The Prophet says nothing about this scene. All he says is that Colonel Price allowed "all manner of abuses to be heaped upon us" and that "during this time my afflictions were great and our situation truly painful."

Early in November General Clark, who now had the prisoners in charge, wrote to Governor Boggs. He would try all these men, he said, by court-martial, but was not sure that it could be legally done. Would the governor obtain the opinion of the attorney-general for him on the point? Also whether the trial could be held outside Caldwell county, since there were no civil authorities there. (The fact was these had all been thrown into jail.) In the meantime, charges had been made out. The men were accused of "treason, murder, arson, burglary, robbery, larceny, and perjury" in general.

A trial in Richmond proved a farce. The prisoners were ordered to make out a list of witnesses—which they did. But when these witnesses appeared, they were either not allowed to testify or were clapped into jail. Thereupon another list was demanded, only to receive the same disposition. The Mormons thereafter refused to give any more names to the authorities. Most of the new prisoners, however, were released for want of evidence, and at least one of the older prisoners—Amasa Lyman. But the six leading prisoners, with some added, were not permitted to leave.

It is almost incredible that such a travesty of justice was carried on in the Missouri of 1838-39. Nevertheless it was. So bitter was the sentiment against the Mormon people, particularly their leader, that little thought was given to the means by which they were punished. It is stated as a fact that the average western Missourian of those days had no more compunction about shooting down a Mormon than he had an Indian, and he thought no more of killing an Indian than a dog. While the seven prisoners were on the way to Independence, they were in the gravest danger of being "strung up to the nearest tree."

Late in November, five of the original seven were taken to Liberty jail—the two Smiths, Rigdon, Wight, and Robinson. McRae and some others were added to the number. Pratt was, for some reason, kept a prisoner in Richmond. In this dungeon the Mormon prophet remained for four and a half months, eating out his heart.

The fortunes of Joseph Smith had never been at such a low ebb as at present.

He was in a vile dungeon and accused of a crime he had not even thought of committing. His avowed enemies were his accusers, his prosecutors, his jailers, his guard, his witnesses, his jurymen, his judge even. His friends, when they came to see him, were often sent to jail on their own account.

What chance had he to escape the clutches of an enraged tiger? If he were condemned, as was highly probable, he would be put to death like a common criminal; and, if he were acquitted, which was as highly improbable, he would be shot down unconscionably like a dog.

And his people?

His people were scattered and peeled. More than fifteen thousand of them—men, women, and children—were even now wandering about shepherdless, shelterless, without a fixed destination or purpose. Had he but known it, his father was presently to die from exposure during the expulsion; and his mother, every stitch of clothing on her body wet from rains and snow, was to be kept alive by fortitude that only women have.

Not only so. The very men who had been with him from the beginning and who had held up his hands while he wrote the Book and created an organization, had forsaken him and the Cause. One after another they had gone, almost all of them—Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, Martin Harris, John Whitmer, Thomas B. Marsh, Orson Hyde, the two Johnson brothers, John Corrill, and others. Even Sidney Rigdon's spirit had been broken on the wheel of persecution and suffering, and Edward Partridge was fast growing lukewarm in the fierce and pitiless storms that beat upon the church. In the main only the newer men stood by him to oversee the flock which he had gathered together.

How deeply this wholesale defection cut into the very marrow of Joseph Smith's soul—Joseph Smith, whose attachments were as strong as hoops of steel—is evident from what happened to John Corrill.

John Corrill, whose feelings ran deep and slow like the undercurrent of a great river, had joined Mormonism only after tremendous mental and emotional disturbances. He had embraced the faith only after his imagination and his intellect had been profoundly moved. Then he had thrown his whole soul into the Cause. He had shared without murmur in the expulsion from Jackson county; he had offered to be whipped or to die, if need be, for his fellow religionists; he had gone homeless into Clay county; he had worked to keep together the Mormons in Missouri; he had helped to secure the new home for the people in Caldwell county; and he had tried to stave off this last expulsion of the Mormons.

And now he was through. He had lost his faith in Joseph Smith. "Calculation after calculation," he said of the Prophet's schemes, "has failed, plan after plan has been overthrown, and our prophet seemed not to know the event till too late. If he said, 'Go up and prosper,' still we did not prosper, but have labored and toiled, and waded through trials, difficulties, and temptations, of various kinds, in hope of deliverance. But no deliverance came. The promises failed, and time after time we have been disappointed." All this he wrote in a book.

"I spent considerable time to-day in conversation with Brother John Corrill," the Prophet says in his Journal under the date of August 30, 1838, "in consequence of some expressions made by him in the presence of several brethren who had not been long in the place.

"Brother Corrill's conduct for some time has been very unbecoming especially in a man in whom so much confidence had been placed. He said he would not yield his judgment to anything proposed by the church, or any individuals of the church, or even the Great I Am, given through the appointed organ, as revelation, but would always act upon his own judgment, let him believe in whatever religion he might. He stated he would always say what he pleased, for he was a republican, and as such would do, say, act, and believe what he pleased."

In February, 1840, Elias Higbee wrote the Prophet that Corrill "was anxious to get into the church again."

Obviously all these things bore down upon the Prophet as he lay in Liberty jail, his soul torn by strange thoughts and feelings. This is evident from a prayer he wrote in March, 1839, a month before his release. Here is a part of it:

O God, where art thou? And where is the pavilion that covereth thy hiding place?

How long shall thy hand be stayed, and thine eye, yea thy pure eye, behold from the eternal heavens the wrongs of thy people and of thy servants, and thine ear be penetrated with their cries?

O Lord, how long shall they suffer these wrongs and unlawful oppressions, before thine heart shall be softened toward them, and thy bowels be moved with compassion toward them? O Lord God almighty, Maker of heaven and earth, and seas, and of all things that are in them, and who controllest and subjectest the devil and the dark and benighted dominion of sheol—stretch forth thy hand; let thine eye pierce; let thy pavilion be taken up; let thy hiding place no longer be covered; let thine ear be inclined; let thine heart be softened, and thy bowels be moved with compassion toward us.

Let thine anger be kindled against our enemies; and, in the fury of thine heart, with thy sword, avenge us of our wrongs. Remember thy suffering Saints, O our God; and thy servants will rejoice in thy name forever.
