John Henry Evans, Joseph Smith, an American Prophet ( 1946)

CHAPTER VII

The Last Peak

From this hour, freedom! From this hour I ordain myself loos'd of limits and imaginary lines, Going where I list, my own master, total and absolute, Listening to others, and considering well what they say, Pausing, searching, receiving, contemplating, Gently, but with undeniable will, divesting myself of the holds that would hold me. I inhale great draughts of space; The east and the west are mine, and the north and the south are mine. I am larger, better than I thought; I did not know I held so much goodness. —WALT WHITMAN.

Imagine a gigantic horseshoe laid out on the ground, with the bend toward the west and the two ends pulled out considerably, so as not to make too narrow a loop.

Imagine further that, on the outside of this horseshoe, there curves majestically a mighty stream of slow moving water, a mile wide at this point, while, on the inside, the land slopes gradually up from the river bank to a bench of prairie land that undulates away eastward, southward, and northward into possible farms and pastures.

And imagine still further that the ground within this curve is so wet that a man on foot can with difficulty make his way from one side to the other, and a team of horses not at all; and that it is covered, moreover, with a heavy growth of brush and scrubby trees, with only ten insignificant looking houses scattered here and there over its surface, mostly near the water front—two made of stone, two of blocks, three of boards, and the rest of logs.

That is Commerce, the new home of the Mormons! It was later called Nauvoo the Beautiful, and this name came out of the hope of its founder and his habitual optimism, rather than from its attractive features before the Mormons undertook to build a city there. Just why it had ever been occupied in the first place and why it had been named Commerce, are mysteries that have never been cleared up.

Charles Schwab, the great steel magnate, was once asked what he would do if at one swoop all his plants were swept away and he had no money to build other plants. His answer was prompt and significant: "If my organization were left intact, I could replace everything in a few years."

Joseph Smith had an idea like that.

His people were without property. In the expulsion from Missouri they had lost everything but their clothes, a few teams and wagons, and some cows. Even their landholdings were gone. John Taylor says that a common sight in those last Missouri days was the dropping of hogs and cattle, not only on the highways but in the very fields as well, at the crack of the enemy rifle.

Furthermore, the exposure of the people to the rains, the snow and hail, and the cold weather had left them, through their consequent lowered vitality, an easy prey to the malarial fever in the spring and summer following. And the leader himself, when he arrived on the scene in April, must have felt his energy depleted from his five and a half months' confinement in jails.

All that Joseph Smith had, therefore, with which to reconstruct community life was organized man power, and man-power in a low physical state, at that. Yet out of that physical paucity, coupled with rare vision, foresight, and coÃ¶perative effort, came the miracle of Nauvoo.

"Commerce," says the Prophet with his incurably forward look, "was so unhealthful very few people could live there; but, believing that it might become a healthful place by the blessing of heaven to the Saints, and no more eligible place presenting itself, I considered it wisdom to make an attempt to build up a city" here.

That was in early June, 1839.

The arrival of the Mormon leader at Quincy, in April, was the signal for immediate action and decision. After shaking hands with friends and receiving their congratulations, he set things going. His coming had revived a corpse ready for the burial.

To be sure, plans had been formed in his absence, but mostly, it seems, they looked in the wrong direction. Some leading men had advised settling in the Territory of Iowa, and had set on foot an inquiry with that end in view. Others, with an eye on the past, had counseled the abandonment of the notion that the Saints ought to keep together. That had been their undoing, and brought them to their present predicament.

Meantime, Joseph had been kept informed as to what was going on among his followers. On the day after his arrival the Prophet took things into his own hands. One the one side, he made arrangements to purchase thousands of acres of land, with a view to establishing his people permanently; and, on the other side, he planned to send all the apostles to England (one to go from there to Palestine, to dedicate that land for the return of the Jews!), while at home he would lay open for the contemplation of the Saints some fresh theological fields, and completely organize the movement. Meanwhile, at odd moments, he would press to completion, with the help of a staff of secretaries, his History of the Church, and at the same time seek redress and compensation from the State of Missouri for the losses sustained by his people. Truly a prodigious program.

Obviously he was turning that imprisonment to good account. It had given him the necessary time and leisure to develop his schemes. He had thus taken a run preparatory to a big jump. Never had the Prophet's visions of the future included such a wide sweep. One stands by in wonder and admiration at the tremendous recuperative powers of Joseph Smith.

As the Mormons, in their worn-down physical condition, began to arrive on the new townsite, they fell sick of the malarial fever. What with the coming of hot weather, the excessive dampness of the earth, and the clouds of mosquitoes—each looking eagerly and noisily for a spot into which to drive down its long, slender, flexible snout—their condition, by July twenty-second, had reached a point where something extraordinary seemed to be called for.

At this time the Prophet was living in a tent at Commerce. With his family he had moved into one of the log houses already built there, but had himself gone into the tent to provide a better place for those who were sick. He had waited upon the sick till he was quite worn out and almost down himself.

On this particular morning he rose with a distinct sense of spiritual power.

It is not difficult to trace his mental processes during the night, for they were obviously connected with the scenes through which he and his people had recently passed. His mind would, first of all, have gone over the details of his own incarceration. The outrageous betrayal; the unjust sentence of death, which was never executed; the long confinement; vermin; putrid food which, if the prisoners turned away from in disgust, was served over and over again, till they managed somehow to dispose of it; and once (as they came to know) that dish of human flesh, the history of which only God knew, and the butcher; sickness and delirium on the part of Sidney Rigdon, till in sheer pity he was released; futile attempts at escape, after which harsher treatment from the jailer, worse fare, if possible, and even coarser guards; and always obscene stories and vulgar jests, as well as the most offensive Western profanity—all these particulars would rise vividly to his mind as he lay there on his miasmatic bed.

And then, too, there would come the details of his strange getaway—court proceedings in Daviess county; no conviction, for lack of evidence; delay on one pretext or another; change of venue to Boone county; on the way the drunken guards; help from one of the guards, less intoxicated than the others; and the dilemma of the officers in the case, fear to let them go and fear to keep them.

Then there were the scenes connected with the expulsion of his followers from Missouri—exposure from the inclement weather; the pity and sympathy of the Quincyites; public charity and work committees from among the citizens. Where was God? Surely he had not forsaken his people in their trouble and distress. Were they to have nothing but mobbings, drivings, plunderings, poverty, and now, on top of all, sickness and death?

But what of the promises? After that agonizing prayer in Liberty jail there had been strong words of hope and comfort: "Thou shalt triumph over all thy foes. Thy people shall never be turned against thee by the testimony of traitors. But for a small moment and thy voice shall be more terrible in the midst of thine enemies than that of the fierce lion, because of thy righteousness, and thy God shall stand by thee forever. Those who lift up the heel against thee, their basket shall not be full, they shall be despised by their flatterers, and their sins shall be a millstone about their necks."

And so, as we have said, the Prophet rose on the morning of July twenty-second feeling himself endowed with a high degree of spiritual power.

Across the river and past the long, narrow island extending up and down the stream, was a sort of town, called Montrose. It consisted mostly of log cabins in an abandoned barracks, which had once been used by Uncle Sam's soldiers while guarding the frontiers of the rapidly growing nation.

In one of these cabins were two families—Brigham Young's and Orson Pratt's. A few doors away, in another cabin, lived Wilford Woodruff, by this time an apostle, who tells the all but incredible tale.

On this twenty-second day of July there came across the river to Montrose, in the ferry-boat, a group of five men. They were Joseph Smith, Parley P. Pratt, Sidney Rigdon, Hyrum Smith, and Heber C. Kimball. Silently they walked to where Young lived. He was in bed, sick of a fever, and had been for some days. The Prophet touched him, spoke to him, and the sick man rose, dressed, and joined the group. Passing by Woodruff's door, Joseph called out to him, "Brother Wilford, follow me." This "Brother Wilford" was glad to do.

Without speaking, the seven men crossed the quadrangle and came to the home of one, Elijah Fordham. Fordham was on what every one believed his death-bed. He was no longer aware of his surroundings. He had been dying for an hour. Already the death glaze was in his eyes. The Prophet went to the bed. One hand holding his hat, he took the sick man's hand with the other. He said:

"Brother Fordham, do you know me?"

There was no answer.

"Brother Elijah," Joseph said again, "don't you know who I am?"

Something began to play on the dying man's features. It was as if he were coming out of a sound sleep. Very feebly he answered, "Yes."

"Have you faith to be healed?"

"I'm afraid it is too late"—very faintly; "if you had come sooner, Brother Joseph, I think I might have been healed."

"Do you believe that Jesus is the Christ?"

"I do, Brother Joseph, I do."

Thereupon the Prophet, standing erect, his face luminously pale, said in a very loud voice: "Elijah, in the name of Jesus of Nazareth, I command you to arise and be made whole!"

In an instant Elijah Fordham leaped from his bed like a man rising from the grave. A healthy color was in his face, and life in every movement. His feet had been done up in poultices of meal. These he kicked off vigorously, scattering the contents over the floor. Calling for his clothes, he dressed, ate a bowl of bread and milk, and went out into the street with the visitors to take part in the healing of others.

Before coming across the river to Montrose, the Prophet had healed all those who were sick on the east side of the stream—first those in his own house and dooryard, then those on the river bank. And now he did the same thing for those on the west side who were fever-stricken.

Woodruff says that, while they were waiting for the ferry-boat to take them back to Commerce, a stranger came up to the Prophet and begged him to come to his home and heal his sick babies. The man had heard of the extraordinary things that had happened.

Joseph hesitated a moment, then he said to Wilford: "You go with the man. Take this handkerchief and wipe the faces of the children, as you administer to them, and they will be healed."

Woodruff says that he did as directed—with the desired result. The handkerchief, a red silk, is still in the Woodruff family treasure chest.

The twenty second day of July, 1839, therefore, has come down in Mormon history as "a day of God's power"—and, incidentally, of Joseph Smith's.

Did Joseph Smith, in creating the City of Nauvoo, anticipate the major problem growing out of our present large aggregations of people in cities? It would seem so. And, as always, he had his solution ready to hand. Whether his solution would also be ours, is quite another question.

To-day our great cities complain of their lack of power. The grants of power of such large towns as New York, Chicago, and Los Angeles, in which are millions of people, come from the state legislature, a body of rural as well as urban representatives, which often enacts measures by trade and bargaining. Instead of making their own charters, their charters are made for them. They exercise only such powers as are specifically granted, whereas they seek to exercise such powers as are not specifically prohibited by the constitutions and laws of the state and nation. In a word, our cities demand independence, autonomy, home rule.

The problem the Mormon prophet was called upon to meet in Nauvoo was identical with this, although the reason was different. He, too, wanted a sort of independence, not that he might have greater freedom in the granting of franchises to gas, electric light, telephone, and street railway companies, and other similar purposes, for these of course did not exist at the time, but rather that he might prevent a repetition of those scenes in Ohio and Missouri, especially in Missouri, through which his people had passed. But in order to do this he would have to obtain from the state legislature larger concessions of power than had ever been granted any American city. That he managed to get such concessions was due not only to certain political conditions in Illinois at that time, but to his ingenuity and tact. The legislature which granted the Nauvoo charter had Abraham Lincoln in it.

When the late President Taft was a visitor in Salt Lake City, he commented publicly on the "large breathing space" in the town and paid a tribute to the founders of the city for their farsightedness. The streets there are wide and roomy, and cross one another at right angles. Had he gone into other parts of Utah, he would have found towns with the same lay-out. But he would have discovered more than that. He would have observed also that the towns were exactly seven miles apart and that all the farms are in between, so that each town is the center of an area of about seven miles square. The people, for the most part, live in the towns, while the men work mostly in the country outside.

Brigham Young has usually been given credit for this general arrangement, but it really belongs to Joseph Smith, since the great Utah pioneer leader but followed out the scheme developed by the Prophet and carried out in Nauvoo.

Civically speaking, the great passion of the Mormon prophet was to have every one living under conditions of both city and country life. This, as may be recalled, was the idea embodied in the plan for the City of Zion, at Independence, Missouri.

The plot was to contain one mile square; each square was to contain ten acres; and the lots were to be laid off in alternate squares. This, according to the Prophet, would accommodate between fifteen and twenty thousand people—not a large city. The farms were to be on the outside of the town. All the houses were to be of brick or stone, with space in front and in the rear for lawns and gardens. The streets were to be eight rods wide and to cross at right angles. And when this plot was "thus laid off and supplied," it was intended that others should be laid off in the same way, and "so fill up the world in these last days."

Doubtless the Prophet did not make any provision for modern industrialism in his plan for cities. Modern industrialism did not exist in his day. But he would probably be opposed to such large industrial centers as have grown up in our American civilization, and greatly prefer, as some have recently suggested, a plan by which our factories might be distributed over the nation in such a way as to provide employment for the rural population during slack seasons.

The underlying element in all the Prophet's civic planning, as indeed in everything he did, was human welfare and not dividends; and he would have had no patience with any argument against his schemes which had no securer foundation than what is or what has been. He would change everything that was wrong—everything in government, in politics, in business, in industry, in agriculture, as well as everything in religion and theology.

The plan of Nauvoo followed the general plan for the City of Zion. The streets were wide; they crossed one another at right angles; the houses were mainly of stone or brick, and in the colonial style of architecture; and the farms were on the outside of the town. Provisions, of course, were made for blacksmith shops, manufacturing establishments, as well as for stores, hotels and livery stables. In population Nauvoo rose to about twenty-five thousand—the largest town in the state.

Nauvoo's charter, as stated, was the most liberal ever granted to any American city. It provided complete independence educationally, judicially, and militarily. The charter was the work of Joseph Smith, and was granted by a legislature, whose members had the elections and taxes in mind more than the particular clauses of the instrument they were considering. Both Joseph Smith and the legislators, it seems, knew what they were after—he wanted power, and they wanted votes.

A city council was provided for, consisting of a mayor, four aldermen, and nine councilors. These were to be elected by such male whites as were twenty-one years of age and eligible to vote in the state elections. Other officers were appointive—a recorder, a treasurer, an assessor, a marshal, and a supervisor of streets. Real and personal property was taxable.

The council was given power "to establish and execute all such ordinances, not repugnant to the state and national constitutions, as they might deem necessary for the peace, benefit, good order, regulation, convenience, and cleanliness of the city."

There were some peculiar features of the charter, two of which were later to prove troublesome. One section provided for an independent school system. A university, within the city limits, was to teach "the arts, sciences, and learned professions," and was to be under the "control and management of a board of trustees, consisting of a chancellor, registrar, and twenty-three regents, with perpetual succession." This board was granted "all the powers and privileges for the advancement of the cause of education which appertain to the trustees of any other college or university of the state."

Another section provided for "a body of independent military men, to be called the Nauvoo Legion." The officers, who were given power to establish and execute "all such laws and ordinances as might be considered necessary for the benefit, government, and regulation of said legion," were to receive their appointment by the governor. The first commander-in-chief was the Prophet himself, who bore the title of "lieutenant-general." Moreover, the legion was to be at the disposal, not only of the governor, but of the mayor as well. And hereby hangs a tale. In a later year the legion was to number between four and five thousand men, with their proportion of the state arms. The men received training from experts, who were provided by the city. Also they were to be exempt from other military duty.

As for the judiciary, the mayor was to have "exclusive jurisdiction in all cases arising under the ordinances of the corporation," to issue "such processes as might be necessary to carry such ordinances into execution and effect, and to hear such appeals as arose out of the municipal court." This court was to consist of the mayor as chief justice and the aldermen as associate justices. The "municipal court," said the charter, "shall have power to grant writs of habeas corpus in all cases arising under the ordinances of the city council."

This charter was signed by the governor, December 16, 1840, and bore the signature of "S. A. Douglas" as secretary of state.

The Prophet's comments on this document are interesting, as showing his purpose.

"The city charter of Nauvoo," he says with undisguised pride, "is of my own plan and device. I concocted it for the salvation of the church, and on principles so broad that every honest man might dwell secure under its protective influence without distinction of sect or party."

Later, when he was in difficulties, he made a comment that is even more illuminating. He says:

If there is not power in our charter and courts, then there is not power in the state of Illinois nor in the Congress or Constitution of the United States. For the United States gave to Illinois her constitution, or charter, and Illinois gave to Nauvoo her charter, conceding to us our vested rights, which she has no power to take from us.

All the power there was in Illinois she gave to Nauvoo. The municipal court has all the power to issue and determine writs of habeas corpus within the limits of this state and that the legislature can confer. This city has all the power that the state courts have, and was given it by the same authority—the legislature.

The charter says that the city council shall have power and authority to make, ordain, establish, and execute such ordinances, not repugnant to the Constitution of the United States or of this state, as they may deem necessary for the peace, benefit, and safety of the inhabitants of said city. Also that the municipal court shall have power to grant writs of habeas corpus in all cases arising under ordinances of the city. There is nothing but what we have power over, except where restricted by the Constitution of the United States.

"But," says the mob, "what dangerous powers!" Yes—dangerous, because they will protect the innocent and put down mobocrats. If these powers are dangerous, then the Constitution of the United States and of this state are dangerous.

But they are not dangerous to good men; they are so to bad men who are breakers of the laws. The lawyers themselves acknowledge that we have all power granted us in our charter that we could ask for—that we have more power than any other court in the state; for all other courts are restricted, while ours is not.

Nauvoo soon became what its name was said by the Prophet to mean—The Beautiful. Somehow it grew into the healthful place its founder had hoped and expected. This miracle happened partly because the removal of the timber bordering the river, permitted the land to drain. The orderly appearing streets in the town, its commodious homes with front and back yards of lawns and gardens, its happy and industrious population where there was no idleness, its temple crowning the point where the rise in the land embraced the plateau to the east—all this impressed visitors, who, as time went on, came from all parts of the country and Europe to see the man who claimed to be the only prophet since John the Baptist.

At the first municipal election, held in February, 1841, the following ticket was "unanimously" chosen: For mayor, John C. Bennett; for aldermen, William Marks, Samuel Smith, Daniel H. Wells, and Newel K. Whitney; for councilors, Joseph Smith, Hyrum Smith, Sidney Rigdon, Charles C. Rich, John T. Barnett, Wilson Law, Don Carlos Smith, John P. Greene and Vinson Knight.

Under date of February third, the Prophet writes in his History In his address to the council the mayor took a leaf from the Prophet's book, when he said: "I now recommend, in the strongest possible terms, that you take prompt, strong, and decisive measures to 'prohibit and suppress' all such establishments [as 'tippling houses' and dram shops]. It is true that you have the power 'to tax,' or license and tolerate, them, and thus add to the city finances; but I consider it much better to raise revenue by an ad valorem tax on the property of sober men, than by licensing dram shops, or taxing the signs of the inebriated worshipers at the shrine of Bacchus. The revels of baccanalians in the houses of blasphemy and noise will always prove a disgrace to a moral people. Let us commence correctly."

By way of handling the liquor problem in Nauvoo, the mayor advised against the sale of spirituous liquors in less than wholesale quantities, on the ground that "the liberty of selling the intoxicating cup is a false liberty." One of the first ordinances under the new government was to prohibit "the vending of whisky in a less quantity than a gallon or other spirituous liquors in a less quantity than a quart, excepting on the recommendation of a physician or surgeon duly accredited by the chancellor and regents of the university of Nauvoo." It was introduced by the Prophet.

Another of the early ordinances, drawn up by the Mormon leader, touched the question of religious liberty. It read:

Be it ordained by the city council of the city of Nauvoo, that the Catholics, Presbyterians, Methodists, Latter-day Saints, Quakers, Episcopals, Universalists, Unitarians, Mohammedans, and all other religious sects and denominations whatever, shall have free toleration, and equal privileges, in this city; and should any person be guilty of ridiculing and abusing or otherwise depreciating another in consequence of his religion, or of disturbing or interrupting any religious meeting within the limits of this city, he shall, on conviction thereof, be considered a disturber of the peace, and fined in any sum not exceeding five hundred dollars, or imprisoned not exceeding six months, or both, at the discretion of said mayor or court.

A careful examination of the details in the Mormon prophet's life and thought during this Nauvoo period—a period of a little more than five years, from April, 1839, when he arrived in Commerce, to June, 1844, when he was murdered in Carthage—reveals some interesting developments in his personality.

For one thing, he becomes more tolerant of others' views, more mellow in his feelings toward mankind, especially the erring among his own people. And, for another thing, he grows almost suddenly surer of himself, more conscious of his own powers, and therefore more dominant in the community he is exerting himself to establish. It is the period when the tree is flowering.

There are at least two reasons for this unfoldment of character into clearer outlines.

In the first place, those five and a half months of enforced confinement in Missouri were beginning to bear fruit. The Prophet's nature, as already hinted, was the unusual combination of the active and the meditative. His mind was never idle. On the contrary, it was preternaturally alert. To confine his body in dungeons was in reality but to liberate the forces of his mind. Some of the largest conceptions in his religious philosophy, as we shall see presently, came out of that imprisonment. He had an almost similar experience in Nauvoo (to be narrated in another chapter), when he went into seclusion to escape his old enemies in Missouri. These two brief periods, taken together, reveal another Joseph Smith from the man who led Zion's army or who founded Nauvoo.

In the second place, it was during this period that he found himself. From his earliest years till he went to Illinois, the Prophet had met only rustics like himself. Cowdery, the Whitmers, the Pratts, Partridge, Young, Kimball, Woodruff, Corrill, and the rest—these were provincials. About the only exception—if he was an exception—was Sidney Rigdon. But Rigdon, as well as these other Mormon leaders, always took second place to young Smith, and looked up to him as a superior. And one cannot find one's self under such conditions.

But in these Nauvoo days Joseph Smith came in contact with men of a different class—men who were either educated or who were prominent in some way. This enabled him, whether consciously or unconsciously, to compare himself with them in native ability.

To begin with, there was Dr. John C. Bennett. Hypocrite and scoundrel, as that eel-like individual was, yet he had a social veneer that took him into positions of prominence. Originally from Massachusetts, he had been connected as teacher with the Willoughby University, Ohio, had practiced medicine in both Ohio and Illinois, and had been elected brigadier general of the Invincible Dragoons in the latter state. In 1840 he had joined the Mormons, and been chosen mayor as a reward for his assistance in securing the charter.

Then there was Daniel H. Wells. Though not a school-trained man, "Squire" Wells, as he came to be called, was a man of exceptional ability. When the Saints came to Commerce, they found him there, a twenty-five-year-old justice of the peace, in possession of eight acres of land. This ground he broke up into city lots and sold to poor people at a low price and for long terms. In his simple, straight-forward nature, as well as in his passionate love of right, he resembled Abraham Lincoln—with whom he has often been compared. During the Prophet's life-time Wells was not a member of the Mormon church, though he was baptized two years after Joseph's death.

Orson Spencer, who embraced Mormonism during this Nauvoo period, was a man of culture and education. Born in the Bay State in 1802, he trained for the ministry. At fifteen he showed such promise in the local school that a friend of the family sent him to Union College, in Schenectady, where he was graduated with distinction at twenty-two. After teaching school for a time in Georgia, he entered a theological college in Hamilton, New York, from which he obtained a master's degree in 1829. Becoming a Baptist preacher, he soon rose into prominence in New England. His conversion to Mormonism created an even greater sensation among Baptists than had the conversion of Sidney Rigdon among the Campbellites. On coming to Nauvoo he was made chancellor of the university there.

In addition to these men, with whom he had almost daily contact, the Prophet was on more or less familiar terms with all the leading men in Illinois—Stephen A. Douglas, Governor Carlin, Governor Ford, Judge Pope, and many of the most prominent legislators, including, most likely, Abraham Lincoln. Douglas he came to know almost intimately, not only while the "Little Giant" was secretary of state, but also while he was judge and Congressman. These contacts came partly because of the Prophet's legal difficulties, and partly because he, too, was regarded as one of Illinois' leading men, possibly its most influential.

Nor must we neglect to mention the large number of strangers who came to see the Prophet in Nauvoo. The name of the Mormon leader was known throughout the United States, Canada, and England. Among some persons it was held in honor, but among the majority it was held in dishonor. That was of no matter, however, to visitors. The fact that in Nauvoo was a man who proclaimed himself a prophet in the biblical sense was alone sufficient to arouse immense curiosity everywhere, and the fact that he had attracted thousands of followers and settled them in a town of the proportions and the beauty of the Mississippi river town but added to the desire to set eyes on him.

Among these visitors were special writers on newspaper staffs, world-wide travelers, ministers of various religious denominations, army officers, and men of renown from both England and the Eastern states. It was always Joseph Smith they had come to see, and sometimes to write up for their readers; and it was Joseph Smith, mainly, who talked with them and showed them the sights, never omitting to put in a good word for the faith, wherever he could do so without lugging it into the conversation.

It was probably from his contacts with some of the leading men of the nation in Washington that the Prophet took his most exact measurements. For, in the winter of 1839-40, he visited the capital in behalf of his people, and there met not only members of the House and the Senate, but also the President and members of the Cabinet.

In October, 1839, he was appointed by a conference of his disciples in Nauvoo to lay before the national authorities the cause of those who had been driven from Missouri. Two others—Sidney Rigdon and Judge Elias Higbee—were appointed to go with the Prophet. But Rigdon, delayed by sickness on the way, did not reach the capital till the business was transacted as far as it could be. The journey required a full month one way. They traveled partly in a wagon belonging to Porter Rockwell, partly on horseback, and partly in the stagecoach of the period.

A little way out from Washington the driver of the coach went into a tavern to quench his thirst. While he was gone, the horses took fright and speeded down the road. Quieting the passengers—a member of Congress and a woman with a baby—the Prophet opened the door, pulled himself gingerly along the outside of the swaying vehicle, drew up the reins, and stopped the animals, but not before they had covered some three miles.

It was a feat so daring, and so successful, as to elicit praise from the Congressman, who declared that he would mention the incident and the name of the hero in the House of Representatives. But, on learning who it was, he remained silent. He was a Missourian. And there the matter ended.

Arriving in Washington, Joseph and his companion sought out "as cheap a boarding place as can be found in the city." The fact is that, as the Prophet says, the two had left home "with little or nothing," except "trust in God."

The very next day they obtained an interview with President Van Buren. "We went to the door," Joseph wrote his brother Hyrum, "and requested to see the President." The President was in "an upper apartment." "We presented him with our letters of introduction. As soon as he had read one of them, he looked upon us with a kind of half-frown, and said: 'What can I do? I can do nothing for you! If I do anything, I shall come in contact with the whole state of Missouri.'

"But we were not to be intimidated," the Mormon leader goes on, "and demanded a hearing. Before we left him he promised to reconsider what he had said, and observed that he felt to sympathize with us, on account of our sufferings."

The President inquired as to the difference between the Mormon faith and others. The Prophet gave as the main difference the gift of the Holy Ghost, which the Mormons enjoyed. That, he thought, covered everything. "I deemed it unnecessary to make many words in preaching the gospel to him, but suffice it to say, he has our testimony."

The rest of the time they "spent in hunting up Representatives in order to get our case before the House." A meeting of the Congressional delegation from Illinois was held, at which the case was given a partial hearing. Action, however, was postponed till senators and representatives from other states could be consulted on the legal aspects involved. The upshot of it all was that a briefer petition was drawn up and later presented to the Senate. Nothing ever came of it, except a recommendation that the petitioners seek redress in the courts and of the legislature of Missouri—a thing which the Mormons, and everybody else for that matter, knew to be useless.

If the Prophet hesitated to "preach the gospel" to President Van Buren, he experienced no such reluctance in preaching it to others, both in Washington and elsewhere.

One of the Representatives—a certain Matthew S. Davis from New York State,—in an illuminating letter to his wife, tells about one of the meetings held in the capital by the Mormon leader. Here are some paragraphs:

I went last evening to hear "Joe" Smith, the celebrated Mormon, expound his doctrine. I, with several others, had a desire to understand his tenets as explained by himself.

He is not an educated man; but he is a plain, sensible, strong minded man. Everything he says, is said in a manner to leave an impression that he is sincere. There is no levity, no fanaticism, no want of dignity in his deportment. In his garb there are no peculiarities; his dress being that of a plain, unpretending citizen. He is by profession a farmer, but is evidently well read.

During the whole of his address, and it occupied more than two hours, there was no opinion or belief that he expressed, that was calculated, in the least degree, to impair the morals of society, or in any manner to degrade and brutalize the human species. There was much in his precepts, if they were followed, that would soften the asperities of man towards man, and that would tend to make him a more rational being than he is generally found to be. There was no violence, no fury, no denunciation. His religion appears to be a religion of meekness, lowliness, and mild persuasion.

Towards the close of his address, he remarked that he had been represented to be a Savior. All this was false. He made no such pretensions. He was but a man, he said: a plain, untutored man, seeking what he should to be saved.

Throughout his whole address, he displayed strongly a spirit of charity and forbearance.

I have taken some pains to explain this man's belief, as he himself explained it. I have changed my opinion of the Mormons. They are an injured and much-abused people.

Leaving Judge Higbee to take care of matters in Washington, the Prophet went on a preaching tour in Pennsylvania and New Jersey. After that, in company with Dr. Robert D. Foster, a Mormon, and Porter Rockwell, he returned home "on the railroad and stages back to Dayton, Ohio," after having been absent a little more than four months.

The Prophet was not favorably impressed with what he saw in Washington. His opinions, expressed with his customary frankness, give us an insight into some of the hidden places of his character.

Congress took too long in getting itself under way. The Senate had to wait till the House could quit bickering over the selection of a speaker, before it could get down to business, and the President had to wait for both before he could present his message. Joseph would have things move faster. If John Quincy Adams was the best man for the place, why in heaven's name could not the Representatives have got together at once on the matter, instead of delaying the affairs of the nation. In this whole matter there was "a great deal of wind blown off on the occasion each day" till a speaker was chosen.

And then, when Congress did at length get started, there was manifest "an itching disposition" on the part of its members "to display their oratory on the most trivial occasions, and so much etiquette, bowing and scraping, twisting and turning, to make a display of their witticisms, that it seems rather a display of folly and show, more than substance and gravity, such as becomes a great nation like ours."

That sounds like a paragraph from the twentieth-century record.

At this time the Democratic party was in power nationally—which means that the influence, manners, and behavior of the South, with its background of courtliness, was ascendant. In those days, at the slightest personal affront, out came the sword on the duel field. The Mormon leader's background and upbringing had been under Northern conditions.

Nor was the Prophet more favorably impressed with the men he met at Washington. And he contacted a large number of the Representatives, the Senators, and the Cabinet members, as well as the President.

"We came with one of the Missouri members from Wheeling to this place," he tells Hyrum. "He was drunk at once—and that was most of the time. There was but one day when he could navigate, and that day he was keeled over so he could not eat dinner." Not a promising introduction to the nation's Representatives.

Of Calhoun the Prophet speaks particularly. "I had an interview with Mr. John C. Calhoun, whose conduct towards me very ill becomes his station." We get no details of the interview. Four years later the Mormon leader, as candidate for the presidency, said some biting things about the Senator—which may have harked back to this meeting.

For Van Buren, Joseph Smith, like a good many other critics of his day and since, had feelings that approached the contemptuous. From the record one is unable to determine whether there were two interviews or only one. The President lived in "a very large and splendid palace, surrounded with a splendid enclosure, decorated with all the fineries and elegancies of this world." It was Van Buren's attitude, however, that caused the greatest offense. In one place, though not in the letter to Hyrum, the Prophet says that the President treated him "very insolently" and listened "with great reluctance" to their entreaties. "Gentlemen," he reports Van Buren as saying, "your cause is just, but I can do nothing for you. If I take up for you, I shall lose the vote of Missouri."

An attitude like that it was utterly impossible for a man of Joseph Smith's type to understand, with his frankness, his forthrightness, and his love of fair play. "On my way home," is his parting shot, "I did not fail to proclaim the iniquity and insolence of Martin Van Buren toward myself and an injured people, which will have its effect on the public mind. May he never be elected again to any office of trust or power, by which he may abuse the innocent and let the guilty go free." He never was.

Joseph Smith went home from the national capital applying to himself a new foot-rule. He had stood up beside the nation's great men and found out how big and how little he was.

One thing could not have escaped his attention. In education, in polish, in the social amenities he was far below the men whom he saw and met and talked with in Washington. He had not their graces of conversation, their elegancies of dress, their aptness for turning a phrase, or their sharpness of wit. And doubtless he envied them in these accomplishments, as adding to social enjoyment.

But neither could another thing have escaped his penetrating observation. This was the way in which many of these men placed their own interests above the interests of the nation. It was perfectly obvious that these men, even the President, had an eye on the coming November election returns—which determined what they did in Congress and the way they did it. "If I take up your cause, I shall lose Missouri." That is what the "subtle rather than strong" man at the White House had told the Prophet. And this spirit was dominant at both ends of the Capitol.

What was it, anyway, that made a man a Man?

Bowing and scraping, looking out for votes every two or four or six years, and then filling the pork barrel for your constituents? Clay was forever compromising with the evil of slavery, in order to satisfy all parties—as if all parties ever could or ever should be satisfied. Calhoun was always trying to circumvent and nullify the Constitution in the interest of a great wrong. Webster had a Seventh-of March speech in his system, and was potentially the "fallen Ichabod" of Whittier's poem. And these three were the greatest living statesmen!

No; the thing that made a man a Man was a passionate love of eternal right, of simple justice, of human service. Nothing else mattered much. What good was an idea if it was a wrong idea? Of what value was it to begin something that was not worth doing? Of what use was it to go ever so far on a road, on which you had only to retrace your steps, if you got nowhere?

"I can do nothing for you!" Jackson would have found a way to do something. Jackson was a strong man. "Go to your plunderers and murderers for redress!"

One of the strange phenomena of Mormonism in Joseph Smith's time is that, when the faith was at its lowest ebb materially, the great missionary enterprises took their rise and received their impetus.

It will be recalled that a mission to England was projected at the time when the organization was falling to pieces in Kirtland and the Prophet's very life was in danger. And now, again, when the church was scattered, and poverty and sickness were playing havoc among its members, extraordinary steps were taken to extend the work of conversion, which the apostles Kimball and Hyde had so promisingly begun, across the sea. Almost the entire "quorum" of apostles were dispatched to that country, at a sacrifice that is incredible.

In July, 1838, the Prophet had told the Twelve, in response to a request by them for instruction, that they should go on a mission to England the following spring and that the point of their departure should be the temple site in Far West. It was a curious place of direction—as the event proved. For, when spring came, Far West was no longer the home of the Mormons, but an extremely dangerous place for one of them to be found in.

Nevertheless, so anxious were the apostles that no word of their leader should fail, that seven of them went to the spot designated and held a meeting. It was midnight of April twenty-sixth. By this time five new men had been appointed to fill the places of those who had abandoned the faith—John E. Page, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, George A. Smith, and Willard Richards, who was still in England. Orson Hyde had repented his defection and joined his compeers in Nauvoo.

When they departed from Nauvoo, some of the apostles were sick, and their families destitute. ''It must be no small matter," said Rigdon at a farewell given the missionaries, ''which could induce men to leave their families and their homes to travel over the earth amidst persecutions and trials such as has always followed the preaching of this gospel."

Young, now the leading apostle, was so sick that he could not walk unassisted even the few rods from his home to the ferry boat. Kimball, when he crossed from Montrose to Nauvoo, had to stay in bed for four days in the latter place. His wife had just given birth to a baby, and all the rest of the children, except one, were down with the fever. George A. Smith and his two companions were so weak that, when their wagon upset and spilled them on the ground, they could not get to their feet for some time.

Moreover, the apostles were without enough money to take them to their destination. Some were assisted by fellow religionists in Nauvoo and Quincy and on the way to New York City. Others obtained work to provide the necessary means for the journey and voyage. But all of them preached Mormonism in the towns through which they passed. They did not, therefore, reach England at the same time.

Of the twelve apostles who were appointed to take this mission only two of them failed to go. These were Page and William Smith. Page was supposed to go to Palestine with Hyde, but he found excuses to stay at home. He was a fine-weather apostle. Presently there appeared an advertisement in an Eastern paper to the effect that a minister of that name would like a job preaching. Smith had never been an enthusiastic worker in the cause. Hot and cold by spurts, he wanted one time to resign, but was urged by his brother not to do so, as that was the mark of a quitter—an idea abhorrent to Joseph. He, too, forsook the religion on his brother's death. He could not stand the strenuous Brigham.

In April, 1840, reports from England began to come to the Prophet at Nauvoo. Since the departure of the first missionaries from the English mission, in April 1838, between eight and nine hundred persons had embraced Mormonism. This brought the total membership in England to around three thousand. The arrival of nine apostles, with a number of other workers, gave the religion a tremendous push, especially so since Brigham Young was one of the group.

Every letter from the Old World brought good tidings to the Mormon leader. Now it was that England, Scotland, and Ireland were to be flooded with explanatory literature. A periodical, to be known as The Millennial Star,was to be issued; an edition of the Book of Mormon published; and a hymn book got out for the use of the Saints, who wanted something new to sing in their meetings. "The priests," wrote the senior apostle, "feel just as they did in the days of the Savior. If they let us alone, all men will believe on us."

Now it was that the apostle Orson Pratt had gone to Edinburgh to start things. Here he found the Scots "tight" in their religion. So, in consequence, he often went up to a high mountain every day to beseech the Lord to "give him the hearts of the people." Which the Lord did. For presently Pratt baptized above two hundred.

And now came reassuring news from Wilford Woodruff. At first he had gone, with an Elder Turley, to Staffordshire, but later had been impressed to go to Herefordshire. In the vicinity of Ledbury he had found the society of "United Brethren," an offshoot of Methodism waiting for a new order of things. Woodruff had that new order. Not only did he baptize the six hundred members of this organization, including forty-five preachers, but some twelve hundred others.

And so it went.

When the apostles returned home, after a year's absence, they had this report to make: Five thousand copies of the Book of Mormon printed; the Star set on its feet and paying for itself; fifty thousand tracts distributed to inquirers; a permanent emigration agency established, through which one thousand converts had gone to swell the population of Nauvoo; and a total membership in Great Britain of near eight thousand "souls."

By no means, however, was the work of Mormon propaganda neglected in the United States and the British Dominions. Only it was carried on, for the most part, by lesser lights, but not less efficiently on that account.

For one of the singular things about Mormonism (and every other virile creed, for that matter) is that some of the most striking results have been attained by the most obscure and humble means. The Book of Mormon converted Parley P. Pratt, Thomas B. Marsh, Brigham Young, Dr. Richards, and hosts of other men of ability. The Reverend Orson Spencer was brought into the church by his lay brother Daniel, but the man who changed the faith of that stout old puritan is not even known by name. And one of the finest scholars of later Mormonism—an English clergyman and an M.A. from Oxford—was converted by an uneducated farm boy from Utah, who, as a missionary for his church, one day handed the minister a tract in his garden.

Well, scores of these unknowns were scattered throughout the United States and Canada, preaching Mormonism in their unostentatious way in the homes, on the streets, and in public places, at their own expense mostly and in the approved fashion, "two-by-two."

And their efforts were reinforced by the work of the apostles, as these went leisurely through the states to England, and also, as we have seen, by the Prophet himself in the District of Columbia, in Pennsylvania, and in New Jersey. Orson Pratt preached in Pennsylvania. Forty-five persons, he says, had recently been baptized in Philadelphia by Benjamin Winchester. Brigham Young and George A. Smith spent some time in New York State and Connecticut.

Thus the membership of the church at home was increased by many thousands.

A party was in progress at the Prophet's home in Nauvoo. In the afternoon fifty couples had sat down at his table to dinner. The guests spent the evening in dancing and listening to music. Joseph Smith liked this sort of thing.

During the festivities a strange man lunged into the room. Was he drunk? His hair hung down to his shoulders; his hat, an old, slouchy piece of headgear, was pulled down over his ears and eyes; and his general attire was anything but neat. "A Missourian!" was in everybody's mouth.

A captain of police was present. Joseph motioned to him to put the stranger out. There was a scuffle. Then, for the first time, the Prophet got a glimpse of the man's face. "To my great surprise and joy untold," says the Mormon leader, "I discovered it was my long-tried and warm, but cruelly persecuted friend, Orrin Porter Rockwell, just arrived from a year's imprisonment, without conviction, in Missouri."

Back in the twenties the Rockwells and the Smiths were neighbors in Manchester. Very often, of an evening when the nights were long, Mother and Father Smith used to call on the Rockwells. On such occasions they talked about the wonderful Book their son was working on. Porter, then a small boy, liked to sit up, on the pretext that the tallow dip needed care.

Later, when he was about fourteen, he picked berries by moonlight and hauled wood to Palmyra, so as to help in the printing of the volume. No one knows whether the money thus earned was ever used for this purpose; that does not matter; it shows where his interest lay. He was one of the Prophet's first converts. Rockwell grew up into a superstitious, drinking, adventurous man, who had no word in his vocabulary for the sensation of fear. In spite of the contrast between them (maybe because of it) he and Joseph became fast friends. No man ever had a follower more devoted than the Prophet had in "Port" Rockwell.

After the martyrdom, Porter went West with Brigham Young. He did this because the Prophet would have liked him to do so. In Utah his very name struck terror to the heart of the worst desperados. Porter was a two-gun man, and his aim with both guns was unerring. He always got his man, and brought him home—even if he was dead. Once he brought back two brothers, both "bad" men, the sons of a widow. "Mrs. Blank," he said to her when she came to the door in answer to his knock, "here's your boys." They were lying on the bottom of his wagon box—dead. And another time, after the railway had gone through Utah to the West Coast, the express company hired Rockwell to capture four bandits who had robbed and brutally maltreated the baggage man. Porter went on the manhunt alone. Presently he brought the four back—three of them dead, and the fourth mortally wounded.

In his old age he used to say, "I've never killed a man that shouldn't ought to have been killed." And most probably that was true.

Men of sixty-five and over, in the Utah of to-day, remember Orrin Porter Rockwell, riding wildly up and down Main Street in Salt Lake City, his long hair streaming in the wind, yelling like a Comanche and lassoing the signs hanging out from the store-fronts; or standing, half-drunk, on a tree stump in front of a saloon, and letting out one of his long hoots, a compound of all the Indian yells, with something of his own added, which threw such a scare into the stranger as made him take to his heels; or reeling into a saloon in one of the mining camps, feigning intoxication, and then all of a sudden whipping out his two guns, lining everybody up against the bar, and taking out his man.

No scissors had touched his hair, nor any razor his beard, from the night of that party at the Prophet's, because ("Port" said) Joseph had promised him that he should not be killed as long as he left his hair uncut as it was then. And he did so, till one day in California he met the widow of the Prophet's brother, Don Carlos, who had become bald through a fever. Thereupon he cut his hair to make her a wig. It was the least thing he could do for a relative of the man he had loved.

The Mormon people everywhere thought well of Porter, in spite of his faults, and they tolerated those faults, because the man had been loyal to their (and his) chieftain, the Prophet.

But why had Rockwell been in jail in Missouri for nearly a year? That is an interesting story, and connects with the fortunes of Joseph Smith.

In May, 1842, Lilburn W. Boggs, now ex-governor of Missouri, was shot and seriously wounded, as he sat by a window in his residence at Independence. At once people there looked about for an enemy, and at once the finger of suspicion pointed to the Mormons. Who had greater cause to wish the death of the ex-governor than Joseph Smith? Since, however, the Prophet was known to have been in Illinois at the time of the shooting, suspicion presently concentrated on Orrin Porter Rockwell, who, as everybody knew, was the Prophet's "lackey" and who had the necessary daring to attempt the assassination.

A few weeks later Boggs went before a justice of the peace in the town and, at different times, swore out two affidavits. They were to the effect that Rockwell and the Mormon leader were guilty of the crime, the former as principal and the latter as "accessory before the fact." And not long after that he applied to Governor Reynolds, of Missouri, for requisition papers on Governor Carlin, of Illinois, for the persons of these two men, to be tried in Missouri on the charge of an attempted assassination.

Governor Reynolds promptly issued the necessary papers. But he went the ex-governor one better. For, in addition to declaring a belief that the men named in the affidavits were guilty of the crime, he stated that they were also fugitives from justice, and should be returned on that account. Boggs had said nothing about that. Reynolds was taking no chances.

Rockwell took a trip East; the Prophet went into seclusion to avoid arrest.

When, as Porter believed, interest in him had died down, he began a return to his home in Nauvoo. At St. Louis, however, he was recognized from descriptions of him in the papers, and arrested. He was "put into iron hobbles," as he expresses it, and taken to Independence. There he was jailed "for safety," because some men were waiting "to put a noose around his neck."

Here he remained the entire time—nearly a year, sleeping on straw without any bedding, eating corn pone "so hard you could knock a nigger down with it," and being served at other times with food so putrid he could not eat it. On being incarcerated all his possessions, except the clothes he stood up in, were taken away from him—a bowie knife, a brace of pistols, and a watch. Here, too, he was "ironed." Once he escaped, but was immediately caught, and came within an ace of being lynched. In the daylight he spent his time fishing for "pukes" with a bent pin out of an upper window. "Puke" was a name given a Missourian.

The reason for keeping Porter so long without a trial was that he might be used as a decoy to bring the Prophet over the state line. Every means imaginable was employed for this purpose.

"Port," said Sheriff Reynolds, "Joe Smith has unlimited confidence in you. He'll come to the line, if you but ask him to. Do that for us, and we'll let you go; and you can name your pile."

Rockwell answered, "I'll see you all damned first—and then I won't."

Meanwhile, things were happening at Nauvoo.

The Prophet, as already stated, secluded himself. For a time he lived among his friends in various parts of the city. Part of the time he spent on the island between Nauvoo and Montrose—a beautiful spot, where the foliage was heavy. Occasionally he went to his own home, and stayed there till rumor compelled him to leave.

Once two sheriffs—one from Illinois and one from Missouri—came to the house. With no semblance of a search warrant and against the protest of Emma Smith, they went through every room. It just happened that, as the men came to the front door, Joseph went out at the back and into a stand of tall corn.

There is little doubt that Governor Carlin was in league with the Missouri governor to get Smith across the state line. This is evident from a conversation between Governor Carlin and Judge Ralston in the presence of William Clayton.

Governor: I am satisfied that no excitement prevails anywhere but in Nauvoo.

Ralston: Is it not a fact that every day men are offering you their services, by letter or in person, to go against the Mormons?

Governor: Well, yes. But I have no idea of calling out the military. My opinion is that, if Mr. Smith gives himself to the sheriff of Missouri, he will be honorably acquitted, and there the matter will end.

Ralston: Just how, in your opinion, Governor, could Mr. Smith be able to pass through the midst of his enemies without violence to him? And how, in case he is acquitted, would he be able to return home?

Governor (with a laugh): Oh, that could easily be arranged.

Not long after this the governor offered a reward of two hundred dollars for Smith's apprehension, matching a similar offer of three hundred dollars by the governor of Missouri.

When Thomas Ford succeeded Carlin as governor, the Prophet's friends asked him to rescind Carlin's proclamation. The governor, after consulting five members of the state supreme court and the district attorney, replied that, in the opinion of these six men, "the requisition from Missouri was illegal and insufficient to cause your arrest," but that they doubted his authority to rescind Carlin's action. He added, "I can only advise you to submit to the laws and have a judicial investigation of your rights." And he promised protection. District Attorney Butterfield and Judge Adams wrote the Prophet to the same effect.

Accordingly, on the twenty-sixth of December, 1843, the Prophet set out for Springfield, with a number of his friends. He was tried before Judge Pope. After a thoroughgoing inquiry into the whole situation, the court ordered "that Smith be discharged from arrest." The written opinion of Judge Pope is thirty-six hundred words long—which he justifies on the ground that it might involve, as a precedent, "the lives and liberties of our citizens." He had, therefore, given the case "the most anxious consideration."

Joseph Smith's arrival and stay in Springfield created something of a sensation. At first prejudice ran high. Hot words were passed between his followers and some of the rougher element in the town. But matters did not get to blows, for the sheriff put a period to the affair. At which the Prophet expressed his surprise. He was not accustomed to have the officials on his side like that.

The Mormon leader was in the capital from December 30 to January 8—nine days. He stayed with Judge Adams, "sleeping on a sofa." The Judge, who was not a Mormon but who in his correspondence addressed him as "my son," often invited his friends to meet the head of the church. On several occasions Joseph was invited into Judge Pope's chambers for conversational purposes. He held two meetings, at the invitation of the speaker, in the hall where the representatives met. But John Taylor and Orson Hyde, not the Prophet, did the preaching.

Also he had a long conversation with the governor, who gave him this piece of advice: "Mr. Smith, don't do any political electioneering." To which the Prophet answered: "I have always acted upon that principle. But my people are driven to union by persecution, not by my influence. Dr. Richards and General Law will testify to that. The Mormons act on the most perfect principle of liberty in all their movements."

On a Sunday morning he had a "pleasant interview" with Attorney Butterfield, Judge Douglas, Senator Gillispie, and others. These gentlemen wanted to know about his religious beliefs. Butterfield inquired as to the main difference between his faith and that of other Christians. In answer the Prophet gave this illuminating statement:

"The most prominent difference is this: Sectarians all are circumscribed by a peculiar creed, which deprives them of the privilege of believing anything not contained therein. The Latter day Saints, on the contrary, have no creed, but stand ready to believe all true principles that exist, as they are made manifest from time to time."

Another man wanted to know about prophets, and how it was that he laid claim to being one. He said:

"If any person should ask me if I were a prophet, I should not deny it, as that would give me the lie. For, according to John, the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy. Therefore, if I profess to be a witness, or a teacher, and have not the spirit of prophecy, which is the testimony of Jesus, I must be a false witness. But, if I be a true teacher and witness, I must possess the spirit of prophecy—and that constitutes a prophet. Any man who says he is a teacher or preacher of righteousness and denies the spirit of prophecy, is a liar, and the truth is not in him. By this key false teachers and imposters may be detected."

This was by no means the end of Missouri's effort to get the Mormon leader into that state.

In January, 1843, the Prophet was shown a letter from John C. Bennett to Sidney Rigdon and Orson Pratt. Pratt promptly turned the letter over to Joseph's secretary—which threw a suspicion (probably unjust) into the leader's mind that Rigdon was too friendly with Bennett. Bennett had by this time left the church under circumstances of extreme bitterness on his part.

"I am leaving to-night for Missouri," said the letter, which was penned from Springfield, "to meet the messenger charged with the arrest of Joseph Smith and others, for murder, burglary, treason, etc." New indictments had been found "by a grand jury of a called court on the original evidence."

We have already given the circumstances under which Dr. Bennett joined the Mormons, told of the honors he received there at the hands of the citizens, and of the lukewarmness of the Prophet toward that moral delinquent.

Things did not go to his liking in Nauvoo. For one thing he had been headed off in some of his philandering. He would make out to some young women there that he had been granted certain love immunities, which were denied to others less important. And, for another thing, he had been curtailed in his intermeddling. A restless spirit, he just would have his finger in every pie. Probably the real secret of his relations with the Mormons was that he thirsted for power, and, when he was thwarted in this ambition, he turned his fury against the one who had stood in his way—Joseph Smith.

The Prophet, it seems, felt that once Bennett had sought his life. In May, 1842, he set down this in his History Presently, after losing his public offices, he left Nauvoo and wrote a libidinous book against the Mormon leader.

As soon as the Prophet learned of the movement against him in Missouri, he sent word by a Mr. Backenstos, a non-mormon, to Governor Ford that, before he would be troubled any more by Missouri, he "would fight."

Nothing, however, happened till the following July. In that month Joseph and Emma, with their children, went on a visit to her sister, who lived near Dixon, Illinois. One day two strange men came to the door. They were Mormon elders, they said, and wished to see "Brother Joseph." Brother Joseph was in the back yard. Approaching him, they drew their pistols, and threatened to kill him if he opened his mouth or moved. They were Sheriff Wilson, of Carthage, Illinois, and Sheriff Reynolds, of Jackson county, Missouri.

Without serving any process or permitting him to get his hat and coat or to speak with his wife, the two officers hurried him off to Dixon. Here they refused him the right to consult a lawyer, till some of the influential citizens compelled them to do so. Cyrus Walker, a Whig candidate for Congressman at the August election, took his case, one of the conditions being that the Prophet would vote for him. Before the case was over, three other lawyers were engaged by the Mormon leader.

The two sheriffs pretty soon were themselves placed under arrest and, being unable to furnish bonds, were put in the charge of Sheriff Campbell, of Lee county. And so the four of them, reinforced by friends of the Prophet, who kept dropping in every now and then, proceeded on their way to Nauvoo, "the nearest court empowered to consider a writ of habeas corpus." Joseph was in the custody of Reynolds and Wilson, who in turn were in the custody of Campbell.

At the court in Nauvoo the Prophet was freed. The charge of treason was too old. Besides, Missouri herself had not thought it of sufficient importance to follow up until the notorious Bennett had revived it. Judge Wells, who tried the case, was not then a Mormon.

When Wilson and Reynolds learned they were headed for Nauvoo, they were very much alarmed, as they had cause to be.

The Prophet showed some of his friends two large patches of skin on his sides that were black and blue. They had been made so by the officers' pistol ends. At one point, in response to their threats, repeated a hundred times with profanity, to shoot him if he spoke or moved, he had opened his shirt-front and said:

"I have endured so much oppression that I am weary of life. Kill me if you please. I am a strong man, however, and with my own natural weapons I could soon level both of you. But if you have any legal process to serve, I am at all times subject to law, and shall make no resistance."

They desisted from their brutality only when Stephen Markham, Joseph's friend, shamed them into decency.

In another sense, though, the two sheriffs had no reason to fear the Mormons. The Prophet gave them his word of honor that not a hair of their head should be touched—not even Reynolds's by Jem Flack, of whom, for some cause, he stood in deadly fear.

The whole town went out to meet the leader. Strong men embraced him and wept on his shoulder. When he mounted "Old Charley," one of his favorite horses, the band struck up "Hail Columbia." The procession moved slowly into Nauvoo, "Emma riding by my side into town." In the evening he and Emma, with fifty of their friends, sat down to dinner. Reynolds and Wilson sat at the head of the table.

Many friends, on that long journey of two hundred and sixty miles, came to the Prophet's aid. At Dixon, as we have seen, they made it possible for him to consult a lawyer. In another place they thwarted a plot on the part of Reynolds and Wilson to escape with him into Missouri, where men were waiting to do their pleasure. And at still another point an old gentleman with a heavy cane, when the sheriffs objected to the Prophet making an address to the crowds, bluntly told them that "nigger-driving pukes" could not "kidnap men here," and if they were not careful "a committee in this grove" would handle their case, "from whose decision there was no appeal."

A bomb was thrown into the political camp when the Illinois State Register, a Democratic organ, charged that the whole thing was a Whig trick, to deflect Mormon votes to that party. There was a "junto in Springfield," whose agent was "the notorious John C. Bennett." And the Register gave seven cogent reasons for its views on the situation.

Strangers who visited Nauvoo those forward-looking days—and the streets abounded in them, not only from our own country but from Europe as well—were uniformly surprised that so much power had gravitated into the hands of one man.

If they were clergymen, like the Reverend Mr. Prior, a Methodist minister from England, they were amazed that a man of Joseph Smith's meager education and upbringing should have acquired such an intimate grasp of biblical lore, have been able to organize a new church, and to have established a religion on a new set of miracles. But, most of all, they were astonished that the faith should have such an influence over the human heart as to uproot old prejudices, social and religious. No man since Luther had exercised so much spiritual power.

If these visitors were men of affairs, like the mayor of Boston, they were nonplussed to account for the material achievements of the Mormon leader. The enchanting city sleeping in the lap of the majestic river; the lay of the town, with its wide streets, its orderly arrangement, its substantial homes, its temple crowning the summit; and its industrious, contented, even prosperous families, in spite of those Missouri experiences—all this made a profound impression on their minds, especially when they learned the Prophet's plans for the future development of the city. For already the "Nauvoo Water Power Company" had been organized, for the purpose of diverting water round the Des Moines rapids, by means of a canal, and of building a great dam at Keokuk for power purposes in Nauvoo—dreams that later years were to realize. Smith was rapidly turning himself into an industrial leader.

Or, if these strangers were soldiers, like the United States artillery officer who visited Nauvoo incog, they were not only surprised but alarmed that there should be anywhere in America a religious leader with an army of between four and five thousand trained men at his command. In 1829 the poet Southey, away off in England, had pointed out the "rare scope and opportunity" in "that party of the Anglo-American Union into which the elder states continually discharge the restless part of their population," for "another Mohammed, a military prophet." And here in Joseph Smith America apparently had such a character.

This artillery officer, after witnessing a parade of the legion, which he admits "made a very noble and imposing appearance," asked himself some questions: "What does it all mean? Why this exact discipline of the Mormon corps? Were they expecting to subvert the Constitution, or to take Missouri, Illinois, Mexico or Texas?"

And he goes on to say: "The evolutions of the troops would do honor to any body of armed militia, and closely approximates our regular forces. There are no troops in the state like them in point of enthusiasm and warlike aspect, yea warlike character. Before many years this legion will be twenty, and perhaps fifty thousand strong, and still augmenting. I have seen the plan for fortifying Nauvoo, which is equal to any of Vauban's."

But whether these visitors to the City of the Saints were clergymen, men of affairs, or military officers, all alike were surprised at the number of pies in which the Mormon leader had his finger.

Nothing, however trivial or big with significance, but either originated with or was carried on by him. At one and the same time he was mayor, chief justice, lieutenant-general of the legion, editor of the leading periodical, regent of the university, main organizer of industrial projects, as well as president of the church. Almost any one of these offices would have proved a full-time job for the average man. And then he found time to encourage a home dramatic society, to become an active member of the Masonic fraternity, to organize a female relief society, and to write the history of his church.

Nor was any of these positions a sinecure. He was the very soul of everything. No detail but had either his knowledge or his sanction. Rarely has there been, even in America, so high-powered a human dynamo.

Mankind is almost instinctively afraid of concentrated power in one man. This feeling has been confirmed by many a sad experience in history. It is doubtful, however, whether there was any real ground to fear power in the Mormon prophet. He never seems to have used his power for his own aggrandizement. He might have been rich, yet he died poor. If, as is sometimes claimed, he used people of means in Nauvoo, it was to build up the community, not himself. He had no interests aside from those of his followers. No man ever loved more passionately the common good, or sought more earnestly to serve others. The Nauvoo charter, the legion, the commercial projects—these he intended for the welfare and protection of his people, his own included.

During the Nauvoo period of five years the Prophet rose to the peak of his power. Physically he was at his best. "Kingly" is the only word Josiah Quincy could think of to describe the Mormon leader's appearance. And Representative Davis wrote to his wife from Washington that the Prophet was "what you ladies would call a very good looking man."

In June, 1844, the St. Louis Weekly Gazette sent a reporter to Nauvoo to interview the General, and that alert individual forwarded this to his paper:

General Smith is in stature and proportion a very large man; and his figure would probably be called a fine one, although by no means distinguished for symmetry or grace.

His chest and shoulders are broad and muscular, although his arms and hands seem never to have been developed by physical toil, and the latter are quite small for his proportions. His foot, however, is massive enough, and extensive enough, in all conscience, to make up for any deficiency in his hand.

The shape of his head is a very oblong oval—the coronal region high, denoting a resolved will—the basilar and occipital full, indicating powerful impulses, and the frontal retreating, although the region devoted by phrenologists to the organization of the perceptive powers is unusually prominent.

His forehead is white, without a furrow, and, notwithstanding the small facial angle, somewhat symmetrical. His hair is quite light and fine—complexion pale—cheeks full—temperament evidently sanguine—lips thin rather than thick, and by no means indicative of boldness or decision of character.

But the Prophet's most remarkable feature is his eye; not that it is very large, or very bright—very thoughtful or very restless—even very deep in its expression or location; for it is usually neither of these. The hue is light hazel, and is shaded, and, at times, almost veiled, by the longest, thickest light lashes you ever saw belonging to a man, whatever the facts respecting the "dear ladies."

The brows are, also, light and thick—indeed, precisely of that description called beetle brow. The expression of the Prophet's eyes when half closed and shaded by their long lashes was quite as crafty as I ever beheld.

His voice is low and soft, and his smile, which is frequent, is agreeable.

This description reads like a catalogue, and, as the Gazette suggests, would serve any jailor as a guide to the Mormon leader's recovery, if he were being looked for by the officers of the law. This is the most detailed description of the Prophet's looks that has come down to us; it is almost free from inferences and comment.

In dress and manners there was nothing peculiar or unusual about the Mormon leader. Those who knew him by reputation only, including some of his disciples, often had strange notions of his personal appearance and ways This was but natural in view of the traditional ideas concerning prophets in general. The Reverend Mr. Prior, already referred to, furnishes us with a case in point. He says of Joseph Smith:

I will not attempt to describe the various feelings of my bosom as I took my seat in a conspicuous place in the congregation, who were waiting in breathless silence for his appearance.

While I tarried, I had plenty of time to revolve in my mind the character and common report of that truly singular personage. I fancied that I should be able to discover in him some of those thoughtful and reserved features, those mystic and sarcastic glances, which I had fancied the ancient sages to possess. I expected to see that fearful, faltering look of conscious shame which, from what I had heard of him, he might be expected to evince.

He appeared at last; but how was I disappointed when, instead of the heads and horns of the beast and the false prophet, I beheld only the appearance of a common man, of tolerably large proportions. I was sadly disappointed, and thought that, although his appearance could not be wrested to indicate anything against him, yet he would manifest all I had heard of him when he began to preach. I sat uneasily, and watched him closely.

I sat in breathless silence, waiting to hear that foul aspersion of other sects, that diabolical disposition of revenge, and to hear that rancorous denunciation of every individual but a Mormon. I waited in vain; I listened with surprise; I sat uneasy in my seat, and could hardly persuade myself but that he had been apprised of my presence, and so ordered his discourse on my account, that I might not be able to kind fault with it; for instead of a jumbled jargon of half-connected sentences and a volley of imprecations, and diabolical and malignant denunciations, heaped on the heads of all who differed from him, and the dreadful twisting and wresting of the Scriptures to suit his own peculiar views, and attempts to weave a web of dark and mystic sophistries around the gospel truths, which I anticipated, he glided along through a very interesting discourse with all the care and happy facility of one who was well aware of his important station, and his duty to God and man.

Representative Davis, in a quotation already given, says that in the Prophet's garb there was nothing "peculiar," his dress was "that of a plain, unpretending citizen." Quincy, when he visited the Mormon leader in 1844, found him "clad in the costume of a journeyman carpenter," with a "striped pantaloon, and a linen jacket which had not lately seen the washtub." And a lady convert from the East, visiting Nauvoo for the first time, was both surprised and disappointed at seeing her idol in his shirt sleeves on a hot day in summer. The fact is that Joseph Smith dressed no better and no worse than other men in the community.

In truth, however, there is an exception to this statement. When the Legion was on parade in the city, especially when there were distinguished visitors present to witness the grand spectacle, the lieutenant-general always dressed in his uniform. A certain Mr. Newhall, from Salem, Massachusetts, writing in the Advertiser there, has given us a descriptive touch of one of these events in Nauvoo. The General, he says, on this particular occasion, was accompanied by "six ladies on horseback." They "were dressed in black velvet, and wore waving plumes of white feathers." With the head of the Legion, who also wore a waving plume, they "rode up and down in front of the regiment."

The fact is, however, that the Prophet had no particular liking for this sort of thing, so far as he himself was concerned. By nature he had little use for pomp and ceremony, even in religion. But he yielded to what seemed to be demanded on such occasions, and to the wishes of his "beloved Emma."

This same writer speaks of the Mormon leader as "very sociable, easy, cheerful, obliging, kind, and hospitable—in a word, a jolly fellow, and one of the last persons whom you would suppose God would have raised up as a prophet or a priest."

Already we have mentioned a new mellowness in the Prophet's nature during this Nauvoo period. It manifested itself at the time of the first attempt of Missouri officials to get him across the border.

His heart overflowed toward every one that had ever done him a kindness, whether living or dead, and many names went into the book, which was for his eyes alone—his brother Hyrum, with his "faithful heart" and his "works worth patterning after"; Newel K. Whitney, "a faithful friend in whom the afflicted sons of men can confide"; Orrin Porter Rockwell, "a fellow-wanderer with myself, an innocent and noble boy"; his father, now dead, who "never did a mean or ungenerous act"; but most of all his "beloved Emma, unwavering, unchangeable, affectionate Emma," with whom he had passed through "many scenes of fatigue and toil, sorrow and suffering, as well as joy and consolation from time to time, which have strewed our paths and crowned our board."

These feelings were called out chiefly by the tender solicitude of his friends for his safety and welfare during his isolation. For these friends could not endure the thoughts of his ever getting again into the hands of "the bloodthirsty hell hounds of Missouri." Wherever he stayed—on the island between Nauvoo and Montrose or with one of his close-lipped followers—they took every precaution to keep secret his hiding place. Usually his home, and particularly his wife, were secretly watched by officers from both Illinois and Missouri. But these men never got an inkling of the Prophet's whereabouts. Yet his closest friends, as well as Emma, often visited him to give him what comfort they could under the circumstances.

Of all the men in Nauvoo, however, the Prophet was the least disturbed. Every now and then rumors arose in Nauvoo of plots to kidnap him, of threatened invasion from Missouri, of decoys planned by officials to get him to the line through the aid of traitors in the city. On such occasions he was unmoved, unperturbed. Indeed, on at least one occasion he mildly reproved those who brought disturbing rumors, for their excitement in the situation.

Joseph Smith is generally supposed to have lacked the lighter aspects of character. One of his later critics remarks that if the founder of Mormonism had possessed the sense of humor, for instance, the faith would never had been born.

"When I want a little bread and milk," he said once to William W. Phelps, when the two were dining alone in the Prophet's home, "my wife loads the table with so many good things, it destroys my appetite."

Just then Emma entered with a tray full of those same "good things" to serve them.

"You must do as Bonaparte did," Phelps answered, "have a little table just large enough for the victuals you want yourself."

"Mr. Smith," Emma put in, "is a bigger man than Bonaparte: he can never eat without his friends."

To which Joseph replied, "That is the wisest thing I ever heard you say."

Emma had stated a fact when she said that her husband could "never eat without his friends." This was particularly so during the Nauvoo period of his life.

Quincy tells us of other instances which show that the Prophet was humorous and given to repartee.

"It seems to me, General," the Bostonian remarked one time during his visit to Nauvoo, "that you have too much power to be safely trusted to one man."

"In your hands, or those of any other person," was the reply, "so much power would, no doubt, be dangerous." And then, in a rich comical aside, as if in hearty recognition of the ridiculous sound the words might have in the ears of a Gentile, he added, "Remember, I am a prophet!"

At the request of Dr. Goforth, a Methodist minister and a member of the visiting party, the Prophet preached a sermon from the steps of the Nauvoo Mansion. He asserted that baptism was essential to salvation.

"Stop!" said the clergyman, who thought it incumbent upon him to question the soundness of certain theological positions maintained by the speaker. "What do you say to the penitent thief?"

"What do you mean?" inquired the Prophet.

"You know our Savior said to the thief, 'This day shalt thou be with me in Paradise,' which shows he could not have been baptized before his admission."

"How do you know he wasn't baptized before he became a thief?" Whereupon the sort of laugh that is provoked by an unexpected hit ran through the audience; but this demonstration of sympathy was rebuked by a severe look from Smith, who went on to say:

"But that is not the true answer. In the original Greek, the word that has been translated 'Paradise' means simply a place of departed spirits. To that place the penitent thief was conveyed, and there, doubtless, he received the principles necessary to his admission into the heavenly kingdom."

Later, as the party was passing the Grove, where meetings were held when the weather permitted, the minister said, "I suppose none but Mormons are allowed to preach in this place."

"On the contrary," was the reply, "I shall be very happy to have you address my people next Sunday, and I will insure a most attentive audience."

"What! do you mean that I may say anything I please and that you will make no reply?"

"You may certainly say anything you please; but I must reserve the right of adding a word or two, if I judge best. I promise to speak of you in the most respectful manner."

"Come," said the Prophet, a little later, after some more disputation, "if you can't argue any better than that, you shall say all you want to say to my people, and I will promise to hold my tongue, for there's not a Mormon among them who would need my assistance to answer you."

Presently, in allusion to some erroneous doctrine, the preacher suddenly exclaimed: "Why, I told my congregation the other Sunday that they might as well believe Joe Smith as such theology as that."

"Did you say Joe Smith?"

"Of course I did. Why not?"

"Considering only the day and the place," replied the Prophet, with a quiet superiority that was overwhelming, "it would have been more respectful to have said Lieutenant-general Joseph Smith."

"Clearly," Quincy adds, "the worthy minister was no match for the head of the Mormon church."
