John Henry Evans, Joseph Smith, an American Prophet ( 1946)

CHAPTER VIII

The Curtain

In one sense, the greatest men of a nation are often those whom it puts to death. Socrates honored the Athenians, who would not suffer him to live. Spinoza was the greatest modern Jew, and the synagogue expelled him with ignominy. Jesus was the glory of the people of Israel, and they crucified him. —RENAN.

"I shall be glad to take your case," said Whig candidate Walker to Joseph Smith in July, 1843, "if you will agree to vote for me." The election was in August.

"I'll do that," the Mormon leader answered. And Walker became his attorney.

The Prophet kept his promise. He voted for Walker. But Walker was defeated. For, of all the Mormons in Nauvoo, Joseph Smith was probably the only one that did vote for him. Most likely, however, if the Mormons had cast their ballots for the Whig candidate, he would have been elected. Instead, his opponent, Hoge, became the Representative of the district in the national House.

It was a unique situation.

Walker was in the political narrows. Like all candidates, he was in desperate straits for votes. In the Illinois of this period it was nip and tuck between the two parties, so nearly equal were they numerically. The Mormons could just about have their way politically. They held the balance of power.

But the Prophet, too, was in difficult straits just then. Missouri was in pursuit—at least, certain of his enemies were. Indeed, an old enemy, in the person of General Moses Wilson, with a dozen men, had been hanging around Springfield for a couple of weeks, waiting for an opportunity to swish the Mormon leader over the line. And Walker had the reputation of being the best criminal lawyer in the state.

The day before the election the Prophet, in a public meeting, said this: "As for Mr. Walker, he is high-minded. He has not hung onto my coat tails to gain his election, as some have said. Before Mr. Walker came to Nauvoo, rumor came up that he might become a candidate. Said I, 'He is an old friend, and I'll vote for him.' When he came to my house, I told him I should vote for him." And then Joseph added, "Brother Hyrum tells me this morning that he has a testimony to the effect it would be better for the people to vote for Hoge."

Doubtless Hyrum's "testimony" had been gained partly from the persistent rumor that the Whigs had actually created and were now capitalizing, the situation in which his brother found himself when he engaged Walker to act as his attorney. This was the "trick" of which the Register had spoken lately. So that, in voting the Democratic ticket, the Mormons were but applying to themselves the well-known "first law of nature."

Really, the situation was a clear case of "you'll be damned if you do and you'll be damned if you don't." Always before an election both party candidates were ultra-friendly to the Mormons—a jolly, handshaking crew. In this particular preÃ«lection campaign Walker and Hoge spent considerable time in Nauvoo, speaking at public meetings and hobnobbing with the principal men there. But after every election, the Mormons had only one set of friends among the politicians—those who had won. The others were suddenly turned into snapping war-dogs. Whichever way the election went the Saints were both praised and blamed.

It all came of their mass action. Ford thought so at the time. But their mass action was brought about, not by the influence of Joseph Smith, as Ford believed, but rather by a common danger. For, when one of two candidates made a threat to repeal the Nauvoo charter, or to do something else against the Mormon interest, what were the Mormons to do but vote for his opponent?

That this was the actual situation is attested by John Taylor, a Mormon, and by Governor Ford, a non-mormon. Joseph Duncan, Taylor says, "pledged himself to his party that, if he were elected [he was running for governor], he would exterminate or drive the Mormons from the state." And Governor Ford, who was nominated for the office when Duncan died and who was elected, declares that Duncan expected to win the election "almost on this question alone." Of course, Duncan would not receive the Mormon vote. This situation arose over and over again.

In consequence, the Mormons, on the advice of their leader, took an independent attitude politically. "In the next canvass," the Prophet wrote in an article published in a local paper, the Times and Seasons, "we shall be influenced by no party consideration, and no Carthagenian coalescence with our people will be suffered. We care not a fig for Whig or Democrat; they are both alike to us. We shall go for our friends, our tried friends, and the cause of human liberty—which is the cause of God." He signed this article "Joseph Smith, Lieutenant-general of the Nauvoo Legion."

It required no prophet to foresee what would eventuate from this state of affairs in Illinois. To stem the tide against his people the head of the church started two lines of action—one a temporary expedient, the other a permanent plan.

Early in 1844 the Prophet announced that he was a candidate for the presidency of the United States. By this time, as Ford himself states, the Mormons in Illinois had become so unpopular that even those men who had been elected by their suffrage "were unwilling to risk their popularity with the people by taking part in their favor, even when the law and justice and the Constitution were all on their side."

The movement to put the Prophet into the White House was begun at a meeting of the apostles, with Hyrum Smith and John P. Greene, in the mayor's office (Joseph was mayor now), "to take into consideration the proper course for this people to pursue in relation to the coming presidential election."

And there it was decided not only that General Joseph Smith should be a candidate, but that "every man in the city who is able to speak in public" should be sent "throughout the land to electioneer and make stump speeches" for him. "There is enough oratory in the church," the mayor said half-humorously, "to carry me into the presidential chair the first slide."

Of course, no one, least of all the candidate himself, expected to see the Mormon leader in the "presidential chair," either then or later, notwithstanding a statement by Governor Ford to the contrary. But Ford looked upon the Mormons as fanatical. The Prophet himself, on certain occasions when he referred to his candidacy, did so in a playful manner. "When I get hold of the eastern papers and see how popular I am," he said once, "I am afraid that I shall be elected." One of these had spoken of him as "a team by himself."

Joseph Smith's candidacy, however, enabled him and his people to do two things. First, they could vote conscientiously in the fall election. Clay was a "compromiser"; Calhoun had advised them to "go to Oregon"; and Van Buren had said he could do nothing in their case. The Mormons could not vote for any of these men. In their prophet they had a "good man," even if they threw away their votes. That is the way the Times and Seasons put the matter editorially.

And then, in addition, General Smith could place before the people some interesting ideas on politics and government. This he did in a pamphlet called "Views of the Powers and Policy of the Government of the United States." This document is full of revealments.

It grandiloquently quotes from French, Italian, and Latin. This probably was the work of Phelps. Also it gives quotations from Franklin, Washington, Jefferson, Adams, Madison, Monroe, and Jackson. There is a blunt frankness in its phraseology—characteristic of both Joseph Smith and the time. Van Buren is mentioned in the pamphlet as "poor little Matty," and Tyler's administration is referred to as "three years of perplexity." The "Views," besides, is shot through with the religious spirit. The nation is importuned to "turn to the Lord and live," and to reform politics.

The Mormon candidate would go into the White House as a decided imperialist. "Come, Texas; come, Mexico; come, Canada; come, all the world. Let us be brethren, one family." His suggestion for governmental economy would startle us to-day, and probably please the masses hugely. "Reduce Congress at least two-thirds. Two senators from a state and two members to a million of population will do more business than the army that now occupy the halls of the national legislature. Pay them two dollars and their board per diem (except Sundays). That is more than the farmer gets, and he lives honestly."

[Joseph Smith: An American Prophet Joseph Smith - The Alternative I call God and angels to witness that I have unsheathed my sword with a firm and unalterable determination that this people shall have legal rights, and be protected from mob violence, or my blood shall be spilt upon the ground like water, and my body consigned to the silent tomb. While I live, I will never tamely submit to the dominion of cursed mobocracy. I would welcome death rather than submit to this oppression; and it would be sweet, oh, sweet, to rest in the grave rather than submit to this oppression, agitation, annoyance, confusion, and alarm upon alarm, any longer.

All prisoners should be required to "work upon roads, public works, or any place where the culprit can be taught wisdom and virtue." For "rigor and seclusion will never do as much to reform the propensities of men as reason and friendship." Only murder "can claim confinement or death."

Slavery ought to be abolished, but not at the expense of the slave-owner. Congress should "pay every man a reasonable price for his slaves." The money could come out of "the surplus revenue rising from the sale of public lands and from the deduction of pay from the members of Congress." This should be done by 1850.

One of the unique planks in this platform concerned money. There should be a national bank—many national banks, in fact; one in every state, with the central bank in Washington. The net gain "of the central bank shall be applied to the national revenue, and that of the state banks to the state and territorial revenue." No bank should be allowed to issue any more bills than "the amount of capital stock in her vaults and the interest."

Honor should be the watchword in the management of the government. "Whenever we find a promise made by a candidate that is not practiced as an officer, hurl the miserable sycophant from his exalted station, as God did Nebuchadnezzar to crop the grass with a beast's heart."

To proclaim these views and the excellence of the Western candidate upwards of three hundred and fifty men were sent out in every direction. Every state was covered in proportion to its population. Incidentally these men preached Mormonism.

But the head of the Mormon church would do more than shunt political difficulties by such temporary expedients as putting up a ticket of his own. He would move his entire people to the Rocky mountains—the region recommended by Calhoun and Douglas. To this end he set things going in February, 1844.

"I instructed the Twelve apostles," he says under date of February 20, "to send out a delegation and investigate the locations of California and Oregon, and hunt out a good location, where we can move after the temple is completed, and where we can build a city in a day and have a government of our own, get up into the mountains, where the devil cannot dig us out."

A few days later he suggested an exploring expedition of twenty-five men for this purpose. "Let that man go," he says, "that can raise five hundred dollars, a good horse and mule, a double barrel gun, one-barrel rifle and the other smooth bore, a saddle and bridle, a pair of revolving pistols, bowie-knife, and a good sabre. Appoint a leader, and let them beat up for volunteers. I want every man that goes to be a king and a priest. When he gets on the mountain, he may want to talk with his God; when among the savage nations, have power to govern them."

This idea of spiritual and material preparedness carried over into the lives of his disciples, as the following typical story will show:

One of the Utah pioneers was once under the necessity of fording the Snake river at a treacherous point. A friend of the younger generation was with him in a wagon that was not too safe and that was drawn by a pair of inefficient ponies. As the vehicle showed undoubted signs of capsizing in midstream and spilling its contents into the water, the elder man, on glancing behind him, discovered his friend in the act of kneeling, a deathly pallor on his face.

"What're you going to do?" the driver shouted back at the young man.

"Pray!" came the laconic reply.

"No; you're not. I prayed before we got into this mess. You get back there and hold those things from falling out. You can pray when we are safe on the other side."

In April the Prophet sent the sagacious and tactful Orson Hyde to Washington. He was to get all the information he could about the Oregon country and also to try to induce Congress to pass a bill authorizing the Mormon migration and protecting them on the way there and after they arrived at their destination.

Congressman Douglas gave Hyde a book on Oregon—a survey of the district by John C. FrÃ©mont. A copy of this valuable book was later franked by Douglas to the Mormon leader. Also Hyde talked with men who had been to Oregon, from whom he learned a great deal about the region. On the basis of all this information Hyde indicated the route to be taken by his people to the proposed new home—from Nauvoo, through Iowa, up the Platte, through the Rockies, and into Oregon, a distance of seventeen hundred miles.

Hyde, however, had little hope of getting anything from Congress. The politicians were wary. It was the eve of a presidential election. Besides, there was the danger of provoking England. All the Congressmen, Hyde wrote the Prophet, were "figuring and play round the grand and important questions. In the days of our Lord the people neglected the weightier matters of the law, but tithed mint, rue, anise, and cummin; but I think in Washington they do little else than tithe the mint.

"We intend to tease the legislators until we either provoke them or get them to do something for us. I have learned this much—that if we want Congress to do anything for us, we must not ask what is right, but we must ask what kind of a thing will Congress pass? For you might as well drive a musket through a cotton bag, or the gospel of Christ through the heart of a priest, case-hardened by sectarianism, or a camel through the eye of a needle, as to drive anything through Congress that will operate against the popularity of the politicians."

Meanwhile, volunteers came in. But many things were going on in Nauvoo these days to distract attention from this great undertaking.

Politics, however, was not the only complicating factor in the situation in which the Prophet found himself during the first half of the year 1844.

There were the usual Western town rivalries, and therefore jealousies; there was also, to some extent, the same lawless element in Hancock county that the Saints had encountered in Missouri; and, worst of all, there were in Nauvoo itself several "Judases" among the Mormons, to use a term that, on the lips of the Mormon leader, proved sensational.

All these factors netted a product that presently got quite out of hand.

Chief among the rivals of Nauvoo were Warsaw and Carthage, in Hancock county. These towns, before the arrival of the Mormons, showed no little promise.

In 1844 a letter printed in the Nauvoo Neighbor, a Mormon periodical, throws some light on the situation confronting the Prophet at this time. It was by "a citizen of Connecticut" who professed to "love law and liberty and life." In this letter it is stated that "the prosperity of Nauvoo," increasing, as it had done, "beyond any former parallel," had "excited in the bosoms" of certain "lazy speculators of Warsaw and the still lazier office drones of Carthage," the county seat, "envy, hatred, and all ungodliness." Here lay "the true secret of all their barbarous movements against Mormonism." These persons had supposed that, "by destroying the Smiths," they would "extinguish their religion, disperse the Mormons, and depopulate and isolate Nauvoo."

Another writer—this time in the State Register—mentions "a gang of town lot speculators at Warsaw," as fearing that Nauvoo would "kill off their town and render speculation abortive."

Besides, a Mr. Backenstos, also a non-mormon, said after the murder of the Prophet that "town rivalry had something to do with the opposition to Nauvoo," adding that, "while Warsaw was on the decline, Nauvoo was rapidly increasing in wealth and population." Backenstos was at one time sheriff of the county, and was therefore in a position to know whereof he spoke.

It seems that, earlier than the time of which we are now speaking, efforts had been made by "some leading men" at Warsaw to get assistance from the Mormon leader in the building of their town. They are represented by Backenstos as having "made one pilgrimage after another to Nauvoo" with that object in mind. Just what the Prophet told them is not known, but it is certain that his refusal to aid them did not pour oil on the troubled waters.

The existence in Hancock county of a rough element in its population is attested to by no less a person than Governor Ford himself, who cannot be accused of having been too friendly to the Mormons. "I had a good opportunity," he says, "to know the settlers of Hancock county. I had attended the circuit courts there as state's attorney, from 1830, when the county was first organized, up to 1834; and to my certain knowledge the early settlers, with some honorable exceptions, were in popular language, hard cases."

The character of those who entered the county between 1834 and the time when the Mormons arrived there, Ford says he did not know from personal experience.

He adds, however, that, "having passed my whole life on the frontier, on the outer edge of the settlements, I have frequently seen that a few settlers would fix the character of a settlement for good or bad, for many years after its commencement. If bad men began the settlement, bad men would be attracted to them, upon the known principle that birds of a feather will flock together. Rogues will find each other, and so will honest men."

Some of the ways in which this lower element found expression were in making bogus money and in stealing—for which the Mormons got most of the blame. Although among the followers of Joseph Smith there may have been both thieves and counterfeiters (it would be strange indeed if there had not been any of this class among them), still there is no evidence to lead one to believe that these criminals received protection or countenance from the Prophet, as was charged at the time. The accusation grew out of the unpopularity of the Mormons.

No doubt the Mormon leader could have coped with the situation if only influences outside his organization had been at work.

He might have met the political situation with a ticket of his own as he had done. He could have answered the gang of land speculators by continuing to build up Nauvoo as he was doing. He would have been able to hold the lawless elements in check by the threat of a body of trained soldiers—the Legion. But even Joseph Smith, pastmaster at meeting sudden emergencies, had to throw up his hands when confronted by a close alliance of forces within and without his ranks.

Many years after the death of the Prophet there came to light the existence, in the Nauvoo of this period, of a secret order, the sole purpose of which was to encompass the defeat, if not actually the death, of the Mormon leader. For the details of this secret society we are indebted to Dennison L. Harris and Robert Scott, then very young men.

One day young Harris received an invitation to attend a secret meeting. He was told that he might bring his father. Enough of the purpose of the gathering having been disclosed to awaken Harris's suspicion, the two went to the Prophet for advice. Joseph thought it would be proper for the son to attend the meeting, but not his father.

It was a Sabbath afternoon. The meeting was held in the home of William Law, a counselor in the presidency of the church, in whose family young Scott had been reared. Besides the boys there were present William and Wilson Law, Francis and Chauncey Higbee, Robert and Charles Foster, a triplet of brothers, and many more. The time was spent in denouncing the Mormon leader at this meeting and at the meeting held the Sunday following. A third meeting was called for the next week. It was understood that at this third session an organization would be effected.

Both meetings were reported to the Prophet by the boys. They asked whether they should attend the next meeting. Joseph, after a moment's reflection, said: "Yes; I don't think they will harm you. But don't take their oath, whatever happens."

On reaching the place on the third Sunday, the young men found the door guarded by armed men. They were admitted, however. At the table sat Francis Higbee, a justice of the peace in Nauvoo. As each person present came forward, he was required to take an oath and to set his name down in a book. The oath pledged him to seek "the destruction of Joseph Smith and his party." Among those who took this oath were three women, each heavily veiled—one was crying and moaning bitterly.

The boys refused to join. There was an angry confusion. From every part of the room came the words, "You know too much now; you must join or die." Knives were drawn; guns and pistols were cocked; men rushed excitedly toward the boys, with threats of death. For a time these thought their end was near. At length, however, calm judgment prevailed, and the young men were allowed to go, after a solemn warning as to what would happen to them if they told what they had seen and heard.

On going down to the river, where the former meetings with the Prophet had been held, they were notified of his presence by a hand lifted above the bank. Scott's older brother was with Joseph. The boys related what had occurred at the Law home.

The Prophet was profoundly moved. He wept. "You do not know," he explained, "how all this will end; but I do; I fully comprehend."

While the details of these meetings were news to the Mormon leader, the fact that he had enemies in his own ranks was well known to him, and he could tell off these by name. In the closing days of December, 1843, he had thrown a bomb into their camp by saying to the police, "We have a Judas in our midst."

It happened that, about this time, one Daniel Avery, a Mormon in Nauvoo, with his son, was "taken for a ride" into Missouri, treated most shamefully on the way, and held there in jail for several weeks. The pretext had been that Avery had stolen a horse in Missouri six years before. Whether the charge was true or not is of no consequence now, for the man, guilty or innocent, had been taken across the line in violation of the law. When Avery did finally succeed in getting a trial, he was acquitted.

It was a serious situation. It might be the Prophet's turn next. What with traitors in Nauvoo and kidnappers on the outside, he was sitting on a powder magazine, and only a lighted match was needed to precipitate an explosion. All his fighting spirit was aroused. He would crush opposition by sheer power.

Of the kidnapping of Avery the Mormon leader wrote to the governor, detailing what had happened and sending him a batch of affidavits—which he "doubted whether that official would pay any heed to." He astonished the chief executive by asking, "Shall any portion of the militia be called out?" To which Ford answered with an emphatic "No. The militia can only be called out to repel an invasion, suppress an insurrection, or on some extreme emergency, and not to suppress, prevent, or punish individual crimes."

Then it was that an astounding thing happened. The city council, in a special ordinance, asked the Federal government to organize Nauvoo into a Territory! It was to be only till such time, however, as Missouri "restores to those exiled citizens the lands, rights, privileges, property, and damage for all losses" incurred in the expulsion of the Mormons from the state. These losses were given as two million dollars.

At the same time the trouble-makers inside the church were checked. There was plenty of ground, as well as necessity, for such an action.

A group of men, headed by Counselor Law and Dr. Foster, felt their liberty restrained in Nauvoo, and so broke away in an attempt to organize a church of their own. The truth seems to be that the Prophet, who never lacked courage or decision, had publicly denounced these recalcitrants for their immoralities, and thus incited their enmity. At first he contented himself with suggesting that some of them "stay at home and hold their tongue, lest rumor turn upon them and disclose some private matters which they would prefer kept hid." But later he came out boldly in a "sulphurous blast" and accused them of lying, wicked conspiracies, and adultery.

His brother Hyrum warned him against "speaking so freely about my enemies in such a manner as to make it actionable." The warning, however, went for the most part unheeded by the Mormon leader. His enemies struck back at him, but quite impotently. In the end they were cut off by the church, and excommunication in Nauvoo meant social isolation, virtual ostracism.

Driven thus to bay, the leaders of the group hobnobbed with the Prophet's enemies in Carthage and Warsaw, and these in turn communicated with his inveterate foes in Missouri, particularly the ubiquitous Bennett. In addition they established a paper in Nauvoo, the Expositor, the aim of which was sufficiently indicated in its title.

This sheet, a weekly, was published by the Laws, the Higbees, the Fosters, and one Charles Ivins. It was edited by Sylvester Emmons, who had never been a Mormon. Its only issue was dated Friday, June 7, 1844. Only one issue saw the light, for it was suppressed by order of the mayor, acting for the council. The paper had been declared a nuisance.

Most of the material in the Expositor referred to local conditions. The burden of its message was that the Mormon leader had too much power, that polygamy was whoredom in disguise, and that the Nauvoo charter should be unconditionally repealed. It was a fact that Joseph Smith, largely through the clauses of the charter, exercised unusual power, for, besides being president of a religious organization, he was mayor, chief justice, and Legion commander. It was a fact, too, that polygamy was being secretly practiced in Nauvoo by Joseph Smith and other leading Mormons. And it was a fact that the extraordinary provisions of the charter were a means of intrenching the Prophet in his power.

There were other facts, however. William Law had confessed to having committed adultery. Wilson Law had been cashiered from the Legion. At least one of the Fosters had been found guilty of immoral conduct. All the wrongdoing on the part of these men had been exposed by the Mormon leader. Moreover, prior to their defection, they had been content that Joseph Smith should exercise the same power he now wielded. Also they had made no protest till now that he practiced what was known as "plural marriage." It was only when the Prophet's power was used against them that they made objection; only when they engaged in improper marital practices themselves that they found fault with the Mormon leader's plurality of wives. But the chief provocative to anger by the Expositor was the spirit of its publishers.

The destruction of the printing establishment was the lighted match that exploded the power magazine. From that moment events trod on one another's heels.

On the eighth of June the press was destroyed. Two days later Joseph Smith, with other city officials, submitted to arrest for having abated the Expositor. Tried before a municipal justice of the peace, the Prophet was acquitted, as having acted within the law. On the fourteenth he wrote to Governor Ford, giving an account of what had occurred. "If your excellency is not satisfied," he ended this letter, "and shall not be satisfied after reading the whole proceedings [of the council in the matter of the Expositor] and shall demand an investigation before Judge Pope, or any legal tribunal at the Capitol, you have only to write your wishes, and we will be forthcoming. We will not trouble you to fill a writ or send an officer for us." Later the governor was asked to come to Nauvoo.

Meantime, popular excitement arose and filled the air with wild rumors. A mass meeting in Warsaw resolved "that the time has arrived when the adherents of Smith, as a body, should be driven from the surrounding settlements into Nauvoo and that the Prophet should then be demanded at their hands; and, if not surrendered, a war of extermination should be waged to the entire destruction, if necessary for our protection, of his adherents." Measures were taken to carry out this resolution. And presently, not only were the Mormons "driven" from the outlying settlements, but they were deprived, in some instances, of their weapons. Fear of what the Mormons might do with their Legion sent exaggerated reports everywhere, till anything might happen.

Nauvoo was filled with rumors, too. One of these was that fifteen hundred Missourians were about to cross the river and assemble in Warsaw. There were affidavits to that effect. At a mass meeting in the city it was decided to send out men into the county "to present a true statement of facts as speedily as possible." And to accomplish this object twenty-four men were chosen. The Prophet advised such of his disciples as lived outside Nauvoo to "defend themselves to the very last" in case a "mob annoyed them," but to "retreat to Nauvoo" in the event the mob proved too numerous. On the eighteenth the city was placed under martial law by the mayor, and the Legion was asked to be in readiness to defend the place against a threatened "invasion" from Missouri.

On the twenty-first the governor, who had gone to Carthage, requested that "one or more well-informed and discreet persons" be sent to him "to lay before me your version of the matter," promising "protection in person and property." John Taylor and Dr. J. M. Bernhisel were accordingly sent there. After hearing them Ford, in a letter, told the mayor that the destruction of the Expositor was "a very gross outrage upon the laws and the liberties of the people," and required that the mayor and the councilmen "submit yourselves to be arrested by the same constable, by virtue of the same warrant,and be tried before the same magistrate whose authority has been heretofore resisted. Nothing short of this can vindicate the dignity of violated law and allay the just excitement of the people."

This meant that Joseph Smith, with his fellow officials in the city government, would have to go to Carthage for trial. Constable Bettisworth had served the warrant referred to, and it was made returnable before Justice Morrison, or "some other justice of the peace." The governor, realizing, however, that these men would incur danger in going to Carthage, pledged his word for the "safety of all such persons as may thus be brought to this place from Nauvoo either for trial or as witnesses for the accused."

The mayor, in a letter to Governor Ford, defended his course. The Expositor had been abated in pursuance of a clause in the charter, and the trial referred to by the governor was in Justice Wells's court, for the Prophet preferred to go before "some other justice of the peace" than the one in Carthage. Besides, there was a law to prevent a man from putting himself in jeopardy more than once for the same offense. The weight of the argument was clearly with the mayor. While the destruction of the press may have been unwise under the circumstances, still the city authorities were within their legal rights in doing what they did. The Prophet politely refused to go to Carthage, in spite of the governor's promise of protection, because the mob could not probably be controlled.

And here again, as events were to show, the Mormon leader was right. Not only was "the mob," which presently was incorporated to a man in the militia, beyond the control of the governor, but there is plenty of evidence to show that the governor, whether consciously or unconsciously, was working with the element that had sworn to "get" the Prophet. At Carthage, according to Taylor, he surrounded himself with the enemies of the Prophet—"fifteen or twenty persons, most of whom were recreant to virtue, honor, integrity, and everything that is considered honorable among men."

Having read the governor's letter, Joseph turned to his brother and said, "There is no mercy—no mercy here."

"No," Hyrum answered. "Just as sure as we fall into their hands, we are dead men."

"Yes; what shall we do, Hyrum?"

"I don't know."

Of a sudden the Prophet's face lighted up. "The way is open," he said. "It is clear to my mind what to do. All they want is Hyrum and myself. Then tell everybody to go about their business, and not to collect in groups, but to scatter about. There is no doubt but they will come here for us. Let them search; they will not harm you in person or property, and not even a hair of your head. We will cross the river to-night, and go away to the West."

That was June twenty-second.

Here is the Prophet's last entry in his History It was five o'clock, Friday afternoon, June twenty-seventh. (We are now in Carthage jail.)

Carthage jail, a stone building, was then on the outskirts of town, half surrounded by woods. A two-story structure, the lower floor was used to house the jailor and his family; the upper was divided into two rooms, of which one opened on the stairway and the other served as a cell and a bedroom.

On this particular Friday afternoon there were four prisoners. They were Joseph Smith, his brother Hyrum, John Taylor, and Dr. Willard Richards. Their imprisonment was the culmination of a well-laid scheme to murder the Prophet. They all knew this. But they were unperturbed by the fact. Of the thousands of men then in the village none had such inner peace.

What became of the Prophet's plan to go West? That is an interesting story—and ended characteristically.

In the home of one William Jordan, on the Iowa side of the great river, a small group of men met at sunrise on the twenty-third. It comprised the two Smiths, Dr. Richards, and Orrin Porter Rockwell. They had come over the river at midnight in a leaky boat—"Port" rowing and the other three bailing out the water.

Joseph had said farewell to his family. His faithful friend, the Doctor, tells us that his chief came out of the house on that occasion with tears streaming down his cheeks, handkerchief to his eyes, and that he walked away in utter grief and silence.

Presently Rockwell left for Nauvoo, to bring horses for Joseph and Hyrum, and Dr. Bernhisel, with Reynolds Cahoon, Hyrum Kimball, and Lorenzo D. Wasson, arrived with news from the city. Officers had gone then to arrest the Prophet, but, not being able to find him, had returned to Carthage. Also the governor had threatened to keep troops in Nauvoo till such time as the mayor saw fit to surrender.

At one o'clock Porter came back. He was not supposed to do so until after dark. He brought a message from Emma to Joseph, with a note confirming the message. Emma was of the opinion that Joseph should give himself up for trial. Porter expressed no opinion. Cahoon, however, believed that, since the governor had promised protection and a fair trial, the Prophet should surrender; and he added that, in his view, Joseph was a coward for leaving his people.

The Mormon leader reflected for a moment. Then said sadly: "If my life is of no value to my friends, it is of no value to me." Another pause, and then he added, "Dr. Richards, will you write this letter for me to Governor Ford?"

The letter, which was signed by the two brothers, ran in part: "I now offer to come to you in Carthage, provided we can have a fair trial, not be abused nor have my witnesses abused, and have all things done in due form of law, without partiality, and you may depend on my honor without the show of a great armed force to produce excitement in the minds of the timid."

At four o'clock the party recrossed the river. On the way to the boat Joseph fell behind with Rockwell. The others kept urging him to hasten. "There is no need to hurry," he told them; "we are only going back to be slaughtered." And every once in a while: "I would like to preach to the Saints once again."

"That can be arranged," Porter encouraged, "and you can talk to them by starlight."

But the idea was given up, and not mentioned by him again until he was imprisoned in Carthage. This was apparently one of the last thoughts in his mind. It is quite probable there was something he had intended to say to his people before he left them for good.

Next morning, after staying with his family the night before, some messengers arrived from Carthage. The governor had changed his mind about sending an escort to Nauvoo to accompany the Mormon leader the twenty miles to the county seat, as giving him an honor "not accorded to any other citizen." Moreover the Prophet must appear in Carthage by ten o'clock.

The journey there and the Prophet's reception on his arrival are full of illuminating incidents—which Mormon historians have dwelt upon affectionately and in detail.

At the temple Joseph looked long and lovingly on the building, not yet completed; on the city lying in the broad arms of the placid river; on a farm he had near the town, of which he spoke with marked affection. On meeting Justice Wells, he bade him farewell with the words, "I wish you to cherish my memory, Squire Wells, and not think me the worst man in the world, either."

Four miles out from Carthage the little company met Captain Dunn, with about sixty mounted militia-men. At once an ominous interpretation on the incident by members of the group. "Don't be alarmed," said the Prophet, "they cannot do to us anything more than was done to the ancient Saints; they can only kill the body." Captain Dunn, however, had no murderous intentions, it seems. All the harm he contemplated he carried in his pocket in the form of an order from the governor for all the state arms now in the possession of the Legion. These must now be given up.

A little farther on they met Sherwood, a Mormon, with several other Mormons. The Prophet is said to have remarked to them: "I am going like a lamb to the slaughter, but I am calm as a summer's morning. I have a conscience void of offense toward God and toward all men. I shall die innocent, and it shall yet be said of me, 'He was murdered in cold blood.' "

Subsequently Captain Dunn, fearing resistance when he got to Nauvoo and asked for the state arms, came back and requested the Mormon leader to return with him to Nauvoo. This the Prophet did, and the arms were given up peaceably. The only objector was the non-mormon justice of the peace—Daniel H. Wells. This done, the Prophet, with his company, now numbering fifteen, turned their faces eastward again toward Carthage. They arrived there on the midnight of the twenty-fourth.

The atmosphere in Carthage was tense. The place was filled with troops. Conspicuous among them were the Carthage Greys and the McDonough boys, as they were called. They were waiting anxiously (one might truthfully say threateningly) for the coming of the Mormon leader. And when he did make his appearance, they made such an uproar, according to John Taylor, as to show the danger into which the mayor of Nauvoo had come. Amid threats the Mormons went to bed in the Hamilton House.

In the afternoon of the twenty-fifth several officers, with others, of the governor's troops in Carthage, all curious to see the Prophet, visited him in his room in the hotel.

"Gentlemen," he asked, "is there anything in my appearance to lead you to believe that I am the desperate character my enemies represent me to be? Tell me frankly."

To which one of them replied, "No, General Smith, there is not—quite the contrary. But we cannot see what is in your heart, nor can we tell what is your intentions."

"Very true, gentlemen," the Prophet said; "you cannot see what is in my heart, and you are therefore unable to judge me or my intentions. But I can see what is in your hearts, and I will tell you what I see. I can see that you are thirsting for my blood, and nothing but my blood will satisfy you. It is not for crime of any description that I and my brethren are thus continually persecuted and harassed by our enemies; but there are other motives, and some of them I have expressed, so far as they relate to me. Inasmuch, however, as you and the people thirst for blood, I prophesy in the name of the Lord, that you shall witness scenes of blood and sorrow to your entire satisfaction. Your souls shall be perfectly satiated with blood. Many of you who are now present shall face the cannon's mouth from sources you think not of. Those people that desire this great evil upon me and my brethren, shall be filled with regret and sorrow because of the scenes of desolation and distress that await them. They shall seek for peace, and shall not be able to find it. Gentlemen, you will find what I have told you to be true."

No doubt the Prophet had in mind the conflict he foresaw would result over the question of slavery. He spoke of it on several occasions, once as early as January, 1833, when he thus expressed it: "And now I am prepared to say by the authority of Jesus Christ, that not many years shall pass away before the United States shall present such a scene of bloodshed as has not a parallel in the history of our country." This was said in a letter to the editor of a paper in Rochester, New York—a Mr. N. E. Seaton. Already we have quoted what he said about the origin of the conflict—that it would begin in South Carolina. It was this vision of bloodshed that led him to suggest a remedy in the purchase of the slaves by the year 1850, or sooner.

It will be remembered that the governor insisted that Joseph Smith submit to arrest by the same constable that arrested him before and that he be tried before Justice Morrison in Carthage. This was the only way in which "a violated law" could be satisfied. All this, however, was forgotten as soon as the Prophet reached Carthage. For, the very next morning, Bettisworth arrested the Mormon leader, not for riot, as the first warrant specified, but for treason, and the warrant was made returnable, not before Justice Morrison, but before Justice Smith, captain of the Carthage Greys.

Just how the governor squared this procedure with this previous insistence has never been explained.

Nor was that all in the way of legal high-handedness. The same night, at the hotel, Bettisworth appeared with a mittimus, signed by Justice Smith. The Prophet must go to jail. Justice Smith afterwards stated that this was to insure the safety of the mayor. But, if so, the thing might have been done legally. For, a mittimus, as the lawyers tell us, presupposes a trial for the purpose of determining guilt; and the Prophet had had no trial with this point in view. Hence he protested. In vain he besought the interference of the governor. And in order to enforce the illegal mittimus, the Justice ordered out the Carthage Greys. So Joseph went to jail.

There can be no reasonable doubt that these measures were in pursuance of a carefully laid plot. The first necessity was to get the Prophet to Carthage. The governor did that. The next thing was to disarm the Legion, while the state troops were allowed to retain theirs. That, too, the governor accomplished. After that the Smiths must be jailed. This was done through a wholly illegal procedure by the justice and captain, a union of the judicial and the military functions.

These facts are not disputed, for they are incorporated in public documents.

The night of the twenty-sixth the Prophet lay on the only bed in the room, with his brother Hyrum. The other men—Dr. Richards, John Taylor, Dan Jones, and John S. Fullmer, the latter two having come as visitors—lay on mattresses that had been placed on the floor. During the night there was some shooting. Joseph got out of his bed and lay with Jones and Fullmer, taking his place between them.

"Here, Brother John," he said to Fullmer, "lay your head on my arm for a pillow." And then presently to Dan Jones, "Are you afraid to die?"

"Has that time come?" Jones asked. "Engaged in such a cause, I do not think that death would have any terrors."

To which the Prophet replied, "You will yet see Wales, and fulfill the mission appointed you before you die."

Jones said afterwards that, the following morning, he was informed by some of the Carthage Greys of their determination to do away with the Smiths, that he went directly to the governor and told him of the threat, but that the chief executive put him off with, "There is no cause for alarm; the men here are not that cruel." When Jones returned to the jail, he was refused admission by the guard. Before long Fullmer, too, left the prison.

When, in the afternoon, Ford went to Nauvoo with the McDonough troops, "to satisfy them," he left the Carthage Greys in charge of the four prisoners. He had promised on more than one occasion to take the Mormon leader with him, but, for some reason, he saw fit to break that promise. It was a disappointment to the Prophet.

At five o'clock the jailor, a Mr. Stigall, became alarmed for the safety of his prisoners. He suggested that they would be safer in what was known as the cell. Joseph said they would go there after supper. But there was no "after supper." Eight men (Carthage Greys) guarded the jail. The rest of the troops were on the public square.

"Dr. Richards," inquired the Prophet, "if we go into the cell, will you go in with us?" He probably meant himself and Hyrum.

"Brother Joseph," replied the Doctor, "you did not ask me to cross the river with you; you did not ask me to come to Carthage with you; you did not ask me to come to jail with you. Do you think I would forsake you now? I will tell you what I will do. If you are condemned to be hanged for treason, I will be hanged in your stead, and you shall go free."

"You cannot do that."

"But I will."

A few minutes later there was a slight rustling at the outer door of the jail. Some one cried, "Surrender!" At the same instant three shots were fired. When Dr. Richards peeped through the side of the curtains, he saw that there were some hundreds of men around the jail. All of them were armed.

Pretty soon shots came through the door and through the window. One of these struck Hyrum Smith on the left side of the nose. He fell, exclaiming, "I am a dead man!"

Joseph glanced at his brother. "Oh my dear brother, Hyrum!" he said. And with that he discharged a revolver through an opening in the door—with what effect is not known. The pistol had been smuggled in to him by a friend.

[Joseph Smith: An American Prophet Death mask of Joseph Smith

Having done that, the Prophet, as Dr. Richards says, walked calmly toward the window, and looked out. Was he thinking that, by getting himself out of the room, he might save his two companions? Before he could escape, however, a ball hit him from the doorway, and a moment later a second pierced him from the window. With this he either fell out or jumped out, falling near the well-curb just below.

A stranger, who had been forcibly taken to the scene of the murder by some of the troopers, declares that, after the Prophet's body reached the ground, it was placed against the curb and shot at. However that may be, four bullet wounds were found in his body.

The whole dastardly scene was over in two minutes.

That very moment, according to Orrin Porter Rockwell, the McDonough boys were with the governor in the Mansion, Joseph Smith's home. One of these, he says, told the rest, "The deed is done before now." "Port" had just slipped into the room "for his hat."

On the morning of the twenty-eighth not a soul was in the little town of Carthage, except the hotel keeper, Dr. Richards, and the wounded apostle Taylor. Every resident had fled in terror, lest the Mormons come upon them. But the Mormons did not think of that. They were too much wounded in spirit—too thunderstruck.

"I say to all the citizens of Nauvoo, my brethren, be still, and know that God reigns," wrote the survivors. "Don't rush out of the city. Don't rush to Carthage—stay at home, and be prepared for an attack from Missouri mobbers. Joseph and Hyrum are dead. We will prepare to move the bodies as soon as possible."

At eight o'clock the bodies were placed on two wagons, which immediately left for Nauvoo, accompanied by a guard of eight soldiers, by Dr. Richards and Mr. Hamilton, and by Samuel Smith, brother of the deceased, who presently himself died of a broken heart. The bodies were covered with green twigs and leaves to keep them from the heat.

"My son," the Voice had said to the Prophet in that other prison, in Liberty, "peace be unto thy soul. Thine adversary and thine afflictions shall be but a small moment, and then, if thou endure it well, God shall exalt thee on high: thou shalt triumph over all thy foes."

That was five years before. He had "endured" his afflictions "well." And this now was his triumph!
