John Henry Evans, Joseph Smith, an American Prophet ( 1946)

PART TWO

The Prophets Religious Philosophy

CHAPTER IX

Introductory

To an imagination of any scope the most far-reaching from of power is not money; it is the command of idea. —JUSTICE OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES

To his disciples Joseph Smith's attraction lay partly in his pesonality, but mainly in the dynamic power of his religious philosophy. Sometimes people were dominated by the one, sometimes by the other, and sometimes by a combination of the two, depending on their nature and the degree of their intelligence.

There was Lyman Wight, for instance. Lyman Wight was a rough, uneducated man, who fairly earned the sobriquet he received in Nauvoo, "the Wild Ram of the Mountains." Originally a disciple of Alexander Campbell, he had been converted to Mormonism by Oliver Cowdery, in the fall of 1830, while the mission to the Indians was on its way to the western border. Cowdery found him and Isaac Morley endeavoring to work out a communistic idea in Kirtland, embodied in what they called "The Family."

At once Wight caught the missionary spirit, and went out to preach the new faith. His first efforts were expended in the fishing districts of Ohio. All day he threw a net with the men, and when night came he preached to them and their wives in the school house. In this ministerial task Lyman stood on the stove, coatless, barefoot, shirt sleeves rolled above his elbows, and trousers' legs above his knees.

"He don't look like a preacher," was a frequent comment, "but it sounds like the truth." In a few weeks Wight baptized a hundred of these seafaring folk and organized them into a "branch" of the church. Among this number was Judge Elias Higbee.

Wight's loyalty to the Prophet was like the natural affection of a faithful dog for its master. In those Missouri days, as we have seen, when the Mormon leader was about to be tried by court—martial and witnesses were frantically sought, Lyman, who was among the prisoners and also to be tried on his own account, was offered his freedom if he would testify against his chief. "The only alternative," said General Wilson, who made the promise, "is that you will be shot with the rest." And Wight's answer was, "Shoot, and be damned."

When the Prophet was killed, Lyman at once became unmanageable, notwithstanding he was an apostle. It was not within the power or the personality of Brigham Young, great as these were, to make him "toe the mark," as the pioneer leader used to say. And when he was broached on the subject, he replied, "The only man that has ever been able to handle me, is dead." After that Lyman went his way to Texas, where he sank into oblivion, and Brigham went his way to Utah, where he arose to fame.

Orson Pratt was an altogether different type of man from Lyman Wight. He was, as we have seen, highly intellectual, with a creative imagination.

While, during his long career as a preacher and writer on Mormonism, he invariably spoke of the Prophet with deep affection and reverence, yet the main appeal to this scholar's fine intelligence was not Joseph Smith himself, but rather his ideas. The man was merely an instrument through which a system of thought was given to the world. Joseph Smith's fundamental conception of the spiritual universe served to put Orson Pratt's fertile brain to work on the organization of details, which he arranged in an orderly procession.

And no man in the first century of Mormonism exerted a greater influence than Orson Pratt, so far as the expression of the Prophet's ideas is concerned. Pratt did much the same thing for Joseph Smith that Paul did for Jesus: he put the main principles of the faith into molds that have not yet altogether broken to pieces. He did for Mormonism what Huxley did for Darwinism: he brought its highest generalizations down to the comprehension of the humblest, and with a logic, a simplicity, and a clarity of style not excelled by that popular scientist himself.

And then there was Brigham Young. It is hard to tell which was the more dominant in his life—Joseph Smith's personality or Joseph Smith's ideas. During the thirty-three years of his leadership of the Mormons, Brigham Young's greatest anxiety was to make his life and work conform to the pattern laid down by the Prophet. Every idea, every expression of that idea in whatever form, had to square with what Joseph Smith had said on the subject.

And even when the great pioneer came to die, his practical genius concentrated on his early "file leader"—the man who had been in his grave thirty-three years and from whose hands he had accepted as a sacred trust the leadership of a great organization. Looking up and out, the glaze of death gathering in his eyes, Brigham exclaimed feebly, "Joseph! Joseph! Joseph!"

Was this an old man looking back upon the happiest period of an unquiet life, before his heart-breaking responsibilities began? Or was it instead a spirit, about to be released from all fleshly worries and cares, making connections with invisible realities?

In either event, here was a stiff and powerful will, whose conscious and subconscious life had been dominated by a stronger personality than his own.

In the main, the appeal of Joseph Smith's ideas lay, strangely enough, not in their newness, but rather in their oldness. Instead of being either strange or novel, they were scriptural merely. This agreed with the new prophet's claim to being a "restorer."

The second quarter of the nineteenth century was Bible-minded. The reformation leaders had made it so. Jonathan Edwards, the Wesleys, and George Whitefield had made it so. The supreme standard of religion was the Hebrew Scriptures. Everything had to square with what some one had said in the New Testament. But the second quarter of the nineteenth century was also spiritually discontented. At least this was so in Western America. Where were the apostles, the prophets, and the other inspired leaders mentioned in the New Testament? How came it that sprinkling and pouring had taken the place of immersion in the Christian church? And what had become of the "signs" that anciently were promised the believer—healing, tongues, prophesying, and other manifestations of the Spirit?

Accordingly men and women everywhere in Western America were scanning the horizon in search of a church more in harmony with the teachings of Jesus and Paul. One of these new faiths was Campbellitism, which swept the country like a cool breeze. The Church of the Disciples taught baptism by immersion, and faith and repentance as pre-requisites. Its foundation was a rather literal interpretation of the Scriptures. Thomas Campbell's favorite phrase was: "Where the Scriptures speak, we speak; where the Scriptures are silent, we are silent."

But Mormonism, while agreeing perfectly with the Scriptures in every essential particular, went considerably further than the religion of Thomas and Alexander Campbell. For, in addition to basing its teachings on the Bible standard and advocating faith, repentance, and baptism by immersion for the remission of sin, the religion of Joseph Smith taught that the Holy Ghost, as anciently, was received by members of the church, with the same "gifts" that are mentioned in the New Testament as having been enjoyed by the ancient Saints. And, too, it had the "same organization as existed in the primitive church"—apostles, prophets, and inspired teachers.

As a result, thousands of Campbellites, both clergy and laymen, were silently gathered into the fold by the Mormon missionaries. Sidney Rigdon, Edward Partridge, John Corrill, Lyman Wight, Isaac Morley, John Murdock, and scores of others, all leaders in the Church of the Disciples, hailed with joy the arrival of the New Movement in Ohio. This was also true of such leaders as John Taylor, the Reverend John P. Greene, and the Reverend Orson Spencer, in other religious denominations. Methodists, Baptists, Presbyterians, Episcopalians, Catholics, and men of no particular creed were attracted to Mormonism because it measured up to the standard laid down in the Gospels and the apostolic Letters. Mormonism thus gathered people who were like-minded to begin with, and it is this fact that goes a long way toward explaining the "miracle" of the "gathering" movement started by the Prophet.

And thus, too, Mormonism comprised, not the riff-raff and undesirable elements of society, as has often been charged, but rather, on the whole, men and women who were responsible, independent, and religious and who were earnest seekers after religious truth.

When the founder of Mormonism spoke about religion, it was not as a scholar, but rather as a man of intuition or inspiration.

Whether or not he was a prophet or seer in the biblical sense, is still a matter in dispute. But there can be no doubt that, in method as well as in spirit, the Mormon leader was more akin to the Hebrew prophets than to any of the religious teachers since the time of Paul.

Alexander Campbell, like Joseph Smith, taught ideas in disagreement with popular notions of his time. Also he organized a church—the Church of the Disciples of Christ.

Now one of the ideas they had in common was baptism. They both insisted, contrary to the teachings of most Christians of their day, that this rite must be performed by immersion and that it can be properly administered only to those who are capable of faith and repentance.

But how did these two religious teachers arrive at the same conclusion in the matter? The answer to this question will give us the key to the Prophet's method, as contradistinguished from that of Campbell.

The founder of the Church of the Disciples was primarily a theologian. Born in 1788, in Ireland, he was educated for the ministry by his father, Thomas Campbell, himself a clergyman, and, later, at the University of Glasgow, Scotland. Meantime, he came under the influence of the Haldane brothers, imbibing their views of life and religion. Besides, he was naturally endowed with strong intellectual powers—a clear head and a vigorous understanding. In 1809, at the age of twenty-one, he followed his father to the United States, where he took up the vocation of preaching.

Up to the time he came to America he believed in the doctrine of infant baptism as taught by the Presbyterian church, to which he belonged. It seems that he had never asked himself any questions regarding its lawfulness. But in this year, while he was considering a rule of faith laid down by his father—"where the Scriptures speak, we speak; and where the Scriptures are silent, we are silent"—the wrongfulness of the practice was first suggested to him by a fellow clergyman.

There followed four years of what his biographer (Robert Richardson) calls "a series of severe mental struggles" over the doctrine. He investigated carefully, as was his wont—reading everything he could find on the subject, to learn whether there was any evidence to show that the doctrine was admissible. Next, he examined the Greek Testament, with the same end in view. Finally, he conversed with his father and other scholars on the subject.

Meanwhile, his views fluctuated greatly. He began with the idea that the doctrine was correct, and read for the purpose of justifying it. After considerable study of the evidence he decided it was wrong. Further reading and reflection, however, convinced him that the matter was of so little importance that one might please one's self in the situation, approving or disapproving the doctrine as one saw fit. So for a time he "let it slip," as he put it. Then, when he became a father and the question demanded of him a personal answer, he reÃ«xamined the whole subject, with the result that he concluded it was wrong again—that immersion was the only correct form and that no infant should be baptized. And he stuck to this conclusion.

This has been the uncertain road that every Christian scholar from the beginning has traveled whenever he has wished to decide what was doubtful in Christian doctrine and practice. He has read; he has reasoned and pondered; he has talked with others. It was the method of the Fathers and of the Reformers, and it is still the method of Protestant clergymen.

Joseph Smith's method of arriving at certainty was the antithesis of this. When he was only twenty-four, he published a pronouncement on the subject of baptism. The following words, which are from the Book of Mormon, are supposed to have been uttered by Jesus to the Nephites on the occasion of his personal ministry among them:

"Whoso repenteth of his sins and desireth to be baptized in my name, on this wise shall ye baptize them—ye shall go down and stand in the water. And these are the words which ye shall say, calling them by name: Having authority given me of Jesus Christ, I baptize you in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen. Then shall ye immerse them in water, and come forth again out of the water."

As for infant baptism, that is "a solemn mockery before God." It is Mormon speaking now—one of the last of the Nephite prophets:

"Teach repentance and baptism unto those who are accountable, and capable of committing sin. Little children are alive in Christ, even from the foundation of the world. He that supposeth that little children need baptism is in the gall of bitterness and in the bonds of iniquity. For it is awful wickedness to suppose that God saveth one child because of baptism, and that another must perish because he hath no baptism."

The purpose in quoting these two passages from the Book of Mormon is to show the definiteness, the positiveness with which the Prophet speaks on the subject that gave so much trouble to Campbell, the scholar.

This conclusion (to use a word that does not really apply here) seems not to have come at the end of a long train of study and reasoning. There is no hunting for scriptural passages and poring over them, no anxious searching of the conscience for guidance, no delving into the original language for light, no reading of what other teachers have said on the subject, no conversation with fellow-workers to clarify the mind. Joseph Smith lacked the mental equipment to do all this, even had he so desired. On the contrary, he appears to have merely "caught the idea" on the wing; it "just came to him," as the phrase has it. It is as if he had access to a secret reservoir of knowledge, which he had only to tap at will.

Accordingly there is about all his theological utterances a clearness, a definiteness, a positiveness, and a sure-footedness that is not usually present in the conclusions that have been reached by the slow, laborious method of "trial and success," of investigation and research. Nor is there, as a rule, any involvement of thought, where, in the famous phrase of Gibbon, the mind recoils upon itself in an effort to comprehend. Anything the Prophet says may be readily understood by the average, untrained mind. This is true whether he is speaking about God or a cup of tea.

Besides, Joseph Smith never amplifies, never expounds, never argues. He only announces. And here is another likeness to the biblical prophets.

Says Isaiah: "Wash you, make you clean; put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes; cease to do evil; learn to do well; seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow.

"Woe to Ariel, to Ariel, the city where David dwelt! Add ye year to year; let them kill sacrifices. Yet I will distress Ariel, and there shall be heaviness and sorrow; and it shall be unto me as unto Ariel. And thou shalt be brought down, and shalt speak out of the ground, and thy speech shall be low out of the dust."

Says Joseph Smith: "Let every man esteem his brother as himself, and practice virtue and holiness before me. Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord. Seek not for riches, but for wisdom; and, behold, the mysteries of God shall be unfolded unto you, and then shall you be made rich. He that hath eternal life is rich.

"Verily, thus saith the Lord concerning the wars that will shortly come to pass, beginning with the rebellion of South Carolina, the time will come that war will be poured out upon all nations, beginning at this place. For, behold, the Southern states shall be divided against the Northern states, and the Southern states will call on the nation of Great Britain; and then war shall be poured out upon all nations."

If this is not the genuine article, it is a pretty good imitation, both in form and in spirit. (This last statement about war was made in December, 1832.) It is the voice of an oracle—at least, of one who is convinced he is an oracle. Yet it is in the manner of almost every theological utterance made by the Prophet. He often prefaces his pronouncements with a "Thus saith the Lord," after the style of the Hebrew seers.

Subjects that the greatest theological scholars in Christendom would hesitate to discuss, let alone make a definite statement about, this Palmyra youth, without education or training, handles with a familiarity that would provoke merriment if it were not for the substantial results which have come out of his words.

It may be a surprise to the reader, whether he be a disciple or an unbeliever in the Prophet's claims, to be told that Joseph Smith was in any sense a mystic.

A mystic, to the popular mind, is an impractical dreamer. But the Mormon leader, by all accounts, was a man who loved active life rather than quiet contemplation. Moreover, the church he founded and the religious philosophy he set forth have often been charged with being materialistic. How then can such a man as the Mormon prophet be looked upon as in any way a mystic?

Nevertheless, Joseph Smith was a mystic, as a close examination of his teachings will show.

The Mormon leader was not a mystic in the same sense as John the Beloved disciple, who was so fond of referring to Christ as a "shepherd," the "light of the world," the "bread of life," the "true vine," etc.; nor was he a mystic in the sense that Eckhart was, who carried the idea of absorption in God almost into pantheism; or of such men as Groot, who put feeling above knowledge; or even the French Molinos, who advised abstinence, torture of the body, and total self-renunciation as the road to inner peace and heavenly security. And of course he was not in the same class of mystics as the great Swedenborg.

In the Mormon prophet's utterances there is nothing, or very little, that is mystical in the sense we have been considering or that an average man would find any difficulty in getting his mind around. His religious philosophy contains no such dark phrases as the "immaculate conception," "transubstantiation," and the three "incomprehensibles" of the Nicene creed. Indeed, the absence of the element of mystery in the forms of religion he established, and therefore of the element of poetry, suggestiveness, and beauty, has often been turned into a point against the Prophet.

To Joseph Smith the conception of Mary, the mother of Jesus, like that of every other woman who has given birth to children, took place in accordance with, not in violation of, law; the bread and the wine in the sacrament of the Lord's Supper, despite any priestly consecration, remains bread and wine, although with a symbolic meaning; and the three Persons in the godhead are as separate and distinct in their individualities as any three persons in the flesh, their unity, like the unity of any three mortals, consisted of an agreement of minds.

As a matter of fact, the Prophet all his life took a great deal of pains to strip the mystical phrases of the Bible of their obscurity and mystery. A disproportionate part of the Book of Mormon is devoted to making Isaiah clear to the modern reader by giving the conditions under which that great prophet said what he did. His vagueness, ambiguity, and uncertainties are thus cleared up in part.

The same thing is true of John's writings. Only, here, especially in the "Apocalypse," the meaning is hidden under symbols. "What is the sea of glass spoken of by John?" was asked of the Prophet. And he answered at once, as from an authoritative source, "It is the earth in its sanctified, immortal, and eternal state."

This sort of thing he did continually.

Joseph Smith, however, was a mystic, though in a much deeper sense than the word implies. The heart of mysticism lies in the fact that the mystic sees the eternal in the temporal. His mind penetrates the shell and lays secure hold on the kernel. No matter whether the mystic be ancient or modern, Oriental or Western, this is true of him, if he be a true mystic and not a fraud.

"It will often happen that in times of spiritual declension," says Professor Fisher, "when a worship of system, a barren orthodoxy, has been substituted for vital faith, that mystics will arise to show practically that religion is something more than a dry dogma, an exercise of the understanding. It may be that in such a protest of the heart, vagaries will be mingled, having no solid basis. Yet with much that is visionary there will be connected a real insight into things divine, and suggestions of high value to those who know how to sift out the chaff from the wheat."

That is what happened to Judaism, and John the Baptist and Jesus appeared. It happened again to the so-called universal church of the Middle Ages, and Luther, Calvin, and Latimer came. And, if one may believe the Mormons, history repeated itself after the Reformation, and Joseph Smith arrived on the scene. At any rate, the Mormon prophet fulminated against modern Christianity, Protestant as well as Catholic, with as much vigor and invective as did either Luther or Christ respectively. In the spirit of the true mystic he reached his hand down through the accretions that had gathered for eighteen hundred years over the simple teachings of Jesus, and took firm hold on the essentials in the religion of the Nazarene.

Here, for instance, is the denunciation of a fifteen-year-old boy in Palmyra, who looked upon himself as an organ voice of the deity (it is God speaking): "All their creeds are an abomination in my sight. The professors of them are corrupt. They draw near to me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me. They teach for doctrines the commandments of men. They have a form of godliness, but they deny the power of God." The ninety-five theses of Luther and the philippic against the Pharisees by Jesus were no severer arraignment than that.

This accusation of the whole Christian world by Joseph Smith he worked out constructively in an organization and a religious philosophy. Just how the insight demanded in such a constructive work manifested itself, will become clear as we go on with a consideration of the Prophet's ideas of God, of the origin and destiny of man, of the purpose of human life, of heaven and hell, of Satan, of the ceremonials of faith, and of a great many other religious, social, and economic questions, especially when we set his views side by side with those generally believed in his time.

Joseph Smith at no time wrote a treatise where his religious philosophy is discussed as a whole, or even shadowly outlined. Had he been a thinker like Jonathan Edwards, or a philosopher like John Dewey, he might have done so. But the Mormon prophet was neither a thinker nor a philosopher in the accepted sense.

Instead, therefore, of setting down his thoughts in order in a book, he gave out "precept upon precept, line upon line, here a little and there a little," without regard apparently for the place each idea might occupy in his general scheme of thought. It is as if he had made a map piece by piece and then left the separate parts to be put together by others.

The materials for an ordered religious philosophy of Mormonism are widely scattered through the literature of the church of the Latter-day Saints. Some of it is to be found in the Book of Mormon, the very first utterance of the Prophet's in print. Some of it is available in what is known among his followers as the Doctrine and Covenants, a volume containing the official pronouncements of Joseph Smith to his generation. In neither of these works, however, is there an approach to a systematic arrangement of the author's religious scheme.

Much of the material we are speaking of here is in what is called the Documentary History of the Church. This work is in six large volumes, and was dictated to secretaries by the Prophet during a period of about six years. Here bits of religion and philosophy are embedded in the midst of the narrative and in some document or other, like currants in a pudding.

These items, scattered through many volumes, we have attempted to put together in this book in such an orderly form as will show some sort of continuity and development. So far as we are aware, it is the first attempt of the kind that has ever been made, either within or without the Mormon church, that approaches the scale we propose. Placed thus, these isolated expressions of the Prophet's form an interesting and highly instructive mosaic, and at the same time reveal the reaches of Joseph Smith's understanding. It is doubtful whether, in comprehensiveness, simplicity, and cohesion, this religious philosophy can be matched anywhere in history.

These ideas, as we shall have reason to say in greater detail elsewhere, are not original, for the most part, with the Mormon prophet. And this fact has been built up into an impressive argument against him by his "enemies."

The truth is that neither Joseph nor any of his disciples, if they were properly informed on the faith, ever claimed originality for these doctrines. Indeed, quite to the contrary. The Prophet claimed only to be a "restorer" of that part of the universal scheme called the "gospel" or, as he preferred to say, "the plan of life and salvation." He would therefore have been the very first to disavow newness in the absolute sense to any of them. To him novelty in a religious idea, especially in connection with that plan he so often spoke of, would be something to look on with suspicion, since it was supposed to be among the eternal verities. We shall see in another place just how old the gospel was in the view of the Mormon leader.

Anyway, the test of an idea or religious truth, whether in one country or another, is not, as every one knows, a matter of origin. As Professor James says, "By their fruits, not by their roots, shall ye know them." If it were a matter of originality, the very teachings of Jesus would suffer. For only a small part indeed (some say none) of these was original with him.

For the most part, the religious philosophy of Joseph Smith was derived from the Hebrew Scriptures; but often the separate ideas in it are of such form as to have escaped the attention of Christian theologians. And this is notable under the circumstances. An instance of this is what the Prophet called "salvation for the dead" through the performance of rites for them by proxy—something distinctive in Mormonism. Another idea in this class is the Mormon doctrine of a pre-earth life for man, instead of merely for Jesus, as the Gospel of John has it.

But even if Joseph Smith had said nothing that is new—which is not the case by any means—still the manner in which he covers the whole field of human life, together with the way in which the separate parts of his religious philosophy hang together, is striking evidence of the Prophet's intellectual scope and fiber. No one else has covered exactly the same ground.

Moreover, these doctrines must be considered in their setting, historically and atmospherically. In a later chapter we shall have occasion to say more on this point.

Some of these doctrines are commonplace enough nowadays. They were not so, however, in his day. As a matter of fact, the "newness" of them was a source of opposition in the Prophet's time, and afterwards. If they were not original absolutely, they certainly were relatively. And their novelty sometimes startled, because they came in conflict with time-worn teachings.

Besides, some of these ideas were limited by their age—which is but natural. For Joseph Smith, like every other great teacher, was a product of his times. No idea came to him till, apparently, there was a need for it; and there never was a need, it seems, but was satisfied immediately out of the capacious resources of the Mormon prophet. If he ran upon an idea—the communistic Family in Kirtland, for instance—he presently brought out of his ample reservoir of wisdom what appeared to him and his disciples "a more perfect" plan.
