John Henry Evans, Joseph Smith, an American Prophet ( 1946)

PART THREE

The Prophet's Explanation of Himself

CHAPTER XII

The Spiritual Expert

The ancients are only venerable to us because distance has destroyed what was trivial; as the sun and stars affect us only grandly, because we cannot reach to all their smoke and surfaces and say, Is that all?—RALPH WALDO EMERSON.

From our long detour into the region of the Mormon prophet's mind and thought we now come back to the main road of his interesting personality.

We shall have to do, however, with quite different materials from those which concerned us in the first sections of this work. In Part One we were interested only in such events in the Prophet's life as might have been obvious to any one who wished to see instead of to interpret. In the remaining sections we shall be concerned with what is behind what the Prophet did and said—happenings to which, for the most part, there were either no witnesses or only one or two, but which must nevertheless be taken into consideration, if we are to understand this unusual personality, especially since it is these occurrences that have created the perplexities concerning him.

That this aspect of Joseph Smith's life is extremely puzzling is evident from the amount of literature on the subject. In the Church Historian's Office in Salt Lake City, Utah, are more than twenty thousand volumes, large and small, each of which says something about the Prophet one way or another. There are also some two thousand pamphlets on the subject. More than fifteen hundred of these books are by anti-mormons, that is, they are more or less bitter in tone,—for what reason one is at a loss to divine. All are by different persons. Most of the pamphlets also are anti-mormon. Then there are hundreds of volumes by non-mormon writers, who have attacked their theme in a not unfriendly spirit, some in an inquiring mood. The rest of the books and pamphlets in the library are by Mormon writers.

This is a comparatively large collection of books to have accumulated on the subject in the one hundred and twenty-seven years since the birth of the Prophet in 1805. For, in the two centuries that have elapsed since the birth of George Washington, who is everywhere looked upon as the outstanding American, there are only two thousand six hundred fifty-six volumes about him in the Library of Congress.

But what is there in Joseph Smith to account for?

Is it because an uneducated youth became so powerful a figure in his world? Is it because he was able to gather so many discordant human units, to begin with, and then to weld them into a whole? Is it that a young man of such meager opportunities should become a better theologian than the great preachers of his day? Is it that so unschooled a man should, at an age when the judgment is unripe, have set forth so complete, so cohesive, and so consistent a scheme of life? Or is it all of these together?

In the last analysis it is not any one of these that baffles the student of Joseph Smith's life—nor indeed all of them. These are but manifestations of something in the man himself that was not in any of those by whom he was surrounded.

What was that?

In business and practical affairs the Prophet was the inferior of such men as Brigham Young, Edward Partridge, and Newel K. Whitney. Indeed, he admitted as much on more than one occasion; he always maintained that he had no "gift" in material things. In scholastic attainments he was not the equal of Orson Pratt and Orson Spencer. And as a public speaker he did not possess the form and polish of Sidney Rigdon. This is asserted by more than one of his disciples, and is admitted by himself in the appointment of the "orator of the Mahoning Association" as his "spokesman. " Yet these men, and others—men who would have elbowed their way to the front in any community by sheer ability—yielded both their will and their judgment to this Palmyra youth.

Why?

It was because they believed him to be what we call nowadays "psychic," because they believed he had a soul so sensitized as to catch without difficulty the thought-waves of God—which eluded their own coarser powers of receptivity. That is the whole secret. In their opinion Joseph Smith was a "prophet and seer" in the sense the words were used anciently.

This "psychic" power in the Prophet was what, in their belief, produced the Book of Mormon. It was what had brought to pass the "gathering" of disciples. For the men and women who took part in that movement were not actuated by thoughts of material gain. In most instances material gain lay in staying where they were when Mormonism found them.

On what grounds did the Prophet's followers come to believe in his "psychic" powers—to believe that he was a prophet and seer? What claims did the Mormon leader himself make in the situation? Just what problems did the Mormons of his day have to solve before they could bring themselves to accept those claims? How does the evidence on which his claims rest, stand up under analysis?

It is an interesting study—the study of a unique personality and of some unique religious experiences.

In 1839, as we have seen, Joseph Smith, with several other Mormons, was in prison—Liberty Jail, as it was ironically called.

On the occasion when they were to be taken to Daviess county for trial, the question arose among the prisoners as to whether they should provide an extra guard from among their friends. For the sentiment against the Prophet and his companions was murderous at the time. All the men, excepting the leader, who had taken no part in the discussion, were agreed that it would be a good thing to have a friendly guard to protect them against what seemed impending.

This decision having been arrived at by free consultation, Hyrum Smith, one of the prisoners, then turned to his brother for his opinion on the subject. Joseph bowed his head for a moment and reflected, as it seemed. Lifting his head, he answered:

"It will not do. We must trust in the Lord. If we take a guard with us, we shall all be destroyed."

"Do you say that in the name of the Lord, Joseph?" Hyrum asked.

"In the name of the Lord," the Prophet answered, "if we take a guard with us, we shall be destroyed. But if we put our trust in the Lord, we shall be safe, and no harm shall befall us, and we shall be better treated than we have ever been since we have been prisoners."

That of course settled the matter.

Says one of the prisoners on this occasion, Alexander McRae, who afterwards related the incident:

When we arrived at the place where the court was held, I began to think he was mistaken for once, for the people rushed upon us en masse, crying, "Kill them! kill them!" I could see no chance for escape, unless we could fight our way through, and we had nothing to do that with.

At this, Brother Joseph, at whom all seemed to rush, rose up and said, "We are in your hands; if we are guilty, we refuse not to be punished by the law."

Hearing these words, two of the most bitter mobocrats in the country—one by the name of William Peniston and the other Kinney, or McKinney, I do not remember which—got up on the benches and began to speak to the people, saying, "Yes, gentlemen, these men are in our hands; let us not use violence, but let the law take its course; the law will condemn them, and they will be punished by it. We do not want the disgrace of taking the law into our own hands."

In a very few minutes they were quieted, and they seemed as friendly as they had a few minutes before been enraged. Liquor was procured, and we all had to drink in token of friendship.

This took place in the court room (a small log cabin about twelve feet square), during the adjournment of the court; and from that time until we got away, they could not put a guard over us who would not become so friendly that they dared not trust them, and the guard was very often changed. We were seated at the first table with the judge, lawyers, etc., and had the best the country afforded, with feather beds to sleep on—a privilege we had not had before enjoyed in all our imprisonment.

This refinement of distinction drawn by Hyrum Smith between what his brother said as a man and what he said as a seer is one which is extremely hard for the uninitiated either to understand or to believe. By both the Prophet and his disciples, however, it was taken as a matter of fact, and needed no explanation.

It implied two things: first, that Joseph Smith, in his own belief and the belief of his followers, could speak authoritatively "in the name of the Lord," and that, when he did thus speak, his words might be depended upon with absolute trust. To be sure, this confidence in what the Mormon leader said in such a situation, was a matter of growth. That is, like everything else, it required evidence to establish it. McRae's phrase, "for once," is significant. If the Prophet disappointed expectation but once, the confidence of his disciples was in danger of breaking down. Second, only the Prophet, in the belief again of his followers, was able to tell whether or not he had made connections with the invisible realities. His disciples of necessity had to take his word for it. Only in the event could they tell. If what he had told them turned out well, it was the Lord that had spoken; but, if it turned out ill, it was Joseph Smith—a very practical, but hazardous, test.

The fact is, strange as it may seem, the Prophet actually encouraged his disciples to draw this distinction between the man and the seer.

"This morning," runs an entry in his Journal for Wednesday, January 8, 1843, "I read German, and visited with a brother and sister from Michigan, who thought that 'a prophet was always a prophet'; but I told them that a prophet was a prophet only when he was acting as such." Nor does this appear to have been a loophole for escape in certain contingencies. He meant exactly that. And he taught the same thing from the pulpit. Always he sought to have his people distinguish between "Joseph Smith" and "Joseph Smith the prophet and seer." They were two different individuals, to all intents and purposes. Was Joseph Smith's a "split personality"?

On another occasion, in the same year, he said publicly, in a half-playful mood: "Many persons think a prophet must be a great deal better than anybody else. Suppose I should condescend—yes, I will call it condescend—to be a great deal better than any of you, I would be raised to the highest heaven; and who should accompany me? I love that man better who swears a stream as long as my arm, yet deals justice to his neighbors and mercifully deals his substance to the poor, than the long, smooth-faced hypocrite. I do not want you to think that I am very righteous, for I am not. There was one good man, and his name was Jesus."

Joseph Smith no doubt suffered from the false connotations of the word "prophet." Whenever the modern man uses the term, there comes up before his imagination a picture of Moses descending from the mount and smashing the tablets on which had been in scribed the Ten Commandments by the finger of God; or of Jeremiah walking through the streets of the Holy City, a yoke on his neck, thundering imprecations and prophecies of evil upon the heads of his recreant people; or of John the Baptist, clothed in camel's hair and with a girdle of skin round his loins, coming with a bound out of the wilderness, where he had fed on locusts and wild honey.

The fact may well be that Moses, Jeremiah, and John the Baptist were very companionable men, when, in the phrase of Joseph Smith, "they were not acting as a prophet." At any rate, it is not probable that they were always in a savage mood on account of the sins of their people. They doubtless ate and drank, they breathed, they complained of the weather, they laughed and enjoyed, much as their contemporaries did. Only, at times they felt the divine afflatus, and spoke hot words against wickedness in high places. For a prophet, it seems, was needed only when the car of civilization was speeding down hill.

And so the Mormon leader strove hard to give the word "prophet" a less grotesque meaning. He had a pressing need to do that for the sake of his own reputation. For the disciple as well as the stranger sometimes had the most fantastic notions as to what the Prophet ought to look like, and they were often perhaps surprised, not to say disappointed, when they saw him and he did not answer to the picture of him which they had in their minds.

Wilford Woodruff was amused, even if his faith was not shaken, when the Prophet asked him to help in the tanning of a wolfskin. Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball, very probably, had a slight shock on seeing the founder of a religion based on the miraculous, engaged in felling trees in the forest. And a young woman from New Jersey tells how she was surprised, even shocked, at finding her hero in his shirt sleeves in Nauvoo, on her arrival there. Even in the Illinois days one often runs upon this entry in that ubiquitous Journal: "Chopped wood all day." One gathers that Josiah Quincy was not a little astonished when he saw the Mormon leader in a jacket that "had not lately seen the washtub" and with a beard two or three days old.

If the Prophet was a pretender, then he must also have been a good actor. For it would require, in that event, no small amount of skill in the dramatic art to keep such men as Brigham Young, Oliver Cowdery, Sidney Rigdon, the two Pratts, Wilford Woodruff, Heber C. Kimball, Dr. Willard Richards, Orson Spencer, and hosts of others equally intelligent and alert, from becoming disillusioned with respect to the New Movement. That they did not, was a tribute either to the leader's art in covering up his deception or to his sincerity.

As a matter of fact, the Prophet often laid himself open to detection, if there was anything to find out, since he made no secret of his manner of receiving the divine will.

In 1829, when he and Cowdery were in Pennsylvania working on the Book of Mormon, David Whitmer was to come for them, to take them to his father's home in Fayette, New York. The distance was about a hundred twenty-five miles, and required more than two days to cover in those slow times.

"When I arrived at Harmony," says young Whitmer, "Joseph and Oliver were coming toward me, and met me some distance from the house. Oliver told me that Joseph had informed him when I started from home, where I had stopped the first night, how I read the sign at the tavern, where I stopped the next night, etc., and that I would be there that day before dinner—all of which was exactly as Joseph had told Oliver, at which I was greatly astonished."

Parley P. Pratt says that he was present on several occasions when the Prophet "received revelations." This, according to Pratt, is what took place:

Each sentence was uttered slowly and very distinctly, and with a pause between each, sufficiently long for it to be recorded by an ordinary writer in long hand. There was never any hesitation, reviewing, or reading back, in order to keep the run of the subject; neither did any of these communications undergo revisions, interlinings, or corrections. As he dictated them, so they stood.

Orson Pratt adds this:

I was present when Joseph received revelations. I particularly remember the one on the United Order. There was no great noise or physical manifestation. Joseph was as calm as the morning sun. But I noticed a change in his countenance that I had never noticed before, when a revelation was given to him. His face was exceedingly white, and seemed to shine.

I had been present many times when the Prophet was revising the new Testament, and wondered why he did not use the urim and thummim, as in translating the Book of Mormon. While this thought passed through my mind, Joseph, as if he had read my thoughts, looked up and explained that the Lord gave him the urim and thummim when he was inexperienced in the Spirit of inspiration. But now that he had advanced so far as to understand the operations of that Spirit, he did not need the assistance of that instrument.

In this way there was silently and gradually built up in the Mormons of Joseph Smith's time a confidence in his psychic powers, until what Alexander McRae says of the men in Liberty Jail with the Prophet, was true of all the Saints who contacted him.

"We never suffered ourselves," McRae says, "to go into any important measure without asking Brother Joseph to enquire of the Lord in relation to it. Such was our confidence in him as a prophet that, when he said, 'Thus saith the Lord,' we were confident it would be as he said; and the more we tried it, the more confidence we had, for we never found his word fail in a single instance. "

It was this confidence, built up in this way during more than fourteen years, that enabled his followers to accept without question the open visions which he claimed to have received.

To these visions let us now turn.

Almost invariably the Mormon prophet's religious experiences are either denied in toto by his critics (as if one person could tell for certain whether another person's experiences are genuine or not), or they are given in a garbled account—which is not at all fair to the Prophet or to the reader.

Whoever has attracted the attention that the Mormon leader has and received enough consideration to be included in all the encyclopedias, is certainly entitled to a hearing in his own words. That is the least an author can do for him. Every man is entitled to explain himself, if an explanation is at all necessary.

And so, in order to avoid even the appearance of unfairness one way or another, we are allowing the Prophet to tell his own story, both in this and in the following chapter, although in a somewhat abridged form.

His first religious experience occurred when he was in his fifteenth year, in 1820. He says:

There was in the place where we lived an unusual excitement on the subject of religion.

It began with the Methodists, but soon became general among all the sects in that region. Indeed, the whole district seemed affected by it, and great multitudes united themselves to the different religious parties, which created no small stir and division amongst the people.

Some were contending for the Methodist faith, some for the Presbyterian, and some for the Baptist. For, notwithstanding the great love which the converts to these different faiths expressed at the time of their conversion and the great zeal manifested by the respective clergy, who were active in getting up and promoting this extraordinary scene of religious feeling, yet when the converts began to file off, some to one party and some to another, it was seen that the seemingly good feelings were more pretended than real.

I was in my fifteenth year. My father's family was proselyted to the Presbyterian faith, and four of them joined the church.

During this time of great excitement, my mind was called up to serious reflection and great uneasiness; but though my feelings were deep and often poignant, still I kept myself aloof from all these parties, though I attended several meetings. In process of time my mind became somewhat partial to the Methodist sect, and I felt some desire to be united with them. My mind at times was greatly excited, the cry and tumult were so great and incessant.

In the midst of this war of words and tumult of opinions, I often said to myself, What is to be done? Who of all these parties are right, or are they all wrong together? If any of them be right, which is it, and how shall I know it?

While I was laboring under the extreme difficulties caused by the content of these parties of religionists, I was one day reading the Epistle of James (1:5), which reads: "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him."

Never did any passage of scripture come with more power to the heart of man than this did to mine. It seemed to enter with great force into every feeling of my heart. I reflected on it again and again, knowing that if any person needed wisdom from God, I did; for how to act I did not know, and unless I could get more wisdom than I then had, I would never know. At length I came to the determination to "ask of God."

In accordance with this determination I retired to the woods to make an attempt. It was on a beautiful, clear day, early in the spring. It was the first time in my life that I had made such an attempt, for amidst all my anxieties I had never as yet made an attempt to pray vocally.

After I had retired to a place where I had previously designed to go, I kneeled down and began to offer up the desires of my heart to God.

I had scarcely done so, when immediately I was seized upon by some power which entirely overcame me, and had such an astonishing influence over me as to bind my tongue so that I could not speak. Thick darkness gathered around me, and it seemed to me for a time as if I were doomed to sudden destruction. But, exerting all my powers to call upon God to deliver me out of the power of this enemy which had seized upon me, and at the very moment when I was ready to sink into despair and abandon myself to destruction—not to an imaginary ruin, but to the power of some actual being from the unseen world—just at this moment of great alarm, I saw a pillar of light exactly over my head, above the brightness of the sun, which descended gradually until it fell upon me.

It no sooner appeared than I found myself delivered from the enemy which held me bound. When the light rested upon me, I saw two personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. One of them spoke unto me, calling me by name, and said, pointing to the other: "This is my beloved Son; hear him."

My object in going to inquire of the Lord was to know which of all the sects was right, that I might know which to join. No sooner, therefore, did I get possession of myself so as to be able to speak, than I asked the personages who stood above me in the light, which of all the sects I should join.

I was answered that I must join none of them, for they were all wrong. And the personage who addressed me said that all their creeds were an abomination in his sight; that those professors were all corrupt; that "they draw near me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me; they teach for doctrines the commandments of men: having a form of godliness, but they deny the power thereof." He again forbade me to join with any of them; and many other things did he say unto me, which I cannot write at this time.

When I came to myself again, I found myself lying on my back, looking into heaven. When the light had departed, I had no strength; but soon recovering in some degree, I went home.

Some few days after this vision I happened to be in company with one of the Methodist preachers, who was very active in the before-mentioned religious excitement, and, conversing with him on the subject of religion, I took occasion to give him an account of the vision which I had received.

I was greatly surprised at his behavior. He treated my communication not only lightly, but with great contempt, saying, it was all of the devil, that there were no such things as visions or revelations in these days; that all such things had ceased with the apostles, and that there would never be any more of them.

I soon found that my telling the story had excited a great deal of prejudice against me among professors of religion, and was the cause of great persecution, which continued to increase; and though I was an obscure boy, only between fourteen and fifteen years of age and my circumstances in life such as to make a boy of no consequence in the world, yet men of high standing would take notice sufficient to excite the public mind against me, and create a bitter persecution; and this was common to all the sects.

It caused me serious reflection then, and often has since, how very strange it was that an obscure boy, and one, too, who was doomed to the necessity of obtaining a scanty maintenance by his daily labor, should be thought a character of sufficient importance to attract the attention of the great ones of the most popular sects of the day, and create in them a spirit of the most bitter persecution and reviling. But strange or not, so it was, and it was often the cause of great sorrow to myself. However, it was nevertheless a fact that I had beheld a vision.

I have often thought since that I felt much like Paul, when he made his defense before King Agrippa and related the account of the vision he had when he saw a light and heard a voice. There were but few who believed him, and he was ridiculed and reviled. But that did not destroy the reality of his vision. He had seen a vision, he knew he had, and all the persecution under heaven could not make it otherwise; and though they should persecute him unto death, yet he knew, and would know to his latest breath, that he had both seen a light and heard a voice speaking unto him, and all the world could not make him think or believe otherwise.

So it was with me.

I had actually seen a light, and, in the midst of that light, I saw two personages, and they did in reality speak to me; and though I was hated and persecuted for saying that I had seen a vision, yet it was true; and while they were persecuting me, reviling me, and speaking all manner of evil against me falsely for so saying, I was led to say in my heart, Why persecute me for telling the truth? I have actually seen a vision, and who am I that I can withstand God? or why does the world think to make me deny what I have actually seen?

For I had seen a vision; I knew it, and I knew that God knew it; and I could not deny it, neither dared I do it. At least, I knew that by so doing, I would offend God, and come under his condemnation.

For three and a half years, according to the Prophet, he received no further visions.

Meantime certain "weaknesses" of which he, no less than his critics, complains, manifested themselves in his life. Of these we have already spoken in another section of this biography. On the twenty-second of September, 1823, he decided to pray for a forgiveness of his sins and for further divine guidance. It seems that, in his first vision, he was told that the true church of Christ should be restored through him, and it was most likely of this he was thinking on this occasion.

Here is what the Prophet says occurred on this September night in his bedroom:

While I was thus in the act of calling upon God, I discovered a light appearing in my room, which continued to increase until the room was lighter than at noonday, when immediately a personage appeared at my bedside, standing in the air, for his feet did not touch the floor.

He had on a loose robe of most exquisite whiteness. It was a whiteness beyond anything earthly I had ever seen; nor do I believe that any earthly thing could be made to appear so exceedingly white and brilliant. His hands were naked, as were his legs, a little above the ankles. His head and neck were also bare. I could discover that he had on no other clothing but this robe, as it was open, so that I could see into his bosom. Not only was his robe exceedingly white, but his whole person was glorious beyond description, and his countenance truly like lightning. The room was exceedingly light, but not so very bright as immediately around his person.

When I first looked upon him, I was afraid; but the fear soon left me. He called me by name, and said he was a messenger sent from the presence of God to me, that his name was Moroni, and that my name should be had for good and evil among all nations. God had a work for me to do.

He said there was a book deposited, written upon gold plates, giving an account of the former inhabitants of this continent. He said that the fulness of the everlasting gospel was contained in it; also, that there were two stones in silver bows deposited with the plates, for the purpose of translating the book.

He told me that, when I got these plates, I should not show them to any person; neither the breastplate with the urim and thummim; only to those to whom I should be commanded to show them.

While he was conversing with me about the plates, the vision was opened to my mind that I could see the place where the plates were deposited, and that so clearly and distinctly that I knew the place again when I visited it.

After this communication I saw the light in the room begin to gather immediately around the person of him who had been speaking to me, and it continued to do so, until the room was again left dark, except just around him, when instantly I saw, as it were, a conduit open right up into heaven, and he ascended until he entirely disappeared, and the room was left as it had been before his appearance.

I lay musing on the singularity of the scene, and marveling greatly at what had been told me by this extraordinary messenger; when, in the midst of my meditation, I suddenly discovered that my room was again beginning to get lighter, and, in an instant, as it were, the same heavenly messenger was again by my bedside.

He commenced, and again related the very same things which he had done at the first visit, without the least variation. Having done so, he again ascended as he had done before.

By this time, so deep were the impressions made on my mind that sleep had fled from my eyes, and I lay overwhelmed in astonishment at what I had both seen and heard. But what was my surprise when again I beheld the same messenger at my bedside, and heard him repeat the same things as before.

After the messenger had ascended from me for the third time, I found that the day was approaching; so that the interviews must have occupied the whole of that night.

The next morning Joseph rose as usual, dressed, had breakfast, and went out to the field to work with his father and brother Alvin. But he was so exhausted from the night's loss of sleep and so absorbed in the content of the messenger's communications that he could not work as was his habit. His father, thinking him ill, sent him to the house, to be doctored by his mother. The narrative continues:

I started with the intention of going to the house; but, in attempting to cross the fence out of the field where we were working, my strength entirely failed me, and I fell helpless on the ground, and for a time was quite unconscious of anything.

The first thing I can recollect was a voice speaking to me, calling me by name. I looked up and beheld the same messenger standing over my head, surrounded by light as before. He then related again all that he had related to me the previous night, and commanded me to go to my father and tell him of the vision and commandments I had received.

I returned to my father in the field, and rehearsed the whole matter to him. He replied that it was of God, and told me to go and do as commanded by the messenger. I left the field and went to the place where the messenger had told me the plates were deposited.

Convenient to Manchester stands a hill of considerable size, the most elevated of any in the neighborhood. On the west side of this hill, not far from the top, under a stone of considerable size, lay the plates, deposited in a stone box. This stone was thick and rounding in the middle on the upper side, and thinner towards the edges, so that the middle part of it was visible above the ground, but the edge all round was covered with earth.

Having removed the earth, I obtained a lever, which I got fixed under the edge of the stone, and, with a little exertion, raised it up.

I looked in, and there indeed did I behold the plates, the urim and thummim, and the breastplate, as stated by the messenger. The box in which they lay was formed by laying stones together crossways of the box, and on these lay the plates and the other things with them.

I made an attempt to take them out, but was forbidden by the messsenger, and was again informed that the time for bringing them forth had not yet arrived, neither would it, until four years from that time; but he told me that I should come to that place precisely in one year from that time, that he would meet me there, and that I should continue to do so until the time should come for obtaining the plates.

Accordingly, I went at the end of each year, and at each time I found the same messenger there, and received instructions and intelligence from him, respecting what the Lord was going to do, and how and in what manner his kingdom was to be conducted in the last days.

At length the time arrived for obtaining the plates, and urim and thummim, and the breastplate. On the twenty-second of September, 1827, having gone as usual at the end of another year to the place where they were deposited, the same heavenly messenger delivered them up to me.

With brief intervals, when the plates were given to the "messsenger" by the Prophet, sometimes for safe-keeping, they were in his possession from September, 1827, till some time in the first half of 1829, "when, according to arrangements, the messenger called for them, and I delivered them up to him." It was on this ancient record, Joseph tells us, that he and Cowdery were working, first in Harmony, Pennsylvania, and then in Fayette, New York, the manuscript of which the Palmyra printer turned into the Book of Mormon.

These visions of God and Moroni however, were not the only ones that the Mormon prophet received. In the belief of Joseph Smith no man has any right to act in the name of God unless and until he has received the necessary divine authority to do so. Since, however, the authority with which Jesus endowed his apostles anciently was withdrawn, according to the Prophet, on the death of these men, or shortly afterwards, and since no one in the early nineteenth century in any of the Christian churches had any divine authority, it was necessary for the priesthood to be restored by those who held it in ancient times. This priesthood, Joseph Smith claimed, was restored to him and Oliver Cowdery before they undertook to set up a church.

In May, 1829, we are told, John the Baptist appeared to these two, in resurrected form, on the banks of the Susquehanna river, in Pennsylvania, laid hands on their heads and ordained them to what is known among the Saints as the "Aaronic, or lesser priesthood." Thus they were empowered to baptize and to "lay on hands for the reception of the Holy Ghost," but not to organize the church, it seems. Later the ancient apostles Peter, James, and John the Beloved appeared to them in an open vision, and gave them, through the laying on of hands, the "higher, or Melchizedek priesthood," which empowered them to establish the church of Christ and also to ordain others to the same priesthood. The apostles also had been raised from the dead.

There were other "keys," however, which the Prophet deemed necessary in his plan. One of these was the "key" to the "gathering of Israel"; another, the "key" to the "salvation for the dead." The former accounts for the movement known as "gathering" in the Mormon church; also for the mission of Orson Hyde to Palestine, for the purpose of dedicating that land for the gathering of the Jews in "the last days." The latter accounts for the erection of numerous temples by the Saints, in various parts of America. The "keys" of the gathering were delivered to the Prophet and Cowdery in the Kirtland temple by Moses, who appeared for the purpose; those of salvation for the dead, by the ancient prophet, Elijah, in fulfillment, as Joseph claimed, of the prophecy of Malachi.

[Joseph Smith: An American Prophet Joseph Smith Monument in Sharon, Vermont

Whatever may be thought of these visions to the Mormon prophet, it is certain that they constitute the foundation of Mormonism. Without them the religion would never have come into existence in the first place, and there is no doubt but that it would surely fall to pieces now if belief in their veridicality were thrown overboard by the Mormons.

The reason is not far to seek. If it were not for that first religious experience of the Prophet's (assuming now that it was an objective reality) the Mormon God would be both incorporeal and inarticulate—a conventional God, in short. Without the Prophet's second vision, or rather series of visions—those in which Moroni figures—there would be no Book of Mormon, and in consequence a large slice of Mormon theology would be eliminated. Lacking the visions involving the Baptist and the ancient apostles, the Mormon leaders would be entirely stripped of all pretense to divine authority. And if it were not for the visions of Moses and Elijah no "gathering" would ever have taken place and hence no awkward problems would have arisen in Mormon history; nor would the Saints have spent millions in erecting temples, in which to do "work" for their dead relatives and friends.

These narratives were written, or rather dictated, by the Mormon leader in the year 1838, although the events they record are supposed to have taken place between the years 1820 and 1836, most of them between the first date and the year 1829. He was then in his thirty-third year. If these were actual experiences, he would be trusting to his memory, since there appears to have been no previous record of the events by him; and if they were inventions, then he would be drawing upon a most fertile, consistent, and vivid imagination. In either event an examination of the narratives will bring to light some interesting things about the personality of Joseph Smith.

There is something impressive in the stories themselves, both in the telling and in their content. In all there are nine characters involved—Moses, Elijah, John the Baptist, Peter, James, John the Beloved, Moroni, Jesus, and God. That is an impressive array. Perhaps none more so could have been chosen. Two of them were outstanding prophets among the Israelites; one had the distinction of opening the Christian dispensation and baptizing the Christ; three were chosen by Jesus to stand at the head of that dispensation; one was a prophet-historian on the American continent, the last of his line; and the remaining Two are accepted by nearly all Christians as members of the divine Trinity.

Moreover, each of these personages seems to have had a distinctive message to deliver—a message in keeping with the importance and dignity of the messenger. Not one of them comes merely to gratify the whim or even the curiosity of the recipient of the visions. The Prophet always maintained that heavenly beings do not appear to men on earth (assuming that they do appear at all) unless there is a good and sufficient reason in the situation.

Thus the Father and the Son manifested themselves in order that the world might again come to a knowledge of the being, character, and attributes of God, which had been lost through pagan influences; the Baptist and the three apostles appeared to confer on Joseph and Oliver the priesthood in its two degrees, without which the church could not have been organized nor any of its ordinances performed; Moses restored the "keys" of authority, so that the "gathering" might take place, and Elijah the "keys" that were to unlock the door for the salvation of the dead; and Moroni removed the veil that hid the face of two continents and, incidentally, revealed in a new way the universality of God's love for man. All the messages focussed in the opening of a New Dispensation, the greatest of all—"the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times."

The manner in which all this is set forth by the Prophet is quite in harmony with the character and importance of the persons and their message. The language is simple, straightforward, and restrained. There was a strong temptation, one would naturally imagine, to run off into embellishments, ecstasy, and extravagance. But none of that appears in the narrative. The story is told with no adornment whatever, or any excessive feeling. The spirit is dignified and chaste, in keeping also with the subject.

Oliver Cowdery, it is stated, was a witness to the appearance of John the Baptist. Here is part of his description of the scene:

What joy! what wonder! what amazement! While the world was racked and distracted—while millions were groping as the blind for the wall, and while all men were resting upon uncertainty, as a general mass, our eyes beheld—our ears heard. As in the "blaze of day"; yes, more—above the glitter of the May sunbeam, which then shed its brilliancy over the face of nature!

Then his voice, though mild, pierced to the center, and his words, "I am thy fellow servant," dispelled every fear.

We listened, we gazed, we admired! 'Twas the voice of the angel from glory—'twas a message from the Most High, and as we heard we rejoiced, while His love enkindled upon our souls, and we were rapt in the vision of the Almighty!

Where was room for doubt? Nowhere; uncertainty had fled, doubt had sunk, no more to rise, while fiction and deception had fled forever.

I shall not attempt to paint the feelings of this heart, nor the majestic beauty and glory which surrounded us on this occasion; but you will believe me when I say that earth, nor men, with the eloquence of time, cannot begin to clothe language in as interesting and sublime a manner as this holy personage. No; nor has this earth power to give the joy, to bestow the peace, or comprehend the wisdom which was contained in each sentence as it was delivered by the power of the Holy Spirit!

Man may deceive his fellow man; deception may follow deception, and the children of the wicked one may have power to seduce the foolish and untaught, till naught but fiction feeds the many, and the fruit of falsehood carries in its current the giddy to the grave. But one touch with the finger of His love, yes, one ray of glory from the upper world, or one word from the mouth of the Savior, from the bosom of eternity, strikes it all into insignificance, and blots it forever from the mind!

The assurance that we were in the presence of an angel; the certainty that we heard the voice of Jesus, and the truth unsullied as it flowed from a pure personage, dictated by the will of God, is to me past description; and I shall ever look upon this expression of the Savior's goodness with wonder and thanksgiving while I am permitted to tarry, and in those mansions where perfection dwells and sin never comes, I hope to adore in that day which shall never cease.

This was said in the church periodical, the Messenger and Advocate, in 1834.

Furthermore, the selection of details in the Prophet's accounts of the visions is somewhat remarkable in a youth who had had no training in the schools. They are masterpieces of condensation. On the assumption that these experiences were veridical, no little sense for discrimination and restraint would be called for, to keep out of the picture needless and distracting particulars; and, on the assumption that they were not veridical, there would be necessary a sustained imagination, a purposive intelligence of no small order. There is in them all a decided verisimilitude—as the teachers of composition would say. If these experiences are not actual, Joseph Smith has managed somehow to give one the impression that they are. They do not read like fabrications.

At the end of the account of that first religious experience of the Prophet's, there is a note of sadness and bewilderment, which is in keeping with the general tone of the narrative. The revivalists had besought the camp-meeters to get a religious experience. That was the undoubted sign of conversion. Joseph Smith went out from one of those meetings and experienced religion in no uncertain way. What was the result? His experience was discounted everywhere. It was too enormous an experience. Not only so. They "persecuted" the recipient of that experience. The Prophet's critics have looked upon this opposition, as the Mormon leader tells it, as evidence of a delusion in the boy. The obsession about "persecution," they assure us, is one of the invariable signs. But Joseph Smith was shot at once, his mother tells us; he was ostracized by his associates, as he tells us, and had to seek companions in a class he thought himself above; and he was held up to ridicule, and pointed out to strangers as "that Smith boy." If this was a delusion, then just what is one to accept as a fact?

In view of the whole situation, it is not difficult to see how young Joseph Smith came to have a reputation for imaginative qualities in and around Palmyra.

This is mentioned, and made a great deal of, by all the Prophet's critics, and those affidavits by old neighbors are full of it. And no wonder. No one else during those revival days had claimed any such experiences. In fact, no one since bible times. Here was a boy who, like Moses, had seen God and talked with him, and who, like Paul, had had a vision of the risen Christ! And presently, as if that had not been enough, he told of how an angel had revealed to him the hiding place of a book of golden plates, on which was inscribed the history of America before Columbus, and which he was to translate by means of the urim and thummim!

Could anything exceed an imagination like that?

Stranger, however, and more troublesome to Joseph Smith's critics, is the way in which the young Prophet brushed aside the most vexing problems that can confront any religious leader, who undertakes also to set up a new spiritual order.

One of these problems involved priesthood. It is well known that the Roman Catholic church asserted then, as it does now, that divine authority has been transmitted to our time through a long line of popes. On that assumption, as one can easily see, the sixteenth-century Reformers, in breaking with Rome, had sawed off the limb on which they were sitting. Just how would this nineteenth-century youth meet a problem that had baffled (and in the end defeated) such theological scholars as Luther and Calvin?

First of all, he sided with the Catholics—not wholly, however. The Protestant clergy, one and all, were without divine authority. The Reformers had been within their prerogative in pointing out the errors of the "universal" church. Also they had been right in demanding more religious freedom for the people, less paternalism on the part of the priesthood. Indeed, they had been "led" by the Spirit of God to do just that. The divine hand was in it. Their work was, in fact, a preparatory movement for that which he, Joseph Smith, was to carry out almost three hundred years later.

The Reformers, however, had exceeded their proper bounds when they established churches of their own. They clearly had no authority to do that. Their service to humanity ended with their protest against the false doctrines of the church. They were following a very dim light when they undertook to set up a new organization, for in doing so they brought only confusion into the religious world—which still continued. For whatever divine authority they might have received from Rome, was taken from them at the time of their excommunication. And the men who had succeeded them in the Protestant churches were also without divine authority.

But Joseph Smith went further than that. He denied that the Roman Catholic church had any true priesthood. The popes had never been authorized of God to act as the head of the church here below. When Jesus committed the "keys" of the kingdom to Peter, he had not meant to include any supposed successors. It might be that the popes were successors to the bishop of Rome. But Peter, far from being a bishop merely, whether of Rome or some other place, was an apostle, was in fact president of the church; and a bishop and an apostle were two different men. The popes had therefore usurped their headship of the church.

Nor was even that the limit of young Smith's audacity. He had not arrived at this conclusion by a train of reasoning. Human reasoning on spiritual themes was always more or less faulty and undependable. Nor had he been told so by some scholar. Religious scholarship had never been able to pull men out of a spiritual bog. God himself had given him this information about the churches. His knowledge had come from the very source of spiritual truth.

Such were the negative claims of the Mormon leader. But he also set forth some very positive claims, too.

The very heads of the ancient church—Peter, James, and John—had appeared to him in an open vision, had laid their hands on his head, and had bestowed upon him the holy apostleship—all the divine authority which Jesus himself had given them. (This "higher" priesthood swallowed up the "lower" authority given him by John the Baptist.) He therefore had the right to set up the Church of Christ again among men—with all the officers, ordinances, and functions pertaining to it.

It was a magnificent gesture that thus swept aside age-old claims in the churches and, at the same time, substituted therefor a new spiritual order.

These visions, also, when taken with later utterances by the Prophet, give us some decidedly new ideas about God, Satan, and angels.

While Joseph Smith believed in an anthropomorphic God, it was not the anthropomorphic God of the Christian religion from, say, the fifth century down to, and including, his own times, nor even the anthropomorphic God of the Old Testament, except perhaps of the prophets, as it has come down to us; it was rather a God more in harmony with the underlying ideas of an age that was not to come till long after the tragedy at Carthage, Illinois.

The God of the ancients, not excluding that of the Israelites, was often a God of caprice and whim. He too often exhibited the imperfections of his human worshipers. So far as the Old Testament was concerned, this arbitrary, humorsome trait in God was due in part to the medium through which ancient views of him were transmitted to us and in part to the fact that the Bible has been translated incorrectly. And here is probably as good a place as any to tell of the Mormon leader's attitude toward the Bible.

Joseph Smith never looked upon the Hebrew Scriptures as being the last word on divine things. The Bible was a sacred history, to be sure. It recorded the dealings of God with ancient saints, both before and after Christ's personal ministry; but it was never intended, according to the Prophet, to supersede other and later revelations of God. So, if all the books of the Bible were destroyed, the process of salvation might still go on. Moreover, in the numerous hands through which the Scriptures had come down to us, "many plain and precious things" had somehow become lost. It was for this reason that, as soon as the Book of Mormon was out of the way, the Prophet undertook an inspired revision of the Bible, in which some of those "precious things" were restored. All this, by the way, was years before the "higher critics" reviewed the sacred writings of the Hebrew people.

Now, to return to the Prophet's idea of God, Joseph Smith taught that God, although an undoubted Person, not at all to be confused with Nature or the Universe, reigned through law. The following is from one of the Mormon classics on the subject:

He that ascended up on high, as also he descended below all things, in that he comprehended all things, that he might be in and through all things, the Light of Truth; which truth shineth.

This is the light of Christ. He is in the sun, in the moon, in the stars, and in the earth. He is the power by which they were made. Also this is the light which giveth you light, which enlighteneth your eyes and quickeneth your understanding. It proceeds forth from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space—the light which is in all things, which giveth life to all things, which is the law by which all things are governed.

They who are not sanctified through the law which I have given, even the law of Christ, must inherit another kingdom, even that of a terrestrial kingdom, or that of a telestial kingdom. For he who is not able to abide the law of a celestial kingdom cannot abide a celestial glory. And he who cannot abide the law of a terrestrial kingdom cannot abide a terrestrial glory. And he who cannot abide the law of a telestial kingdom cannot abide a telestial glory; therefore he is not meet for a kingdom of glory. Therefore he must abide a kingdom which is not a kingdom of glory.

Joseph Smith's "godhead" was a real triune. It comprised three distinct Entities. Two of these—the Father and the Son—were Persons in the dictionary sense of this word; the third was an intelligent Entity which filled the "immensity of space." In this way the Prophet incorporated in his religious philosophy a modified form of the old anthropomorphic God, and in the same conception he anticipated the idea of a physical as well as a spiritual universe governed by law. Thus he united in a single conception the ideas of a transcendent and an immanent God.

The Mormon leader believed, too, in both angels and devils as persons—but not in the popular sense. Joseph Smith's angels had no wings. Neither were they a distinct race of spiritual beings—distinct, that is, from man. On the contrary, they were but perfected men and women, who had been residents on Earth. They were messengers from God to man, and only those who are connected with this planet through having lived here, are permitted to act as messengers. Thus Moroni was a resurrected man, who had lived on the American continent anciently—often termed by the Mormons the "angel Moroni," although the Prophet in his narrative calls him a "messenger."

As for the devil and his fellow spirits, they are brothers to man and also to Jesus and sons and daughters of God in the same sense that we are. Only, they do not have bodies of flesh and blood. They were in that pre-earth world with us. Hence, in the Prophet's theology they are actual personalities, as much so as we are; and they have real power, as in that life-and-death struggle of Joseph's in the Grove, on the occasion of the first religious experience. To the boy who went into the woods that day, that "power of darkness" was not an "imaginary" but an "actual being from the unseen world."

Besides, not all our misdeeds, according to Joseph Smith, are to be attributed to satan, as many well-meaning Christian folk, seeking an alibi for sin, would have us believe. "The devil," said the Prophet, "cannot compel mankind to do evil; all is voluntary. Those who resist the Spirit of God will be led into temptation, and then the association of heaven will be withdrawn. God will not exert any compulsory means, and the devil can not. The devil has power over us only to the extent that we give him power. Such ideas as are commonly entertained on this subject are absurd."

Evidently that fourteen-year-old boy who entered the Palmyra woods that beautiful spring morning, had more with him than "a peepstone in an old hat."

During his life-time the Mormon prophet advanced a doctrine quite as revolutionary in the field of religion as any that Roger Bacon, Galileo, or Darwin taught in the realm of science, and it ought to entitle him to as definite and secure a place in history.

The story is told of Galileo that he went up to the top of the Tower of Pisa one day, with a block of wood in one hand and a block of lead in the other, each weighing exactly a pound. He had in mind to drop them at precisely the same instant, to see whether or not the heavier body would reach the ground first. That was more than three centuries ago.

Aristotle, about fifteen hundred years earlier, had said that heavy bodies fell faster than light ones, and everybody for a thousand years believed it, without ever thinking to subject the idea to a practical test. The Greek philosopher had probably reasoned himself into the belief on the theory of resistance, and so he stated it dogmatically. But Galileo had a doubt on the point. He would make sure whether Aristotle was right, by the process of experimentation, by having an experience, by using the objective rather than the subjective method. It was one of the great moments in history.

The fact is that up almost to the time of Galileo, certainly to the time of Roger Bacon, Aristotle had dominated the European mind. Natural science was based on authority, not on research and experiment. In addition to saying that heavy bodies fell faster than light ones, Aristotle had taught that "the sun and all the stars revolved about the earth, that heavenly bodies were perfect and unchangeable, and that all earthly things were made of four elements—earth, air, water, and fire." For "the Greeks were not much inclined to make long and careful experiments."

Doubt as to Aristotle's accuracy seems to have started with Roger Bacon. Bacon declared that "if men would only study common things instead of reading the books of the ancients, science could outdo the wonders which magicians of his day claimed to perform"—a statement which our century has verified. Bacon, Copernicus, Galileo, especially Galileo, instituted a method in science that has completely revolutionized our knowledge of physical things and processes. We no longer go to books for our knowledge, but rather to things themselves. In science the objective method has displaced the subjective method.

An exactly parallel thing happened also in the Christian religion during the same period. Only, in the case of religion the old method still persists, with no sign of change.

Saint Augustine, who lived around the year four hundred, A.D., has this to say about how spiritual knowledge is to be obtained: "Nothing is to be accepted save on the authority of Scripture, since greater is that authority than all the powers of the mind." And fourteen hundred years after that—namely, in the first quarter of the nineteenth century—the Reverend Thomas Campbell, father of Alexander Campbell and co-founder of the Church of the Disciples of Christ, put the same idea this way: "Where the Scriptures speak, we speak; where the Scriptures are silent, we are silent." In all those centuries no change took place in the manner of obtaining religious knowledge, in spite of the fact that, during the later centuries, our way of acquiring scientific knowledge was undergoing radical changes.

Christianity therefore grew into a religion of authority. The Bible, at first, and then tradition, was the sole standard of measuring faith. The traditional idea sprang up when biblical knowledge on certain points proved insufficient. The idea of the Bible as the standard was accentuated by the Reformers. They demanded that the good Book be placed in the hands of every man and woman, to be interpreted privately. And this way of authority has continued without change to this very year. The Mormon prophet was the first to suggest a doubt as to its efficacy as a means of obtaining spiritual knowledge.

Christianity, then, has been a subjective religion all these centuries, instead of the objective religion that it was in the hands of Jesus and the apostles. And here, the Mormon leader thought, lay the real apostasy of the Christian churches. That is, men developed God in their minds, and in the same way they worked out their ideas of the devil, of angels, of the soul, of salvation, of heaven and hell. They did that, because they had had no personal experiences in the matter. In consequence we have only a variety of opinions on spiritual subjects, and often opinions so absurd and far-fetched as to be nothing short of amazing. When memory has no material to work upon, the imagination works overtime.

Now Joseph Smith attempted to do in the field of religion what Galileo did in the field of science. He endeavored to introduce the idea that religious knowledge is obtained in exactly the same way that any other knowledge is acquired—namely, by studying things, not books, by the objective rather than the subjective method, by actual experience instead of by reflection and reasoning.

Let us look again at the situation out of which that first religious experience of the Prophet arose. There was a revival in the neighborhood. Now, a religious revival aimed at one thing only—to arouse the feelings of men and women, chiefly through fear of eternal punishment, to the point where they would go to the "mourner's bench" and confess Jesus. This particular revival in Manchester set Joseph Smith, not to feeling, but to thinking. He reflected on the situation. First, he doubted whether two sects that differed on so important a matter as baptism could both be right. He doubted also that the feelings of bitterness among the converted and among the churches was a wholesome thing in religion. Second, he looked about him for some means by which he could decide the question, "Which of all these churches is right?"

That thread-bare story of the "peepstone in an old hat" is so stupidly silly that one wonders how it ever managed to get itself accepted by any one who thinks at all. This boy was struggling, not with a peepstone in a hat, but with a question in his mind and heart. He was endeavoring to bring to bear on the subject his understanding, his intelligence. Joseph Smith was not a fool. He was a thoughtful boy, trying to think his way to the truth in religion.

He might have gone—as he did—to the preachers. But one would tell him this, and another that. "Lo, here is Christ," shouted the Baptist; and the Methodist, "No, he is with us." And in the end he would be no wiser than when he began.

He might also have gone to the Bible—which he did. But there were so many things in the Bible, that it was hopeless for a boy of fourteen to think of getting any help there. Even the ministers, apparently, had failed to find in that volume any assistance in settling their difficulties—else why were they divided? Besides, the Bible said nothing about Methodists, Baptists, and Presbyterians—only Christians.

One night, however he got a clue. It came from the Scriptures, but not in the way he expected. The preacher at one of the meetings took for his text the words of James, already quoted, "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, who giveth liberally."

As Galileo went up to the top of the tower to test Aristotle's statement about falling bodies, so Joseph Smith went into a grove to test the statement of James about obtaining spiritual guidance. Only, in the boy's case, he found the statement true.

When Joseph came out of that grove and went into the house, he said to his mother, "I have found out for myself that Presbyterianism is wrong." That was his mother's new-found church. And later he set this down in his Journal After that Joseph Smith never went to any book, not even the Bible, when he sought for spiritual knowledge; any more than Galileo went to Aristotle or some other philosopher when he was looking for accurate knowledge about natural phenomena.

Out of this religious experience, whatever it was, came the Mormon prophet's theory of religious knowledge.

To begin with, Joseph Smith's spiritual world was objective, not subjective. It comprised God, human spirits, angels, evil spirits, and the Holy Ghost. All these were objective realities. And then, too, it was possible through the power of faith to contact God, the Holy Ghost, and angels. These contacts might be (1) by personal visitations of heavenly beings, whether unembodied, disembodied, or reÃ«mbodied; or (2) by the direct operation of the Holy Spirit upon the mind or intelligent spirit of man. The Holy Ghost was something that might be given to you and that might be taken from you. Whenever any of these contacts takes place, spiritual knowledge comes as a result.

Spiritual knowledge, in the Prophet's view, could not come through reading, even though what was read was the word of God, any more than scientific knowledge could come from reading about the experiments of others. Reading resulted in information, not knowledge. Knowledge, in whatever field, came only through personal experience.

At a funeral of one of the Saints in Nauvoo the Prophet made this point clear. He said in reference to death:

What is the object of our coming into existence, then dying and falling away, to be here no more?

It is but reasonable to suppose that God would reveal something in reference to the matter, and it is a subject we ought to study more than any other. If we have any claim on our heavenly Father for anything, it is for knowledge on this important subject.

Could we read and comprehend all that has been written from the days of Adam, on the relation of God and angels in a future state, we should know very little about it. Reading the experience of others, or the revelation given to them, can never give us a comprehensive view of our condition and true relation to God.

Knowledge of these things can only be obtained by experience through the ordinances of God set forth for that purpose. Could you gaze into heaven five minutes, you would know more than you would by reading all that ever was written on the subject.

Singularly enough Professor William James, one of America's greatest philosophers and psychologists, has a passage in one of his books to the same purport, in relation to knowledge in another field. He says:

The first time we see light, in Condillac's phrase, we are it rather than see it. But all our later optical knowledge is about what this experience gives, and though we were struck blind from the first moment, our scholarship in the subject would lack no essential feature so long as our memory remained.

In training establishments for the blind they teach the pupils as much about light as in ordinary schools. Reflection, refraction, the spectrum, the ether-theory, etc., are all studied. But the best taught born-blind pupil of such an establishment yet lacks a knowledge which the least instructed baby has. They can never show him what light is in its "first intention"; and the loss of that sensible knowledge no book-learning can replace.

All this is so obvious that we usually find sensation "postulated" as an element of experience, even by those philosophers who are least inclined to make much of its importance, or to pay respects to the knowledge which it brings.

That is exactly the Mormon prophet's idea of the value of experience as a means of acquiring knowledge in the domain of religion.

Perhaps it ought to be said here, however, that Joseph Smith did not come to this conclusion through study and reflection. He was a mere boy at the time he first had the idea, incapable of thinking his way through so difficult a problem to so startling a result. Most likely it was his child-like simplicity that arrived at such a result, and the question leading up to the prodigious discovery, as he would himself say, "was given him of the Spirit." But the conclusion he reached, if we may put it that way, was none the less important than if it had been reasoned out. Indeed, it was looked upon by him as all the more important that it came as it did.

But the Prophet had no thought apparently of confining these spiritual contacts to himself. On the contrary, he sought to bring them about in all his disciples. That is what makes the discovery valuable—if it has any value at all. Just as Galileo's discovery (or at least use) of the experimental method, by becoming common in scientific investigation, has benefited all men through its application.

We have already quoted the Mormon leader's statement that the spirit of prophecy was identical with the testimony of Jesus. He would have every disciple possess the testimony of Jesus through his own personal experience—which would make him a "prophet."

Whenever the Prophet gave out anything "in the name of the Lord," he invariably challenged his followers to go to the same source as he had done, so that they might know for themselves, instead of depending on him alone for knowledge which he knew could come only through experience. A statement toward the end of the Book of Mormon is a case in point. Moroni, the last writer in the volume, is represented as saying:

And now I seal up these records, after I have spoken a few words of exhortation.

I would exhort you that, when you shall read these things, you would remember how merciful the Lord has been to the children of men. I would exhort you that you ask God, the eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if you shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it to you by the power of the Holy Ghost. And by the power of the Holy Ghost you may know the truth of all things.

Always the Prophet threw the burden of getting knowledge upon his followers. He seemed utterly indifferent as to what they did in the situation, when he told them the "mind and will of the Lord." He informed them; what they did after that was a matter for them to decide, not for him. If they wished to know, he had pointed out the way to obtain the required knowledge.

One or two instances will make this clear.

When Bishop Partridge went to Missouri from Kirtland, the Prophet said to Newel K. Whitney, "The Lord has called you to the bishopric here." Whitney protested. "I cannot see a bishop in me, Brother Joseph; but, if you say it is the Lord's will, I will consent." The leader merely said, "You need not take my word for it; go to the Lord yourself and ask him." Newel says he did that, and received a "testimony." In the solitude of his room, after praying, he says he heard a voice saying, "Thy strength is in me." And he became bishop.

On the occasion when the Prophet, with others, was in Liberty Jail, he told his companions "in the name of the Lord" something affecting their future, adding, "If you will ask the Lord, he will give you a testimony for yourselves." Says McRae, "I immediately asked, and had no more than asked, until I received as clear a testimony as ever I did of anything in my life, that it was true. Brother Hyrum and Caleb Baldwin bore testimony to the same" effect.

That was invariably Joseph Smith's way. He never asked any of his disciples to accept his word on anything spiritual. He took it for granted that, if the Cause was of God, God would give others a "testimony" concerning its truth. After that the responsibility was with them.

In the doctrine of personal testimony, of individual contacts with spiritual entities, lies the ultimate principle of Mormonism, as Joseph Smith saw religion.

Religion is thus objective, not subjective. It is the result of personal experience, not of reading nor of reflection and meditation. Experience is the great desideratum. Nothing else can be depended upon as a means of acquiring spiritual knowledge. Spiritual knowledge can therefore be as definite, as certain, and as dependable as physical or social knowledge. This idea is deeply fundamental in the religious philosophy of the Mormon prophet.

Out of this proposition sprang two important corollaries. One of these throws out of the field of consideration mere book-learning, so far as spiritual knowledge is concerned, as well as any ideas that are derived from reasoning and the use of the imagination. The other deals with the manner in which certitude in religion may be attained.

There has always been in the Christian church a class of men who have thought to attain spiritual understanding through scholarship. They have pored over books, especially what are called "sacred books." They have sought to find out the conditions under which certain things were said by the writers; they have laboriously compared one passage with another to get at the general meaning; they have gone to the original tongue from which the volume was translated, to ascertain the derivation and use of words; they have meditated on the subject, with a view to generating thought and making special applications. Always it has been thought necessary to look into the past and into the mind, as if the secret of religious knowledge lay there.

And what a muddle these scholars had made of things! A plan of salvation, devised by an omniscient Being, but so narrow as to miss the greater part of the race. A salvation where no thought was had for individual differences, either native or acquired. A heaven to attain which only belief or forms were necessary on the part of any one. A God embodied in creeds that only the learned could understand and that forbade additional knowledge coming through an increase of wisdom. Men and women condemned to an unending punishment for a sin in which they had had no part whatever. Little children sent to an eternal hell because they had not had the good fortune to be baptized or because they had lived at the wrong time. Priestcraft, a blind leading of the blind, and all together falling into the ditch. Scores of sects, each contending a different way for "the faith once delivered to the saints." Perplexity, doubt, skepticism—these had been the fruits of the mistaken notion that religious knowledge, religious certitude is derived from scholarship.

The scholars of Joseph Smith's time who sought to speak in the name of religion were of course theologians, and it was at these men that he aimed his darts of criticism. Of the later scholars who essayed to discuss religious knowledge—the geologist, the astronomer, the biologist, the bacteriologist, the psychologist—he knew nothing; nor did he of the "practical man of affairs" who attempted to show the way to spiritual salvation. But there is little reason to suppose that he would have accorded to them any more right to speak in the name of God than he accorded to the theological scholars—perhaps much less, as a matter of fact. For, to the Prophet, a scholar was a scholar, and scholarship was not one of the things God required in order to understand spiritual truth.

As a man one might know God, but not as a scholar. That was the sharp distinction which the Mormon leader drew, and he would have applied it to the scholar in any department of human activity. A geologist might write and talk about rocks and the earth; a biologist, about plant and animal life; an astronomer, about the stars; a bacteriologist, about germs and diseases; a physicist, about electrons; a psychologist, about the manifestations of the mind. But none of these might speak or write authoritatively about God, about spirit, about the Holy Ghost, about the soul, about immortality, about heaven and hell—at least, not as scholars. A knowledge of spiritual things did not come, nor were they to be understood, through scholarship. Men might as well learn this fact first as last.

As men differed physically, mentally, and in other ways, so they differed spiritually. Every human being possessed a certain spiritual sensitivity, and this could be cultivated through use and faith. That is to say, every one might come to know God for himself, might find out for himself just what God required of him, and might know what it is to walk in the Way of Truth, to experience the joys of the spiritual life. But God must have spokesmen to represent him to the people. And naturally these spokesmen would be chosen from among those who natively had the highest spiritual sensitivity. They would therefore be the prophets, the seers, the spiritual experts. These might speak with authority and positiveness of God, of the soul, of spirit, of eternal life, of the Hereafter. Hence Abraham, Moses, Isaiah, Paul, and Jesus.

Now, the spiritual pronouncements of this spiritual expert, this seer, might easily be "verified" by any one who would take the trouble of putting himself in the necessary frame of mind to do so. In other words, whoever wished to know whether or not what he was told by a prophet was true, might obtain that knowledge by contacting God in some way, by asking him who gave liberally without upbraiding—provided of course he asked in faith. This, according to the Prophet, is what Jesus meant when he said, "If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself." And Joseph Smith was always willing that his teachings should be subjected to that test.

If the Mormon prophet were living to-day, he would no doubt say that the conflict between religion and science is not a conflict between the truth in religion and the truth in science, but rather a clash between the teachings of science and the unwarranted dogmas of men. Man-made religion had been placed in juxtaposition with man-made science. If the truth in religion and the truth in science were placed side by side, there would be no inharmony at all. The Prophet therefore insisted on a careful discrimination between what was the fruit of man's own thinking, in whatever realm, and what had come through a genuine seer and prophet of God.

When the Prophet went to Washington to seek redress for his people, as will be remembered, he told President Van Buren, in answer to a question, that one of the main differences between Mormonism and other Christian faiths lay in the fact that the Saints believed in the continued power of the Holy Ghost. And here we come to the second point growing out of Joseph Smith's theory of religious knowledge through personal testimony.

This point is elaborated in one of the most remarkable documents in the history of religion. So illuminating is it that we make extensive quotations from it here:

Various and conflicting are the opinions of men in regard to the gift of the Holy Ghost.

Some people have been in the habit of calling every supernatural manifestation the effects of the Spirit of God, whilst others think there is no manifestation connected with it at all; and that it is nothing but a mere impulse of the mind, or an inward feeling, impression, or secret testimony or evidence, which men possess, and that there is no such thing as an outward manifestation.

We believe that the Holy Ghost is imparted by the laying on of hands of those in authority, and that the gift of tongues, and also the gift of prophecy are gifts of the Spirit, and are obtained through that medium. But then to say that men always prophesied and spoke in tongues when they had the imposition of hands, would be to state that which is not true.

Paul says, "To one is given the gift of tongues, to another the gift of prophecy, and to another the gift of healing." Again: "Do all prophesy? do all speak with tongues? do all interpret?" Evidently showing that all did not possess these several gifts; but that one received one gift, and another received another gift. All did not prophesy, all did not speak in tongues, all did not work miracles; but all did receive the Holy Ghost.

The same is the case with us in our administrations, while more frequently there is no manifestation at all—that is visible to the surrounding multitude.

The Church is a compact body, composed of different members, and strictly analogous to the human system; and Paul, after speaking of the different gifts, says: "Now ye are the body of Christ and members in particular. God hath set some in the Church, first, apostles; secondarily, prophets; thirdly, teachers; after that, miracles, then gifts of healing, helps, governments, diversities of tongues. Are all teachers? Are all workers of miracles? Do all speak with tongues? Do all interpret?"

It is evident that they do not. Yet they are all members of one body. All members of the natural body are not the eye, the ear, the head, or the hand. Yet the eye cannot say to the ear, "I have no need of thee," nor the head to the foot, "I have no need of thee." They are all so many component parts in the perfect machine—the one body.

These, then, are all gifts; they come from God; they are of God; they are all gifts of the Holy Ghost; they are what Christ ascended into heaven to impart.

Yet how few of them could be known by the generality of men. Peter and John were apostles, yet the Jewish court scourged them as impostors. Paul was both an apostle and prophet, yet they stoned him and put him into prison. The people knew nothing about it, although he had in his possession the gift of the Holy Ghost. Our Savior was "anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows," yet so far from the people knowing him, they said he was Beelzebub, and crucified him as an impostor. Who could point out a pastor, a teacher, or an evangelist by their appearance? Yet they had the gift of the Holy Ghost.

Other gifts are mentioned by Paul—the word of wisdom, the word of knowledge, faith, healing, the working of miracles, prophecy, discerning of spirits, tongues, interpretation of tongues. Yet which of them could be known by an observer at the imposition of hands? The word of wisdom and the word of knowledge are as much gifts as any other, yet a person possessed of both of these gifts, or received them by the imposition of hands, who would know it? So with the gift of faith, healing, or the power to work miracles.

The greatest, the best, and the most useful gifts would be known nothing about by the observer. It is true that a man might prophesy, but what does the world know about prophesying? Not the world, but those who know one gift from another, are capable of writing about spiritual gifts. If we had the testimony of the Scribes and the Pharisees concerning the outpouring of the Spirit on the day of Pentecost, they would have told us that it was no gift, but that the people were "drunken with new wine. " And we shall have to come to the same conclusion that Paul did—"No man knows the things of God but by the Spirit of God."

The manifestations of the gift of the Holy Ghost—the ministering of angels, the development of the power of God—were seldom exhibited publicly. Most generally when angels have come or God has revealed himself, it has been to individuals in private, in their chamber, in the wilderness or fields, and generally without noise or tumult.

The Lord cannot always be known by the thunder of his voice, by the display of his power, or by the manifestation of his glory; and those that are the most anxious to see these things, are the least prepared to meet them. Were the Lord to manifest his power as he did to the children of Israel, such characters would be the first to say, "Let not the Lord speak any more, lest we his people die."

Seek to know God in your closets, call upon him in the fields. Follow the directions of the Book of Mormon, and pray over and for your families, your cattle, your flocks, your herds, your corn, and all that you possess; ask the blessing of God upon your labors and everything that you engage in; keep the commandments of God; be virtuous and pure; be men of integrity and truth: then you will be able more perfectly to understand the difference between right and wrong—between the things of God and the things of men; and your path will be like that of the just, which shineth brighter and brighter unto the perfect day.

Be not so curious about tongues; do not speak in tongues except there be an interpreter present. The ultimate design of tongues is to speak to foreigners; and if persons are very anxious to display their intelligence, let them speak to such in their own tongues. The gifts of God are all useful in their place, but when they are applied to that which God does not intend, they prove an injury, a snare, and a curse, instead of a blessing.

Egoist, fanatic, plagiarist, imposter—these are among the tender epithets which Josiah Quincy speaks of as having been flung at the Mormon prophet during his life-time (and also since), but which are now beginning to rebound, like a boomerang, to the hurt of those who threw them.

Egoist Joseph Smith certainly was, though not quite in the sense in which the word was employed by his critics. And need enough, in all conscience, had the head of the Mormon church for all the self-confidence he could possibly muster under the circumstances. Otherwise he would have broken down under the strain.

Here, for instance, is what he wrote (not at all in an irreverent spirit) to one James Arlington Bennett, in 1843, in answer to a letter by that wily politician: "I combat the errors of ages; I meet the violence of mobs; I cope with illegal proceedings from executive authority; I cut the gordian knot of powers; and I solve mathematical problems of universities—with truth, diamond truth, and God is my right hand man."

This was one of the occasions when he became righteously indignant at the attempts to use him politically. Bennett had written that "I may yet run for a high office in your state, when you would be sure of my best services in your behalf; therefore, a known connection with you would be against our mutual interest." That "high office" was governor. The letter had come from New York City, where Bennett then lived, and in it were such complimentary phrases as: "I am capable of being a most undeviating friend," "you have proved yourself a mathematical and philosophical divine," "the boldness of your plans are calculated to throw a charm over your whole being and to point you out as the most extraordinary man of the present age," "I rate you higher as a legislator than I do Moses," and "you know Mahomet had his 'right hand man.' "

Of course the Prophet, being no fool, had no difficulty in penetrating the thin veil of flattery, and he answered with more than his usual frankness. Preceding the passage just quoted from the Mormon leader is the following, somewhat abridged:

When I leave the dignity and honor I have received from heaven, to boost a man into power through the aid of my friends, where the evil and designing, after the object has been accomplished, can lock up the clemency intended as a reciprocation for such favors, and where the wicked and unprincipled, as a matter of course, would seize the opportunity to flintify the hearts of the nation against me for dabbling at a sly game of politics,—verily I say, when I leave the dignity and honor of heaven, to gratify the ambition and vanity of man or men, may my power cease, like the strength of Samson when he was shorn of his locks while asleep in the lap of Delilah.

Shall I who have witnessed the visions of eternity and beheld the glorious mansions of bliss and the regions and the misery of the damned—shall I turn to be a Judas? Shall I worm myself into a political hypocrite? Shall I stoop from the sublime authority of Almighty God, to be handled as a monkey's cat-paw, and petrify myself into a clown to act the farce of political demagoguery?

Yes, Joseph Smith was an egoist. The egoism in this passage was his, the bombastic spirit of it was his secretary's, William W. Phelps. But the Prophet, as must be admitted, had something back of his self-confidence—accomplishments in both the field of action and of thought which, as Arlington Bennett says, were unparalleled; and this, Joseph Smith knew.

It must be conceded, however, by the most ardent admirer of the Mormon leader that, during this Nauvoo period, he showed undoubted signs of autocracy. Toward the close of his life, particularly, he would brook no opposition to his plans. There is little doubt that, with his large talent for persuasion and his personal charm, he could have conciliated the Laws, the Fosters, and the Higbees—men who were conspicuous in bringing about his death. But he would not do this. It would be, in his phrase, compromising with the devil, and compromises with the devil were decidedly not in his line. His brother Hyrum, a mild, even-tempered, judicial-minded man, besought him on more than one occasion not to be so free with his criticism of these men, but to no purpose apparently.

There is little doubt, too, that the abatement of the Expositor was ill-advised, although within the law. As we see the matter from this distance, there was not enough slander in the sheet to warrant any great alarm. Much of what was said there was true—for instance, the excessive authority vested in the Prophet, and the testimony of William Law and his wife on the revelation of plural marriage. It is barely possible there was something behind the general's candidacy for the presidency of the United States, other than to avoid trouble at home and to exploit his political views before the nation.

The truth is, however, that egoism is characteristic of great men—and necessarily so, it would seem. The observant and scholarty Renan says, in his Life of Jesus:

Very great and very disinterested minds often present, associated with much elevation, that character of perpetual attention to themselves, and extreme personal susceptibility, which, in general, is peculiar to women.

Their conviction that God is with them, and occupies Himself perpetually with them, is so strong that they have no fear of obtruding themselves upon others; our reserve, and our respect for the opinions of others, which is part of our weakness, could not belong to them.

This exaltation of self is not egotism; for such men, possessed by their idea, give their lives freely, in order to seal their work; it is the identification of self with the object it has embraced, carried to its utmost limit. It is regarded as vain glory by those who see in the new teaching only the personal phantasy of the founder; but it is the finger of God to those who see the result. The fool stands side by side here with the inspired man, only the fool never succeeds.

It has not yet been given to mental aberration to influence seriously the progress of humanity.

Whether or not Joseph Smith can be regarded among the "very great" here mentioned, this passage, at any rate, furnishes a good description of the Mormon prophet's condition of mind.

Yet the founder of Mormonism possessed a humility that is in striking contrast with the boldness and egoism of which we spoke in the preceding section. More than once in the progress of our narrative we have had occasion to mention details which point in that direction.

Doubtless when the Prophet looked back on what he had accomplished in the face of the most violent opposition and compared it with what others had done under far more favorable conditions, he could not but feel an exaltation of spirit and think well of himself. But when he called to mind, as he often did, that he was only an "instrument in the hands of God," there bore down on him a feeling of nothingness. "I was a rough stone till the Lord took me in hand," was a phrase frequently on his lips.

Joseph Smith was, if anything, a "restorer." That is the title he always gave himself. He never claimed to have originated the ideas that are associated with his name. He was not a plagiarist in the ordinary sense; he was original; but he was rarely the first one to advocate an idea. A glance at the Prophet's religious conceptions will show this to be true.

The doctrine of a prior existence for man is clearly stated by Plato and suggested by the poet Wordsworth. This we have already seen. And the idea of a post-existence of the soul in some form or other is common to all Christian beliefs. Indeed, it is the central theme in the teachings of both Jesus and Paul. That the human spirit actually exists, instead of being merely subjective, and that it bears the same form as the human body, were accepted very generally in the time of the Prophet. So that the backbone of his religious philosophy is not new, although it must be admitted that there is a decided novelty in the form in which he presented the various details of it. And the emphasis was his own.

This, though, cannot be said of some of the lesser ideas in his scheme. His assertion that man, in his essential being, is co-eternal with God; his idea that in the Hereafter our present attributes of thought, choice, and feeling will persist; his theory that "salvation" need not be worked for, but that it will come to all, irrespective of what they do or what they are; his conception of "exaltation" in connection with heaven, and the fundamental inequalities which we shall find there—all this, with many other ideas he advanced, although a natural inference from the central fact of human continuity as the Prophet conceived it, yet amounts to an original contribution to religion.

Even his idea of personal testimony, which lay securely in the heart of the New Movement, was not original with the Prophet.

"Whom do men say that I am?" asked Jesus of his apostles, when he "came to the coasts of Philippi."

Peter answered: "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the Living God."

Then Jesus: "Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-jona; for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven. "

This idea of revelation, a coming of something from without to within—one of the forgotten ideas in Christianity—the Saints still lay great store by; and the reason is to be traced back to the founder of the religion, who himself believed it fundamental, not only in his system, but in all revealed religion.

Nor was there anything particularly new in the Mormon leader's economic and social order.

In the Acts of the Apostles we read:

And the multitude of them that believed were of one heart and of one soul: neither said any of them that ought of the things which he possessed was his own; but they had all things common.

Neither was there any among them that lacked; for as many as were possessors of lands or houses sold them, and brought the prices of the things that were sold.

There is the core of the Mormon prophet's economic scheme, known as the "United Order."

Indeed, it would seem that as late as the second century after Christ this idea of "all things common" of the early church was in vogue. For Justin Martyr says, by way of explaining the power of faith to the members of the organization:

Those of us who before delighted in impurities now rejoice in sobriety; those who practiced the magical arts now have devoted themselves to the benevolent and eternal Father; those who sought to acquire wealth, above all things, now have their possessions common; those who hated and slaughtered each other, and, being of different tribes, had no intercourse, after the appearance of Christ, living in the same communion, pray for enemies and endeavor to convert those that unjustly hate us.

It has been suggested by writers on this phase of Mormonism that Joseph Smith got his ideas from the Rippites in Harmony, Pennsylvania. This is hardly probable, however, for the Rippites sold out and moved away from Harmony in 1814, and the Prophet did not go to Pennsylvania until 1825, eleven years later. Nor is it probable that Emma Smith, who became the wife of the Prophet, remembered enough (if anything) about the Rippites to give much information to her husband, for she was only ten years old when the "Family" left Harmony; and one can easily imagine how much interest a child under ten would have had, even in those days, in economic experiments.

The idea of the United Order, most likely, came from the New Testament and the "Family" in the neighborhood of Kirtland—if we are to deny the divine origin of the Book of Mormon. For the Nephites, for two hundred years after the appearance of Christ among them, lived under the order described in Acts:

The people were all converted unto the Lord, upon all the face of the land; and there were no contentions and disputations among them, and every man did deal justly one with another.

And they had all things common among them; therefore there were not rich and poor, bond and free, but they were all made free, and partakers of the heavenly gift.

The "Family," as we have seen, suggested the "more perfect" plan to the Prophet. That is, seeing the need for something in the community which was about to be established in Thompson—the Colesville "branch"—he "went to the Lord" for that something. The result was the United Order.

As for polygamy, every one knows that the plural marriage system was an institution among the ancient Israelites, and that the Bible extols it. Indeed, the Mormon leader makes a point of the fact that the first suggestion for the idea came from the Scriptures. In the Book of Mormon he had condemned the practice of polygamy among the Nephites in these strong words:

This people begin to wax in iniquity; they understand not the scriptures, for they seek to excuse themselves in committing whoredoms because of the things which were written concerning David and Solomon, his son.

David and Solomon truly had many wives and concubines, which thing was abominable before me, saith the Lord.

Wherefore, saith the Lord, I have led this people forth out of the land of Jerusalem by the power of mine arm, that I might raise up unto me a righteous branch from the fruit of the loins of Jacob. Wherefore I will not suffer that this people shall do like unto them of old.

There shall not any man among you have save it be one wife; and concubines he shall have none; for I, the Lord God, delight in the chastity of women. Wherefore whoredoms are an abomination before me.

For I, the Lord, have seen the sorrow, and heard the mourning, of the daughters of my people in the land of Jerusalem; yea, and in all the lands of my people, because of the wickedness and abominations of their husbands. And I will not suffer that the cries of the fair daughters of this people, which I have led out of the land of Jerusalem, shall come up unto me against the men of my people.

This passage, however, does not really condemn the principle of plural marriage, but only the way it was practiced by some of the patriarchs in ancient Israel—David and Solomon in particular. Indeed, sandwiched in this very quotation are words that leave it open for polygamy to be adopted under certain conditions. For the Nephite writer represents God as saying: "If I will raise up a seed unto me, I will command my people; otherwise they shall hearken to these things." Joseph Smith himself never, it would seem, took the pains to explain the apparent inconsistency between these words in the Book of Mormon and his own revelation on the subject.

But to return: While the Prophet was revising the Bible, he wondered just why the Lord had condoned the practice of polygamy by the ancients. Here is the opening of the celebrated document on Mormon plural marriage—which shows how the idea originated:

Verily, thus saith the Lord unto you, my servant Joseph: inasmuch as you have inquired of my hand to know and understand wherein I, the Lord, justified my servants Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, as also Moses, David, and Solomon, my servants, as touching the principle and doctrine of their having many wives—

Prepare thy heart to receive and obey the instructions which I am about to give unto you; for all those who have this law revealed unto them, must obey the same. For, behold, I reveal unto you a new and an everlasting covenant.

Some disciples of the Prophet, overly anxious to hedge him about at every point, have sought to show that the document known among the Mormons as the "Word of Wisdom" was original in every particular. Other disciples, however, under the influence of the modern scientific spirit, have tried to show that at least some of the ideas contained there were believed and taught by the more thoughtful of the Prophet's contemporaries, and that some of these ideas sprang out of his environment.

There may be some truth in this statement, since in some of the books of the period, particularly books treating of medical and hygienic subjects, ideas somewhat similar to those in the "Word of Wisdom" are to be found.

In a five-volume work by John Mason Good, for instance, called The Study of Medicine, the second edition of which was published in London, England, in the year 1825, is a chapter on the "wonderful malady" due to "spiritous liquors," to cure which the "art of medicine is of little avail." And in a much earlier work, The Way to Health, Long Life, and Happiness, or A Discourse on Temperance, by Thomas Tryton, "a student of physick," the third edition of which appeared in London, England, in 1687, is a discussion on the ill effects of tobacco, "strong drinks" (the exact phrase in Joseph Smith's document), and the use of flesh for food, with a recommendation for eating vegetables and "herbs of cleanliness," and with plenty of fresh air in sleeping apartments.

To be sure, there is no evidence, so far as is known, that either of these works, or any other of similar purport, ever fell into the hands of the Prophet, or that the ideas they contain were common property even among the most progressive-minded, at the time when he composed the remarkable document bearing his name. And so, before this accusation of plagiarism can be made, it ought to be shown that either these or other works of the kind were among the books known, directly or indirectly, to the Mormon leader. And there is no point gained by his followers in saying, as they sometimes do, that the articles mentioned in the "Word of Wisdom" were "in strict opposition to the most advanced knowledge of his time."

There is a higher sense of originality in giving an old idea a new form and body. In this sense of the word Joseph Smith was undoubtedly original.

Shakespeare, for instance, stole all his plots, except one—and that was the poorest of the forty. Yet Shakespeare is accounted the first of poets and playwrights. Why? Because he fashioned old materials in such a way as to give them beauty, universality, and truth. His work is decidedly new, original. He created something. The old became new under his magic hand. Holinshed's Chronicles of England and Scotland is valuable to-day chiefly because it throws light on the great bard's genius.

Franklin discovered the identity of lightning with electricity. But was not Edison original? The first automobile was an exact duplicate in appearance of the horse-carriage of the period, even to the whip socket. Yet the automobile of to-day is a new invention, an original contrivance. In reality everything "new" is built up out of old materials—a machine, human government, a book, a picture, a song, a poem. Usually it is different in only one or two respects.

If Joseph Smith borrowed an idea from some source other than his own mind at any time, that idea, when he got through with it, was something very different from what it was when he took it up. This is the essence of originality.

Take the idea of demons, for example. The conception of evil spirits, at the time of the Prophet, had become hopelessly involved in a morass of absurdities. According to the prevailing notions, they resembled man in form, but Satan was supposed to be two miles high. They were frightfully ugly, although, for their own purposes, they could assume other shapes—that of a beautiful woman, or a reptile. Saint Patrick and other saints on occasions, for this reason, excommunicated insects. The Devil, in the form of a buzzing fly, once kept the monk Pannychius from supping his wine.

Demons were the keepers of hell—which was a place of fire and brimstone. They could spy upon one's thoughts, in spite of anything one might do. Accordingly they laid all sorts of snares for the feet of the unwary. For a whole season Saint Giles was forced to carry one of them on his back. Devils attended church for their own bad ends, thus dividing the spiritual world with God—who appeared to be quite helpless in the situation. Also one might draw up a contract with the Prince of Darkness, agreeing to sell one's soul for a consideration. The contract was always written in blood.

Joseph Smith's demons, as we have seen, did not much resemble these. For his pattern he went back to the Gospels. Devils were in the human form and of human size, varying as much as people in the flesh; they were, in fact, brothers of man, since they, too, were children of God in the spirit; also they were in that pre-earth world, just as all men were; they had no bodies, but could on occasions occupy the bodies of men and women on earth, though they were not to be blamed for the diseases to which flesh is heir; and they had power over mankind, but only to the extent that mankind gave them power.

His views on the use of tobacco are illuminating from more than one angle. The first quotation is from Tryton's Way to Health; the second from the Doctrine and Covenants:

Tobacco is an herb of Mars and Saturn: from the first it derives its hot, tart quality, and owes its strong, fulsome, poisonous nature to the latter. It makes most excellent ointment, and is much safer being applied outwardly than inwardly.

'Tis one of nature's extremes, and there is no preparation found out that can destroy its poisonous qualities, or reconcile and make it friendly to man's nature, only the continual use and custom of taking it; for this cause at first taking it disagrees with all sorts of complexions, with some more than others, according to the degree of antipathy it bears to each man's peculiar nature, having a nearer affinity to some than others.

It being extremely hot in operation, it is good taken in a pipe against all cold, windy, phlegmatic humors, but the constant and common whiffing it does not only destroy and render invalid all its physical virtues, but heats and dries up nature, and consumes the radical moisture, causing most that use it to spit up the moist matter, which ought not to be drawn out of the stomach by such forcible attractions, it being a mistake for people to think that the more thin, phlegmy matter they spit up the better it is for them. Hence it is that the Pot and the Pipe are frequently companions.

Tobacco is not for the body, neither for the belly, and is not good for man, but is an herb for bruises and all sick cattle, to be used with judgment and skill.

If one were to admit that the Prophet got his ideas from Tryton, which is not probable, still the "Word of Wisdom" might truthfully be called original, on account of the form in which it is put. Not only does Joseph Smith not have the nonsense and irrelevant details of Tryton, but he goes at once and concisely to the heart of the subject, with great forthrightness and compactness of form. Besides, he connects up his ideas with religion.

According to the Prophet, certain fundamental truths in religion were given to the first man. They were revealed to him because they were both universal and fundamental in the scheme of "life and salvation." But on account of man's penchant for forgetting and wanting to change things, these have had to be revealed over and over again in the history of the race. That is why, here and there over all the earth, may be found fragments of this universal plan, overlaid with human accretions of error. This idea we have mentioned before, but it has special significance in this connection.

Now, it was the great task of the prophet of the last and greatest of dispensations, Joseph Smith, to divest the fundamental ideas of religion of these accretions of error and to hold up to view the underlying truths. That, in the main, has been the work of prophets in general, during all the ages. But it was specially necessary in our times because of the larger accumulations of man-made doctrines.

Religious history abounds in accounts of men who, under stress of the powerful emotions that spiritual natures are subjected to, carried matters to such extremes as to bring religion into undeserved reproach among those who for some reason were less susceptible to spiritual impressions than themselves. Especially has this been the case with persons who were inclined to be "psychic."

The "pillar saints" of the Middle Ages are an instance of this. So, too, are those monastics who felt it necessary to escape from the tumult of life into deserts and mountain caves, as well as those who tortured both their bodies and their minds, because they believed that was the best way to serve God. There are probably more men in the madhouses of the world who are under the delusion that they are Jesus Christ or some ancient prophet than there are who imagine themselves to be merely Napoleon. And the mental hospitals are full of both men and women who have lost their minds over some religious creed or other.

Now, the founder of Mormonism was not only fundamentally religious, but, as the reader of the preceding section is aware, he was highly "psychic"—if he was telling the truth about his visions—and he was in that class of "psychics" which have a strong tendency to run to extremes.

Yet Joseph Smith never lost his balance where one would naturally have expected him to do so. Highly emotional by nature, he had a rare sense of humor and proportion that kept him from confusing things on this side with things on the other side of the line that separates the visible from the invisible.

The Prophet believed in miracles. Indeed, miracles constitute the very foundation stones of the religion which he established. Without them the whole superstructure would tumble to the ground, or, to speak with strict accuracy, would not have been erected at all.

Of his visions we have already spoken—the vision of the Father and the Son, and of the two subsequent visions of the Christ; of the seventeen or eighteen visions of Moroni, the last of the Nephite prophets and keeper of the plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated; and of the visions of Moses, Elijah, John the Baptist, and the three ancient apostles, Peter and James and John.

Here is a description of the first instance in Mormon history in which the devil was cast out of a man. The man in this case was Newel Knight. Newel had attended the meetings of the Saints in Colesville, but had steadfastly refused to pray in public. One morning, alone in the woods, he made an unsuccessful attempt to pray. The Prophet says:

He began to feel uneasy, and continued to feel worse both in mind and body, until, upon reaching his own house, his appearance was such as to alarm his wife very much.

He requested her to go and bring me to him. I went, and found him suffering very much in his mind, and his body acted in a very strange manner. His visage and limbs were distorted and twisted in every shape and appearance possible to imagine; and finally he was caught up off the floor of the apartment, and tossed about most fearfully.

His situation was soon made known to his neighbors and relatives, and in a short time as many as eight or nine grown persons had got together to witness the scene.

After he had thus suffered for a time, I succeeded in getting hold of him by the hand, when almost immediately he spoke to me, and with great earnestness requested me to cast the devil out of him, saying that he knew he was in him, and that he also knew that I could cast him out.

I replied, "If you know that I can, it shall be done." Almost unconsciously I rebuked the devil, and commanded him in the name of Jesus Christ to depart from him.

Immediately Newel spoke out and said that he saw the devil leave him and vanish from his sight. As soon as the devil had departed from our friend, his countenance became natural, his distortions of body ceased, and almost immediately the Spirit of the Lord descended upon him. So soon as consciousness returned, his bodily weakness was such that we were obliged to lay him upon his bed.

While the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon were on a visit to Canada and living at Freeman Nickerson's, this scene took place, according to Lydia Goldthwait Bailey, at one of the meetings held there:

"Brother Joseph," said Freeman, "having heard a great deal about the gift of tongues among the Saints in Kirtland, I should like very much to hear it."

This was before the preaching began. It was evidently what is known among the Mormons as a "testimony meeting." The Prophet reflected a moment. Then:

"The first person who rises to speak in this meeting will have the gift of tongues."

At once, for some reason that does not appear, all eyes turned expectantly to the grieving young woman, Lydia, who also, as the reader will remember, was a visitor at the home of Freeman Nickerson. Presently she rose, and no sooner began to speak, than the gift of tongues came upon her.

"Speaking in tongues," it would seem, was as common among the early Mormons as it was among the early Christians. It was a strange phenomenon. Usually among the Latter-day Saints one person "spoke in tongues" and another "interpreted." Howe, Booth, and Corrill all mention it as one of the miracles claimed by the Mormons of their day—the first two derisively. Its purpose, as already noted, was said by the Prophet to be to preach the gospel to foreigners unable to speak the language of the missionary.

Other miracles believed in by the Mormons were healing the sick by the laying on of hands, and prophesying. We have given an instance of the former from the Journal of the apostle Wilford Woodruff, when malarial fever struck the new community of Nauvoo. We have also referred on several occasions to the Prophet's power to foretell future events.

The Mormon leader's theory of the miraculous was not the extravagant view so often taken by Christians generally of his day, who, while not believing in any manifestation of the miraculous in their own time, yet felt the necessity of accepting and defending the miracles of the New Testament church.

In the first place, Joseph Smith taught that, if there was a God at all, it was only natural to expect that he would reveal himself to man—especially if he was the Father of all mankind, as he was represented to be. This taken for granted, just how would he manifest himself? The answer was simple to the Prophet: It would be through a personal appearance, as in the case of Moses; through the appearance of his Son, as in the case of Paul; through angelic ministrations, as in the case of Elizabeth and Mary; or through the power of the Holy Ghost, as in the case of the apostles on the Day of Pentecost, and millions of other Saints in the Christian Dispensation and later.

The Prophet made a great point of the silent influence of the Holy Spirit on the human mind. We have already mentioned the Mormon belief concerning the action of that Spirit on the mind of Columbus, on the minds of the Pilgrims, and on the minds of the men who framed the Constitution of the United States, according to the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants. That was the way in which the Holy Ghost wrought upon the mind generally. Not only to members of the church, but to outsiders, the Spirit manifested itself. Often, however, men were quite unaware that they were being thus influenced, but attributed their ideas and acts wholly to ordinary causes.

Of this sort of coÃ¶peration with God we have the case of Oliver Cowdery, during the translation of the Book of Mormon.

Cowdery, who was at the time Joseph's scribe, wished to do some translating. He wanted to know, it seems, whether he, too, did not have the "gift" of seership, which he ascribed to the Prophet. So he was allowed to try.

He failed utterly. And his companion, speaking for the Lord, told him why—he had supposed that God would do it all, whereas he must do something for himself. The interesting passage in the revelation runs thus:

You have not understood. You have supposed that I would give it unto you, when you took no thought save it was to ask of me.

Behold, I say unto you that you must study it out in your mind. Then you must ask of me if it be right; and, if it is right, I will cause that your bosom shall burn within you; therefore, you shall feel that it is right.

But, if it be not right, you shall have no such feelings, but you shall have a stupor of thought that shall cause you to forget the thing that is wrong; therefore, you cannot write that which is sacred save it be given you from me.

Now, if you had known this, you could have translated.

This was always the test of inspiration with the Prophet, and it is still the test with his followers. Light, clarity of thought, a seeing of one's way clearly—that is of God; but darkness, stupor of thought, a blind groping of one's way—that is not of God.

According to the Prophet miracles were not in violation of, but in obedience to, law. Only it was our ignorance of the laws involved in the miraculous that made it a miracle. Parley P. Pratt, as early as 1855, made this clear:

Had a sailor of the last century been running before a wind, and met with a vessel running at a good rate of speed directly in opposition to the wind and current, this sight would have presented to his understanding a miracle in the highest possible sense of the term; that is, an event entirely contrary to the laws of nature, as known to him.

But, once familiar with the arts of the living age, that "miracle" ceases to be such, and the laws of nature, and of cause and effect, are found to be still moving, unimpaired, in all the harmony of primeval existence and operation.

The same views will apply, with equal force, to all the spiritual phenomena of the universe.

The terms miracle and mystery must become obsolete, and finally disappear from the vocabulary of intelligences, as they advance in the higher spheres of intellectual consistency. Even now they should be used only in a relative or limited sense, as applicable to those things which are not yet within reach of our powers, or means of comprehension.

The Mormon leader gave out that miracles were for the benefit of the faithful, that they were a sort of last recourse when human powers had failed, and that they were not to be made the subject of false pride and boasting.

Very often unbelievers demanded of the Prophet and his disciples a sign of their divine calling, in the form of a miracle. But these men parried the demands off the same way that Jesus did. Only an adulterous generation asked for signs. Signs were for believers. There was something incongruous in an unbeliever asking for a sign. His very frame of mind precluded a miracle in his behalf. Miracles were for believers who wished to have a further confirmation that they were on the right path spiritually. They were acts of mercy from God to his saints.

Besides, to perform miracles before unbelievers was a kind of boasting, and boasting of the things of God was prohibited in the New Movement. Said the Prophet, speaking in God's name:

These signs shall follow them that believe: In my name they shall do many wonderful works.

They shall cast out devils; they shall heal the sick; they shall open the eyes of the blind, and unstop the ears of the deaf; the tongue of the dumb shall speak; if any man shall administer poison unto them, it shall not hurt them; and the poison of a serpent shall have no power to harm them.

But a commandment I give, that they shall not boast of these things, neither speak of them before the world; for they are given for their profit and salvation.

This prohibition the Prophet always applied to himself. Only on rare occasions does he go into detail in his History when he mentions a miraculous event. Of the case of healing in early Nauvoo days, the leader merely says: "Many of the sick were this day raised up by the power of God, through the instrumentality of the elders ministering unto them in the name of Jesus Christ." It is a disciple, Wilford Woodruff, who gives us the details of the healing.

Restraint, sanity, reasonableness—this seems to have been the motto of the Prophet when considering the miraculous in religion.

God often healed the sick through the power of faith. But it was not wise to go to God with every little ache and pain that one might have. Men and women must do something for themselves; they must avail themselves of the means, remedies, and facilities which man had discovered for healing purposes.

Thus, away back in 1835, we find this entry in the Journal When the Camp of Zion was on its way to Missouri, in 1834, the Prophet told the men: "It was presumption for any one to provoke a serpent to bite him, but if a man of God was accidentally bitten by a poisonous serpent, he might have faith, or his brethren might have faith for him, so that the Lord would hear his prayer and he might be healed; but when a man designedly provokes a serpent to bite him, the principle is the same as when a man drinks poison knowing it to be such. In that case no man has any claim on the promises of God to be healed."

Here is an entry for Friday, May 27, 1842: "Had an attack of a bilious nature, stayed at home, took some medicine." And this advice he gave, in more severe cases, to his disciples: "Whosoever among you are sick, and have not faith to be healed, but believe, shall be nourished with all tenderness, with herbs and mild food, and that not by the hand of an enemy."

In 1834, we are told, "John Corrill entered a complaint against Lyman Wight for teaching that 'all disease in this church is of the devil, and that medicine administered to the sick is of the devil; for the sick in the church ought to live by faith.' " Here is the Prophet's answer: "It was not lawful to teach that all disease is of the devil; but if there is any one who has this faith, let him have it to himself; and if there are any who believe that herbs and roots administered to the sick and all wholesome vegetables by members of the church—if any one teach that these things are of satan, such teaching is not of God."

In the Kirtland "branch," after the departure of the Lamanite mission for Missouri, there were some strange manifestations by the new converts.

Parley P. Pratt says that "some persons would seem to swoon away, and make unseemly gestures, and be drawn or disfigured in their countenances. Others would fall into ecstasies, cramps, fits, etc. Others would seem to have visions and revelations, which were not edifying or congenial to the doctrine and spirit of the gospel." According to John Corrill, "many saw wonderful lights in the air and on the ground, and would relate many great and marvelous things which they saw in their visions. They conducted themselves in a strange manner, sometimes imitating Indians in their maneuvers, sometimes running out into the fields, getting on stumps of trees and there preaching as though surrounded by a congregation,—all the while so completely absorbed in visions as to be apparently insensible to all that was passing around them.

"I would here remark, however," Corrill adds, "that it was but a very few of the church who were exercised in that way. The more substantial minded looked upon it with astonishment, and were suspicious that it was from an evil source."

At once, when he heard of these manifestations, the Prophet characterized them as the work of "false spirits." The Spirit of God was the spirit of light, of peace, of understanding, of harmony, of happiness.

Similarly, as we saw in another connection, the Mormon leader, with fine selective intelligence, rejected as "absurd" the mass of accretions that had gathered around the words "satan," "demons," "salvation," "God," "heaven," and "hell."
