John Henry Evans, Joseph Smith, an American Prophet ( 1946)

CHAPTER XIII

The Crossroads

If this counsel or this work be of men, it will come to nought; but if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it—lest hap1y ye be found even to fight against God.—GAMAIEL .

There is no serious disagreement of facts in the life and work of Joseph Smith. The differences arise only when one attempts to discover the meaning of the facts, the interpretation to be placed upon them.

It is a fact that this young man from Palmyra, without education or experience as men count these, published a book of more than six hundred pages, which purports to be a history of some ancient Americans, primarily the ancestors of the present red man. There is a question, however, as to whether its author was aided in the work of composition by others—Sidney Rigdon, for instance—although to-day competent critics of that book have abandoned the Rigdon-Spaulding theory. But the Book of Mormon itself is a substantial fact that cannot be denied.

It is a fact, too, that this same young man set up an organization which is conceded by all those who have given it serious attention and impartial study to be one of the most efficient in a world which has become expert in organization and that, moreover, this bit of creative work was done before the organizing genius of the Americans had made itself felt in the world of business and politics.

It is a fact, moreover, that this Palmyra youth established a religious philosophy, a body of ideas, that is admittedly one of the most complete, cohesive, and satisfying, not only in American thought, but in the thought of the world. The reader has been made familiar with the principal ideas of the Mormon prophet, and has seen how fundamental they are and how different from those that prevailed generally in his time. At the least, this religious philosophy will bear comparison with anything that can be found in the history of religion. And coupled with this fact is the fact that Joseph Smith, even at the age of twenty-four, showed a grasp of theological ideas that surpassed that of the most learned divines of his age.

Finally, it is a fact that the young Prophet, in spite of his lowly upbringing, his lack of education, and the fierce opposition he encountered everywhere, has exerted a wider and deeper influence in religion than any great leader since the greatest of the Reformers. Reference is made not merely to the power that drew together men and women from various nations and welded them into a highly integrated whole, but also, and especially, to that far subtler power in his religious system that reshaped so many human lives. Just what were the results of that power, the reader has already seen.

If, however, there is little difference as to the accomplishments of the Mormon prophet, why is it that he has been, for more than a hundred years, the center of bitter controversy?

Mormonism itself, the product of Joseph Smith, is not now so much as formerly involved in that dispute—certainly not on its material side. At one time everything connected with the Mormon prophet was the object of savage attack. But of late years—ten or fifteen at the most—the war of words on the subject has become restricted to the founder of the faith. "The incredible thing about Mormonism," says a recent writer, "is that such a respectable religion could have derived from such a disreputable person." This is an unconscious admission that the problem of Mormonism goes back to the Prophet. It is therefore the character of Joseph Smith that is in question, now as formerly.

There was a time when the Prophet was everywhere regarded as a religious impostor. This is the thesis defended by nearly every non-mormon writer during the first years of the faith—by Howe, by Campbell, by Bennett, and by many others, who took their cue from these earlier authors. In some quarters this view is still taken, but not by those writers who are both informed and open-minded on the subject.

Nowadays, writers on Joseph Smith, as a rule,—at least, the more thoughtful of them—are more charitable toward the founder of Mormonism, perhaps because of the modern scientific spirit, which always looks for facts instead of opinions merely; or for opinions mixed with facts by some legerdemain of words. And so the charge usually against the Prophet these days is, not that he was a deceiver, but that he was deceived. His was a case, we are told by these scientific writers, of self-hypnosis. The controversy is still, however, whether or not the visions and revelations of the Mormon leader were genuine.

On the one hand, Joseph Smith declared that heavenly beings visited him; that one of these, Moroni, showed him the "place of deposit" of a book of golden plates, on which was engraved the history of ancient America; that, by means of an instrument specially provided for the purpose—the urim and thummim—he was enabled to translate the language on the plates, although he knew nothing of that tongue; that the true priesthood was conferred upon him by John the Baptist and by three ancient apostles—Peter, James, and John; that he was thus empowered to organize the Church of Christ again among men; that he received numerous revelations and visions for his instruction and guidance in his personal ministry among his disciples; that, in short, the true source and origin of his ideas and the roots of his main acts in connection with the establishment of the New Movement lay in spiritual manifestations to him.

On the other hand, all this is denied by his critics. But, inasmuch as a simple denial is not enough or very convincing, a counter theory is set forth. According to this theory as at first advanced, Joseph Smith fabricated all his visions and revelations, he did not really have any golden plates in his possession, or if he did, these, too, were got up for the purpose of deception; and in the work of composing the book he was aided by an old manuscript of the Reverend Solomon Spaulding, which was doctored, and the religious element injected into it, by the Reverend Sidney Rigdon. Latterly, it was asserted that the Prophet hypnotized himself into the belief that he had the plates and that he possessed the force of character to hypnotize others into this belief; that, in a word, there is no truth in the statement that Joseph Smith received inspiration from any other source than himself and his environment when he produced Mormonism.

That is the controversy between the Mormon prophet and his disciples, on the one side, and the critics of Mormonism, on the other side. Always, during the last one hundred years and more, it has been assertion by the one party of a divine origin for the faith and a denial by the other party of that divine origin.

It is Joseph Smith's character, then, that is usually put in the crucible these days by all the critics of Mormonism. Not his character after the publication of the Book of Mormon and the organization of the church, but rather his activities before these events.

After 1830 the life of the Prophet was more or less of an open book. The society he created was almost daily increasing in membership; his personal contacts were numerous and constantly multiplying; and the documents in connection with the church were getting more and more plentiful, where his words and deeds were set down by friend and foe.

But that was not the case prior to 1830. Those early years in Palmyra were years of obscurity for Joseph Smith—at least, he was known only to neighbors and friends. But they were extremely important years, because within them Mormonism was in the making. In a sense, the new religion took its color largely from the native talents and disposition of its founder. It became increasingly difficult, however, for later generations to find out just what was the character of the Prophet, as those who knew him passed off the stage one by one.

For information concerning this early period in the Mormon leader's life, we are dependent on two general sources, one Mormon and the other non-mormon.

First, there are the writings of the Prophet himself and of his mother. The former are contained in his Autobiography and the latter in the History of the Prophet. In the Prophet's work we have no details of his life to speak of, only a few general statements. The mother, however, gives us numerous particulars about her son, especially before he became famous.

Mother Smith dictated her book, after her son's death, to a Mrs. Cory, chiefly from memory. In 1855 the material was published in England by Orson Pratt, who obtained the manuscript from Isaac Sheen. Sheen in turn had obtained it from William Smith, brother of Joseph. The Pratt edition, however, was not approved by Brigham Young, and so was suppressed by him in 1865. In 1902, after a revised copy of the original manuscript had appeared as a serial in the Improvement Era, a Mormon publication in Salt Lake City, it was published again in book form under the authority of the church.

This work is not only frank, but it reveals many family secrets and makes not a few unconscious admissions adverse to the Smiths, which have been made the most of by unfriendly critics of Mormonism and of its founder. Nearly two-thirds of the book is about the Prophet's life prior to the organization of the church, in 1830.

Neither the details given by the Prophet about himself nor those related of him by his mother (except such as may help to discredit him) are generally acceptable to non-mormon writers. And that is very natural, considering that their purpose, almost invariably, has been to show that Mormonism had a low origin.

A second source of first-hand information on the Prophet's early life is non-mormon—in fact much of it is. This includes a letter by William W. Phelps, then an outsider; some affidavits and statements published by Howe in his Mormonism Unveiled; accounts by O. Turner, Pomeroy Tucker, and Daniel Hendrix, the latter two connected with the Wayne Sentinel, in Palmyra; and one or two others.

These versions of Joseph Smith's life in those years, which are either disputed or altogether ignored by Mormon writers, must be squarely faced by the biographer of the Prophet. They cannot be dismissed with the lift of an eyebrow or the shrug of a shoulder, on the one hand, nor can they be accepted at their face value, on the other hand, as is usually done by those who quote them. Rather they should be carefully examined, before they are used, in order to set a value on the statements. This has never been done, by either Mormon or non-mormon historians.

Turner's account of the Smiths in Palmyra has already been quoted in part in an earlier chapter of this work. It bears evidence of having been written for historical purposes, rather than as anti-mormon propaganda. Probably this is one reason why it has figured so little by outsiders in later books on Mormonism. There is nothing in it that is pronouncedly for or pronouncedly against the founder of Mormonism.

The letter by Phelps to Howe has also been quoted in part. On the whole, it is favorable to the Prophet. Perhaps for this reason, it was not to Howe's liking; for he makes an unfair attack on its author, accusing him of duplicity in the situation, on the grounds partly that Phelps shortly afterwards embraced Mormonism.

Of the letter by Hendrix, also quoted elsewhere, the most that can be said of it, is that its author was an old man when he wrote it. Sixty-seven years is a long time to keep insignificant details in the memory, particularly when there was nothing at the time to show that they would be needed later on. On the whole, however, it is not unfavorable to the character of the Prophet. Its worst statements only prove that the Smiths were very poor.

The Tucker statement is disappointing to the historian seeking first-hand information. For, as a matter of fact, one does not get from it the impression that Tucker was speaking from personal knowledge of Joseph Smith. Once or twice the writer was present at a conference between Grandin and the Prophet, when the matter of publishing the Book of Mormon was discussed. Tucker appears to have crystallized current stories about the Smiths in general and the Prophet in particular into a single impression unfavorable to the young man, without attempting to limit the account to what he himself knew from personal experience, or without attempting to discriminate between the true and the false. The Origin, Rise, and Progress of Mormonism, although often quoted, cannot therefore be said to yield much first-hand information about Joseph Smith's early life.

The statements and affidavits at the end of the Howe book are the most intractable, since they all profess to give only personal experiences of the signers with the Smiths, including the Prophet.

Some eighty-nine persons, nearly all men, signed these statements. One of them bears the names of fifty-one persons, and another of eleven. Included are the names of Peter Ingersol, William Stafford, and others, who were so close to embracing Mormonism that Tucker actually enumerates them as among the first converts to the faith; also the names of Isaac Hale, father of Emma Smith, and of Lucy Harris, divorced wife of Martin Harris.

Most of these signers claim to have been acquainted with Joseph Smith between the years of 1820 and 1827. This would be the time when the young man's visions were bringing him into prominence in Palmyra and the surrounding country. The statements are not only uniformly unfavorable to the Prophet's character, but not one of them even hints that he had a single redeeming trait. That is noteworthy, even in such a collection. They have been quoted directly and indirectly by anti-mormon writers—more perhaps than any other document.

Here are some characteristic expressions in this rare group of affidavits: Lazy, indolent, profane, intemperate, lying, unreliable, worthless, quarrelsome, peculiar, visionary, artful, money-digging, gambling. All these words are applied to the Smiths in general and to Joseph Smith, Junior, in particular. According to Tucker, the Smith family were also irreligious, Joseph "being universally voted the laziest and most worthless of the generation." One of the signers of the Howe statements declares that "not one of the family had the least claim to respectability." Another testifies to the effect that Joseph "bore the reputation among his neighbors of being a liar."

What about these statements?

The first thing to be said about them is the manner in which they were gathered. They were collected either by Howe himself, or at his suggestion. They were not volunteer statements. Indeed, they bear evidence of having been written by the same person. Mrs. Harris uses this phrase: "Having been called upon to give a statement."

Howe's purpose was to discredit Joseph Smith before the people. Not only, therefore, were the persons making the statements hand-picked, but the items in their statements were carefully selected beforehand. All this is clear from the various affidavits in Howe's book. Kennedy suggests that these people were envious that one of their neighbors had acquired a fame denied them, and there may be grounds for this statement.

But just how far can these assertions be depended upon to reflect the truth about the Prophet's early life? That is the question. Nowadays we do not think very well of those who, at the instance of a man who is writing a book against some one, go to a notary public and swear out an affidavit against the character of a former neighbor.

A close inspection of these statements serves to throw a doubt on the claim that the testimony is the result of direct experience. Consider the statement of Willard Chase. Chase speaks of matters he could not possibly have known first-hand—the Prophet's marriage, for instance. And in one place he says, "he told a neighbor of mine" so-and-so. This is hearsay, not evidence.

Moreover, much of what is said in the statements is trivial and, as the lawyers say, irrelevant. Sophia Lewis, presumably a relative of Emma Smith says, for example, that the first child of the pair "was still-born, and very much deformed"—which, if true, may well have been due to other causes than the moral dereliction of the father.

And then, too, some of these people were too anxious to testify. There is nothing of the reluctant witness about them; they are not only willing, but eager witnesses. Besides, one man is called on to testify to the good character of Peter Ingersol; another, to the good character of Stafford and Ingersol; and four others to the good character of Chase and Ingersol. We wonder why. And in addition, there is an attempt on the part of one or two to ransack their memory for all the disreputable things possible in the character of the defendant. "The Smiths," says one, "were lazy, intemperate, worthless, very much addicted to lying, and money-digging." This is too much.

In the evaluation of these affidavits and statements, therefore, one must take all the conditions into account, if one is to get at the facts in the case and know just what was the character of Joseph Smith during this early period. It is certain that the Prophet made but little attempt to answer the various charges against him in Howe's book. Perhaps he thought it was not necessary to do so with his friends, and useless with his enemies. This doubtless was the case.

When, however, one probes into these documents to find what is back of them, one discovers something interesting.

One gathers that, during the four years between 1823 and 1827, the whole neighborhood about Palmyra was stirred up over the stories told by the Smiths. For the family seem not to have been at all reticent about what they believed had happened to Joseph.

Rumors of gold plates deposited in a hill; of an ancient people fighting their last battles around one of the hills near Palmyra; of treasures having been buried by those same people, or their ancestors, in hills thereabouts—all this would naturally have fired the imaginations of the more ignorant, and even have tinged that of the more intelligent, and set them to digging. Phelps, in his letter to Howe, says, "The places where they dug for the plates in Manchester are to be seen." Others speak of many holes dug in the hill, in an effort to find either the plates that were said to lie buried there or to locate treasure of another kind. Apparently, as these rumors spread, excitement increased.

The persistence of these rumors, the particularization of the Smiths, especially Joseph, with respect to his "find," and the general air of truth in the situation, would very likely have created the impression in the minds of many that he really had in his possession, or knew the whereabouts of, some gold plates. At any rate, several attempts were made by neighbors to locate them. On more than one occasion, according to Mother Smith, raids were made on the Smith home—one by Willard Chase, who seems to have believed Joseph to have had something in the nature of gold plates,—and she tells of three attempts to take them away from him as the youth brought them home from the hill.

If we assume that the Prophet's story is true, we can account for some of the characteristics ascribed to him by these affidavit signers.

First of all, his secretiveness, his imagination, his propensity to "lying," his money-digging proclivities, his tendency to "the foolish and marvelous," mentioned frequently in the affidavits—all these traits are easily explained. Naturally, the story being once out, he would resort to parrying, which would give the impression that he was faking. The story itself would be sufficient to show his visionary, imaginative nature; and his statement that he found the plates in the hill near by, together with his having gone with Stoal to Pennsylvania to dig in a mine, would tend to fasten upon him the name of "money-digger." Moreover, if his story was true, he could not go about showing the plates to every one, and his refusal to do so would subject him to the charge of lying.

Furthermore, the Smith family, including the Prophet, could easily have acquired the reputation of being credulous. It was a credulous age, particularly in country districts. Palmyra had its share of superstitious, and it is not at all unlikely that the Smiths shared to some extent the characteristics of their age and of their town. But the belief of the family in the miraculous, which they held all along, would serve to accentuate the feeling that they were more superstitious and credulous than their neighbors.

In a word, many of the undesirable characteristics ascribed to the young prophet in the period we are examining can be accounted for without our assuming that he really possessed them in the ordinary sense. They can be accounted for on the assumption that he really had the plates—that, in short, his story was true, whatever difficulties the assumption may plunge us into. This, at least, is an interpretation that cannot be dismissed by the critic with a wave of the hand.

There is another line of thought, however, which is illuminating. It is found in Wordsworth's famous words, "The child is father to the man."

The characteristics of the man, Joseph Smith, are not those which these affidavits attribute to him as a boy. They are the very opposite of them, in fact. People who knew him intimately after 1830 are unanimous in ascribing to him the qualities of frankness, honesty, sobriety, cheerfulness, courage, forthrightness, truthfulness. If he, as a boy and young man, were what the signers of the Howe affidavits say he was, then he must have made a more wonderful transformation than is recorded of any one else. It is a miracle harder to believe than any claimed by Mormonism. For, as any one may prove by looking into his own life, the traits of the boy are, in the main, the traits of the man. The tendency to deceive, to quarrelsomeness, to be over-credulous, when it exists at all, is too deeply fundamental wholly to be eradicated.

To believe that the author of religious books containing high moral precepts and a high moral tone, the creator of one of the great religious organizations of the age, an organization that has continued now for more than a hundred years, and the inspirer of hundreds of thousands of intelligent men and women to the higher spiritual life—to believe that all this grew out of the lying, worthless, whisky-drinking, vagabond of the affidavits, is to fly in the face of all the known laws of individual human growth.

Those testimonies which we considered in the preceding section were collected, as we stated, either by Howe or at his instance. At any rate, they appeared in his book, the first of its kind. As we have seen, there were some eighty-nine persons who swore to the disreputable character of Joseph Smith prior to the time when he published the Book of Mormon.

As a matter of fact, Howe might have obtained at least as many signatures of men and women who would have been willing to testify to the Prophet's good character; and they would have been as well known for probity as those whose signatures he published. But Howe, it seems, was not interested in doing that; he had a thesis to defend.

For there were people in those days, both in Palmyra and in surrounding towns, who knew young Smith and his family and who had found in them some admirable qualities. There were the Knights, for instance, the Stoals, the Whitmers, the Cowderys. These knew the Smiths rather intimately. Joseph had worked for Knight and Stoal. Then there were the Rockwells, the Thayres, the Jollys, the Pages, the Petersons, and many others. True, these did not go to the notary public and swear out affidavits to his good character. They did something far more effective than that; they embraced his cause at no small sacrifice to themselves.

The testimony of these people should be set side by side with that of the signers of statements against the Prophet, when the character of the founder of Mormonism during the pre-Kirtland years is sought.

Doubtless, too, those who signed the affidavits, as well as those who made statements on the subject, knew of some good qualities in the Prophet, which would naturally not go into the book; just as the Whitmers, the Knights, and other friends of his must have known of undesirable things about him. It was a matter of balancing the good against the bad, and in each case people emphasized the aspects of his character to which their nature and disposition inclined them most. That is what everybody does—and must do. Otherwise no one would have either a friend or an enemy in life.

That Joseph Smith, even in those days when the Book was in preparation, emitted an atmosphere of sincerity and truth, goes without saying. To assume that he did not, is to create a situation that would be hard to explain; for Mormonism drew to itself some very intelligent men and women, as we have seen. And it was this general atmosphere of truth that first attracted and then held a following. There is nothing that sooner disillusions than intimacy—if there is anything to be disillusioned over.

And these early converts, in spite of the fact that most of them had not seen the plates which the Prophet said he had in his possession, nevertheless accepted his word for it. That, as we have stated, was due to the general air of truth surrounding the Mormon leader. This is the only explanation one can offer in the situation—at least, the only one that squares with all the facts in the case.

A number of persons, however, felt assured of the actual existence of the gold plates and the reality of the messenger. Among these were two women—Mother Smith and Mother Whitmer.

Mrs. Smith tells us in her History that she saw the urim and thummim, or interpreters, and the breast-plate found with the record in the stone box.

She saw the interpreters when Joseph came home from the hill on the morning of September 22, 1827, where he had gone for the purpose of bringing back the sacred treasures. He did not at that time bring home the book itself; this he had deposited, Mother Smith tells us, within the hollow trunk of an old birch tree in the woods, some distance from the Smith farm. But he did bring home on that occasion, she says, the urim and thummim, which he showed to his mother. He called it a "key." "I took the article into my hands," she assures us, "and examined it."

After another visit to the hill, Joseph one morning called to his mother to come down from the attic, that he had something to show her. When she descended into the room where he was, he placed in her hands, she says, an object wrapped in "a thin muslin handkerchief, so thin that I could feel its proportions without any difficulty." And she describes it in detail. It was a breast-plate, evidently made for a very large man. She examined it, she tells us; after which Joseph placed it in the chest with the urim and thummim.

The experience of Mother Whitmer is related by her son David, in his Address to All Believers.

One morning, he says, while she was on her way to the barn to do the milking, she was accosted by a strange man, as she supposed. He had on his back a kind of knapsack, with something in it. He told her that she had been complaining to herself of late about her added work, on account of the presence in her home of Joseph and Oliver; and he assured her that her sacrifice would not go for nothing, because she was helping to further the purposes and work of God. Thereupon he opened his knapsack and showed her a book of gold plates.

Mrs. Whitmer, David tells us, believed this person to be the messenger Moroni and the book to be the Nephite Record, which was in course of translation.

Then there were what may be termed the major witnesses to the divine origin of the Book of Mormon. Of these there were two sets. One set claimed to have seen the messenger Moroni, the gold plates, and to have heard the voice of God; the other set of eight men asserted that they saw and "hefted" the gold plates.

When the translation was finished, we are told, the Prophet sent word to his parents. Presumably he sent word to Martin Harris, too. It was completed, as we have seen, in the Whitmer home in Fayette. As soon as they could do so, Joseph Smith, senior, his wife, and Harris appeared at the Whitmer home. It was while the two families were together that the three witnesses claim to have had their vision of the angel and the book.

After the customary devotional exercises were over one morning, Mother Smith tells us, Joseph went up to Harris and said solemnly:

"Martin, you have got to humble yourself before God this day, that you may obtain forgiveness of your sins. If you do, it is the will of God that you should look upon the plates, in company with Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer."

A few minutes afterwards Joseph, Oliver, David, and Martin left the house, going in the direction of the woods not far away. For what took place there we are indebted to the Prophet's narrative. He says:

According to previous arrangement, I commenced by vocal prayer, and was followed by each of the others in succession.

We did not at the first trial, however, obtain any answer. We again observed the same order of prayer, each calling on God in rotation, but with the same result as before.

Upon this Martin Harris proposed that he should withdraw from us, believing, as he expressed himself, that his presence was the cause of our not obtaining what we wished for. He accordingly withdrew, and we knelt down again.

We had not been many minutes engaged in prayer, when presently we beheld a light above us in the air, of exceeding brightness; and beheld an angel before us. In his hands he held the plates which we had been praying to have a view of.

He turned over the leaves one by one, so that we could see them and discern the engravings thereon distinctly. He then addressed himself to David Whitmer, and said, "Blessed is the Lord and he that keepeth his commandments." Immediately afterwards we heard a voice from out of the bright light, saying,

"These plates have been revealed by the power of God, and they have been translated by the power of God. The translation of them which you have seen is correct, and I command you to bear record of what you now see and hear."

I now left David and Oliver and went in pursuit of Martin, whom I found at a considerable distance, fervently engaged in prayer. He soon told me, however, that he had not yet prevailed with the Lord, and earnestly requested me to join him in prayer.

We accordingly joined in prayer, and ultimately obtained our desires. For, before we had finished, the same vision was opened to our view—at least, it was again opened to me. And I once more beheld the same things.

At this moment Martin cried out, " 'Tis enough! 'tis enough! mine eyes have beheld—mine eyes have beheld!" And, jumping up, he shouted, "Hosannah!" blessing God, and otherwise rejoicing exceedingly.

Whitmer adds some details to this account by the Prophet. In an interview with Orson Pratt and Joseph F. Smith, in 1878, he said:

We not only saw the plates of the Book of Mormon, but also the Brass Plates, the plates of the Book of Ether, and many other plates. The fact is, it was just as though Joseph, Oliver, and I were sitting just here on a log, when we were overshadowed by a light.

It was not like the light of the sun, nor like that of fire, but more glorious and beautiful. It extended away around us, I cannot tell how far, but in the midst of this light there appeared, as it were, a table with many records or plates upon it, besides the plates of the Book of Mormon, also the sword of Laban, the directors, and the interpreters.

I saw them just as plain as I see this bed, and I heard the voice of the Lord as distinctly as I ever heard anything in my life. Our testimony as recorded in the Book of Mormon is strictly and absolutely true, just as it is written there.

A document was drawn up and signed by Cowdery, Whitmer, and Harris. It appeared at the end of the first edition of the published work, but is now to be found at the beginning of the volume. It reads:

Be it known unto all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people, unto whom this work shall come: That we, through the grace of God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, have seen the plates which contain this record, which is the record of the people of Nephi, and also of the Lamanites, their brethren, and also of the people of Jared, who came from the tower of which hath been spoken.

And we also know that they have been translated by the gift and power of God, for his voice hath declared it unto us; wherefore we know of a surety that the work is true.

And we also testify that we have seen the engravings which are upon the plates; and they have been shown unto us by the power of God, and not of man.

And we declare with words of soberness that an angel of God came down from heaven, and he brought and laid before our eyes, that we beheld and saw the plates, and the engravings thereon; and we know that it is by the grace of God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, that we beheld and bear record that these things are true.

It is marvelous in our eyes. Nevertheless, the voice of the Lord commanded us that we should bear record of it; wherefore, to be obedient unto the commandments of God, we bear testimony of these things.

And we know that if we are faithful in Christ, we shall rid our garments of the blood of all men, and be found spotless before the judgment-seat of Christ, and shall dwell with him eternally in the heavens. And honor be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, which is one God. Amen.

Shortly after this the plates were shown to eight men, we are told, by the Prophet himself.

One morning these eight men, with Joseph, met in the woods near the home of the Smiths in Manchester. They were: Christian Whitmer, Jacob Whitmer, Peter Whitmer, Jun., John Whitmer, Hiram Page, Joseph Smith, Sen., Hyrum Smith, and Samuel H. Smith. Here is their testimony:

Be it known unto all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people, unto whom this work shall come: That Joseph Smith, Jun., the translator of this work, has shown unto us the plates of which hath been spoken, which have the appearance of gold; and as many of the leaves as the said Smith has translated we did handle with our hands; and we also saw the engravings thereon, all of which has the appearance of ancient work, and of curious workmanship.

And this we bear record with words of soberness, that the said Smith has shown unto us, for we have seen and hefted, and know of a surety that the said Smith has got the plates of which we have spoken. And we give our names unto the world, to witness unto the world that which we have seen. And we lie not, God bearing witness of it.

All this occurred before the Book of Mormon was published. The testimony of these eight was placed with that of the three at the close of the volume.

Mother Smith gives us a glimpse of the situation after the four men returned to the Whitmer home:

It was between three and four o'clock P.M. Mrs. Whitmer, Mr. Smith, and myself were sitting in the bedroom at the time. On coming in, Joseph threw himself down beside me, and exclaimed:

"Father, mother, you do not know how happy I am. The Lord has now caused the plates to be shown to three more besides myself. They have seen an angel, who has testified to them, and they will have to bear witness to the truth of what I have said; for now they know for themselves that I do not go about to deceive the people. I feel as if I was relieved of a burden, which was almost too heavy for me to bear, and it rejoices my soul that I am no longer to be entirely alone in the world."

Upon this, Martin Harris came in. He seemed almost overcome with joy, and testified boldly to what he had both seen and heard. And so did David and Oliver, adding that no tongue could express the joy of their hearts, and the greatness of the things which they had both seen and heard.

Here, then, are eleven men who corroborate the statement of Joseph Smith that he had in his possession some gold plates from which the Book of Mormon is supposed to have been translated.

What are we to do with this testimony?

In a work of this kind it would be out of place to argue that these men were, or were not, telling the truth. Argument is the province of the special pleader, not of the historian. The most that can properly be done here is to open the way to the facts in the case. This is a pressing need, as the subject has been angrily debated now for more than a hundred years. The facts need to be segregated from opinion and inference, and made to stand out by themselves, so that the reader may be left free to form his own judgment of the truth (or otherwise) of the testimony of the Eleven Witnesses.

It is well at the outset to understand the deep significance of this testimony and the interdependence of the supernormal behavior of the Mormon prophet and that of the men who were associated with him in the setting up of Mormonism—Cowdery, Rigdon, Whitmer, and Harris. This statement does not of course apply to the Eight Witnesses, because their experience, if it was an experience, was wholly normal, and must always be considered so.

The supernormal, or miraculous behavior of the Prophet and his companions, has already been outlined. It includes the appearance of Moroni to the four men considered in the preceding chapter, and all the other appearances to Joseph Smith, also the appearance of Christ and the Father to the Prophet, of both to the Prophet and Rigdon, of Christ to the Prophet and Cowdery, and the manifestations of the Baptist, of the three ancient apostles, and of the prophets Moses and Elijah to Joseph and Oliver.

These all are interdependent. They stand or fall together. If any one of them is questioned, then the way is left open to doubt all of them. Moreover, Mormonism itself rests on the foundation of this series of visions, this supernormal, or miraculous behavior of the men involved. There can be no two opinions on that point. Mormonism has its basis on the miraculous element in religion, or it has no foundation at all on which to stand. They are fooling themselves, whether within or without the Mormon church, who think they can accept the faith of Joseph Smith and at the same time reject the visions of Joseph Smith. No such choice is permissible. One must believe these supernormal experiences and Mormonism, or one must reject Mormonism with the visions.

A distinction may help us here.

The word "religion" comes from a Latin word meaning to "bind." That is to say, in religion men "bind" themselves to do something; they tie their interests together in an organization. In this etymological sense religion is man-made, not God-made. Put otherwise, the set of beliefs included in religion, no matter in what department of human thought and action they may lie, originate wholly in man himself.

It follows that man may include in his conception of religious beliefs whatever ideas he wishes. Religion to him may be associated with a personal God, Nature, the Universe, or a divine immanence; or it may limit itself to the merely normal activities of life as we know it here and now, without considering any after-existence. It follows, too, that man may change religion to suit his growing needs. The thing having originated with him and grown under his hands, he may add to it, or eliminate any idea or practice from it, or as has been done on occasions, abolish it altogether. All this is on the etymological basis of religion, not of course on any later meanings the word may have acquired.

With the word "theology" it is different. Derived from two Greek words meaning "god" and "speak," theology therefore signifies, etymologically, "a speech about God." But this implies two things. In the first place, any "speech" about God involves not only what he says about himself, but also what he says concerning man, his origin, nature, and destiny. And, in the second place, since God transcends the mere human powers of ascertainment and understanding, whatever man comes to know about God in this broad sense must come from God to begin with. Hence theology is God-made, not man-made.

Here, too, several things follow. For one thing, no man, of himself, may alter the body of theological ideas. He may accept them, or he may reject them, but he may not change them in any way. And that for the very simple reason that he is incompetent to do so, through lack of knowledge and through lack of vision. Man's knowledge, leaving out God, is limited to what he can gain through the sensuous organism. That organism is of no avail in the acquiring of knowledge concerning spiritual entities. And so, while man is both competent and free to alter whatever he sees fit to alter in man-made religion, he is not at liberty to make any changes in what God has revealed—assuming that God has revealed anything.

For another thing, theology and religion may be united in the same system. If we regard religion as the body of flesh, then theology might be regarded as the skeleton that enables the flesh to stand up. Theology supplies the fundamental ideals and ends of life; religion, the details as these become necessary in our development. It might be, for ought we know, that religion as well as theology had its origin in a divine source.

And while religious knowledge changes to suit man's growing life, theological knowledge should remain always the same. Perhaps it would be nearer the truth to say that, although we know more and more of the facts of the material and the spiritual world, yet our interpretation of physical phenomena changes and our interpretation of spiritual phenomena grows. That is to say, the revelation of God's personality and attributes to, say, Adam and Joseph Smith (assuming that he did reveal himself to them) would be essentially the same in both cases. In other words, while we may increase the number of things we know about God, in the broad sense in which we are using the term here, we should have nothing to unlearn. In religion, on the contrary, we are forever unlearning, in our effort to arrive at truth, because we are always feeling our way as in the dark.

The question, then, of whether or not the plates of the Book of Mormon had a physical existence, involves Joseph Smith's whole religious philosophy—not only the doctrine of God, of angels, of devils, of the human spirit, of the Holy Ghost, but also the idea that heavenly beings may on occasion visit men in the flesh, and the possibility that the Holy Ghost may, through faith, act upon the mind. It is really the question whether spiritual knowledge, like scientific knowledge, is subjective or objective, whether it comes from without or from within.

If this fundamental conception of the Prophet's is untrue, then Mormonism collapses as a revealed faith, and becomes only another religion.

One thing is clear, and that is that no one can either "prove" or "disprove" the testimony of these witnesses to the divine origin of Mormonism. That may as well be recognized first as last.

"Before we had yet finished praying," says the Prophet, in recording the experience he had in common with Martin Harris, "the same vision was opened to our view—at least, it was again opened to me." Joseph Smith here recognizes the fact that experience is personal. This of necessity is true. No one else can tell what we are experiencing, except by the outward signs that we manifest. When Harris, "jumping up, cried out, 'Hosanna,"' his companion judged that he, too, had seen the same vision. And this must per force be true of every one. Experience is personal.

When therefore any one says that this testimony of the witnesses is true or not true, he is expressing an opinion. The opinion may be an offhand remark, as of one who has picked up a catch phrase, or it may be a deduction coming at the end of a long train of investigation and study—it does not matter; it is the expression of an opinion just the same. For these experiences, if they were experiences, came to particular men; they cannot, from the very nature of the case, be repeated, and even if they could, they would be new experiences. It is utterly futile either to deny or to affirm them, for the reason that an experience is necessarily personal in its nature.

There was a time when people who rejected supernormal, or miraculous behavior in their fellows or in history, did so on the general ground of the improbability of the experience. This attitude was put thus dogmatically by Hume, who always denounced dogmaticism in the theologian: "The miraculous is the impossible." But how did the great philosopher-historian know that? By simply standing it beside what he knew had happened or was happening. And so, for decades, religious skeptics acted on the Hume dictum. They dismissed miracles with a grand sweep of the hand. If these persons had been asked their opinion on the question as to whether the human voice, without any visible means of transmission, could be distinctly heard over a distance of a thousand, or even a hundred miles, they would not only have laughed outright, but would have considered that a sufficient answer.

We do not test the truth of a statement that way to-day. The newer practice is thus stated by Professor Ihne, of the University of Heidelberg:

The first question we have to answer, if we would judge of the credibility of a statement claiming to be considered historical, is not whether it is probable or likely; for the fictions of a novel or poem may be extremely likely without having the least pretense to veracity.

We must ask, What is the evidence upon which the statement rests? Were the witnesses able and were they willing to tell the truth?

All historical narratives must be derived from contemporary evidence, from persons who have heard or seen what they report and who do not purposely corrupt, distort, or altogether falsify the facts.

Inaccuracy, incompleteness, faulty apprehension, we must expect and excuse even in the best of witnesses, for experience shows that facts, as they pass through the observing and reasoning mind of witnesses, inevitably assume that particular form and color which the individuality of these witnesses gives to them. We may even expect contradictions as to detail, degree, and manner. In partial and passionate witnesses we may look for involuntary or even voluntary misrepresentations.

All such divergencies in statements of eye-witnesses it is the duty of the historian to weigh against each other, and from their combination to work out the truth.

This statement by an eminent authority, one who was accustomed to work on source materials in history, thus reduces the problem before us to the veracity of the witnesses—Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery, Sidney Rigdon, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris. Were they "able and willing to tell the truth?"

To be sure, there is an element in the case of the witnesses to Mormonism of which Professor Ihne does not take cognizance in the passage just quoted from him. It is the miraculous element.

But does not the miraculous happen, if it happens at all, in experience? What is seen is seen through the physical eyes, what is heard is heard through the physical ears, and what is felt is felt through the sense of touch. At least, that would seem to be the case whenever in history we have an instance of the miraculous. Certainly it was so in the case before us—assuming that it was veridical. And so there is no reason why the test proposed by the German scholar for statements made in connection with Roman history should not be applied to any witness who testifies to the marvelous. Indeed, some scholars do that in the case of the men who so testify in connection with the New Testament miracles.

What, then, is the situation with respect to the five men who claim to have witnessed the miraculous birth of Mormonism, so far as the application of this rule enunciated by Professor Ihne is concerned?

To begin with, the biographer of Joseph Smith who wishes to see justice done to these witnesses cannot but protest against the unfairness with which his non-mormon critics almost uniformly approach this subject of the witnesses. Misstatements of facts, distorsion of facts, the omission of essential facts, even the manufacture of facts—these have been the rule, and a straightforward setting forth of the situation has been extremely rare. Here, for instance, is one of the things in point.

In 1831 some important documents, with a sum of money, were to be conveyed from Kirtland to Independence. Oliver Cowdery was to be the messenger, because he was going there anyway to set up a printing plant. On second thought, however, the Prophet suggested that some one go with him. He said, speaking "for the Lord," "It is not wisdom in me that he should be entrusted with the commandments and the moneys, except some one go with him, who will be true and faithful." So John Whitmer accompanied him.

The reason for this suggestion, one would naturally think, should be sought in the circumstances under which it was made. Here are those circumstances: The journey lay through a thousand miles, nearly, of sparsely inhabited country, the last stage of which led into a district known to be infested with lawless characters; besides, money was hard to get, and the documents were priceless. Clearly the documents and the money would be safer with two persons than with one.

But the author of the most pretentious history of the Mormons by an outsider, entirely ignoring these conditions, although he must have known them, draws the conclusion for his readers that Oliver could not be trusted with money. And the statement is made with the obvious purpose of discrediting Cowdery as a witness to the divine origin of the Book of Mormon, since it is made in that connection. Comment on that sort of history is unnecessary.

There was nothing subnormal about these men. Smith, Rigdon, and Cowdery were above the average in intelligence, and all of them were successful men.

Harris, perhaps the least intelligent of the five, was a well-to-do farmer in Palmyra. "Before his acquaintance with the Smith family," says Howe, "he was considered an honest, industrious citizen, by his neighbors. He had accumulated a handsome property." And Booth, in his second letter, which is quoted by Howe, tells us this: "Martin Harris is what may be called a great talker, an extravagant boaster; so much so, that he renders himself disagreeable to many of his Society. The money he has expended, and the great things he has done, form a considerable topic of his conversation."

Martin's wife, from whom he was divorced, charges him with having been "quick in temper" and with "beating" her at times. And she adds that, before he joined the Mormons, he "attended to his business." Another of the Howe affidavits says that, "in matters of business," Harris "was considered good."

Conceding that Harris "abused his wife," that he talked overmuch, and that he and his wife separated, still it is difficult to see that he was disqualified from being a witness to a supernormal experience. Harris gave up money for his belief, and acquisitiveness is one of the powerful incentives in man. And he gave money against the advice of his wife, of his other relatives, of both Grandin and Tucker, the printers, and of the Reverend Mr. Clark, to whom he went for counsel on the subject.

David Whitmer seems always to have been respected by his neighbors. At least, we do not find any one speaking in disrespectful terms of him. A rather large man, he was of more than average intelligence. Somewhat even-tempered, he was not in the habit of "seeing things." At Richmond, Missouri, where he lived for nearly sixty years, he was highly thought of, in spite of his testimony.

In 1881, when Whitmer was seventy-six, more than twenty leading citizens, among whom were lawyers, doctors, merchants, bankers, and local officials, issued a statement to the effect that they had "been acquainted with him long and intimately" and that they knew him "to be a man of the highest integrity, and of undoubted truth and veracity." The statement was given out because his character had been attacked on the score of his testimony to the Book of Mormon. None of the signers was a Mormon.

When he died, in 1888, at the age of eighty-three, the local paper said of him: "No man ever lived here who had among our people more friends and fewer enemies. Honest, conscientious, and upright in all his dealings, just in his estimate of men, and open, manly, and frank in his treatment of all, he made lasting friends who loved him to the end."

Of the other three we have spoken in considerable detail, especially of the Prophet.

Once, when a Mormon from Utah visited David Whitmer at his home to interview him as a witness, the old gentleman, at one point in the conversation, rising from his chair, said, "Young man, you seem to think it's an honor to be a witness to the Book of Mormon. I tell you, it's a burden!" And a burden it surely must have been, not only to Whitmer, but to the others as well.

Whitmer was the last of the five to die. His end came in 1888. Smith had died in 1844, Cowdery in 1850, Harris in 1875, and Rigdon in 1876. From the year 1830 till they drew their last breath, they were the butt of ridicule in unbelieving circles, and their names, outside Mormonism, were held in derision everywhere.

Perhaps one of the things that aggravated the situation for all but the Prophet was the fact that they were separated from their people in other matters of faith. This put them in an awkward position. For, while they adhered to their testimony, yet they were not affiliated with the organization which had been brought into existence largely through the visions to which they testified.

Their trials are indicated in some typical instances. Harris, although temperate in his habits, sometimes drank wine with his friends. On occasions these friends would try to get him intoxicated, so as to draw from him a denial of his testimony. But the ruse was never successful.

Newspaper men often visited Whitmer to interview him on the subject of the Book of Mormon. After some of these conversations the reporters wrote that David had denied his testimony to having seen the angel and heard the Voice. Such a statement always aroused his indignation and brought out a public statement. As a matter of fact, it was one of these occasions that called forth Whitmer's Address to All Believers, in which he took the opportunity, once and for all, to refute the charge that he had ever denied his testimony.

As we have said elsewhere, Cowdery went to Michigan after his experiences, where he became district attorney. Once, in the court room, his opponent, in a plea to the jury, ridiculed Cowdery as a visionary, and told of the connection he had with the Book of Mormon. It was a dramatic moment when Oliver made his answer. For there, in a crowded court room and before judge and jury, he solemnly reiterated his testimony.

On another occasion a fellow lawyer came into his office, a Book of Mormon in his hand. "Mr. Cowdery," he said, "I see your name here as having seen an angel and heard the voice of God. You don't believe that, do you?"

"No"; the district attorney answered, "I do not believe it. I know it. Belief is swallowed up in knowledge."

How did these men die? Men do not like to die with what they know to be a lie on their lips. We already know how Joseph Smith died. He was killed because he persisted in his position that he did have visions and revelations from heaven.

"Oliver died the happiest man I ever saw," says David Whitmer. Just before he died, he asked to be raised up a little in his bed. This having been done, he bore his last testimony. "Now, lay me down," he said; "I am going to my Savior." And he died "with a smile on his face." These details are from eye and ear witnesses of the scene.

Whitmer's death was equally dramatic. "Dr. Buchanan," he said, "I want you to say whether or not I am in my right mind." The physician answered that he judged so from his conversation. Then Whitmer: "I want to tell you all that the Nephite Record is true. Now, you can say that you have heard me bear my testimony on my death-bed. My trust is in Christ forever."

And here is what Martin Harris's son wrote about his father to Salt Lake City: "He was taken sick a week ago yesterday. He cannot move, only by our aid. He has continued to talk about, and to testify to the truth of the Book of Mormon, and was in his happiest mood when he could get some one to listen to his testimony. His last audible words were something about the Three Witnesses, but we could not understand what it was."

Rigdon died in Friendship, New York. With Joseph Smith he testified, in 1832, that he saw Christ "on the right hand of God, and heard the voice of God bearing record that he is the only Begotten of the Father." "And now," the statement says, "after the many testimonies which have been given of him, this is the testimony, last of all, which we give of him: That he lives!" These are bold words. He never denied them.

"Numerous pilgrimages," said the Friendship Register on his death, "had been made to him from different parts by various persons desirous of obtaining further information from him relative to the origin of the Book of Mormon; but he unwaveringly adhered to his original theory on this matter, being the same as that held by the Mormons; and he treated with great scorn and contempt the statement of parties imputing the authorship of the work to himself."

The testimony of these five witnesses is to the presence of the miraculous element in Mormonism, for which reason it has become, and still remains, the center of controversy, and this in spite of the showing made on the rule laid down for the weighing of evidence by historians.

The testimony of the Eight Witnesses, however, is of a different sort. For, as already stated, there was present in the experience to which these men testify no supernormal element whatever. It was, on the contrary, a plain, matter-of-fact exhibition of a book of plates by one man to eight other men. Moreover, it was not at night, but in the daylight, not in a dark room, but in the open. The conditions were as favorable as we could ask for an inspection of the object shown.

This second set of men was made up of four Whitmers, three Smiths, and a brother-in-law of the Whitmers. Christian Whitmer died in 1835, Peter Whitmer, Jr., the following year, the elder Joseph Smith in 1840, Hyrum and Samuel Smith in 1844, Jacob Whitmer in 1856, Hiram Page in 1852, and John Whitmer in 1878. Three of them—Jacob Whitmer, John Whitmer, and Hiram Page—died outside the Mormon fold. Not one of them, however, even hinted a denial of his testimony to the existence of the plates from which the Book of Mormon is supposed to have been translated.

The only attempt to explain this testimony of the Eight Witnesses—aside of course from that which accepts it as true—is an exclamation point after a statement calling attention to the fact that three of the men were Smiths and four of them Whitmers, and the suggestion that perhaps the Prophet made up some plates for the purpose.

But the matter is not so easily disposed of. Naturally Joseph Smith, if he were to have witnesses at all, would have to select them from among those who were believers; and believers at this particular time were few. One would be hard put to it to suggest eight others to act in this capacity. Anyway, that is not really an objection, in view of the fact that the men otherwise are qualified. Besides, where would Joseph Smith get his materials for plates? By what means would he prepare them so as to deceive the eyes of the men? For they examined the engravings, they tell us, and found them to have "the appearance of ancient work and of curious workmanship." And, last of all, just how should we square this piece of deception on the part of the Prophet with his well-known frankness of disposition and his subsequent career?

In reality, this testimony of the Eight is more difficult to dispose of than that of the Three, because it is in the field of the perfectly normal, and can be handled with our own experiences in mind.

And so we come back to the question with which we started this chapter: What are we to do with the testimony of the witnesses?

The Mormons accept it, and apparently enjoy not only inner peace, but spiritual security. They have applied the test that their Prophet suggests: going to the source of the testimony itself.

John Fiske, in a footnote to his Discovery of America, makes this comment on the authorship of the Book of Mormon: After calling it "a curious piece of literary imposture," he says, "It is pure fiction, and a very clumsy sort, such as might easily be devised by an ignorant man accustomed to the language of the Bible."

One wonders, on reading that, whether the fastidiously literary historian had the patience to read the Book of Mormon through. Certainly he did not give it the careful reading and the attention to details that the book deserves at the hand of an investigator. For really there are some problems growing out of that book, which cannot be solved so easily as Professor Fiske's phrase would seem to indicate. One of these problems touches this very question of literary style; the others involve the matter of the book.

Indeed, the language of the Nephite Record is nothing to brag about. It imitates the style of the King James version of the Bible, as Fiske says, and even the most devout believer in the volume, if he is honest, must admit that it is a poor imitation. Furthermore, it abounds in errors of grammar and of rhetoric. The phrase "and it came to pass" occurs with wearisome iteration throughout the work. And the narrative is encumbered with confusing digressions. Some of the errors in grammar have been corrected in later editions of the book, but enough remain to make it on the whole rather uninviting to the superficial investigator, especially if he be squeamish in matters of style.

In truth, however, the Book of Mormon itself anticipates criticism on this very score of language. One of its writers—the last one, Moroni—is represented as saying that its modern readers would most likely "mock" at it on account of its literary deficiencies, because he felt that Nephite writers were "weak" in the placement of their words and "awkward" in the use of their pens; and he attributes these defects to the language in which they wrote—the reformed Egyptian, rather than the Hebrew.

If, however, Fiske had in mind other features of the Book of Mormon—its general theme, its background, its ideas, its character delineation—then we must take exception to what he says about the work. For, when one reads the Book of Mormon without remembering its style, one becomes more and more struck with the fact that no "ignorant man," however "accustomed to the language of the Bible," could have written the work unaided. Indeed, the Spaulding-Rigdon theory arose out of a belief that Joseph Smith was too ignorant to have composed it without considerable help. In other words, it was easier for the first critics of the Book of Mormon to believe the impossible Spaulding-Rigdon story than for them to believe that the Book of Mormon originated in the unschooled youth from the backwoods of New York.

[Joseph Smith: An American Prophet Monument to Joseph Smith on the summit of the Hill Cumorah, near Palmyra, New York; now (1933) in course of construction.

Doubtless the reader of the Nephite Record who has an eye for literary architecture, will miss in that work the artifices of style—careful blocking of material, logical arrangement, steady progress of action toward an end, varied and clear connectives, sentences that linger in the memory by reason of their happy combination of words, diction that is both exact and imaginative. Still, if one can forget matters of mere style, one gradually comes to sense in the "Mormon bible" a not unskillful handling of material in a purposeful way, a steady marshaling of details in a rather straight line, the pressing forward of things toward a goal, that is not to be looked for in a twenty-four-year-old farm boy without training and experience in writing.

The Book of Mormon has a theme. It is given in the preface as being to "convince the Jew and the Gentile that Jesus is the Christ, the eternal God, manifesting himself unto all nations." And this theme is never lost sight of throughout the work. It is rather in the general atmosphere, however, that the purpose becomes dominant. During the six hundred years before the birth of Christ, as well as during the four hundred years after that event, the spirit of Jesus motivates whatever goes into the book. A sustained purpose like that is a sure sign of intellect in a writer.

The Book of Mormon has verisimilitude of a high order. It gives one the impression of fact rather than of fiction. This is done partly through details, partly through atmosphere. Never at any point is the reader allowed to think of the book as an original work, a work of the imagination, but instead as a veritable translation. Any one who has written a book knows how hard it is to keep up this sense of reality, especially when the situation is foreign to the author.

A recent critic of the Book of Mormon suggests a parallel between Nephi and Joseph Smith as a momentary betrayal of this hypothesis of translation. They are both young, for instance, being about seventeen or eighteen; they are both large of body and of athletic build; and the fathers of both are given to visions. Other critics have pointed out that the condemnation of infant baptism and secret societies were coming to be local topics of interest. But this will have to be accounted for on other grounds. Infant baptism controversies have never been of local interest merely at any time since the third century. Secret societies are almost as old as the world, and have been troublesome always to those who were on the outside. And the references to the size, age, and parentage of Nephi may be a coincidence merely, since such facts are not at all uncommon.

The Book of Mormon has rare character drawing. And this is admittedly the most difficult thing to do in imaginative work. As a rule, great writers live because of their skill in creating characters rather than because of any talent they may have for plot, setting, purpose, or style. Shakespeare, George Eliot, Thackeray, Dickens, Tolstoi, Hugo—these are remembered chiefly by reason of their power in character portrayal. If a writer have more than that, so much the better; but ordinarily that will make him immortal.

Now, the Nephite Record has scores of characters, counting the minor as well as the major figures. The number of characters far exceeds that in Ivanhoe or Quo Vadis. They are not, however, so varied. The purpose of the work would not allow of women, for instance, or humorous personalities. Being serious in tone, the book permits, in the main, only characters dominated by ideas, either good or bad. But within this limitation there is a somewhat wide variety.

Chiefly these characters are molded on the Hebrew pattern—which would be but natural, seeing that the Lehites came originally from Jerusalem. The principal characters are patterned after the major prophets. There is the same prevailing seriousness, the same uncompromising attitude toward sin, the same passion for righteousness, the same thundering voice demanding repentance. Yet there is a difference.

Alma, the Younger, although somewhat resembling Paul in his intellectualism (his is the greatest intellect in the Book of Mormon), has a simplicity, a range of knowledge, and a clarity of doctrine that we do not find in the apostle to the Gentiles. He is not only a theologian, but a soldier and a statesman.

Nephi the First has no parallel among the Hebrews. Primarily a prophet and seer, for he is not only guided by the still, small voice of inspiration, but has open visions, he is a natural leader like Moses, a preacher like Joshua, a builder like Solomon, and a man of great resources. Nephi springs from his environment, and shapes it.

There is also a character that might have been patterned after Shakespeare's Iago, were he not so different in his villainy. His name is Amalickiah. Selfishly ambitious, bold, aggressive, efficient, he stands out in outlines that are unforgettable. Although the scene in which he appears covers less than twenty pages—and not all of the scene belongs to him, by any means—yet his figure is both clear and impressive. It is a masterpiece of character sketching—a sort of thumbnail sketch.

Speaking of Hebrew patterns, one is reminded of a literary aspect in this work of the Prophet's, which we have never seen mentioned anywhere. It has to do with the manner of thought. The Greek mind did its thinking in general terms. This was characteristic. The Hebrew mind, on the contrary, did its thinking in concrete terms. This, too, was characteristic. Now, if the Book of Mormon is a translation, as it professes to be, then we should expect to see this concreteness of style there, since the Lehites were Hebrew in origin. And, strangely enough, this is exactly what we find. "Ye sold yourselves for nought," says Isaiah, "and ye shall be redeemed without money." And Alma: "They have labored exceedingly, and have brought forth much fruit; and how great shall be their reward."

Finally, the Book of Mormon has a high moral tone. This is significant, as coming from the "whisky-drinking, lazy, worthless, lying vagabond" of the affidavits in the Howe book.

Joseph Smith was wont to say that "the Book of Mormon was the most correct of any book on earth, and the keystone of our religion, and that a man would get nearer to God by abiding by its precepts than by any other book." If this be so, it is because those "precepts" are clearer there than anywhere else, the Bible not excepted, and because the work is saturated with the spirit of religion in a very high sense.

In the Book of Mormon we find not only the Ten Commandments, but also the Sermon on the Mount. It is the spirit of the work, however, that takes such firm hold of the reader who accepts whole-heartedly its teachings. This somehow reaches down into the primitive, elemental thing in men, the thing that makes them brothers in a very real sense. Elsewhere we spoke of the power exerted by this strange book on the first disciples of the Mormon prophet. It was this spirit that did the work.

Nothing in the Book of Mormon better expresses the spiritual atmosphere of the work than the passage we quoted many chapters ago (page 43) from Enos, one of the writers in the book. It may be recalled that Enos, a grandson of Lehi, went out hunting, and that, while doing so, he reflected on what his father had said about "the joy of the saints." Then he prayed. All day and far into the night he "wrestled" with the Lord—till his prayer was answered.

Out of this situation we get three primary things in the religious life: First, Enos was determined to obtain a personal testimony. His father had told him many things; but that was information, not knowledge. He must have an experience with God. Then he would know. And he received that experience. Second, he was thereupon overwhelmed with a desire for personal righteousness. He was a sinner; he must repent; then he must mend his life. Third, having received a remission of his sins and experienced for himself "the joy of the saints," he straightway felt the desire for service. He now prayed for the unsteady Nephites and for the wayward Lamanites, that they might see the Path and follow it.

Personal testimony, personal righteousness, and the duty of service—these are of the very essence of the spiritual life; and these ideals are also the very warp and woof of the Book of Mormon.

Besides having a knowledge of literary technique in some of its less superficial aspects, Joseph Smith, on the assumption that the Book of Mormon originated with him, would have to know a good many things which, so far as we are aware, were not known to even the scholars of his time.

Indeed, so far as these points are concerned, the difficulty is not one whit diminished if we admit that he was aided in the composition of the book by the Spaulding manuscript, either with or without the help of Rigdon. In taking up these matters we are of course still thinking of the ability and the character of the Prophet, for his personal qualities are inextricably bound up with the authorship and origin of the work published under his name.

Let us begin with the least striking, but one of the most curious, points.

A number of years ago a noted physicist paid a visit to the late Lorenzo Snow, then president of the Mormon church.

"Mr. Snow," asked the visitor, "in the Book of Mormon I read of an incident where the voice of Jesus was heard all over the American continent. Just how do you explain that point?"

What the stranger had reference to was the appearance of Christ to the Nephites after his resurrection. The situation is this: When Jesus was crucified in Palestine and his body lay in the tomb, there were three days of darkness in America, during which many catastrophes happened. After these events, and as people were bemoaning their dead, the following scene, which we have considerably abridged, occurred:

And it came to pass that there was a voice heard among the inhabitants upon all the face of the land, crying,

"Wo unto this people, except they repent. It is because of their iniquity that they are fallen. Behold, the great city of Zarahemla have I burned with fire, the great city of Moroni have I sunk, the great city of Moronihah have I covered with earth, and other great cities have I destroyed.

"O all ye that are spared because ye were more righteous than they, will ye not now repent and turn unto me, that I may heal you? Mine arm of mercy is extended towards you, and whosoever will come, him will I receive.

"I am Jesus Christ, the Son of God. I created the heavens and the earth, and all things that in them are. I was with the Father from the beginning. I am the Light of the world."

All the people of the land did hear these sayings, and did witness of it. And after these sayings there was silence for the space of many hours.

President Snow had only this answer to make to his visitor's question: "In your scientific investigations do you not come to questions that you are unable to answer?"

"Yes, indeed, Mr. Snow—many of them."

"Well, that is the case also in religion. The question you have asked me is one of them. We just do not have a satisfactory answer for it—we cannot explain the situation at all."

Had President Snow been acquainted with the recent developments in the radio, he might have given a different answer to his visitor.

It is a curious thing.

Another point gives the student of the Book of Mormon more cause for reflection. It, too, is connected with the crucifixion of Christ. The difficulty was stated many years ago by the apostle Orson Pratt.

According to the Gospels the crucifixion took place in the afternoon, between the sixth and the ninth hour. The Jews began their reckoning at six o'clock in the morning. Consequently the sixth hour would be twelve o'clock noon, and the ninth hour three o'clock in the afternoon. Hence Jesus hung on the cross from twelve o'clock to three o'clock.

But the Book of Mormon gives the time of the crucifixion as the morning. Here is the passage in which the statement occurs:

And it came to pass that when the thunderings, and the lightnings, and the storm, and the tempest, and the quakings of the earth did cease, then there was darkness upon the face of the land. For these did last for about the space of three hours.

And it was in the morning, and the darkness dispersed from off the face of the land, and the earth did cease to tremble, and the rocks did cease to rend, and the dreadful groanings did cease, and all the tumultuous noises did pass away.

Here is a clear contradiction, it would seem. But it is soon cleared away when we taken into account the difference in longitude between Palestine and America.

When it was twelve o'clock noon in Jerusalem, it would be only half-past four in the morning where the Record was being made by Mormon in his abridgment of the longer history of the Nephites. Now, if the Book of Mormon gave the time of the crucifixion as the afternoon, believers in the divine origin of the work would have some difficulty explaining away the conflict.

As it is, we must ask the question: Just how is this bit of literary workmanship to be accounted for in the unschooled youth from Palmyra?

Professor Fiske, in the footnote which we referred to a few pages back, pokes fun at the author of the Book of Mormon for making the ancient Americans work in iron. As a matter of fact, the Book of Mormon does speak of the Nephites as digging for ores, smelting them, and making articles out of the metals.

This is what is said when the Lehites, after their journey across the wilderness between Jerusalem and the ocean, begin to wonder how they are to continue their journey to the Promised Land:

And, I, Nephi, said: Lord, whither shall I go that I may find ore to molten, that I may make tools to construct the ship after the manner which thou hast shown unto me?

And it came to pass that the Lord told me whither I should go to find ore, that I might make tools. I did make a bellows wherewith to blow the fire, of the skins of beasts; and after I made a bellows, I did smite together two stones that I might make a fire. And I did make tools of the ore which I did molten out of the rock.

All through the book reference is made to mining as an industry known to, and practiced by, the peoples spoken of in the Smith book. Not only did they make tools and farm implements, but they made various kinds of coin to be used as money. The Record mentions gold, silver, iron, steel, and copper as having been known to the Book of Mormon peoples. Joseph Smith, as we are told, had in his possession a breast-plate, which he took out of the stone box in the hill, and the record itself, with many others of which the book speaks, was made of gold plates.

Up to the year 1927 it was not known for certain that the ancient Americans knew anything about metal tools. Investigators often wondered, however, just how the ancients managed to carve stone images without some instrument that was harder than stone. But in that year Hyatt Verrill, an American archÃ¦ologist, working among the ruins of one of the ancient cities in Central America, came upon a steel chisel. Describing his find in the World's Work for January, 1927, he says:

Less than a year ago I was scoffed at for suggesting that an entirely new and unknown culture of great antiquity had existed in Panama, but now we have undeniable proofs of this fact.

Moreover, at a depth of five and one-half feet below the surface, at the temple site, among broken pottery and embedded in charcoal, I found a steel or hardened iron implement.

The greater portion is almost completely destroyed by corrosion, but the chisel-shaped end is in good condition. It is so hard that it is scarcely touched by a file and will scratch glass, and with such an implement it would be a simple matter to cut and carve the hardest stone.

Furthermore, in 1922, the American press carried a dispatch to the effect that an ancient city as large as Chicago had been discovered buried in the jungles of Colombia. It later developed that it was not so large as had at first been supposed, but some interesting things were excavated from its ruins. Among these were some breast-plates made of pure gold, evidently for women; and these are now in the museum at Medillin, Colombia.

It is worthy to note also, that articles made of copper were unearthed, but no arrowheads, and that gold ornaments and beads were found in the graves.

Other details strike the attention when one studies the Book of Mormon in the light of the difficulties encountered by a modern author of the work. Some of these have been pointed out by Dr. J. M. Sjodahl, a scholar and linguist.

The first Nephi, one of the writers mentioned in the Record, says this: "I make a record in the language of my father, which consists of the learning of the Jews and the language of the Egyptians." Now, why was Nephi not made to say, "in the Hebrew language"? The answer is simple, Dr. Sjodahl explains, assuming that the book is a translation, not an original work.

The term "Hebrew" was not, in Nephi's day, applied to the language of the Israelites. It was sometimes called "the tongue of the West Country," sometimes "the Jews' language," sometimes "the language of Canaan," but never the "Hebrew language." The name Hebrew as applied to the language did not come into use till the second century before Christ, and Nephi is supposed to have begun his history about three hundred fifty years earlier; but even in the second century the word Hebrew referred to the Syro-Aramenean rather than the language of the Israelites. Josephus is believed to have been the first to apply the term "Hebrew" to the old language of the Jews. Moroni, however, four hundred years after Christ, made the same application as did Josephus—the Hebrew language. How does it happen that Joseph Smith did not here commit an anachronism?

One of the characters in the Book of Mormon is made to say, "We are upon an isle of the sea." This was true enough, but how did the young prophet know it. No one else did in his time. It was not till 1847 that this geographical fact was known. Dr. Brinton says that "the Indians almost universally believed the dry land they knew, to be part of a great island, everywhere surrounded by wide waters whose limits were unknown."

Dr. Sjodahl resents the idea that, as Emerson puts it, "broad America must wear the name of a thief," and he set forth an ingenius substitute theory, that the name America, far from being properly associated with the Florentine Vespucci, is really American in origin—is, in fact, a Book of Mormon name.

In that volume are the words Amaleki and Amalickiah. The root word of both is Mulek, another Nephite proper noun. "These words," says Dr. Sjodahl, "consist of three parts: 'a,' which is the same as the Hebrew definite article, 'the'; 'malek,' or 'malick,' which means 'king'; and 'i,' or 'iah,' which means 'Jehovah.' Compare A-meric-a with A-malek-i, or A-malick-iah, and note how close the resemblance is. The only difference is that between the 'r' and the 'l,' but that is a difference in appearance only, not in reality." And then he shows, from Franz Boas, an authority on American languages, that the letter "r" is rare among the native languages, and that "the trill of it is so weak that it merges into '1,' 'd, 'h,' or 'y,' as the case may be."

Thomas Belt, a noted English traveler and scientist, found the name America (Amerique or Amerrique) used among the natives of Nicaragua. It is the Indian name of a mountain range, and, as Felix Belly, a French explorer, says, is "given to the highlands between Juigalpa and la Libertad." Belt's book, The Naturalist in Nicaragua, was published in 1875, and Belly's, A travers l'Amerique Centrale, appeared in Paris in 1867.

"It is, then," concludes Dr. Sjodahl, "an indisputable fact that the name America is an original American word, much older than Vespucci, and in its several variations it is found practically all over the American continents."

These instances will serve to show not only the nature of the problems confronted by those who would solve the problem of the origin of the Book of Mormon, but also the field that is open to those who may care to enter upon the engaging path leading to a solution of that problem.

Difficulties growing out of the Book of Mormon have been, and will probably continue to be, troublesome to students of Joseph Smith and Mormonism. The subject fairly bristles with unguessed riddles. Every now and then, while the old aspects remain as perplexing as ever, new ones make their appearance. The kaleidoscope is forever turning up new and strange combinations.

One of the Prophet's critics, for instance, writing in 1910, gives us a list of some thirty books, all published before 1830, which treat more or less of ancient America and the beliefs of the natives. There is not the remotest probability that any of these works found its way into Palmyra, since only five of them were published in the United States and Palmyra was not a high-brow community, or, even if it did, that the young farm-hand, doing odd jobs for his neighbors, ever set either eyes or hands on it, or would be interested in doing so. Nevertheless, we may expect that some curious bookworm, aroused over Mormonism, will pore over those old volumes, in the hope of shedding another ray of light on the mysterious book that issued from the Grandin press; for, after all, the burden of proof is clearly on those who would upset the story of Joseph Smith respecting the book's origin.

But even if all that the Prophet's critics ask for as to the Book of Mormon were granted, there would still remain a number of puzzling features connected with the Mormon leader to keep them as busy as ever. We have space here for but two of these.

One of these puzzles lies in the movement known among the Mormons as the "gathering."

The fact of the "gathering" is patent. Probably it is the most conspicuous thing about Mormonism as we know it. For more than a century now whoever has become a member of the Society has been immediately taken with the "spirit of gathering," and, if he has had the means to do so, has packed up his belongings and joined the body of his people wherever they may have been. At first it was Missouri, then it was Illinois, and now it is Utah and the West, although there is a decided tendency among the Mormons of to-day to stay where they are in the United States, and the immigration laws have put somewhat of a period to the movement of the Saints from abroad to "Zion." On the one hundredth anniversary of the organization of the Mormon church, held in Salt Lake City, April 6, 1930, representatives from twenty-nine different nations were found to take a part in a huge pageant in the great tabernacle on the occasion. In all of heterogeneous America there is not anywhere so heterogeneous a commonwealth as in Utah.

Not only is the fact of the "gathering" patent, but its benefits, socially and religiously, are not hard to understand. Two men working together can accomplish more than two men working separately, and this holds good of two hundred, two thousand, two million men. CoÃ¶peration has been a strong point in Mormonism from the very beginning. Nauvoo and Salt Lake City would have been impossible on any other principle. Besides, group psychology has worked powerfully for the faith. And if no other influence had been at work within Mormonism to form a group-life, external forces alone would have been sufficient to drive the Mormons together.

This attraction of the various units in Mormonism for one another has always created astonishment in the outsider. Ferris, a non-mormon writer, calls it "the real miracle" of the religion. To him, though, the miracle consisted in "so large a body of men and women in a civilized land, and in the nineteenth century, being brought under, governed, and controlled by such gross imposture." The author of that statement, for he was one of the Federal Officials sent out to rule the Mormons, was thinking of Mormonism in the days of Brigham Young. And yet, all the while, there was going on under his very eyes a far greater miracle than he was writing about. For the Great American Desert, in the finest uprush of the coÃ¶perative spirit the country has ever known, was undergoing a transformation theretofore undlearned of.

It is the integrating forces within Mormonism, however, that has really to be accounted for. What boots it to bring together ten thousand discordant human units, if they are to remain ten thousand discordant human units? The discongruity has only been increased. A hundred shouting throats do not make a choir. There needs the division into parts, the training of the voice, the swinging of the master's baton, to produce unison, feeling, harmony. In Mormonism Joseph Smith was the means by which the heterogeneous elements in it were fused into agreement. His followers, with surprising facility, stuffed their old habits of thought, and took on the ideas and ways of the new faith. Somehow a Mormon was a Mormon in any part of the world, and when the converts got together, they not only pulled in unison, but they thought and felt together. This is why the outsider cannot understand the sight of "so large a body of men and women" walking in step.

Doubtless some strange power has been at work here. But what is it? Surely, the secret does not lie in the Joseph Smith of the affidavits by old neighbors. The more one lowers the character of the founder of Mormonism, the more one is baffled at the spectacle of Mormonism. Nor does the explanation lie in the ignorance and credulity of his following. Ignorant and credulous people do not redeem deserts, build temples and universities, work together in the group-life, and cover the earth with missionaries. Rather, one would think, the credulity is in whoever can believe that so respectable a religion as Mormonism could have derived from so disreputable a person as Joseph Smith is represented to have been.

Another phase of the Mormon prophet challenges attention. It is that he has so many great achievements to his credit in so short a time. Just what did he do, and under what conditions?

First of all, he created what amounts to a new system of religious philosophy. The source of his ideas does not matter just now; for it must always remain a moot question—whether it is easier to reach up, as it were, and pick one's ideas out of the air, or to lay a tax on one's predecessors for ideas and then to assemble them into a coherent whole. The fact is enough. Joseph Smith enunciated a religious philosophy which is at once complete, cohesive, practical. Glorifying man as man has never before been glorified, it has been found to satisfy hundreds of thousands of intelligent men and women in all parts of the world.

Second, the Mormon prophet created an organization which is conceded by all who have studied it to be probably the most efficient social mechanism in the world. On the one hand, it is so simple as to be applicable to a few people and, on the other hand, so elastic as to fit the needs of a hundred million. With a priesthood comprising almost the whole male membership of the church, the organization serves both to inculcate ideas among believers and hold them together, and also to spread the ideas throughout the world, by means of what amounts to a volunteer missionary system.

Third, Joseph Smith managed somehow to inspire his following with a sustained zeal, such as is rare in even religious history. And the strange thing about it is that this enthusiasm was as great at a distance from him, where his name and teachings only were accepted, as within the narrow circle of his immediate person; and it is as great now, eighty-nine years after his death, as when he was alive. It is almost impossible to exaggerate the influence of Joseph Smith in the Mormonism of to-day, which numbers close to a million persons.

That, however, is not the whole story by any means. These achievements were won under three serious handicaps: Joseph Smith had no education to speak of, in the sense of schooling. He could read and write and do sums in arithmetic—all very inadequately. Moreover, he did his work in the face of constant, often violent opposition from those who did not believe as he did. The character of that opposition the reader is already familiar with. And, too, he did not have the advantage of years in which to complete his work in life. He died before he was thirty-nine.

If any one wishes to evaluate the qualities of the Mormon prophet, let him look at the men whom he knows and then at the men in history.

First, let one pick out the men under forty in one's own circle of acquaintances. It would be more to the point if only those were chosen who had not been to college or even to high school and who had no particular vocation, but worked on a mortgaged farm. If, however, this class of persons does not yield the results desired, let the circle be widened to include those under forty who have had all the advantages of education and a cultured environment. What have these men done? How do their achievements compare with those of Joseph Smith? While no one can look into the future, yet it is illuminating to inquire how many of them, and which of them will be increasingly famous eighty-nine years after their death.

The study of historical characters will prove equally enlightening. If Washington had died at the age of thirty-nine, he would to-day be unknown outside Virginia, and there only as a man of quiet dignity, the owner of a plantation. Had Lincoln not lived beyond that age, there would not now be a statue of him by Saint-Gaudens in one of the Chicago parks, and he would be known only locally as a circuit-riding lawyer, full of apt stories. And if Mary Baker-Eddy had passed away at thirty-nine, her grave would now be covered with grass and weeds, and her head board long since eaten of worms.

What had Andrew Jackson, Grover Cleveland, Theodore Roosevelt, or Woodrow Wilson to their credit when they reached thirty-nine; or Webster, Clay, or Calhoun? And so we might go on. It is a rare thing indeed to find any one under forty who has done anything worth social remembrance—except perhaps in the arts, like poetry and music, where development comes early.

Remote history teaches us the same story. Moses was long past forty when he beheld the burning bush and received a message there. Although Gautama was thirty years old when he took up the life of contemplation, yet he must have been at least thirty-seven when the Light came under the Tree, and his teachings had yet to be developed into a system. Saint Augustine was thirty-two when he was baptized into the Christian church, and forty-one when he was made bishop of Hippo. It was not till he was "about forty" that Mohammed began to receive intimations of his mission. Martin Luther was thirty-seven when the pope issued a bull excommunicating him. The turning-point in John Wesley's life did not come till he was thirty-five, with his great work all before him.

This lateness of arrival by religious and political leaders is due largely to the fact that in their field thought and experience are necessary, and these come only with years—except in rare cases. The Mormon prophet's case is apparently an exception. And so the question still remains, more prominent than ever: Just how is all this to be explained?

Meantime, the religion of Joseph Smith goes quietly on its way, exactly as if there were no problems at all in connection with it.
