John Henry Evans, Joseph Smith, an American Prophet ( 1946)

Bibliography

While there are in the Church Historian's Office in Salt Lake City, Utah, more than twenty thousand volumes and pamphlets, each of which contains something about Joseph Smith, yet in the preparation of a biography of the Prophet from original sources of information one needs to consult only a comparatively few of these. The reason is clear. The great bulk of matter in books about the Mormon leader, whether by Mormons or non-mormons, is mere opinion, second hand material, or fiction dressed up as facts. This consideration, therefore, reduces to narrow limits the number of books to be listed here.

Following are the main works consulted in the writing of this biography, and they are arranged in two groups—Mormon and non-mormon:

Journal History of the Church: This has never been published. The first fourteen volumes of the one hundred and two in the Historian's Office are about the events that took place during the Prophet's life-time, chronicled day by day, beginning with 1830.

Documentary History of the Church: Six volumes, edited by B. H. Roberts, Assistant Church Historian. This is really an autobiography, since it was dictated to secretaries by the Prophet himself. Contains many valuable documents. Salt Lake City, 1902. The matter appeared serially, first in the Millennial Star, Liverpool, and then in the Deseret News, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Book of Mormon: Many editions of this work have appeared, but the one quoted here is that for 1920, published in Salt Lake City, although the first edition, printed in Palmyra, New York, in 1830, has been consulted.

Doctrine and Covenants: This book contains the revelations claimed by Joseph Smith. There have been many editions, but the edition of 1928 has been used here. The first edition was published in 1831, in Missouri, under the title, Book of Commandments.

Letters on File in the Church Historian's Office, some by Joseph Smith, concerning the early years of Mormonism; unpublished.

Diary of Joseph Smith: This is in the Prophet's own handwriting and has never been printed, except in brief excerpts. Beginning Nov. 29, 1932, and ending Dec. 5, 1834, it covers but 93 pages in all. A close-up of the Mormon leader.

Far West Record: An unpublished manuscript, covering the period during which the Mormons were in Caldwell and Davies counties, Missouri.

History of the Prophet Joseph: By his mother, Lucy Mack Smith. Salt Lake City, 1902. Published with the approval of the Church.

Key to the Science of Theology: By Parley P. Pratt, an intimate of the Prophet. Liverpool, England, 1855. Is a philosophical explanation of the main tenets of the Mormon faith.

Life and Travels of Parley P. Pratt: First published in 1888 by his son. An autobiography.

Messenger and Advocate: A Mormon periodical put out in Missouri, beginning in 1831.

Times and Seasons: A Mormon periodical in Nauvoo, edited for a time by the Prophet himself.

Deseret News: A newspaper published in Salt Lake City, Utah. While it began after the Prophet's death, yet it contains much first-hand material about Smith, since it printed sermons by leading churchmen, who spoke of their relations with the founder of Mormonism—Orson Pratt, for instance.

Life of Wilford Woodruff: Salt Lake City, 1909. Prepared for publication by M. F. Cowley. Has extensive quotations from Woodruff's private Journal. The Journal is in the Historian's Office.

Life of John Taylor: By B. H. Roberts. Salt Lake City, 1892. Contains long excerpts from Taylor's private Journal.

Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow: By Eliza Snow Smith, plural wife of the Prophet. Salt Lake City, 1884.

Life of Heber C. Kimball: By Orson F. Whitney. Salt Lake City, 1888. Quotes copiously from Kimball's private Journal.

Narrative of Solomon Mack: By himself.

Biographical Encyclopedia: Andrew Jensen. Three volumes, the first of which, published in 1901, particularly contains original statements embedded in the narratives, by those who knew the Prophet.

Ancestry and Posterity of Joseph Smith and Emma Hale: By Mary Adentia Smith Anderson. A scholarly work, painstaking and accurate. Quotes copiously from town records where the progenitors of Smith lived. 1929.

Mormonism Unveiled: By E. D. Howe. The first, and still the leading, anti-mormon work. Its subtitle, "A faithful account of that delusion from its rise to the present," sufficiently indicates its purpose and spirit. Contains the Phelps letter, the Booth letters, and the statements and affidavits of Smith's old neighbors and his father-in-law, Isaac Hale. If one may judge by the similarity between this book and Campbell's tract against the Mormons, the head of the Church of the Disciples had no small hand in the writing of this volume.

Brief History of the Church: By John Corrill. Corrill was an actor in the scenes he describes. Published in Missouri, 1839.

Monroe (now Wayne) County: By O. Turner, 1851. Only a part of this, however, is about the Smiths. But that is mostly drawn from the personal experience of the author. In the historical, rather than the propagandist, mood.

Saint Louis Weekly Gazette: The issue for May 18, 1844, contains a descriptive article from a correspondent who had been sent to Nauvoo, to interview the Prophet.

History of the Mormons: By Samuel M. Smucker. Philadelphia, 1856. Contains first-hand estimates and statements about the Prophet.

Delusions, An Analysis of the Book of Mormon: Alexander Campbell. A pamphlet, 16 pages. This is the tract mentioned above in connection with Howe's Mormonism Unveiled.

Gleanings By The Way: The Rev. John A. Clark. Philadelphia, 1842. Very little of this, however, is direct testimony; the incident concerning Martin Harris is direct source material; Harris sometimes attended Clark's Church in Palmyra.

Origin, Rise, and Progress of Mormonism: Pomeroy Tucker. New York, 1867. Written thirty-seven years after the publication of the Book of Mormon, which issued from the plant owned by him and Grandin. Very little of this work is "personal remembrances," as is promised on the title page. It attempts to crystallize the tales current about Smith.

Study of Medicine: John Mason Good. Five volumes. Second edition, London, 1825.

The Way to Health, Long Life, and Happiness, or A Discourse on Temperance: Thomas Tryton, a "student of physick." Third edition, London, 1687. This is the work quoted in the text in connection with the "Word of Wisdom."

Antiquities of Mexico: Contains "fac-similies of ancient Mexican paintings." Lord Kingsborough. London, 1831. Embodies what was known about American antiquities before the publication of the Book of Mormon.

Figures of the Past: Josiah Quincy. Boston, 1901. Ninth edition. First edition appeared in 1883. Only the last chapter is about Joseph Smith.

First Lines in Arithmetic: A textbook used by Joseph Smith in the Palmyra School; Hartford, Connecticut, 1818. Contains his name in his own hand; also that of his sister, Catherine, who evidently used the book later.

The English Reader: Also, as it appears, used by the Prophet as a text in the Palmyra days.

Reader: A textbook originally published in London, England, and containing sonnets; wholly religious. Evidently used by the Prophet in the Palmyra school.
