Ronald D. Dennis, Welsh Mormon Writings from 1844 to 1862: A Historical Bibliography ( 1988)

Explanation of Procedure

The following outline of various aspects of the book should prove helpful in understanding its structure and content:

I. IDENTIFICATION

Each item is identified according to the following format:

The "identification" for item 1 is given here as an example:

(1) Dan Jones.

(2) Y farw wedi ei chyfodi yn fyw: neu'r hen grefydd newydd. Traethawd yn dangos anghyfnewidioldeb teyrnas Dduw.

(3) (The dead raised to life: or the old religion anew. Treatise showing the immutability of the kingdom of God.)

(4) Wrexham: Printed by William Bayley, Estyn Street, 1845.

(5) iv[5]-48 pp. 19 cm.

(6) Printed wrappers—the front wrapper differs only slightly from the title page; it has just 4 lines of scriptural quotation, where the title page has 14 lines; also it has an ornamental border, where the title page has none.

II. LETTERS

Each of the 10 nonextant items is assigned a letter according to the date of its assumed appearance in print. Although integrated with the extant publications in the chronological listings of appendixes A and B to provide a "global look," the discussions for these 10 items are placed together and follow those for the extant items.

III. NUMBERS

Each of the 107 extant items is assigned a number according to its chronological order. The assigned number will always follow the Welsh titles as they are mentioned in the discussions.

IV. DISCUSSIONS

The discussions vary in length and content; most, however, contain the following information:

V. REPOSITORIES

I have surveyed numerous book repositories in the United States and in Wales, searching for Welsh Mormon publications. Following the discussion of each item, I have indicated those repositories which house that item. A list of the repositories and their respective abbreviations is on page 12.

VI. FLAKE NUMBERS

Of the 107 extant items, 79 are mentioned in Chad J. Flake's A Mormon Bibliography, 1830-1930 (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1978). To facilitate referencing, the number given by Flake is listed herein following the discussion of each of the 79 items.

VII. WELSH TITLES

The Welsh title for any item being discussed is not translated. Whenever used in other discussions, however, the Welsh title is always translated and followed by its letter or number. Lengthy titles are often shortened for convenience.

Prophwyd y Jubili (Prophet of the Jubilee, item 5) and Udgorn Seion (Zion's Trumpet, item 23), the two Welsh Mormon periodicals, are used with such great frequency that their English translations and item numbers will not be given from here on.

VIII. TRANSLATIONS

Quotations from documents in Welsh have been translated into English. All translations are mine.
