Ronald D. Dennis, Welsh Mormon Writings from 1844 to 1862: A Historical Bibliography ( 1988)

IX. APPENDIX A

Appendix A is a listing of all 117 items according to the following format:

ann announcement

col collection of publications

doc doctrine

his history

hym hymnal

let letter

per periodical

pol polemic

rec record keeping

ver verse

X. APPENDIX B

Appendix B contains the same information as Appendix A, except that the titles, often shortened, are given in English.

XI. APPENDIX C

Appendix C is an alphabetical listing of all original titles that have been determined either by seeing the item itself or by finding a mention of it in the periodicals or book lists. If you have what you suspect is a Welsh Mormon publication, you can locate the discussion of that item by using this appendix. To facilitate use, the English language alphabetizing system has been used.

XII. APPENDIX D

Appendix D contains the same information as Appendix A but with a chart showing which items are housed at each of the sixteen repositories.

XIII. ILLUSTRATIONS

Most of the illustrations interspersed throughout are wrappers or title pages for the extant items; a few are internal pages of particular significance. Those which are two-to-a-page have been reduced; the title page for item 34 and the fold-out page from item 69 have also been reduced. The other illustrations are located as follows:

I am indebted to several institutions which were kind enough to photograph their materials for inclusion in this book:

Henry E. Huntington Library Item 33

Harvard University Library Item 74

Princeton University Library Item 21

National Library of Wales Items 3, 72, 100-107

Historical Dept. of the LDS Church Items 4, 8, 22, 25, 34,

58, 61, 76, 89

Brigham Young University Library Items 1, 2, 6, 7, 10, 11,

12, 14, 18, 32, 49

XIV. MAP

A number of places in Wales are mentioned in this volume. Most of these are indicated on a map located on the inside front and back covers. Two towns by the name of Llanelli are on the map: one is in the old county of Breconshire and the other in the old county of Carmarthenshire. Mentioned in the text but not indicated on the map are Georgetown and Glebeland (areas of Merthyr Tydfil) and Nantygwenith (a street in Merthyr Tydfil).

Repositories

CSmH Henry E. Huntington Library, San Marino, California

CtY Yale University Library, New Haven, Connecticut

CU-B The Bancroft Library, University of California, Berkeley,

California

MH Harvard University Library, Cambridge, Massachusetts

NjP Princeton University Library, Princeton, New Jersey

UPB Brigham Young University Library, Provo, Utah

USl Salt Lake City Public Library, Salt Lake City, Utah

USlC Library-Archives, Historical Department of the LDS Church,

Salt Lake City, Utah

UU University of Utah Library, Salt Lake City, Utah

WB University College of North Wales Library, Bangor, Wales

WCC County of South Glamorgan Library, Cardiff, Wales

WCS University College Library, Salisbury Collection, Cardiff,

Wales

WHi State Historical Society of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin

WN National Library of Wales, Aberystwyth, Wales

WS University College of Swansea Library, Swansea, Wales

WSW West Glamorgan County Library, Swansea, Wales
