Ronald D. Dennis, Welsh Mormon Writings from 1844 to 1862: A Historical Bibliography ( 1988)

Discussions of Extant Items

Y farw wedi ei chyfodi yn fyw: neu'r hen grefydd newydd. Traethawd yn dangos anghyfnewidioldeb teyrnas Dduw.

(The dead raised to life: or the old religion anew. Treatise showing the immutability of the kingdom of God.)

Wrexham: Printed by William Bayley, Estyn Street, 1845.

iv[5]-48 pp. 19 cm.

Printed wrappers—the front wrapper differs only slightly from the title page; it has just 4 lines of scriptural quotation, where the title page has 14 lines; also, it has an ornamental border, where the title page has none.

The preface to this, the first extant Welsh Mormon pamphlet, is dated 4 April 1845. Three months earlier, the author, Dan Jones, had begun his labors as a Mormon missionary in North Wales. In a letter dated 24 February 1845, Jones wrote to Wilford Woodruff, an apostle of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints: "Since Br. Stratton left I have prepared a work for the press, principally about the order of the Kingdom set up in the days of the Apostles, illustrating the first principles, the immutability of the Gospel c something similar to P. P. Pratts, on the Kingdom, in the voice of Warning, but Welsh of course" (Library-Archives, Historical Department of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; hereafter cited as LDS Church Archives).

The night before Joseph and Hyrum Smith were martyred, Dan Jones was with them in the jail at Carthage, Illinois. There he was the recipient of Joseph's last prophecy: "You will yet see Wales, and fulfill the mission appointed you before you die." The call for Jones to return to his native land as a missionary had come on 11 May 1843, more than a year before the Carthage prophecy; but his departure had been delayed, possibly by involvements in connection with the Maid of Iowa, a small river steamer which Joseph Smith had purchased from Jones. That the money from the Maid of Iowa was intended to be used for publishing materials in Welsh is indicated by Joseph Smith's comment to Jones shortly before going to Carthage (Jones is quoting Joseph Smith): "'I have a check in the house for $1200 as soon as I can get it cashed you shall have $1100 of it, and the start for Wales, not with your fingers in your mouth but prepared to buy a Press; and do business aright'" (Jones to T. Bullock, 20 January 1855, LDS Church Archives). According to Jones, however, payment was never made; and during his first mission to Wales he had to have his writings published on a borrowed press.

In his 24 February 1845 letter to Wilford Woodruff, Jones describes the intended publication and then laments the cost: "Twil be in pamphlet form about two sheets, or 48 pages, of twelve fold, close type. . . . They wanted l 16 pr 1000. but tomorrow I have to go see another Printer will make a trade with him for a thousand copies for something less get him to print them in two weeks." The printer who eventually did the work on this pamphlet was William Bayley of Wrexham in North Wales.

Jones uses more than two-thirds of the section "The Kingdom of God" from Apostle Parley P. Pratt's pamphlet Voice of Warning. At times he translates directly; at times he paraphrases; other times he rearranges the order. Nearly always he elaborates on Pratt's line of logic. Although at least three-fourths of Jones's pamphlet is not in Voice of Warning, generally this "nonborrowed" portion is an expansion of ideas which had been set forth by Parley P. Pratt. Some of the more significant enlarged areas are the necessity of baptism, the existence of spiritual gifts in modern times, and the reality of the death and resurrection of the Savior.

Curiously, not once in Y farw wedi ei chyfodi yn fyw does Jones mention the word Mormon or even The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. But the various ministers of other religions apparently knew perfectly well which faith Jones represented, and united in opposition. In a cooperative effort, the Baptists and the Independents of Merthyr Tydfil appointed one David Williams to refute Jones's pamphlet with one of their own: Twyll y Seintiau Diweddaf yn cael ei ddynoethi, mewn nodiadau byr ar draethawd a ysgrifenwyd yn ddiweddar gan Capt. D. Jones, dan yr enw, "Traethawd ar anghyfnewidioldeb teyrnas Dduw" (The fraud of the Latter Saints exposed in brief observations on the treatise which was written recently by Capt. D. Jones, by the name of "Treatise on the immutability of the kingdom of God"). This first Welsh anti-Mormon pamphlet was published in December 1845.

Extremely rare today, Y farw wedi ei chyfodi yn fyw had become a collector's item within five years of its publication. John Davis commented in the wrapper (p. iv) of the February 1850 Udgorn Seion: "Remember that the books of the Saints are the only things that go up in price the older they get. Just try buying the early volumes of the STAR for five pounds, or the Hen grefydd newydd [Old religion anew——a portion of the title of item 1] for a half a crown."

CSmH, UPB, USlC, WCS, WN, WS

Flake no. 4469

(Proclamation of the Twelve Apostles in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. To all the kings of the earth, to the president and to the governors of the United States of America, and to the rulers and all the people of the world.)

Rhydybont: Translated and published by Capt. Jones. Printed by John Jones, 1845.

12 pp. 17 cm.

In answer to a request from President Brigham Young, this proclamation was translated into Welsh by Dan Jones, the only instance of its being published as a separate pamphlet. Inasmuch as Jones's periodical Prophwyd y Jubili would not begin for another seven months, a separate publication was the only choice. "At y darllenydd Cymraeg" (To the Welsh reader), a translator's note dated 1 December 1845, is on page 12.

Although there is an eight-month period between Y farw wedi ei chyfodi yn fyw (The dead raised to life, item 1) and Annerchiad, there is no indication of anything in Welsh having been published by Jones during this time. In spite of an advertisement on page 12 of Annerchiad concerning a treatise in "answer to the chief objections which are offered to gainsay the doctrine which we profess," Jones did not publish such a treatise until early February of 1846, a pamphlet entitled Atebydd y gwrthddadleuon (A reply to the objections, item 3).

In July 1846 Jones advertised his first four pamphlets in the wrapper for the first issue of Prophwyd y Jubili in this order:

That Annerchiad preceded Atebydd y gwrthddadleuon, however, is suggested by Jones's report to Reuben Hedlock in a letter dated 7 February 1846: "I have now the last form of my pamphlet in press, and am busily engaged working them off myself. I have also a reply ready, to a pamphlet published lately; printed in Welsh, at Merthyr, against my first pamphlet, by a clan of priests, misrepresenting us, and our good Mormon creed, most foully. This I can publish within a month, if I stay here to do it" (Millennial Star, 15 February 1846, p. 63).

"Reply . . . to a pamphlet published lately" is an obvious reference to Y glorian, a pamphlet written in answer to David Williams's scathing review of Y farw wedi ei chyfodi yn fyw. And since Annerchiad had been published in early December 1845, the "pamphlet in press" logically refers to Atebydd y gwrthddadleuon. Why Jones reversed the order of his second and third pamphlets is not clear.

The press used to produce Annerchiad and all other publications during his first mission was then owned by Jones's brother John, in Rhydybont, a small village about fifty miles over the Black Mountain to the northwest of Merthyr Tydfil. "J. Jones, Llangollen," as his brother John was known, was a controversial figure throughout Wales because of some debates in which he had engaged concerning the temperance movement and baptism by immersion (he was living in the town of Llangollen at the time). The Independents had invited him to Rhydybont as their minister.

Concerning Annerchiad, on 3 December 1845 Dan Jones wrote the following to Brigham Young:

After so long silence I take the liberty thus to reintroduce myself, and send you each of the Twelve, a copy of the Welsh translation of yr "Proclamation," tho' now near midnight, tis but a few minutes since I finished printing 4000, with my own hand, on a borrowed Press; which I intend to spread far wide through my native land, send them to the nobility, judges, rulers, priests people, that all may hear the great, the glorious truths contained therein and be ready to escape if they will, or be inexcusable if they don't. Please accept of this novel token of the love memory of a brother far away; preserve it until, awful day! when you ascend those thrones, when the books will open, then this will bear me witness that Cambria's sons have heard yr timely warning in their native language,——keep it among yr relics, if worthy of a place to tell that the "Sailor" lives to give it publicity and fulfilment. (LDS Church Archives)

David Williams, the author of a 32-page rebuttal to Y farw wedi ei chyfodi yn fyw (The dead raised to life, item 1) entitled Twyll y Seintiau Diweddaf yn cael ei ddynoethi (The fraud of the Latter Saints exposed), also had some observations about Annerchiad:

By the time I had glanced over the above treatise on the kingdom of God, yet another one came to my attention, one so presumptuous as if it had been written by the fingers of the devil, who had dipped his pen in the venom of dragons or in the fiery furnace itself, and had it printed in the gates of hell, and this under the name "Proclamation of the Twelve Apostles——the Saints, etc., to all the kings of the earth, etc." Oh my! for human nature to have sunk so low, and become so impudent as to assert such majestic things in a deceitful way. The above booklet, that is the Annerchiad, has gone so far in its baseless assertions, that all one Welshman has to do is read it carefully to see its madness. (Pp. 28-29)

CSmH, UPB, USlC, WN

Flake no. 1509

Atebydd y gwrthddadleuon a ddygir yn fwyaf cyffredinol drwy y wlad yn erbyn Saint y Dyddiau Diweddaf, a'r athrawiaeth a broffesant; mewn ffurf o ymddyddan, er symud y rhwystrau oddiar ffordd y Cymry ymofyngar, heb "anmhwyllo ynghylch cwestiynau, ac ymryson ynghylch geiriau, o'r rhai y mae cenfigen, ymryson, cableddau, a drwg dybiau yn dyfod; ac na ddaliont ar CHWEDLAU ac achau anorphen, y rhai sydd yn peri cwestiynau, yn hytrach nag adeiladaeth dduwiol, yr hon sydd trwy ffydd: gwnaed [PAWB] felly."

(A reply to the objections which are most commonly brought throughout the country against the Latter-day Saints, and the doctrine which they profess; in the form of a dialogue to remove the obtacles from the path of the inquisitive Welsh without "doting about questions and strifes of words, whereof cometh envy, strife, railings, and evil surmisings; and neither giving heed to FABLES and endless genealogies, which minister questions, rather than godly edifying which is in faith: so do [EVERYONE].")

Merthyr Tydfil: Published and for sale by the author. Printed by John Jones, Rhydybont, [1846].

24 pp. 19 cm.

Printed wrapper——wrapper has an ornamental border; unpaginated.

Although advertised on page 12 of Annerchiad (Proclamation, item 2), dated 1 December 1845, Atebydd was apparently published two months later in early February 1846 (see item 2). The first half of the scriptural quotation in the title is from 1 Timothy 6:4; the second half is from 1 Timothy 1:4. The bracketed word pawb (everyone) in the title is Dan Jones's addition, as are the capital letters for chwedlau (fables) earlier.

The bound copies of Atebydd do not have the printed wrapper, and the pamphlet appears to be entitled Ymddyddan rhwng meistriaid traddodiad, sectariad, a Sant. A "Mene tekel" yr olaf ar ei gyhuddwyr (Dialogue between the masters of tradition, a sectarian, and a Saint. And "Mene tekel" of the last on his accusers). Only the unbound copy of the pamphlet at the National Library of Wales has the wrapper; on the back is an announcement of Jones's plans to publish Prophwyd y Jubili, a monthly periodical which was to appear in June 1846.

The first quarter of Atebydd is essentially a slightly modified translation of Orson Pratt's "Dialogue between tradition, reason, and scriptus," which had appeared in his Prophetic Almanac for 1845. Dan Jones changes "reason" to "Saint" and "scriptus" to "sectarian" but uses the same points of discussion and interchange among the three participants for the first six pages. In Pratt's presentation, as Mr. Tradition leaves in defeat, the dialogue is concluded with a 2-column "Comparison of evidence." At this juncture in the Welsh, however, the "Comparison of evidence" is omitted and the dialogue continues between the Saint and the sectarian to the eventual convincing of the latter. Many topics previously discussed in Jones's Y farw wedi ei chyfodi yn fyw (The dead raised to life, item 1) are again presented, such as the necessity of baptism, the necessity of proper authority, and the four things required to establish a kingdom. Also discussed are the apostasy, the fate of Luther and Calvin, the angel in Revelation 14:6, and the restoration of the gospel. Answers are given by the Saint to several questions posed by the sectarian, such as "Why do people have to be baptized in the nude?" (Mormons were shocked at this accusation), "Does baptism literally wash away all one's sins?" and "What is the fate of all who died without a knowledge of the gospel?"

Atebydd was advertised in each of the six wrappers for Prophwyd y Jubili, July through December 1846. Jones did not mention his pamphlets again until the April 1847 Prophwyd y Jubili, when he announced the appearance of three new pamphlets. Then in the July issue Jones advertised a volume entitled Capt. Jones ar Formoniaeth, yn 1846 (Capt. Jones on Mormonism, in 1846, item 9); among its contents was Atebydd.

In the November and December 1847 issues, and again in the February and March 1848 issues, Jones offered to buy back for full price any copies in good condition of Atebydd and several other publications. Then in the July 1848 issue, Jones mentioned that Capt. Jones ar Formoniaeth, yn 1846 was sold out and that he was unable to satisfy the frequent requests for the early pamphlets because they had all been sent to the distributors. Furthermore, he had no plans for any second edition until he was sure that the first edition had all been sold. Apparently there was no second edition, for John Davis declared in the October 1849 wrapper for Udgorn Seion that Atebydd was out of print and that there would be no second edition unless there were enough requests to warrant it.

CSmH, UPB, USlC, WCS, WN

Flake no. A42

Y glorian, yn yr hon y gwelir David yn pwyso Williams, a Williams yn pwyso David; neu David Williams, o Abercanaid, yn gwrthddweyd ei hun, wedi ei ddal yn ei dwyll, a'i brofi yn ddeistaidd.

(The scales, in which are seen David weighing Williams, and Williams weighing David; or David Williams, from Abercanaid, contradicting himself, caught in his deceit, and proved deistic.)

Merthyr Tydfil: Published and for sale by the author. J. Jones, Printer, Rhydybont, 1846.

16 pp. 19 cm.

The title page of Y glorian bears scriptural quotations from Job 15:6, "Thine own mouth condemneth thee, and not I: yea, thine own lips testify against thee," and Job 11:3, "Should thy lies make men hold their peace? and when thou mockest, shall no man make thee ashamed?" A 4-line poem also appears on the title page:

No matter the depth of the dust and muck

Which has been thrown on the Mormons' majesty;

Good is our plea, God is on our side,

Despite the ugly commotion of all the wolves.

Dan Jones's first pamphlet, Y farw wedi ei chyfodi yn fyw (The dead raised to life, item 1), caused such a stir in Wales that a group of Baptist ministers joined forces with a group of Independent ministers and commissioned David Williams, a lay preacher, to write a rebuttal. The result was a 32-page pamphlet entitled Twyll y Seintiau Diweddaf yn cael ei ddynoethi (The fraud of the Latter Saints exposed). Williams's pamphlet was first published in December of 1845, and a second edition was dated 1846 (see item 2).

In a letter to Apostle Wilford Woodruff, dated 2 January 1846, Jones stated:

I should be pleased if you would send me a letter authorizing me to collect what I can from the Welsh Saints on Ac[count] etc. to enable me to bring out another pamphlet now, in answer to one now just out by the joint stock of Priests just such another as the Mormonism Unveiled tho' in Welsh, published in this place, if it is not answered some weak Saints sinners may stumble about it. (LDS Church Archives)

His request must have been granted, as in a letter to Reuben Hedlock, dated 7 February 1846, Jones reported:

I have also a reply ready to a pamphlet published lately; printed in Welsh, at Merthyr, against my first pamphlet, by a clan of priests, misrepresenting us, and our good Mormon creed, most foully. This I can publish within a month, if I stay here to do it. (Millennial Star, 15 February 1846, p. 63)

As indicated by the title and the scriptures quoted from the book of Job, Dan Jones takes a scornful attitude toward David Williams as he puts him on the scales——David on one side and Williams on the other——and proceeds to point out his contradictions. Throughout the entire 16 pages, full of satire and derision, Jones simply follows the standard, mid-nineteenth-century techniques of the polemic. The bulk of his defense centers around the signs that were to follow the believers, as mentioned in Mark 16:17-18. Williams had challenged Jones to prove that he was sent of God by healing all the sick of Merthyr Tydfil and by drinking something deadly without suffering any harmful effect. Jones counters with scriptural quotations concerning sign-seekers. He also counters Williams's attack on Mormon views concerning additional scripture, the necessity of baptism, and Williams's vitriolic observations about Annerchiad y Deuddeg Apostol (Proclamation of the Twelve Apostles, item 2). This segment is typical of Jones's style throughout the pamphlet:

Who says that? Williams, I think, for David in the previous two lines says the complete opposite to that in this admission. . . . Which one do you believe? David or Williams? I believe David now. . . . Well done, Williams! Although he lost before, he wins now, and is closer to the truth than David.

The first section of the pamphlet, entitled "At y darllenydd" (To the reader), bears quoting:

I appeal to the reader in this essay, for it would be a foolishness to appeal to Mr. Williams, for reason or scripture, when his work proves him devoid of the one and the other, he being chained so close to his prejudiced traditions, that one might think that he would lose his life before losing them. He resembles that poor man who had sunk down into a bog on the bank of a great river in America after great floods. When some traveler came past that way, after the surface had hardened, he saw a hat in front of him. He picked it up, and to his great surprise, beheld a head underneath it. After staring at it until he believed his own eyes, he grasped it with all his strength thinking to pull it to the bank by its hair; but with the first pull the poor man shouted out loudly, "Don't, don't take me to the bank, for I have a good horse underneath me and a pair of new boots on my feet; I would rather sink with them than lose them!!!"

Perhaps some will say that this is wasted effort——that this little man, and his pamphlet, are beneath notice. I admit from experience that that was the first thought, and quite reasonable, of every principled man; but on second thought I remembered the second advice of the wise man: "Answer the fool according to his foolishness, lest he be wise in his own sight." When I understood that this "scribe" is a "mouth-piece" for some conference of bullies, and a bell hammer for their belfry, I thought that if I did not defend myself and the truth in the face of such terrible false accusations, and show the foolishness, deceit, and idiocy of this "clique," there would be no peace for the Saints at their work, or on the streets, or in their meeting houses either, from the "nation of brawlers" upsetting them in public; and since "silent contempt" after long trial did nothing but make them worse still, one must "shut up their mouths" with the truth. Read unbiasedly, oh reader, and give fair play to Y GLORIAN to turn properly.

Instead of answering Dan Jones's Y glorian with yet another pamphlet, David Williams simply issued a second printing of Twyll y Seintiau Diweddaf yn cael ei ddynoethi and then went to Y Bedyddiwr (The Baptist), a monthly periodical of the Baptists, in an effort to scandalize the Mormons. For ammunition he used Thomas Jones, an apostate Mormon, and his series of reasons for no longer believing in Mormonism (see item 8 for more on Thomas Jones).

CSmH, UPB, USlC, WCS, WN

Flake no. 4472

(Prophet of the Jubilee, or, Star of the Saints; containing an account of the establishment of the "Dispensation of the fulness of times," together with the persecutions, martyrdom, and exile of its adepts, and their success.)

Merthyr Tydfil: [Printed by John Jones, Rhydybont] July 1846——October 1848 [Published by Dan Jones], and November 1848——December 1848 [Printed by J. Davis, Carmarthen].

Monthly. 3 vols. (30 whole nos.) 580 pp. 16.2 cm.

Each issue from July 1846 to November 1846 has 28 pages. The issue for December 1846 has 24 pages plus 4 additional pages (title page, blank, foreword, and index for volume 1). Each issue from July 1846 to December 1846 has a 4-page wrapper.

The issue for January 1847, 16 pages, begins on page [5]. It was no doubt intended to produce a title page, a foreword, and an index for volume 3 with the December 1847 issue, but they were not printed.

Each issue from February 1847 to December 1847 has 16 pages.

Each issue from January 1848 to October 1848 has 16 pages.

The issue for November 1848 has 12 pages.

The issue for December 1848 has 20 pages plus 4 (title page, blank, foreword, and index for volume 3).

The driving force behind Prophwyd y Jubili was Captain Dan Jones, whose publishing and proselyting activities had already attracted considerable opposition to Mormonism. After nearly a year in North Wales, Jones was transferred to South Wales by a motion from Apostle Wilford Woodruff at the Manchester Conference of 15 December 1845. The motion received unanimous approval, and Dan Jones proceeded to Merthyr Tydfil to preside over "all the churches in Wales" (Millennial Star, 1 January 1846, p. 8).

Awaiting him in Merthyr was a 32-page reply to his first pamphlet, Y farw wedi ei chyfodi yn fyw (The dead raised to life, item 1). The author was David Williams, a lay Baptist preacher in the Merthyr Tydfil area. Williams's pamphlet, Twyll y Seintiau Diweddaf yn cael ei ddynoethi (The fraud of the Latter Saints exposed), was the first of more than twenty anti-Mormon publications which would appear during the next eight years in Wales. Even more frequent than the pamphlets were the merciless attacks against Mormonism in the various periodicals of the Nonconformists (those denominations not in agreement with the Catholic or the Anglican churches). Jones sent rebuttals to the editors, but none were printed. He expressed his frustration in the first issue of Prophwyd y Jubili:

In the kindest manner in defense of our innocence we have sent convincing letters to the periodicals which have accused us. But have they been allowed to appear? No! Have we been accused in the Amserau [Times], Seren Gomer [Star of Gomer], Dysgedydd [Educator], Bedyddiwr [Baptist], etc.? Yes, indeed. Have we been loaned space to clear ourselves? No, indeed. Every meanness of an excuse has been sought out instead. What are we to do? . . . Has the press been closed against us? Is this Welsh freedom in the nineteenth century? Have the periodicals been closed? We shall open our own periodical, then. Has the press been defiled by slandering us? We shall cleanse it by defending ourselves, then. (Prophwyd y Jubili, July 1846, wrapper, p. [2])

Although space in the Millennial Star was available to Jones (the use of which would have eliminated the expense of a second Mormon publication in Britain) and although the Welsh were a highly literate people, the majority were literate in Welsh only. This fact, coupled with the animosity the Welsh felt for the English (as well as the Welsh editors' unwillingness to print anything in favor of the Mormons), prompted Dan Jones to launch Prophwyd y Jubili, a publication which was aimed at keeping Mormon character "above every invention, slander and lie" (Prophwyd y Jubili, July 1846, wrapper, p. [2]).

In Jones's comments to his compatriots on page 12 of Annerchiad y Deuddeg Apostol (Proclamation of the Twelve Apostles, item 2), dated 1 December 1845, no mention is made of a Welsh Mormon periodical, but by early February of the following year, plans were definite. On the back cover of Atebydd y gwrthddadleuon (A reply to the objections, item 3), published in February 1846, Jones printed an announcement of his forthcoming Prophwyd y Jubili. He declared his intention to commence publication in June 1846 of a periodical which would contain short treatises on doctrinal subjects of the Latter-day Saints, quotations from the Book of Mormon, a defense of the character of the Saints, and miscellanies. The first issue of Prophwyd y Jubili came off the press in July 1846, a month later than Jones's prediction.

Jones had intended to acquire a printing press in Wales with the money he was to have received from Joseph Smith for the purchase of the Maid of Iowa, a riverboat (see item 2). Because he did not receive the money, Jones had to resort to using a borrowed press during his first mission. Most of his publications were printed at Rhydybont on the press of his non-Mormon brother, the Reverend John Jones; only his first pamphlet and the final two issues of Prophwyd y Jubili were not. In a letter dated 29 September 1847 to President Orson Spencer, Dan Jones declared that his brother's press was "the only press in Wales, to my knowledge, that will publish for me" (Millennial Star, 15 October 1847, p. 319).

Ten years Dan's senior, John Jones was already a controversial figure in Wales, having been involved in several printed polemics and having appeared in public debates on baptism and temperance. His cooperation in publishing for the Mormons did little to endear him to the hearts of his fellow ministers; in fact, one of them claimed: "There is no other press sufficiently 'prostitute' to give birth to such a monster" (Seren Gomer, December 1847, p. 374). Earlier, in the first issue of his own publication, Y Golygydd (The Editor), John Jones wrote the following to "H. H." (Jones had published only one 12-page pamphlet for the Mormons): "Our dear friend can sleep peacefully concerning any danger that we have been overly disposed to Mormonism. Since the Mormons came to Wales no one has published as much, perhaps, against their particular subjects as we have. See our Esboniad [Explanation] on Matthew 24. Our work in publishing their books proves nothing more than our press is iron, and its owner is a free craftsman" (January 1846 wrapper, p. [2]). Reverend Jones proceeded to demonstrate that he was, indeed, free to do as he pleased by printing, during the next three years, pamphlets and books consisting of well over one thousand different pages. How many copies were printed of each item is not known; however, Dan Jones declared that he had put into print more than 850,000 pages of writings in support of Mormonism during 1847 alone (Millennial Star, 15 April 1848, p. 122). Even allowing for hyperbole, the press at Rhydybont was a busy one indeed. Little wonder, then, that the ministers were distressed at the willingness of one of their number to print materials which were instrumental in "deceiving" many of their own congregations.

Prophwyd y Jubili was an extremely ambitious effort for the first six months; each issue consisted of 28 pages plus a 4-page wrapper. Beginning in 1847, the covers were no longer made, the size was reduced to 16 pages per issue, and the price was cut from threepence to twopence. As for its circulation, the only known comment is the one made by Dan Jones in his report of the December 1847 Merthyr Tydfil Conference to the effect that he had increased the circulation to about 1,200 (Millennial Star, 15 April 1848, p. 122).

Prophwyd y Jubili is similar in content to the Millennial Star, with a substantial amount of material borrowed from the latter and translated into Welsh, especially doctrinal writings and letters from Church leaders. Other contents are conference reports, progress in baptisms, poetry, accounts of miraculous healings, accounts of persecution and conversion, and an occasional "thumbing of the nose" at the enemy's lack of success in forestalling the spread of Mormonism in Wales. In almost every issue, there is a defense of the Saints against another attack in one of the other religious periodicals. The Reverend W. R. Davies, a Baptist minister from Dowlais (about two miles north of Merthyr Tydfil), was one of the earliest and most relentless enemies of Mormonism. His 20-page anti-Mormon pamphlet, his sermons and his constant harassment in the columns of Seren Gomer and Y Bedyddiwr are all met head on in Prophwyd y Jubili. Together with the numerous pamphlets which were published during its two-and-a-half years of existence, Prophwyd y Jubili served as an extension of the Mormon proselyting effort in Wales; and during this period, Church membership grew from about six hundred to nearly four thousand. In 1848, as Jones's plans to return to America became more definite, the need for a successor who could continue to publish in Welsh became apparent, and John Davis, a young bachelor from Carmarthen who had published some poetry in Prophwyd y Jubili, was selected. Davis proved to be an excellent choice, and for the next five years he served as editor of Udgorn Seion, the successor to Prophwyd y Jubili. During his tenure, Davis expanded the publication to a biweekly in 1851 and to a weekly in 1853. In 1854 he emigrated and was replaced by none other than Dan Jones, back in Wales on his second mission.

In the foreword to the third volume of Prophwyd y Jubili, dated 15 December 1848, Dan Jones announced that it would be the last: "Not because he cannot come to you again is he being suspended; rather we consider that he deserves by now to go to his 'resting place,' since he has run his race and kept the faith."

CU-B, MH, NjP, UPB, USlC, WN; CSmH has vol. 1 only. WS has November 1847 through December 1848.

Flake no. 6773

Beth yw Mormoniaeth?

(What is Mormonism?)

Merthyr Tydfil: Published and for sale by D. Jones. John Jones, Printer, [1846?].

4 pp. 17 cm.

The contents of this small pamphlet first appeared in the August 1846 Prophwyd y Jubili (pp. 29-34). Although the typesetting is different, there are but two minor wording changes in the text. In the April 1847 Prophwyd y Jubili, the pamphlet is advertised as "newly published."

The source of inspiration for Beth yw Mormoniaeth? is clearly an article of the equivalent title in English, written by Parley P. Pratt and Samuel Brannan. Their writing is dated New York, 6 April 1845, and appeared in the 15 June 1845 Millennial Star. Jones's pamphlet, both a translation and an elaboration, incorporates all of the contents and sequence of ideas of the source.

The major addition is a 1-page quotation from the prophet Mormon, who abridged the ancient American records that became the Book of Mormon. It is not a true quotation, however, but rather a series of comments in the first person singular, following the Book of Mormon linguistic style, in which "Mormon" identifies himself and describes his background. Most of what Mormon "says" is consistent with information given throughout the Book of Mormon, but there are a few errors. For example, Mormon is quoted as saying that his forefathers had left Jerusalem in the time of King Zedekiah "about six hundred years before its destruction, and the capture of its inhabitants by Shalmaneser." The author no doubt meant to have Mormon say "six hundred years before Christ" and the "capture of its inhabitants by Nebuchadnezzar." Furthermore, it is anachronistic for Mormon to be speaking of the Jewish captivity, inasmuch as his forefathers, according to the Book of Mormon, left Jerusalem before the event.

UPB, USl, USlC, WS

Flake no. 4466

Hymnau, wedi eu cyfansoddi a'u casglu, yn fwyaf neillduol, at wasanaeth Saint y Dyddiau Diweddaf.

(Hymns, composed and collected most particularly for the use of the Latter-day Saints.)

[Rhydybont: Printed by John Jones, 1846.]

viii-[56] pp. 10.5 cm.

THE FOUR WELSH MORMON HYMNALS

Item Date of

Number Publication Comments

7 1846 133 hymns compiled by Dan Jones

28 1849 194 hymns compiled by John Davis

56 1851 John Davis's reprint of item 7

70 1852 575 hymns compiled by John

Davis (84 from item 7, 188 from

item 28, and 303 others)

Items 28 and 56 were often

bound together (see item 64).

Because the four hymnals are easily confused, the above table may be useful for reference. Only a fragment of the first Welsh Mormon hymnal has been found. The title page is missing and pages iii and iv are quite frayed at the edges, although their printed contents are about 85 percent complete. Pages v-viii, containing the alphabetically arranged index to the 133 hymns, are complete, as are the following eight leaves, containing pages 1-16 and the first 36 hymns.

It was advertised for sale by Dan Jones in the November 1846 Prophwyd y Jubili (wrapper). In 1849, John Davis published a different collection of Welsh Mormon hymns, and in 1851 he published a second edition of the 1846 hymnal. He explained his reasons for publishing a new collection as follows:

All the hymns of the old book have been omitted so that all who choose to bind it with the new one may do so, and thus possess more of a completeness. (Casgliad o hymnau newyddion [Collection of new hymns], foreword, item 28)

The "old book" is no doubt the hymnal published by Dan Jones in 1846, and the "new one" is the one which Davis published in 1849. Apparently the 1846 edition was still available at the time of publication of the 1849 edition in June, although Davis began his foreword with the following observation:

The unusual increase among the Saints, since they received the previous hymnal, is such that not one in ten of them has one; consequently, a collection of new hymns is being presented to them. (Ibid.)

The supply of the 1846 hymnal was exhausted by September 1850, as announced in Udgorn Seion for that month. Eight months later, the 31 May 1851 Udgorn Seion carried the following announcement: "The 'Hen lyfr hymnau' [Old hymn book] is ready, unbound" (p. 180).

In his 1851 printing of the 1846 hymnal, Davis used exactly the same format that Dan Jones had used, even including Jones's foreword. Although the typesetting is different, the 1846 hymnal most likely having been printed on John Jones's press in Rhydybont, Davis matched the contents page for page in the 1851 printing. There appear to be only two minor changes:

The foreword is as follows:

Each sect has its hymns, together with its particular practices. Some of the hymns of the other denominations are sufficiently suitable to be sung by us, but not all; and since there is not a collection of hymns in the language, on which we can place our complete approval, we have no other choice but to compose and gather together such hymns as we consider suitable for us to sing in our worship services. That is the reason for publishing this small book; and although we are not releasing it as the highest-flying or the greatest of poetic accomplishments, we do think that it will coincide with the doctrine and spiritual tastes of the Saints. Hoping that it will bring pleasure and edification to them in their congregations and in their homes, it is presented to them by their humble brother, D. Jones.

Hymn number 133, on page 56, is listed twice in the table of contents——first as Brodyr a chwiorydd cu, then as Frodyr a chwiorydd cu (both titles mean "Dear brothers and sisters")——consequently, there are 134 separate listings in the table of contents, but only 133 hymns. The shortest hymns have only 4 lines; the longest has 30 lines. Although not listed in the table of contents, there are 13 section headings under which the hymns are grouped. These are as follows:

Hymn Number

The arabic numeral is missing for the eighth hymn. Two hymns are numbered 131. No hymn is numbered 132.

UPB (fragment only, containing pages [iii]-viii, [1]-16)

Amddiffyniad y Saint versus cyhuddiadau Thomas Jones, Merthyr, ac ereill.

(A defense of the Saints versus the accusations of Thomas Jones, Merthyr, and others.)

Rhydybont: Printed by John Jones, [1846?].

8 pp. 17 cm.

The entire contents of this pamphlet were printed in the December 1846 Prophwyd y Jubili (pp. 148-56) and, with the exception of the title, the typesetting is the same for both. The pamphlet is not advertised in the Prophwyd y Jubili as being available, however, until the July 1847 issue, thus putting the publication date of the pamphlet sometime between December 1846 and July 1847. And because the typesetting is the same for the pamphlet as for the segment in the Prophwyd y Jubili, one would tend to place the date of publication near the beginning of 1847, or shortly after the December Prophwyd y Jubili was off the press.

The Thomas Jones mentioned in the title had joined with the Mormons in April 1843. Three years later, shortly after being excommunicated for immoral conduct, Jones was interviewed by David Williams, a Baptist minister who had published a 32-page pamphlet rebutting Dan Jones's first pamphlet. The interview, dated 4 June 1846, was written up and sent by Williams to the editor of Y Bedyddiwr (The Baptist), who in turn printed Williams's brief introduction and his interview with Thomas Jones in two-and-a-half columns of the July issue of his periodical (pp. 250-51).

Six weeks later, Thomas Jones admitted, in the presence of witnesses, that he had not been completely truthful in the interview with Williams and that he was repentant for having allowed it to be published. His declaration, according to an affidavit signed by eight witnesses and printed on the last page of Amddiffyniad y Saint, was recorded by Elder Robert Evans, a Mormon missionary, in his (Evans's) journal on 13 July 1846. (The journal is not extant.)

In the September 1846 issue of Y Bedyddiwr is a letter to the editor written by one "Meiriadog" (a pseudonym used by John Edwards, a poet and Campbellite Baptist) in which he recounts a conversation between himself and Robert Evans. In the course of the conversation, Meiriadog quoted from the July Y Bedyddiwr about the Thomas Jones incident, whereupon Evans produced Jones's repentant comments which Evans had recorded in his journal. Meiriadog asked and received permission from Evans to copy Jones's comments and then quoted them as part of his lengthy anti-Mormon letter to the editor. Meiriadog challenged Robert Evans to a debate and assured him that the editor of Y Bedyddiwr would print their writings. But the editor refused, declaring, "Y Bedyddiwr does not exist as a tool for them [the Mormons] to spread their tales and assertions up and down the country" (September 1844, p. 354).

Upon seeing Jones's about-face described in Meiriadog's letter, David Williams immediately sent another letter to the editor, which was printed in the October 1846 Y Bedyddiwr. Williams carefully worded his letter to make it appear that Thomas Jones had made yet another about-face since his comments recorded in Evans's journal. But Dan Jones, on page 7 of Amddiffyniad y Saint, argues that Williams was merely drawing further from his original interview with Thomas Jones for his "latest" derogatory observations about Mormonism.

The foregoing sequence of events prompted three Mormon missionaries——William Phillips, William Henshaw, and Thomas Pugh——to write a letter of defense to the editor of Y Bedyddiwr. Their letter, which was refused publication, constitutes nearly three pages of Amddiffyniad y Saint. An account of their attempt to convince the editor to cooperate with them constitutes the first two pages of the pamphlet. The remaining three pages contain further considerations of the characters of Thomas Jones and David Williams as well as a half-page affidavit signed by eight witnesses to the effect that they had seen Robert Evans record in his diary the words of Thomas Jones.

USl, USlC, WN

Flake no. 4458

Capt. Jones ar Formoniaeth, yn 1846.

(Capt. Jones on Mormonism, in 1846.)

(A collection of previously published items bound together.)

The Prophwyd y Jubili for July 1847 (p. 116) and August 1847 (p. 132) carried the announcement of a volume entitled Capt. Jones ar Formoniaeth, yn 1846. According to the advertisement, the volume consisted of a collection of Dan Jones's publications during 1845 and 1846 "bound in one beautiful volume, twelve-fold." For just three shillings one could have the following (the titles are given as listed in the announcement):

I have found only two volumes bearing the title Capt. Jones ar Formoniaeth, yn 1846. Neither has a separate table of contents and both lack the fifth and sixth items as listed above. The fifth item in the announcement could be either Amddiffyniad y Saint versus cyhuddiadau Thomas Jones, Merthyr, ac ereill (A defense of the Saints versus the accusations of Thomas Jones, Merthyr, and others, item 8) or Amddiffyniad y Saint yn ngwyneb camgyhuddiadau y rhai a alwant eu hunain yn "Gwcw y Don," yn y Seren Gomer, Ionawr, 1847 (A defense of the Saints against the false accusations of those who call themselves "Cuckoo of Ton" [the meaning of "Ton" is unclear but appears to be a place name, in the Star of Gomer, January 1847, item 13). As for item 6 in the announcement, no pamphlet with the title Y Milflwyddiant (The Millennium) or even with "milfwyddiant" in the title has as yet been identified (see comments on Y Milfwyddiant, item B).

The 4-page pamphlet Beth yw Mormoniaeth? (What is Mormonism?, item 6) is not mentioned in the advertisement as being part of the contents of this volume, nor is it bound in either of the two extant copies, although it was published prior to 1846. The pamphlet, however, was bound in a similar volume the following year. Since it sold for just a halfpenny, perhaps the supply was exhausted at the time of publication of Capt. Jones ar Formoniaeth, yn 1846, and it was reprinted in time for the collection that appeared the following year.

As for the urgency of securing a copy, the editor of Prophwyd y Jubili advised: "It is best to get a copy soon, since the above [items] can be obtained only in this Volume [collection of publications], except for the volume of Prophwyd y Jubili, for they are out of print, and we do not intend to reprint them soon" (Prophwyd y Jubili, July 1847, p. 116; August 1847, p. 132).

CSmH, USlC

Beth ydyw yr efengyl?

(What is the gospel?)

Rhydybont: Printed by John Jones, [1846?].

8 pp. 17 cm.

Beth ydyw yr efengyl?

(What is the gospel?)

Rhydybont: Printed by John Jones, [1847?].

12 pp. 17 cm.

With a different typesetting, the 12-page edition of Beth ydyw yr efengyl? (item 11) has the contents of the smaller edition (item 10) in its first 9 pages. Pages 10, 11, and 12 appeared in the January 1847 issue of Prophwyd y Jubili (pp.[5]-9) under the title of "Annerchiad at y Cymry" (Proclamation to the Welsh). There are about 20 lines in the Prophwyd y Jubili printing of this "Annerchiad" which are not in the 12-page pamphlet, but the remainder of the contents is identical.

Dan Jones, editor of Prophwyd y Jubili, was no doubt the writer of the "Annerchiad" and would, therefore, most likely be the writer (or at least the translator) and publisher of the rest of the pamphlet as well, although his name appears nowhere in the publication itself. An earlier pamphlet, Atebydd y gwrthddadleuon (A reply to the objections, item 3), without its wrapper, has no mention of an author, but the wrapper has the author's name in large print. The same could be true of items 10 and 11.

Nothing by the title of Beth ydyw yr efengyl? is ever advertised in Prophwyd y Jubili; in fact, not until April 1849 in Udgorn Seion is the title mentioned. Since both pamphlets were printed in the town of Rhydybont, the date of publication would have to have been between December 1845 and October 1848, the period during which Mormon materials were printed by Dan Jones's brother, John, at Rhydybont. A possible explanation is that the 8-page version may have been published in late 1846, and then, after the appearance of the "Annerchiad at y Cymry," which was used to introduce the second volume of Prophwyd y Jubili, the "Annerchiad" was combined with the contents of the 8-page version to produce the 12-page version.

The title in Welsh of both versions is Beth ydyw yr efengyl? When advertised in Udgorn Seion, however, the title is Beth yw'r efengyl? The difference is in the verb form and the definite article—separate in the longer title ("ydyw yr") and contracted in the shorter ("yw'r"). The meaning is unaltered.

The contents are purely doctrinal; even the "Annerchiad at y Cymry" in the 12-page version contains no names of individuals, periodicals, or other sects. The gospel is first explained through considerations of what it is not. Then Romans 1:16 and some other scriptural verses are cited to clarify what the gospel is. No specific source for the pamphlet has as yet been identified.

Item 10: UPB

Item 11: UPB, USlC

Flake no. 4464

Gau-brophwydi.

(False prophets.)

Merthyr Tydfil: Published and for sale by D. Jones. Printed by John Jones, Rhydybont, [1847].

8 pp. 17 cm.

Gau-brophwydi is listed in the April 1847 Prophwyd y Jubili as newly published. Although not in answer to any specific attacks on the Mormons, it is a defense against the widespread accusation that the Mormons were false prophets. As Dan Jones explained to Brigham Young in a letter dated 3 December 1845, this was one of the favorite epithets used by the opponents of Mormonism in Wales:

Their priests warn the people tis dangerous to hear me, that I'm the arch impostor of Wales: many an honest fellow has been turned out of their synagogues for coming to hear me, while the old women send their children to cry false prophets, etc., etc., after me through the streets and sometimes a hundred of these little urchins amuse me by their parrot tongues. (LDS Church Archives)

Although similar in size and topic to Thomas Ward's "On the false prophets of the last days" (Millennial Star, April 1842, pp. 177-84), Gau-brophwydi is neither a translation nor a reworking of Ward's writing. For most of his doctrinal writings, Dan Jones borrowed quite heavily from articles and pamphlets already in print, but Gau-brophwydi appears to be an exception.

UPB, USl, USlC

Flake no. 4471

Amddiffyniad y Saint, yn ngwyneb camgyhuddiadau y rhai a alwant eu hunain yn "Gwcw y Don," yn y Seren Gomer, Ionawr, 1847.

(A defense of the Saints against the false accusations of those who call themselves "Cuckoo of Ton," in Star of Gomer, January 1847.)

Merthyr Tydfil: Published and for sale by D. Jones. Printed by John Jones, Rhydybont, [1847].

12 pp. 17 cm.

One of the most vociferous enemies of Mormonism in Wales was W. R. Davies, a Baptist minister in Dowlais, a town about two miles from Merthyr Tydfil. It was he who coined the nickname "Latter-day Satanists" to describe the Welsh Mormons. In just over two years (1846-1848), he published no fewer than ten articles in four different periodicals, in addition to two separate pamphlets, in his efforts to discredit the Mormons and put a halt to their astounding progress in Merthyr Tydfil and environs.

To counter his earliest attacks, letters of defense were prepared and submitted to the periodicals which had printed Davies's anti-Mormon writings. But the periodicals systematically refused to publish them. The frustration caused by this lack of fair play was at least partially responsible for the establishment of the first Welsh Mormon periodical, Prophwyd y Jubili, begun in July 1846. The first issue carried a 6-page rebuttal to Davies's writings which had appeared three months earlier in Y Bedyddiwr (The Baptist). Included also in the rebuttal was a copy of the letter that the editor of Y Bedyddiwr had refused to publish.

In the four issues of Prophwyd y Jubili from September to December 1846, Dan Jones published more than 20 pages reviewing, in serial form, a 20-page pamphlet produced by Davies in March 1846. Davies's pamphlet is entitled Y Seintiau Diweddaf. Sylwedd pregeth a draddodwyd ar y gwyrthiau, er mwyn goleuo y cyffredin a dangos twyll y creaduriaid a alwant eu hunain yn "Seintiau y Dyddiau Diweddaf" (The Latter Saints. Substance of a sermon which was given on the miracles, to enlighten every man and show the deceit of the creatures who call themselves the "Latter-day Saints"). For the most part it deals with miracles in general, but one "miracle" in particular is held up for scrutiny and scorn—one which, according to the Mormons, happened in the healing of the broken leg of one William Hughes.

In a signed statement published in the first issue of Prophwyd y Jubili, William Hughes stated that two bones of his left leg had been broken on 18 January 1846, when a heavy weight fell on it in a coal mine. He was taken to his house where a Dr. Allday put his leg in splints. That same evening, according to Hughes's testimony, one of the Mormon elders came by his house and gave him a blessing which completely relieved the pain. Three days later Captain Dan Jones gave Hughes another blessing, after which Hughes took off the splints and began to walk around, testifying that his leg was completely healed.

The Reverend W. R. Davies, in addition to making light of the incident in his pamphlet, also wrote about the alleged healing in a highly sarcastic article in Y Bedyddiwr for March 1846 (page 111) and mocked the "Satanists" (as he called the Mormons) for making such a ridiculous claim. Dan Jones bristled at Davies's pamphlet and his article; he published, in the July 1846 Prophwyd y Jubili (pp. 22-28), a detailed analysis of what he considered to be Davies's lies.

Six months later the incident was still being discussed. Davies again mentioned it in a 3-column article in another Baptist periodical, Seren Gomer (Star of Gomer), which he signed with a rather strange pseudonym—"Gwcw y Don" (Cuckoo of Ton).

Dan Jones was rabid when the article reached his attention, and he immediately set about writing a defense. The result was a 12-page mixture of Jones's best sarcasm and his most flamboyant rage. In addition to attempts to show how unfair Davies had been toward Mormonism in spite of non-Mormon witnesses in the Hughes case, Jones also answers the false charges that Davies brings against the Mormons in his article. In true polemic fashion, Jones extrapolates on Davies's pseudonym: "At first we thought that it was the little cuckoo from Ton we had in our grasp, and then it turned into a profaning magpie; after that we thought perhaps the strange bird was a parrot until it became a rapacious kite" (p. 9).

It is not difficult to imagine the Mormons' delight when, in 1848, Davies's "right-hand man," Rees Price, and his wife left the Dowlais Baptists and joined with the Latter-day Saints (Prophwyd y Jubili, September 1848, pp. 131-33). Shortly thereafter, another of Davies's followers, Job Rowland, converted to Mormonism. And in a letter printed in the final issue of Prophwyd y Jubili, Rowland described how Davies's behavior had actually helped him discover the truth of Mormonism (December 1848, pp. 187-88).

Inasmuch as Amddiffyniad y Saint is in answer to Davies's article in the January 1847 Seren Gomer and inasmuch as it is advertised in the April 1847 Prophwyd y Jubili, the date of publication logically falls between those two dates.

UPB, USl, USlC, WN

Flake no. 4459

"Haman" yn hongian ar ei grogbren ei hun! neu Daniel Jones (ddall) a'i lyfr yn profi gwirionedd Mormoniaeth!!

("Haman" hanging from his own gallows! or Daniel Jones [the blind] and his booklet proving the truth of Mormonism!!)

Merthyr Tydfil: Published and for sale by D. Jones. Printed by John Jones, Rhydybont, [1847].

8 pp. 16 cm.

On 7 July 1846, in the town of Llanybydder, Carmarthenshire, a blind man by the name of Daniel Jones was baptized by the Latter-day Saints. Witnesses, however, testified to having heard Jones admit that he had agreed to the baptism as a "prepared Judas," who would then reject Mormonism because of the Mormons' inability to heal him of his blindness (see "Haman," p. 6).

Following Jones's baptism, two Mormon elders—Captain Dan Jones and Abel Evans—anointed his eyes with oil and pronounced a blessing on him. Immediately afterwards, the blind man testified that during the blessing he had seen the candlestick on the table and firmly believed that he was on the verge of a complete restoration of his sight. After attending only two LDS meetings, however, he broke off his association with the Mormons and began to speak out against them, presumably according to his original plan.

A few months later Dan Jones and Thomas Jeremy met the blind man on their way back to Llanybydder. He did not answer when asked why he was persecuting the Mormons, whereupon Jones told him that if he continued his campaign against the Saints the hand of God would be on him and his fate would be hotter than that of Kora, Dathan, and Abiram, the three who were swallowed up in the earth after fighting against Moses.

In spite of the warning, the blind man was persuaded to publish a pamphlet about his experience and thus warn the Welsh of the Mormons' deceit. Twelve pages in length and entitled Y drych cywir, lle y gellir canfod yn eglur twyll y Mormoniaid, neu "Seintiau y Dyddiau Diweddaf;" mewn dull o holiadau ac atebion, rhwng Daniel a'i gyfaill (The correct image wherein the deception of the Mormons or the "Latter-day Saints" can be perceived clearly; in the form of questions and answers between Daniel and his friend), the pamphlet is the account of an interview conducted by the blind man's friend, the Reverend Josiah Thomas Jones, who was editor of Y Drysorfa Gynulleidfaol (The Congregational Treasury), a religious periodical. Also included is an anti-Mormon ballad that became popular in South Wales.

Captain Jones's reaction to the blind man's pamphlet was a pamphlet of his own—"Haman" yn hongian ar ei grogbren ei hun!—describing the details of the baptism, the momentary restoration of the blind man's sight, and the testimony of various witnesses. "Haman" was published shortly before 25 April 1847, the date of Dan Jones's letter printed in the Millennial Star, in which he states that he has replied to the blind man's pamphlet. He also describes the fulfillment of his prophetic warning given a few months earlier:

No sooner was the reply out of press, than on the old blind man it came, hot and heavy. He cried out that he was burning up alive; his friends poured cold water on him night and day in vain! He would rush out from them to a pool that was by, and there he would roll, and wallow, and yelp until he terrified the passers by. (15 July 1847, p. 219)

Jones adds that the blind man "died a monument of the displeasure of a just God for hypocrisy."

An epilogue to the whole affair was a second edition over a year later of the blind man's pamphlet. Strangely enough, those behind it claimed that Daniel the Blind was still alive. Thomas Jeremy states in a letter to Dan Jones: "I have been with Mr. James Evans, the Registrar, who recorded the death of Daniel Jones, and he is willing to give a copy to anyone who wants it, by paying two shillings and sixpence and the postage" (Prophwyd y Jubili, November 1848, p. 171).

UPB, USl

Flake no. 4474

Profion o eirwiredd Llyfr Mormon.

(Proofs of the truthfulness of the Book of Mormon.)

[Rhydybont: Printed by John Jones, 1847?]

12 pp. 17.5 cm.

The contents of this pamphlet appeared in the Prophwyd y Jubili for September 1846 (pp. 63-70) and October 1846 (pp. 95-101). Dan Jones mentions the pamphlet in a letter to Brigham Young dated 21 June 1847; but it is not mentioned at all in Prophwyd y Jubili or in Udgorn Seion or in any of the book lists. The entire 12 pages are doctrinal in nature and are a direct translation from segments of Charles Thompson's 1841 Evidences in proof of the Book of Mormon.

Contrary to custom, no printer or place of publication is given at the end. One is led to wonder if perhaps there was a printed wrapper, discarded when the pamphlet was bound.

Of the two extant copies of Profion, one is owned by the National Library of Wales, the other by a private collector in Provo, Utah.

WN

Hanes Saint y Dyddiau Diweddaf, o'u sefydliad yn y flwyddyn 1823, hyd yr amser yr alltudiwyd tri chan mil o honynt o'r America oherwydd eu crefydd, yn y flwyddyn 1846.

(History of the Latter-day Saints, from their establishment in the year 1823, until the time that three hundred thousand of them were exiled from America because of their religion, in the year 1846.)

Merthyr Tydfil: Published and for sale by Capt. Jones. Printed by J. Jones, Rhydybont, [1847].

[ii]-[1]-102 pp. 17.1 cm.

Advertised in the July 1847 Prophwyd y Jubili (p. 108) as being off the press, this small book represents the earliest attempt at a comprehensive history of the Mormons. It is actually a mosaic, whose component parts originate from several sources, principally the periodical Times and Seasons and Orson Pratt's An interesting account of several remarkable visions. A few items from the Millennial Star and the Book of Mormon were also translated and used. Over half of the book is originally by Dan Jones and includes such things as his conversion story and his involvement in the events surrounding the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith.

The table of contents lists 49 divisions but only 27 of these are given separate chapter headings and numbers in the text. No explanation is offered in the preface, not is one apparent in the book itself.

The first 46 pages of Hanes appeared in Prophwyd y Jubili between July and November 1846 (pp. 6-22, 35-47, 58-62, 91-95, 120-27). Five pages (pp. 87-88; 90-92) were published in Prophwyd y Jubili as a sample of the booklet when it was first advertised in July 1847 (pp. 108-12), and the typesetting is identical for the corresponding segments. It is doubtful, however, that plates were saved over a period of that many months; it was far less expensive to have the plates prepared again. The typesetter would logically use the same format the second time, and the result would not appear to be a variant setting.

The segment printed in the November 1846 Prophwyd y Jubili indicates that the history was to be continued, but it was not. Perhaps, at this half-way point, the author decided to suspend further publication of materials which he intended to include in Hanes and thus save the duplication. Seven months later Hanes was published.

Shortly after its publication, Hanes was used to entice people to attend a meeting at which Dan Jones would reply to the charges of one Edward Roberts, a Baptist minister from Rhymney. Roberts lectured against Mormonism in Dowlais the night of 2 September 1847 and charged sixpence for admission. Jones advertised that he would reply to Roberts's lecture the following evening, with admission being the purchase of a shilling book (Hanes) for sixpence, "thereby paying them sixpence for coming" (Millennial Star, 15 October 1847, p. 318).

Toward the end of his 40-page review of Roberts's lectures against Mormonism (see comments on Adolygiad ar ddarlithoedd y Parch. E. Roberts [A review of the lectures of Rev. E. Roberts, item 17]), Jones describes the Reverend's reaction to Hanes:

After ransacking the treatises and the newspapers, and every sink hole for every tale he could find to show his own deceptive reasoning, yes, after agitating his mind to the highest degree of hydrophobia in his pulpit, the Reverend remembered the book that is called Hanes y Saint (History of the Saints [title is slightly altered]), and while beating it against the pulpit, nearly tearing it to shreds, out of rage for the paper and ink, to show what he would do with its author, and before showing one error in it or bringing any logic or scripture to gainsay it, except for his own assertions and those of his partners, he gave a "wholesale" condemnation of it in the following evangelical sentences: "If you wish to buy a worthless book, here it is. If you want a book full of deception, here it is. . . . If you want a book which shows the DEVILISHNESS OF JOE, here it is, etc." Now there's a gentlemanly and evangelical way to review a book, isn't it? (Adolygiad ar ddarlithoedd y Parch. E. Roberts, item 17, p. 38)

The unnamed author of a review of Hanes-most likely Jones himself—sees the book in a different way:

Historical exactness is the chief motto of the author in this book, and in addition to the advantages which he had of being an eyewitness of many of the scenes which he describes, he has spared neither cost nor trouble to search for reliable witnesses, such as those who were put under oath in courts, and [whose testimonies] were made public to the world for the most part, and which stand irrefutable to this day, and which the author keeps carefully in his library for the satisfaction of the doubter who asks to see them.

The author did not know of a better way to disabuse his fellow country men than by presenting to them this history of the holy religion which is falsely portrayed so greatly throughout our country. It would be well for the reader to secure a copy soon, for through a misunderstanding of the printer, only half of what we expected was printed. (Prophwyd y Jubili, July 1847, p. 108)

MH, UPB, USl, USlC, WN

Flake no. 3830

Adolygiad ar ddarlithoedd y Parch. E. Roberts, (Gweinidog y Bedyddwyr yn Rymni,) yn erbyn Mormoniaeth, pa rai a draddododd yn Nghaersalem, Medi yr Ail, ac yn Bethania (Capel yr Annibynwyr,) Medi y Trydydd, yn Nowlais.

(A review of the lectures of the Rev. E. Roberts, [a Baptist minister in Rhymney,] against Mormonism, which were delivered in Caersalem, September the Second, and in Bethania [a Congregational chapel], September the Third, in Dowlais.)

Merthyr Tydfil: Published and for sale by Capt. Jones. Printed by John Jones, Rhydybont, 1847.

40 pp. 17 cm.

The dark blue printed wrapper is identical to the title page except for a single-line straight-edged border and an indication of the price (fourpence). Only the recto has printing.

In Wales, the bulk of convert baptisms during 1845 and 1846 were in South Wales, especially the Merthyr Tydfil area. Numbers ranged from twenty to forty baptisms per month, but the growth rate nearly doubled in May and June of 1847, during which time some longstanding members of W. R. Davies's congregation in Dowlais became Mormons. Davies then invited a neighboring colleague of the cloth, the Reverend Edward Roberts, to lecture at his (Davies's) pulpit in Dowlais and deliver the "home stroke" to the growth of Mormonism. (The English phrase home stroke is used in a 2-column article in the October 1847 Seren Gomer [Star of Gomer], p. 318, about Roberts's supposed triumph; it apparently means "coup de grace.") Roberts had also lost members of his own congregation in Rhymney to the hated Mormons, and he eagerly joined forces with Davies in the campaign.

The lecture was announced for the evening of 2 September 1847 at the Caersalem Chapel in Dowlais. Dan Jones endeavored to steal the Baptists' thunder by beginning a series of lectures of his own about the Book of Mormon on 21 August 1847 in Dowlais, about two weeks before Roberts's scheduled presentation. Handbills were circulated to announce these lectures and also Jones's rebuttal to Roberts's lecture. The rebuttal was to be on the evening of 3 September 1847. Jones, in attendance at Roberts's meeting, gave one of his handbills to the chairman and requested that its contents be announced from the pulpit. The chairman declined to make any such announcement; instead, Roberts went to the pulpit and declared that he would give another lecture the following evening with no admission charge—a presentation obviously intended to keep people from attending Jones's rebuttal.

ones assigned a few Mormons to take notes at Roberts's second lecture, and before the end of September he had a 40-page reply at the press in Rhydybont. His preface, however, is dated 18 October 1847.

In true polemic fashion, Jones ridicules Roberts's points of argument one by one. He accuses him of raising money for a Baptist chapel by preaching lies. With respect to Roberts's observation about Joseph Smith's big hands, Jones replies, "You, workers of Dowlais, remember to keep your hands hidden from this preacher lest you be condemned as badly as Joseph Smith" (p. 5). Jones laments that Roberts had resorted to fantasies and stories about Mormonism instead of dealing with principles and doctrines. Over one-third of the pamphlet considers the charge that Joseph Smith had borrowed from Solomon Spaulding's manuscript in writing the Book of Mormon. This segment is essentially a translation of Benjamin Winchester's 1840 pamphlet on the same topic (The origin of the Spaulding story).

It came as no surprise that Adolygiad received scathing comments in the Baptist periodical Seren Gomer. One Dafydd Lewis called it a "dull and idiotic book . . . offensive to the Welsh language" and remarked that it was "blasphemous to the common sense of the Welsh that such rubbish be directed to their attention." He pointed out that the pamphlet had been printed on the press at Rhydybont and that there was "no other press sufficiently 'prostitute' to give birth to such a monster" (Seren Gomer, December 1847, p. 375).

As might be expected, Adolygiad fared considerably better in Prophwyd y Jubili, the Mormon periodical. One Daniel ab Iago from Rhymney even wrote a 20-line poem in praise of the pamphlet and the author. He declared that Adolygiad was "brilliant" and a "wealth of wisdom" that was well worth reading (Prophwyd y Jubili, February 1848, pp. 23-24).

Dan Jones wrote in his preface to Adolygiad and also in the November Prophwyd y Jubili (pp. 171-73) about the benefits of opposition and persecution. He claimed that not a week had gone by without baptisms in Dowlais since the lectures of the Reverend Roberts. "Welcome persecution! Welcome pain! Welcome shame!" declared Jones (Adolygiad ar ddarlithoedd y Parch. E. Roberts, p. [2]).

William Howells, a lay Baptist preacher from Aberdare (about seven miles from Merthyr Tydfil) and later the first Mormon missionary to France, gave Adolygiad credit as the key element in his conversion to Mormonism, and he thanked W. R. Davies and Edward Roberts for helping to open his eyes with their anti-Mormon antics (Udgorn Seion, May 1849, p. 93).

The University College of Swansea Library houses the only extant copy of this pamphlet that has the wrapper.

UPB, USl, USlC, WCS, WS, WSW

Flake no. 4456

Adolygiad ar ddarlith olaf y Parch. E. Roberts, Rymni, yn erbyn "Mormoniaeth."

(A review of the last lecture of the Rev. E. Roberts, Rhymney, against "Mormonism.")

Rhydybont: Printed by John Jones, [1848].

12 pp. 17 cm.

Dan Jones's 40-page Adolygiad ar ddarlithoedd y Parch. E. Roberts (A review of the lectures of the Rev. E. Roberts, item 17) did little to discourage the determined Baptist minister of Rhymney. On the evening of 2 November 1847, two months following his first two lectures in Dowlais, Roberts delivered yet another lecture against Mormonism at the Ebenezer Chapel in Merthyr Tydfil. Jones saw to it that a copy of his Adolygiad (item 17) was put into Roberts's hands before this third lecture so that he would have "the advantage of seeing his false ideas" (Adolygiad ar ddarlith olaf, p. [1]).

One Dafydd Lewis gave his impression as to how Roberts handily disposed of Jones's pamphlet: "The speaker [Roberts] showed clearly that this crackpot reviewer [Jones] had failed to refute anything in his [Roberts's] lectures—only asserting that they were lies!" (Seren Gomer [Star of Gomer], December 1847, 375). Jones declared in his Adolygiad ar ddarlith olaf that Roberts had done nothing more than single out two minor details: (1) the use of the formal you in place of the familiar thou in addressing the reader, and (2) the use of the word debate where no official challenge to a debate had ever been issued. This nitpicking, observed Jones, hardly represented the "unusual dexterity" Lewis claimed for Roberts (pp. 1, 8).

The following week, on 10 November 1847, a lecture was delivered (presumably by Jones) at the White Lion Inn in Merthyr Tydfil to review Roberts's latest presentation. Over thirty of Roberts's accusations were enumerated and condemned, and it was obvious that those in attendance "loathed the slanderous, disgraceful and unwarranted attacks" which had been launched against the Mormons (Adolygiad ar ddarlith olaf, p. 7).

Adolygiad ar ddarlith olaf appears to have been published in February 1848. It is not mentioned in the February Prophwyd y Jubili, but it is in the March 1848 issue (p. 41). Jones declares on page 2 of this second Adolygiad that he had delayed its publication because he was awaiting the appearance of a pamphlet by Roberts. That pamphlet, Twyll Mormoniaeth (Deceit of Mormonism), was available soon afterwards for sixpence, the same price charged for admission to Roberts's first lecture.

Jones's publication is a series of refutations of Roberts's accusations and, as Jones sees them, contradictions. Jones announces that Roberts and others can spare themselves the trouble of preparing their elegies and funeral sermons for Mormonism, and then he declares this prophecy: "There will be a call for the funeral sermons for Mr. Davies from Dowlais, Roberts from Rhymney, Dafydd Lewis and the Editor of Seren Gomer, together with all her persecutors before she [Mormonism] dies; yea, before there is even one sign of illness!" (p. 10).

On 29 November 1847, Roberts lectured once more against Mormonism while in North Wales. No further mention is made of him in Mormon publications until 1850, when a note is inserted in the January Udgorn Seion: "He [Roberts] was thrown from Rhymney to North Wales, and from North Wales to Liverpool where he now earns his living hawking tea, having been excommunicated from the Baptists for transgressions we do not wish to bring to mind" (p. 32).

MH, UPB, USl, USlC, WN

Flake no. 4457

Capt. Jones ar Formoniaeth, yn 1847.

(Capt. Jones on Mormonism, in 1847.)

(A collection of previously published items bound together.)

In the Prophwyd y Jubili for February and March 1848, there appears an advertisement for "bound volumes of the treatises which were published in 1847" (pp. 32, 48). In the Prophwyd y Jubili for June, July, and September is this announcement:

We have just received nearly one hundred volumes of Capt. Jones ar Formoniaeth, yn 1847, from the binder. They have unusually good binding, [they look] splendid, and [they are] reasonably priced at various prices as before. We hope that the Saints will try to get at least one of these for every family before it is too late. (Pp. 96, 112, 144)

The only extant copy of this volume contains the following items:

There is no separate table of contents. The following three other pamphlets known to have been published during 1847 are not included:

Most likely these were not in stock at the time of binding.

USlC

Yr eurgrawn ysgrythyrol, yn yr hwn y cynnwysir crynodeb o adnodau a nodiadau, i brofi prif bynciau Saint y Dyddiau Diweddaf.

(The scriptural treasury, in which is contained a compendium of verses and notes, to prove the main subjects of the Latter-day Saints.)

Merthyr Tydfil: Published and for sale by Capt. Jones. Printed by John Jones, Rhydybont, 1848.

iv[5]-288 pp. 16.5 cm.

Having completed his Hanes Saint y Dyddiau Diweddaf (History of the Latter-day Saints, item 16) in July 1847, Dan Jones embarked immediately on yet another major project—a digest of scriptures in support of Mormonism. Because of its size Yr eurgrawn was published in 5 segments over a ten-month period. The first part is advertised in the September 1847 Prophwyd y Jubili:

The first part of Yr eurgrawn ysgrythyrol is off the press, price one shilling, and can be obtained with the Prophwyd. The work will contain about four or five more parts, sixpence each. I sincerely beseech you, dear friends, to continue your previous diligence in spreading our publications, especially the Eurgrawn, and to send the money back as soon as you can. One need only see the first part in order to see the great need there is for such a book as an instructor to the Saints; and especially so the preachers can understand that which we, believe about all the subjects it contains, and so they can have the thoughts of inspired writers gathered together ready at their disposal, so that they can defend [our beliefs] against the attacks of their antagonists. (P. 148)

The third and fifth segments are announced in the May and July 1848 issues of Prophwyd y Jubili (pp. 80, 112). No announcements were made in Prophwyd y Jubili for the second or fourth segments.

There were some problems associated with the staggered publication dates of Yr eurgrawn, as indicated by Jones's plea in Prophwyd y Jubili:

There are several hundred of each segment of the Eurgrawn yet on hand, and we hope that all who purchased previous parts will strive to buy them all, or else we shall buy back individual segments if they are clean and tidy. (July 1848, p. 112)

To a large extent Yr eurgrawn is a reworking of Benjamin Winchester's 1842 Synopsis of the holy scriptures and concordance. The three scriptural references (John 5:39, Romans 15:4, and 2 Peter 1:20) printed on the title page of Yr eurgrawn are the same as those on the title page of Synopsis. Many of the topics listed in the two tables of contents are also identical. Jones simply translated sizeable portions of Synopsis; some parts he expanded and adapted; others he omitted.

The price of Yr eurgrawn ranged from four shillings to five shillings and sixpence, depending on the binding. Many who could afford to buy the small pamphlets and subscribe to Prophwyd y Jubili were either unable or unwilling to purchase Yr eurgrawn. Six years later, Robert Evans asked Dan Jones about a second edition and was informed that "hundreds of copies" had been on hand for years (Udgorn Seion, 23 September 1854, p. 509). Jones indicated that he had often wondered why so few had purchased the book: "I don't believe that half or even one in six of even the Preachers of the Saints have a copy" (ibid.). One year later he declared:

Except for fear of being accused of egotism, I would say that it [Yr eurgrawn] is the best present I have ever given the Saints through the press; and if I were as sectarian as I once was, I should not hesitate to call it an almost infallible way of getting a grasp on a hundred magnificent principles that the laymen of our country know hardly anything about. (Udgorn Seion, 27 October 1855, p. 351)

CtY, MH, NjP, UPB, USlC, WN, WSW

Flake no. 4468

Pregeth gwrth-Formonaidd. At y Parch. T. Williams, Ebenezer, ger Caerfyrddin.

(An anti-Mormon sermon. To the Rev. T. Williams, Ebenezer, near Carmarthen.)

Rhydybont: Printed by John Jones, [1848].

4 pp. 17.5 cm.

On 2 July 1848, Thomas Williams, minister of the Ebenezer Baptist Chapel in Llangynog Parish near Carmarthen, delivered a sermon about the Mormons. Seated in the congregation taking notes was John Davis, a devout Mormon who would soon succeed Captain Dan Jones as the chief spokesman of Mormonism in the principality of Wales.

A few days following the sermon, Davis composed a letter to the Reverend Williams and outlined his objections to a number of Williams's statements. Davis took particular exception to the claim that the Mormons had to accept the idea that all the reformers of Christianity since the time of the Apostles were in the depths of hell. Davis accuses Williams of twisting the beliefs of Mormonism and exhorting his parishioners to turn a deaf ear to the Mormon missionaries. Davis then tells the Ebenezer Chapel members to cease being "spirits in prison" and to flee to the Mormons for freedom.

Davis's letter, dated 6 July 1848, was printed in the August 1848 Prophwyd y Jubili (pp. 118-22) and then as a separate pamphlet entitled Pregeth gwrth-Formonaidd. At the end of the pamphlet is the following information: "Taken from Prophwyd y Jubili for August 1848." The pamphlet was printed at Rhydybont by John Jones and was one of the last Mormon items to be produced on that press. Since the Latter-day Saints acquired their own printer (John Davis) and their own press (Davis's press at Carmarthen) in November 1848, Pregeth gwrth-Formonaidd was probably published in September or October 1848.

Although no other pamphlets from either side followed Pregeth gwrth-Formonaidd, the matter did receive further attention in Seren Gomer (Star of Gomer), the Baptist periodical for which John Davis had previously worked. In the October 1848 issue (pp. 304-5), a writer who signed himself "Anti-Humbug" in English rails at Davis and the Mormons, while at the same time heaping praise on Thomas Williams for his keen insights into Mormonism, as presented in his 2 July 1848 sermon. Among Davis's papers (in the hands of one of his descendants) is an unpublished reply to "Anti-Humbug," whom Davis identifies as Samuel Evans, editor of Seren Gomer and an excommunicated Baptist. It was probably Davis's intention to have his reply (dated 6 October 1848) appear in Prophwyd y Jubili, but it was never published.

At the time Davis wrote Pregeth gwrth-Formonaidd he intended to leave Wales within eight months, with the first group of Welsh Mormon emigrants. The feisty spirit he demonstrated in his writing, however, coupled with his printing skills, probably helped bring him the assignment to be in charge of Mormon publications in Wales for the next five years.

Before writing this pamphlet, Davis had authored several articles and some poetry which had been published in Seren Gomer, the Baptist magazine, and in Prophwyd y Jubili, the Mormon periodical. This, however, appears to be his first separate pamphlet.

There is but one extant copy of Pregeth gwrth-Formonaidd, bound with twenty-two other Welsh Mormon publications, in a volume owned by Princeton University.

NjP

Sylwadau ar bregeth ynghylch "Saint y Dyddiau Diweddaf a doniau gwyrthiol."

(Observations on a sermon about "The Latter-day Saints and miraculous gifts.")

Carmarthen: Printed by J. Davis, [1848?].

8 pp. 16.6 cm.

The contents of Sylwadau first appeared in the December 1848 issue of Prophwyd y Jubili. Everything, including the typesetting and the page arrangements, is identical. John Davis very possibly used the plates prepared for the periodical (after minor adjustments such as pagination and title) to print the pamphlet.

Sylwadau sold for one penny as opposed to two-and-one-half pence for the December 1848 issue of Prophwyd y Jubili. There are at least three reasons which explain why Davis went to the trouble of publishing Sylwadau in separate pamphlet form: (1) Prophwyd y Jubili was intended for a Mormon readership, whereas Sylwadau was written for a broader audience; (2) the periodical was dated and would, in a short time, be either unmarketable or its supply would be exhausted; (3) Davis was entitled to a portion of the profits which the pamphlet might realize.

Sylwadau contains Davis's response to a sermon which had been delivered 27 August 1848 in Carmarthen by the Reverend David Evans, a widely respected Anglican priest. A short time after delivering his sermon, Evans published it in the form of a 20-page pamphlet which sold for sixpence. The pamphlet, entitled Saint y Dyddiau Diweddaf a doniau gwyrthiol (The Latter-day Saints and miraculous gifts), lacks the vicious language which other antagonists were then using whenever they mentioned the Mormons. Evans does, however, severely criticize the defense that Mormons offered for a continuation of miracles from the time of Jesus Christ. He presents his ideas in a gentlemanly fashion and concludes that the Mormons are false prophets and heretics.

In Sylwadau, Davis also refrains from ad hominem arguments and simply addresses himself to Evans's points of logic, one by one, defending modern-day miracles by those who have the proper authority to act in the name of the Savior.

Since Sylwadau was published in Carmarthen, it would have come off Davis's press sometime before it was moved to Merthyr Tydfil (early March 1849) and after its appearance in Prophwyd y Jubili (December 1848).

CU-B, MH, NjP, USlC

Flake no. 2705

(Zion's Trumpet, or Star of the Saints; containing the principles of the "Dispensation of the fulness of times," in treatises, letters, accounts, poetry, etc.)

Carmarthen, January 1849-February 1849; Merthyr Tydfil, March 1849-August 1854; Swansea, September 1854-March 1861; Liverpool, April 1861-April 1862.

Monthly, biweekly, or weekly. 14 vols. ([469] whole nos.) [7,792] pp. 17.5 cm.

The December 1848 Prophwyd y Jubili was the thirtieth and final issue. In the 15 December 1848 foreword to volume 3, Dan Jones announced:

From now on we intend to trumpet after you in UDGORN SEION, shouting each month, "Come out of her, my people." Mentioned frequently will be the excellencies of Zion and the law that shall come out from there, together with the best path for everyone to go to that country [America].

With the periodical's change in name came a new editor, John Davis, a twenty-seven-year-old convert of three years, from the town of Carmarthen. Davis had become acquainted with Mormonism while in the employ of John Jones, brother of Dan Jones and owner of the press at Rhydybont (near Llanybydder) where most of the early Welsh Mormon pamphlets were printed. Davis had worked at several printing establishments prior to his conversion, thus bringing with him the precise capabilities needed to carry on Welsh Mormon publications after the departure of Dan Jones.

Another advantage that John Davis brought with him was his own press, an old Caledonian model with secondhand type. On 29 December 1853, Dan Jones purchased it from Davis for l 3 when he resumed leadership of the Mormons in Wales, on his second mission. He also paid Davis l 25 for a Columbian Super Royal press, which Davis had presumably acquired along the way (Dan Jones papers, LDS Church Archives). It was in the town of Carmarthen at his father's house and on his own press that John Davis printed the November and December 1848 issues of Prophwyd y Jubili, the January and February 1849 issues of Udgorn Seion, and an 8-page pamphlet about miracles (item 22).

The March 1849 Udgorn Seion was the first to be printed in Merthyr Tydfil following the move of the press from Carmarthen. Although Davis was a counselor to William Phillips in the local presidency of the LDS church in Wales, his prime responsibility was with the Udgorn Seion and other publishing activities. During his five years in office, he not only produced 2,352 pages of Udgorn Seion, but he also published more than fifty other items as well. These ranged from 1-page poems to the 483-page translation of the Book of Mormon, and included three different hymnals.

In 1850 Davis increased the size of Udgorn Seion from 24 pages per month to 32; he also raised the price from twopence to two-and-a-half pence each. The first twenty-four issues each have a 4-page printed wrapper, a feature of Dan Jones's Prophwyd y Jubili for the first six issues. In 1851 and 1852 Udgorn Seion was published biweekly; its price was dropped to one penny for each 16-page issue, and the wrappers were discontinued. In 1853, Davis's last year as editor, Udgorn Seion was published weekly.

After five busy years producing Welsh Mormon materials, Davis was granted permission to emigrate to America, and thus he followed the advice given in virtually every issue of his periodical. His were difficult shoes to fill from among his fellow converts, many of whom had spent their lives in coal mines and did well just to read what Davis had published. Once again in Wales, however, was Davis's predecessor, Dan Jones, who had been called to serve a second mission. In 1854 Jones succeeded not only Davis in the printing activities but also William Phillips, on whose shoulders all other church responsibilities had been placed.

In September 1854 the base of Church operations for Wales was moved from Merthyr Tydfil to Swansea. The press was set up in a place referred to as the "Udgorn Seion Office," and the periodical was trimmed in frequency to a biweekly. Daniel Daniels became its editor in the spring of 1856, when Dan Jones was assigned to lead a group of more than five hundred Welsh Mormon emigrants to Salt Lake City.

By this time much of the periodical's contents were merely translations of items that had appeared in the Millennial Star—minutes of conferences held in Salt Lake City, doctrinal discourses by various Church leaders, and the like. Daniels was released after less than two years as editor; Benjamin P. Evans took his place in 1858. Once again Udgorn Seion began to appear weekly and continued to do so until its demise in April 1862. When Evans was released after three years of service, the whole printing operation, press included, was moved to Liverpool, the headquarters of the Church in Britain. The press was loaded onto the steamer Sovereign 24 March 1861 at Swansea and reached Liverpool three days later (William Ajax Journal, typescript copy, pp. 57-59, UPB). The move was effected in order to cut costs and increase efficiency. Although George Q. Cannon, president of the Church in Great Britain, was the official editor, he spoke no Welsh, and so twenty-nine-year-old William Ajax was assigned to move to Liverpool and take the responsibility of publishing Udgorn Seion.

The last issue to be printed, according to William Ajax's journal entry for 9 April 1862, was the fourteenth for that year, most likely one dated 5 April 1862. About a month before, Cannon had purchased "a fine Ulnerstonian printing-machine," and the first item which it processed was an issue of Udgorn Seion (Ajax Journal, 13 March 1862). Thus it appears that John Davis's press, which had printed over 460 numbers of Udgorn Seion during a thirteen-year period, was denied the honor of producing the last few issues.

Circulation for Udgorn Seion peaked at about 2,000 during Davis's time and was at about 500 for the three years prior to its demise in 1862. Its readership was continually diminished by emigration. Because the rate of conversion had suffered a dramatic decrease, coupled with the fact that no one was available to replace Ajax, Church leaders in Liverpool decided to "let them read English," as it were. Ajax lamented the prospect of leaving his compatriots without a periodical in their own language:

It would be a great loss to the Welsh Saints to lose it. . . . He [the Welshman] may manage to converse freely in the English language and to transact any business in it; but there is no language that can reach his heart as well as the Welsh. (Ajax Journal, 15 March 1862)

The last complete volume now extant is the one for 1857. Only seventeen isolated numbers have been located for the years 1858-1861, and none for 1862. The pagination of these extant issues indicates that the periodical continued to be published on a weekly basis until the end, with 16 pages each. By combining calculated figures with known figures, it appears that approximately 7,792 pages of Udgorn Seion were produced during thirteen years and three months, a truly prodigious effort in view of its limited audience and the small number of qualified persons who could assist in its publication.

The following table shows the year-by-year details of Udgorn Seion:

UDGORN SEION

# of Price/ Pages/ Total Place of

Vol Year issues Frequ- Cents Issue pages publi- Editor

ency cation

then/ Davis

Merthyr

Tydfil

Tydfil Davis

Tydfil Davis

Tydfil Davis

Tydfil Davis

Tydfil Davis

till Aug Tydfil Jones

then till Sep

Biweekly then

Swansea

Jones

Jones/

Daniel

Daniels

Daniels

Liverpool Geo. Q. Cannon

ISOLATED EXTANT ISSUES

1858: (1) 9 Jan

(2) 16 Jan

(40) 9 Oct

1859: (36) 3 Sep

(48) 26 Nov

(49) 3 Dec

(50) 10 Dec

(51) 17 Dec

1860: (5) 28 Jan

(13) 24 Mar

(18) 28 Apr

(38) 15 Sep

(46) 10 Nov

(53) 29 Dec

1861: (6) 9 Feb

(19) 18 May

(31) 3 Aug

CSmH vols. 1, 4-7

CtY vols. 1, 2

CU-B vols. 1-3

MH vols. 1-6, 8, 9

NjP vols. 1-6

UPB vols. 1-7

USl vols. 1, 7

USlC vols. 1-10, 11 (#1, 2)

UU vols. 3, 7

WB vols. 1-4, 6, 7

WCC vols. 4-6

WHi vols. 1-3, 6

WN vols. 1, 2, 5-7, 11 (#40), 12 (#36, 48, 49, 50, 51), 13 (#5, 13, 18, 38, 46, 53), 14 (#6, 19)

WS vols. 4, 9

Vol. 14 (#31) is in private hands.

Flake no. 9069

Ymddyddan rhwng y parchedig a'r bachgenyn.

(A dialogue between the reverend and the boy.)

Merthyr Tydfil: J. Davis, Printer, Georgetown, [1849].

1 p. 17 cm.

First advertised as being available for a halfpenny in April 1849 (Udgorn Seion, wrapper, p. 4), this poem enjoyed considerable popularity over the next several years in Wales. Four variants have been determined, and there are likely more that have yet to surface. Three of the variants have only small differences in the title lettering and the publication information at the bottom. A fourth variant has an ornamental border and is signed "Gwrandawwr" (A listener) instead of "J. Davis."

The poem portrays a preacher who is chiding a young Mormon lad for having been duped by "that deluded lot." The boy defends his position as well as he can and bests the preacher at every turn. There are 8 stanzas of 4 lines each in the poem; the last of these stanzas indicates the boy's triumph over the preacher:

Rev.: You little devil!—I'm going from your presence, I shan't concern myself further with you; Go ahead and believe the Saints, and go deceived to hell with them.

Boy: The tempter went [away]-and, O, my Father, who art in heaven, I thank thee for giving [me] strength, to totally defeat him.

Three years later Davis translated the poem into English (see item 66). The content is basically the same as in the original, although a few minor changes were made for the sake of rhyme. A comparison of my nonpoetic translation from the original Welsh, above, with the same four lines in Davis's English version will illustrate the difference:

Rev.: Thou, little rascal!—now I'll go—I'll talk no more with thee; Believe the Saints, and go to hell, where Mormons all shall be.

Boy: The tempter's gone—and, O my God, to thee all thanks I owe, For thou didst give thy strength to me to triumph o'er my foe!

CSmH, CU-B, MH, NjP,UPB (three of the four variants), USlC, WN

Flake no. 2714

25.[John Davis.]

Can pregethwr.

(Song of a preacher.)

[Merthyr Tydfil: Printed by John Davis, 1849.]

1 p. 17 cm.

This song contains 19 stanzas of 4 lines each, plus a chorus which was to be sung after each stanza. The words are arranged in 2 columns divided by an undulating line. There is a straight-lined border around the entire song with elaborate ornamentation in each of the four corners.

Although John Davis does not indicate his name anywhere on the broadside, immediately under the title is this identification clue: "By the author of Ymddyddan rhwng y parchedig a'r bachgenyn" (Dialogue between the reverend and the boy). Judging from the number of variants of Ymddyddan (Dialogue, item 24), it was very popular among the Welsh Mormons. Because of this success and also because of his position as editor of a periodical with a circulation of about 1,500, Davis himself had gained considerable renown. Possibly for this reason he deemed it unnecessary to attach his name to Can Pregethwr. No variants have been identified; thus it appears that it did not rival Ymddyddan in fame.

The wording of Can Pregethwr is very clever and the rhythm is light. A preacher is singing throughout, in ballad fashion, about his efforts to convince others of his message of Mormonism. Mormon or Mormonism is not specifically mentioned, however. The seventh stanza and the chorus are typical of the general content:

The Spirit of God, in days of yore,

Led everyone to the truth;

But now the Reverends testify,

That such was not the case for long.

Chorus:

O, lend your ears now,

And listen very carefully;

And judge what is bad or good,

Wrong or right.

At the bottom in capital letters is this bit of advice: "While swallowing pills, let everyone take care, without thinking, not to swallow himself."

Can Pregethwr is first mentioned in the book list in the April 1849 Udgorn Seion (wrapper, p. 4); its price was a halfpenny.

MH, NjP, USlC

Flake no. 2695

Profwch bob peth.

(Prove all things.)

Merthyr Tydfil: J. Davis, Printer, Georgetown,[1849].

4 pp. 17 cm.

This pamphlet consists of 3 parts:

The first two parts were published in the February 1849 Udgorn Seion (pp. 25-29), and the third part appeared in the March 1849 issue (pp. 45-46). The pamphlet is advertised in the April 1849 issue (wrapper, p. 4), and so the date of publication would have to be between the publication dates of Udgorn Seion for March and April.

"J. D." is most likely John Davis, inasmuch as he identified himself with these initials in some of his other writings. "R. Evans" is Robert Evans, a convert to Mormonism of four years and a former Campbellite.

Two variants of the pamphlet have been identified. The copy at the Huntington Library has "John Davis" as printer (instead of "J. Davis") and a slightly different typesetting from the others. Contents, however, are identical.

Its price was a halfpenny each, or three shillings and sixpence per hundred.

CSmH, CU-B, MH, NjP, UPB, USlC, WN

Flake no. 2704

Hanes ymfudiad y Saint i Galifornia; yn gynnwysedig mewn dau lythyr o New Orleans, America, un oddiwrth Capt. D. Jones, a'r llall oddiwrth Mr. Thos. Jeremy, (gynt o Lanybydder), at olygydd Udgorn Seion.

(An account of the Saints' emigration to California; contained in two letters from New Orleans, America, one from Capt. D. Jones, and the other from Mr. Thos. Jeremy, [originally from Llanybydder], to the editor of Zion's Trumpet.)

Merthyr Tydfil: Printed and for sale by J. Davis, Georgetown, 1849.

iv[5]-24 pp. 17 cm.

The two letters contained in this pamphlet were meant to be printed in Udgorn Seion; because of their length, however, John Davis elected to have them constitute a separate publication.

The emigration mentioned in the title refers to the first group of Welsh Mormon converts to leave Britain for the Mormon "Zion," located in the Rocky Mountains. (The whole area from the Rocky Mountains to the west coast was called "California" by the British Saints during the late 1840s.)

On 26 February 1849 the Buena Vista left Liverpool with 249 Welsh Mormons on board. Captain Dan Jones, their leader, had been the leader of all Mormons in Wales prior to his departure in February. His letter (17 of the 24 pages of the pamphlet) is a comprehensive and at times literary account of the fifty-day crossing to New Orleans. Thomas Jeremy's letter (3 pages of the 24) adds a few events not covered by Jones's account, but covers essentially the same material.

Both Jeremy and Jones hoped that others of their compatriots would follow after them; consequently their letters are filled with encouragement and positive experiences. Even the burials at sea are viewed in a positive light—the sea would preserve the body for resurrection better than would the earth.

In his 2-page foreword, John Davis quotes a letter which was supposedly from Dan Jones, but it was dated 27 February 1849, New Orleans, just one day after the group's departure from Liverpool. This, together with a few other strange aspects of the letter, led Davis to conclude that the letter was a forged one, written by antagonists in South Wales in an effort to thwart the success of the Mormons.

The pamphlet was published in two states. After 1,500 copies were printed (the preface is dated 26 May 1849), Davis received yet another letter from New Orleans, this one from Thomas Richards, who sailed on the Hartley, a ship that left Liverpool one week after the Buena Vista. On board the Hartley were approximately seventy-five Welsh Mormons who had not been able to travel on the Buena Vista because of space limitations. Upon receiving Richards's letter, Davis inserted an 11-line paragraph about the Hartley travelers on page iv of the pamphlet (the last of the foreword).

Hanes ymfudiad y Saint has a full title page with a double straight-lined border. Its price was twopence. In the May 1849 Udgorn Seion (wrapper, p. 2), Davis declared his intention to publish the Jones and Jeremy letters (both dated New Orleans, 18 April 1849) as a separate pamphlet. Strangely, this publication is not mentioned again in Udgorn Seion, nor does it appear in any book lists. Possibly the supply was depleted rapidly with no call for a second printing, since the information it contained was outdated.

CU-B, MH, NjP, UPB, USl, USlC, WN

Flake no. 4475

Casgliad o hymnau newyddion ynghyd ag odlau ysbrydol, at wasanaeth Saint y Dyddiau Diweddaf.

(Collection of new hymns together with spiritual verses, for the use of the Latter-day Saints.)

Merthyr Tydfil: Printed and for sale by J. Davis, Georgetown, 1849.

viii-[104] pp. 7 cm. x 10.5 cm.

In the April 1849 Udgorn Seion, John Davis announced that he was preparing the material for a new hymn book, to be ready by June, and issued a call for any "good new hymns" that might merit a place in the hymnal (wrapper, p. 2). Another notice appeared in the May issue (wrapper, p. 2), followed by an apology for delay in the June issue. Davis blamed the delay on the letters he had received concerning the crossing of the Buena Vista. The urgency for getting the letters into print he said, superseded his commitment to the hymnal. He also put part of the blame on the cholera epidemic then raging in the Merthyr Tydfil area.

Casgliad o hymnau newyddion appears to have been published by July 1849, inasmuch as it is advertised in that month's Udgorn Seion (wrapper, p. 2). Also on page 2 of the wrapper, Davis rectified an omission in his foreword to the hymnal—not mentioned was the symbol "—" which was to indicate that the composer of a hymn was unknown. He also called attention to the omission of the word all in line 1, verse 3, of hymn 190 (one of the five hymns in English).

Davis chose not to include any of the 133 hymns from Dan Jones's 1846 hymnal; thus, all who wished to bind the two of them together could do so in order to have a "completeness" (Casgliad o hymnau newyddion, foreword). Davis wished to avoid including any hymns from the other denominations lest the Mormons be criticized for using "products of the world."

Of the 194 hymns selected for inclusion, 71 were composed by John Davis himself. The other 123 had come from 28 other composers, whom Davis identifies by their initials after each hymn. In his foreword, Davis addresses the others:

Perhaps many will see frequent changes in their hymns, which were made through permission of some and without others being aware. The aim of the compiler was to improve them, though that may not be the result; if he offended, he begs forgiveness, and assures that he will not revise further inferior hymns, rather he will discard them.

In order to assist the Saints in selecting hymns appropriate to the occasion, Davis arranged the index under 2 main headings: "Hymns for Public Meetings" and "Hymns for Social Meetings."

Under the first category are 15 divisions: the Restoration, funerals, baptism, Babylon, gratitude, coming of Christ, the gospel, the Church, persecution, invitation, prayers, Zion, kingdom, emigration, and miscellaneous.

Under the second category are 10 divisions: love, counsel, gifts, prayers, praise to God, the sacrament, Zion, departure, meeting, and miscellaneous.

The hymns range from 4 lines to 60 (hymn number 121). All of the Welsh hymns (numbers 1 through 189) are included in the larger hymnal which Davis published in 1852.

NjP, UPB, WN

Flake no. 1871

L'Evangile. (French)

(The gospel.)

Merthyr Tydfil: Printed by John Davis, Georgetown, [1849].

2 pp. 17 cm.

L'Evangile is essentially a translation of The gospel, a tract written in English. Consequently, although William Howells did not compose the contents of the tract, it was he who was responsible for getting the translation and printing done as part of the preparation for his mission to France, which began in July 1849.

Howells, the first Mormon missionary to France, took a generous supply of pamphlets with him to his field of labor. In a 10 September 1849 letter to John Davis, he mentioned having distributed in Le Havre during one month "about 1,500 pamphlets in French, Italian, Creole, English and Spanish" (Udgorn Seion, September 1849, pp. 172-73). Many of these he sold or loaned; but the French leaflet he gave away to interested parties at no charge.

Only a few minor modifications of the English version were made in the French translation. The most significant is the omission of the following phrase: "Infant sprinkling is therefore unnecessary and unscriptural." Perhaps Howells considered this too strong a condemnation of a widespread practice among French Catholics.

L'Evangile has 33 scriptural references in support of the basic principles of Mormonism which are mentioned in the text. It is advertised on page 4 of the wrapper of the July 1849 issue of Udgorn Seion; its price was a halfpenny.

USlC

Y doniau ysbrydol yn mrawdlys y gelyn; yn cynnwys sylwadau ar ysgrifau "Sylwedydd o'r Gogledd," yn Seren Gomer (o Hydref, 1848, hyd Chwefror, 1849), ynghylch y "doniau ysbrydol."

(The spiritual gifts in the court of the enemy; containing observations on the writings of the "Observer from the North," in Star of Gomer [from October, 1848, until February, 1849], concerning the "spiritual gifts.")

Merthyr Tydfil: Printed and for sale by J. Davis, Georgetown, 1849.

24 pp. 17 cm.

The entire contents of this pamphlet, with the exception of the title page and a 10-line foreword, were published previously in Udgorn Seion, between April and July 1849 (pp. 67-71, 85-93, 108-13, 128-32). John Davis states in his foreword that he was publishing Y doniau ysbrydol at the request of some of the readers of Udgorn Seion.

The "court of the enemy," as mentioned in the title, refers to the Baptist periodical, Seren Gomer (Star of Gomer), which had frequently published anti-Mormon materials and then refused to print anything sent to the editor in rebuttal. The writings of the "Observer from the North," also mentioned in the title, were aimed at refuting Dan Jones's writings on the topic of spiritual gifts. (Jones's Yr eurgrawn ysgrythyrol [The scriptural treasury, item 20] contains those writings as well as his articles on many other facets of Mormonism.)

Davis systematically refutes the observations of the "Observer" and defends his mentor, Dan Jones. The pamphlet is purely doctrinal in nature. The brief foreword is dated 12 July 1849. Its price was twopence.

CU-B, MH, NjP, UPB, USlC, WCS, WN

Flake no. 2980

Bedydd.

(Baptism.)

Merthyr Tydfil: J. Davis, Printer, [1849].

12 pp. 17 cm.

John Davis intended this publication on baptism to be the definitive word on the subject. The well-structured contents are presented under 5 major headings:

Davis devotes 4 pages to the second heading, 5 pages to the third, and a paragraph to each of the other three. He backs up his line of logic with numerous scriptures. Much had been written on the topic by other Mormons by 1849; Davis appears to have availed himself of several sources.

Bedydd was first advertised in the August 1849 Udgorn Seion. Its price was one penny.

CU-B, MH, NjP, UPB, USlC, WN

Flake no. 2694

(The first general epistle from the First Presidency of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, from the Great Salt Lake Valley, to the Saints scattered across the earth.)

Merthyr Tydfil: John Davis, Printer, [1849].

12 pp. 17 cm.

John Davis intended to print Yr epistol cyffredinol cyntaf in the August 1849 Udgorn Seion. On page 2 of the wrapper for that month, however, he stated that there had not been sufficient space. Instead of waiting until the following month's issue, Davis declared that it would appear "without delay" as a separate booklet, price one penny. Strangely, this pamphlet fails to appear in several of Davis's book lists.

In 1851 when Davis assembled his writings into a bound collection which he entitled Y casgl (The compilement, item 61), he included Yr epistol. Two years later in his second Y casgl (The compilement, item 71) he did not include it—an indication, perhaps, that it was out of print. But four years later Daniel Daniels, then editor of Udgorn Seion, listed it in several of his price lists. Either it had been reprinted (rather unlikely for that type of publication, then eight years old), or perhaps copies had been gathered up from distributors who had failed to sell their allotment.

There is no preface or postscript to Yr epistol cyffredinol cyntaf on the part of the translator or the publisher (Davis in both cases). There is a note, however, at the end of the pamphlet which states that it had been translated from the New York Herald for 22 June 1849.

CSmH, MH, NjP, UPB, USl, USlC, WN, WS

Flake no. 1666

Cwyn yr ymfudwr, a'i ddau anerchiad.

(Lament of the emigrant, and his two greetings.)

Merthyr Tydfil: Printed by John Davis, Georgetown, [1849?].

4 pp. 18 cm.

Noah Jones, his wife Esther, and their eleven-year-old daughter Mary were part of the first group of Welsh Mormon emigrants which sailed on the Buena Vista. They left Liverpool 26 February 1849 and arrived at New Orleans fifty days later. The steamboat Constitution transported them up the Mississippi River to St. Louis, where they boarded another steamer, the Highland Mary, to travel up the Missouri River to Council Bluffs, Iowa. A large number died from cholera while on the Missouri, including Noah's wife Esther.

The first of the three poems contained in Cwyn yr ymfudwr (5 stanzas of 9 lines each) reviews the events that surrounded the death of the author's wife while on board the Highland Mary.

The second poem (8 stanzas of 4 lines each) is Jones's call to his compatriots to repent and join him in going to the country "which was given freely to the Saints, before the foundation of the world."

In the last poem (10 couplets, each followed by a 3-line chorus), Jones anticipates the "lovely day" when he and all Welsh Mormons would "go free from the captivity of Babylon the Great."

Jones wrote the second and third poems while he was still in Wales. The first poem he sent back to his family in Wales after he arrived at Council Bluffs. Jones's father had John Davis publish the poems, together with a 7-line explanation of their origins.

Cwyn yr ymfudwr appears in none of Davis's book lists, nor in either edition of Y casgl (the 1851 and 1853 collections of Davis's publications, items 61 and 71). The only extant copy is owned by the Huntington Library and is bound at the end of Udgorn Seion, vol. 5, with items 26, 38, 24, 32, and 55.

CSmH

Cofres-lyfr o aelodau Eglwys Iesu Grist, a elwir Saint y Dyddiau Diweddaf, o dan lywyddiaeth Cymru.

(Register of the members of the Church of Jesus Christ, known as the Latter-day Saints, under the presidency of Wales.)

Merthyr Tydfil: Published, printed, edited and for sale by John Davis, Nantygwenith, Georgetown, 1849.

92 leaves. 23.4 x 38.3 cm.

One of John Davis's prime goals when he assumed responsibility for Church publications in Wales was to produce a large book which would contain a history and record of members for each branch throughout the principality. His first printed reference to this project is in the February 1849 Udgorn Seion (wrapper, p. 2), in which he asks everyone to be patient, inasmuch as such a project required great effort and expense.

In the October 1849 Udgorn Seion (wrapper, p. 2) Davis promised that the book would be ready within a month or two, at the "very reasonable price of just ten shillings." He advised the branches to be prepared to pay for it as they received their copy.

At one time Davis had entertained the idea of having the book printed in England. He eventually decided, however, that he could produce a more attractive book at much lower cost on his own press in Wales.

The November 1849 Udgorn Seion (wrapper, p. 3) carried the notice that the books were at the bindery and would be ready within two or three weeks. Davis had decided to put a high-quality binding on each one; consequently, the price would have to be eleven shillings, still five shillings less than the books prepared by the Church in England.

The result of Davis's laborious efforts was a handsome and a substantial register book. He had leather reinforcement put around the spine (4.5 cm, front and back) and around the four outside corners. The binding is a very heavy one, typical of "official" books of the nineteenth century. On the inside front and back covers and on the outside of the first and last leaves is a heavy paper with a gray-red, cell-like pattern. The verso of these leaves is plain.

On the front cover is an 11 x 6 cm. label. Within the double, straight-lined border is the title, author, and the first part of Revelation 20:12—"And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God; and the BOOKS were opened." Leaf 2, the title page, modifies the title slightly from the cover label: Cofres-lyfr o aelodau Eglwys Iesu Grist, a elwir Saint y Dyddiau Diweddaf, ymgynnulledig yn Nghangen _____________, yn Nghynnadledd ______________, o dan lywyddiaeth Cymru. (Register of the members of the Church of Jesus Christ, which is called the Latter-day Saints, congregated in the _____________ Branch, in the _______________ Conference, under the presidency of Wales.) Revelation 20:12 is then quoted in its entirety; publication details follow.

Leaf 3 contains a lengthy foreword, dated 9 November 1849, which is replete with instruction and exhortation concerning use of the book. Leaves 4-11 and 82-91 are printed with blue horizontal lines 0.9 cm. apart. The front leaves were intended to contain a history of the branch; the last leaves were for additional information.

Leaves 12-81 have blue horizontal lines 1.6 cm. apart. Beginning on the inside of leaf 12 and continuing to the inside of leaf 81 are columns of varying width. When the book is lying open, there are 33 columns extending over the two pages. There are 19 major headings: number, name, occupation, residence, birth (date, parish, county), baptism (age, date, by whom), confirmation (date, by whom), disfellowshipped (date, reason), restored, excommunicated (date, reason), received by letter (date, from what branch, beginning), transferred (date, to which branch), ordained deacon (date, by whom), ordained teacher (date, by whom), ordained priest (date, by whom), ordained elder (date, by whom), died, emigrated, notes. The details called for in parentheses constitute the subheadings, each of which has a column beneath it.

Davis stated that the book would have 200 pages. Since there is no pagination, the number of leaves bound in each book could have varied. The one examined for this discussion is the one for the Cardiff Branch. This and the other 36 extant copies of Cofres-lyfr are housed at the Granite Mountain Records Vault of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Salt Lake City, Utah.

USlC

Sylwadau ar yr hyn sydd o ran, a'r hyn sydd berffaith.

(Observations on that which is in part, and that which is perfect.)

Merthyr Tydfil: Printed, published and for sale by J. Davis, Nantygwenith, Georgetown, 1850.

16 pp. 17 cm.

The scripture quoted on the title page (1 Corinthians 13:8-10) is also quoted on the first page of text (p. 3). The phrase in the title comes from 1 Corinthians 13:10: "But when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away." John Davis uses his line of logic to show that this scripture defends the existence of spiritual gifts. He explains that "that which is in part" is the imperfect Church member, who at the time of Paul and the other Apostles, enjoyed spiritual gifts despite his lack of perfection. And until the Church members became perfect they would continue to have those gifts; consequently the Latter-day Saints, still imperfect, were blessed with the same spiritual gifts as received by the "saints" centuries earlier.

Davis further explains that "that which is perfect" has reference to the saints after the gospel has "perfected" them. At that time, the gifts will no longer be necessary and will "be done away."

A 16-line poem which sums up Davis's argument is placed at the end of the text.

Although 1850 is the date on the title page, Sylwadau, on the last page of the wrapper of the December 1849 Udgorn Seion, was advertised as being "newly published." Its price was one-and-a-half pence.

CU-B, MH, NjP, UPB, USlC, WCS

Flake no. 2706

Athrawiaeth iachus.

(Sound doctrine.)

Merthyr Tydfil: John Davis, Printer, [1850].

4 pp. 17 cm.

John Davis expounds on 2 Timothy 4:3 for this small pamphlet, using numerous other scriptural passages to support his conclusions. These conclusions were that the only church then preaching sound doctrine was The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and that the other churches were those who could "not endure sound doctrine."

The December 1849 issue of Udgorn Seion has the entire contents of Athrawiaeth iachus (pp. 225-29). It was first advertised in the March 1850 issue of Udgorn Seion (wrapper, p. 3) and sold for a halfpenny.

CU-B, MH, NjP, UPB, USlC, WN, WS

Flake no. 2693

Pregethu i'r ysbrydion yn ngharchar, a bedyddio dros y meirw.

(Preaching to the spirits in prison, and baptism for the dead.)

Merthyr Tydfil: Printed and for sale by J. Davis, Georgetown, [1850].

8 pp. 17 cm.

By using biblical phrases in the title of this publication, John Davis followed the procedure used for his previous two pamphlets (items 35 and 36). On the title page, three passages of scripture are quoted: 1 Peter 3:18-20, 1 Peter 4:6, and 1 Corinthians 15:29-30. The 7 pages of text are basically an interpretation of these verses according to Mormon doctrine.

Most of the contents of Pregethu i'r ysbrydion appeared in the March 1850 Udgorn Seion (pp. 61-66). The final paragraphs on page 5 and page 8 of the pamphlet are new, as are the final 14 lines of the 16-line poem at the end of the pamphlet.

Pregethu i'r ysbrydion is advertised in the March 1850 Udgorn Seion (wrapper, p. 3). The only extant copies of the pamphlet, however, all bear the date of 1851. One would conclude that there was a second printing, although it is not mentioned in Udgorn Seion.

CU-B, MH, NjP, UPB, USlC, WN, WS

Flake no. 2703

Ffordd y bywyd tragywyddol, a ddarlunir yn yr ysgrythyrau santaidd.

(The way of eternal life, which is portrayed in the holy scriptures.)

Merthyr Tydfil: Printed and for sale by J. Davis, Georgetown, 1850.

12 pp. 17 cm.

John 5:39-40 is cited on the title page of this pamphlet: "Search the scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal life: and they are they which testify of me. And ye will not come to me, that ye might have life." Numerous other scriptures are quoted throughout the text as John Davis presents his definition of the phrase eternal life. He ends his discussion with John 17:3—"And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou has sent."

The Huntington Library has the only copy of this pamphlet that does not have a 16-line poem on the final page. All copies, however, carry the date of 1850 on the title page. There were apparently two separate printings of the pamphlet, and the blank space left on page 12 of the first printing was filled in with some poetry when the second printing was made.

Ffordd y bywyd tragywyddol was first advertised in the April 1850 Udgorn Seion (wrapper, p. 4). Its price was one penny.

CSmH, CU-B, MH, NjP, UPB, USlC, WN, WS

Flake no. 2702

Ewch, a dysgwch.

(Go, and teach.)

Merthyr Tydfil: Printed by J. Davis, Georgetown, [1850].

2 pp. 17 cm.

The title for this 2-page leaflet is taken from Matthew 28:19-20: "Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: and lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world. Amen." John Davis explains that this injunction, given by Christ to his Apostles after his resurrection, has application to modern-day believers as well. Davis addresses two main issues: the proper teachings of the true religion and the appropriate mode of baptism.

The contents of this small publication first appeared in the April 1850 Udgorn Seion (pp. 95-97). In that same issue (wrapper, p. 4), Ewch, a dysgwch is advertised as being available to the book distributors for two shillings per hundred. The price for an individual leaflet is not mentioned. It most likely sold for a halfpenny, or perhaps, because of its size, it may have been given away without charge.

CU-B, MH, NjP, UPB, USlC, WN

Flake no. 2701

Crefydd a grym.

(Religion and strength.)

Merthyr Tydfil: Printed by John Davis, Georgetown, [1850].

2 pp. 17 cm.

This leaflet consists of 3 hymns written for Mormons. The first is entitled "Crefydd a grym" and was to be sung to the tune of "Life let us cherish," presumably a well-known melody at that time. Its structure is 4 verses of 4 lines each, plus a 4-line chorus intended for repetition after each verse.

The second hymn is identical to the first in format and carries the title of "Seion" (Zion). The first two hymns are followed by the initials "J. D.," thus identifying the composer as John Davis. Both hymns are included in Davis's 1852 hymnal (no. 268 and no. 269).

The third hymn, "Llawenydd y Saint" (Joy of the Saints), has 4 verses of 8 lines each plus a 2-line chorus. "T. H." are the initials which follow. These could refer to Thomas Harris, who had composed other hymns and poetry appearing in Udgorn Seion.

Crefydd a grym was first advertised in the April 1850 Udgorn Seion (wrapper, p. 4). Its price was a halfpenny.

CU-B, MH, NjP, UPB, USlC

Flake no. 2699

(Lectures on faith, which were delivered first before a class of elders, in Kirtland, Ohio, in America.)

Merthyr Tydfil: Printed and for sale by J. Davis, Georgetown, 1850.

[ii]-40 pp. 17 cm.

The 7 lectures which comprise Darlithiau ar ffydd first appeared in Udgorn Seion, January to May 1850 (7-10, 39-49, 67-71, 97-105, 123-35). John Davis had translated them from English into Welsh from the Doctrine and Covenants; he had omitted, however, the "Questions and answers" which follow each of the first five lectures in the English version. The following year, with the translation and publication of Llyfr Athrawiaeth a Chyfammodau (The book of Doctrine and Covenants, item 60), Davis included the "Questions and answers," resulting in 19 additional pages of text.

In his 8-line "Hysbysiad" (Notice), on the verso of the title page, Davis states that he was publishing the Darlithiau ar ffydd in a separate booklet at the request of several readers of Udgorn Seion, so that more people would have access to them.

The lectures were delivered before the School of Elders in Kirtland during the winter of 1834. They cover such basic doctrines of Mormonism as faith, the attributes of the Godhead, salvation, and man's relationship to God. Although Joseph Smith may not have authored everything in the lectures, he did have a hand in preparing them for publication in the 1835 Doctrine and Covenants.

Darlithiau ar ffydd was first advertised in the May 1850 Udgorn Seion (wrapper, p. 4). The price was fourpence.

MH, NjP, UPB, USlC, WCS, WN

Flake no. 7282

Corff Crist, neu yr eglwys.

(The body of Christ, or the church.)

Merthyr Tydfil: John Davis, Printer, 1850.

12 pp. 17 cm.

In this pamphlet, John Davis takes the reader through a lengthy discussion of the Apostle Paul's analogy in 1 Corinthians 12:14-30. According to Davis's explanation, the members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are the parts of the body of Christ referred to in verse 27. He gives particular emphasis to verse 20 ("But now are they many members, yet but one body") and declares that the "one body" means there is only one true Church, the one he represents.

At the end of the treatise, Davis puts an exact date, 10 May 1850, something which he rarely did with his publications. Corff Crist was advertised in Udgorn Seion, the issue for June 1850 (wrapper, p. 4). The price was one penny.

CSmH, CtY, CU-B, MH, NjP, UPB, USlC, WCS, WN

Flake no. 2698

A welcome hymn.

Merthyr Tydfil: J. Davis, Printer, 1850.

1 p. 17 cm.

This hymn was composed in English by John Davis in honor of the Apostle John Taylor's visit to Merthyr Tydfil on 9 June 1850. John Taylor had visited Wales on a previous occasion, over three years before. Both times he was the featured speaker at a conference. Because most Welsh Mormons did not understand English, Taylor's comments had to be interpreted into Welsh. Whether this was done simultaneously or otherwise is not clear from the conference minutes.

It was a rare occasion for one of the Twelve Apostles of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to visit the Saints in Wales. Thus John Davis prepared A welcome hymn to make the Apostle's visit memorable, both to him and to those who attended the conference. Davis states in the three lines which follow the title that the hymn was sung at the conference, but he does not indicate by whom. If it was sung by the congregation, there were many who, because of the language barrier, had no idea what they were singing.

Although conclusive evidence is lacking, the hymn was most likely printed before the conference so that those singing it would have the words.

A welcome hymn consists of 3 verses of 8 lines each. There is a double straight-lined border around the contents. It was not advertised in Udgorn Seion, but it was included in a 26 July 1851 price list, item 58. Its price was a halfpenny.

MH, NjP, USlC

Flake no. 2712

Tystiolaeth y Sant.

(Testimony of the Saint.)

Merthyr Tydfil: J. Davis, Printer, 1850.

1 p. 17 cm.

Apparently A welcome hymn (item 43), composed and published by John Davis in honor of Apostle John Taylor's second visit to Wales in June 1850, was well received by Welsh Mormons, as two more poems were published almost immediately afterwards. Both Tystiolaeth y Sant and Dyddiau Noah (The days of Noah, item 45) are dated 28 June 1850.

Tystiolaeth y Sant consists of eight 4-line stanzas in which "the Saint" (Davis) declares his joy at having come out of the darkness of the world (the other religions) into the light of the restored gospel (Mormonism). Despite the jeers of former colleagues, he considers himself favored of the Lord to have been able to receive the privilege of true baptism and an understanding of life that removes fear of death.

Tystiolaeth y Sant was advertised in the July 1850 Udgorn Seion (wrapper, p. 3). Its price was a halfpenny.

CU-B, MH, NjP, UPB, USlC, WN

Flake no. 2711

Dyddiau Noah.

(The days of Noah.)

Merthyr Tydfil: John Davis, Printer, 1850.

4 pp. 17 cm.

This rather lengthy narrative poem carries the same date (28 June 1850) as Tystiolaeth y Sant (Testimony of the Saint, item 44). It is, as the title suggests, a poetic account of events that preceded the building of the ark and the devastation of the Flood. John Davis moralizes considerably about those who rejected the message of the prophet Noah.

The poem consists of 30 stanzas of 4 lines each. Each line has 13 syllables. In 1868, when Davis published his Beehive Songster in Salt Lake City, the first of the 21 items he included was an English translation of Dyddiau Noah (pp. 5-11).

The poem was first advertised in the July 1850 Udgorn Seion (wrapper, p. 3). It sold for a halfpenny.

CU-B, MH, NjP, UPB, USlC, WN, WS

Flake no. 2700

Ymddyddanion.

(Conversations.)

Merthyr Tydfil: Printed by J. Davis, Georgetown, [1850].

4 pp. 17 cm.

There are 3 divisions to this publication, all of which had been published previously in Udgorn Seion. The first section is entitled "Buddioldeb Beiblau i'r paganiaid" (The benefit of Bibles to the pagans) and consists of a conversation between William (a Protestant) and Thomas (a Mormon). At the outset, William reports enthusiastically to Thomas of his church's effort to distribute the Bible to nonbelievers. Thomas counters with the observation that Jesus had requested the gospel, not the Bible, to be taken to the world. Furthermore, continues Thomas, even if the pagans were to read the Bible they would simply continue as nonbelievers once they saw the discrepancies between the Savior's teachings and the teachings of the Protestants. Thomas's explanation of the close alignment of Mormon doctrine with Bible teachings has such an impact on William that William's closing comment is that he will soon be a Mormon himself.

The second section is entitled "Y parchedig a'r pagan" (The reverend and the pagan) and is a conversation in which a pagan challenges a reverend about the discrepancy between the characteristics of Christ's church, as mentioned by Paul in 1 Corinthians 12:28, and the characteristics of the various Protestant sects. When informed by the reverend that such things as apostles, prophets, miracles, and the gifts of healing are no longer necessary in the true church, the pagan says that he will continue with his gods of wood and stone.

"Credo Saint y Dyddiau Diweddaf" (The creed of the Latter-day Saints) is the title of the third section; the contents are what now comprise the Articles of Faith of the LDS church. The eleventh one, included in this 1850 printing of 14 statements, is no longer part of the modern-day 13 Articles. It reads as follows: "We believe in the literal resurrection of the body, and that the dead in Christ will rise first, and that the rest of the dead live not again until the thousand years are expired."

"Buddioldeb Beiblau i'r paganiaid" first appeared in the June 1850 Udgorn Seion (pp. 149-60). A pagination error occurred in that issue of Udgorn Seion; page 160 follows immediately after page 149, inasmuch as the typesetter placed a 6 where a 5 was intended.

"Y parchedig a'r pagan" was printed in the May 1850 issue of Udgorn Seion (pp. 121-22).

"Credo Saint y Dyddiau Diweddaf" first appeared in the May 1850 Udgorn Seion (pp. 135-37).

Ymddyddanion is among the publications listed for sale in the July 1850 Udgorn Seion (wrapper, p. 3). Its price was a halfpenny.

CU-B, MH, NjP, UPB, USlC, WN

Flake no. 2716

Cyfarwyddiadau i'r ymfudwyr tua Dinas y Llyn Halen, mewn llythyr oddiwrth Wm. Morgan, Kanesville, Iowa, at yr Henuriaid W. Phillips a J. Davis, Merthyr; yn yr hwn y cynnwysir llythyr oddiwrth yr Apostolion Benson a Smith, ynghyd a Chapt. D. Jones.

(Directions to the emigrants to Salt Lake City, in a letter from Wm. Morgan, Kanesville, Iowa, to Elders W. Phillips and J. Davis, Merthyr; also contained is a letter from Apostles Benson and Smith, and Capt. D. Jones.)

Merthyr Tydfil: Printed and for sale by J. Davis, Georgetown, 1850.

12 pp. 17 cm.

Due to lack of space in the September 1850 Udgorn Seion, John Davis decided to publish separately the information contained in this pamphlet, which he distributed to Welsh Mormons along with the Udgorn Seion for that month. Normally Davis announced the availability of new pamphlets and awaited orders to come from the various distributors. Because of the vital nature of Cyfarwyddiadau i'r ymfudwyr, however, he boldly sent it to his distributors without waiting for orders, on the assumption that no Mormon would want to be without one.

The information of greatest interest to future emigrants is contained in a letter written by three individuals: Elder E. T. Benson, Elder G. A. Smith, and Dan Jones. Dated 21 September 1849, it was written at a point 649 miles from Winter Quarters, as the first group of Welsh Mormon pioneers and others trudged along toward the Salt Lake Valley. The letter was written in English and sent to William Morgan in Kanesville (Council Bluffs), Iowa, where many Mormons, including 113 Welsh converts, were preparing to cross the plains. Jones requested that Morgan translate the letter into Welsh and forward it to John Davis for publication in Udgorn Seion. The letter contains details of the journey and numerous suggestions for those who would follow after.

In addition to the translated letter, William Morgan wrote one of his own, dated 19 July 1850, which contains information about the Welsh emigrants of Dan Jones's 1849 group who had remained in Council Bluffs. Lack of funds had not permitted them to continue directly on to Salt Lake City. Morgan, from his vantage point, offered many helpful hints to those who would later make the journey.

Each of the two letters occupies just over 4 pages. Had either one been a bit shorter, the pamphlet may have been just 8 pages in length, but using 12 pages (the next larger size), Davis was able to include a title page and 3 pages of poetry.

The first poem is entitled "Galarnad Seion" (Lamentation of Zion) and consists of 6 stanzas of 6 lines each. Zion laments having been uprooted and having her children suffer. The "Father" offers comfort and promises relief, which Zion gratefully receives in the fifth stanza. In the sixth, all voices join in, encouraging the Saints to be faithful and to rejoice in their new land. The poem was translated by "Gwilym Ddu" (Black William), a pen name for William Lewis, who was one of the Welsh pioneers in the Dan Jones group. Neither the original English title nor author is given.

The second bit of poetry is by "Gwilym Ddu" (Black William) and is entitled "Englynion," a word that has no translation in English but which means "alliterative stanzas." There are 4 stanzas of 4 lines each. Gwilym Ddu uses the poem as a means of scoffing at those in Wales who prophesied that Dan Jones would take all the emigrants to Cuba and sell them as slaves. The poet issues a warning to the antagonists and ends by comparing Jones to Moses, as one who was leading them to the "land of praise" (p. 12).
