The pamphlet has two states: one that has "Pris lg" (Price one penny) at the bottom and one that does not.

MH, NjP, UPB, USlC, WCS

Flake no. 5513

Tri llythyr oddiwrth Capt. D. Jones, ac un oddiwrth Mrs. Lewis (o Gydweli), o Ddinas y Llyn Halen.

(Three letters from Capt. D. Jones, and one from Mrs. Lewis [of Kidwelly], from Salt Lake City.)

Merthyr Tydfil: John Davis, Printer, 1850.

8 pp. 17 cm.

John Davis's "At y darllenydd" (To the reader), written 24 September 1850, explains the existence of this pamphlet:

The following letters arrived on the 21st of September, after we had printed the Udgorn [Trumpet, shortened title] together with Cyfarwyddiadau i'r ymfudwyr [Directions to the emigrants, item 47], and we thought it best to publish them without delay; and in hopes that many will be distributed, so that our sacrifice will not be too great, we venture to offer them at half price, i.e., a halfpenny.

Most of the Welsh Mormons planned to follow Captain Dan Jones's route from Liverpool to Salt Lake City via New Orleans, St. Louis, and Council Bluffs. These letters were the first to reach Wales from those who had crossed the ocean and the plains in 1849, so all Welsh Mormons were anxious to read them. Had they arrived a few days earlier, space would have been provided for them in the September 1850 Udgorn Seion. And had they arrived a few days later, the pamphlet would likely have contained an additional letter from Thomas Jeremy which, according to Davis's 10-line foreword, arrived the same day the pamphlet was at the press.

Jones's first letter, dated 20 November 1849, was directed to William Phillips, his successor in Wales. The next two were both dated 12 April 1850—one to William Phillips, the other to John Davis. The letter by Elizabeth Lewis, directed to John Davis, was dated 10 April 1850. The first letter, although dated over four months earlier than the others, was sent with them. Jones explained in his second letter that he had intended to send the first with a group of American soldiers who passed through Salt Lake City in late November, but bad weather had kept the soldiers from leaving until the following spring.

All the letters contained glowing reports of circumstances in the Salt Lake Valley. The Welsh pioneers who had crossed the plains between Council Bluffs and Salt Lake City the previous year were getting settled and were prospering in their "promised land." Strong encouragement was offered to all to hasten after them.

MH, NjP, UPB, USlC, WS

Flake no. 4481

Can newydd, o ganmoliaeth i lywyddiaeth Eglwys Iesu Grist o Saint y Dyddiau Diweddaf.

(A new song, of praise to the Presidency of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.)

Merthyr Tydfil: Printed by J. Davis, [1850?].

4 pp. 16.7 cm.

Directly beneath the title of this publication is the following information: "Cyfansoddwyd a chyhoeddwyd, trwy ganiatad, gan Margaret Jones, Georgetown (sef, Eos Cymru Newydd)" (Composed and published, with permission, by Margaret Jones, Georgetown [that is, New Wales's Nightingale]).

Although the title suggests just one, there are actually two poems in this publication. The first consists of 6 stanzas of 10 lines each. The poet praises Brigham Young, the Apostles, Dan Jones, and William Phillips. She asks blessings on all of God's servants and portrays the last days, when peace will finally reign among the Saints.

Can newydd is not advertised in any of the book lists during John Davis's time as Church printer in Merthyr Tydfil (1849-1853), nor is it included in either of Davis's collections of his publications (the 1851 Y casgl [The compilement, item 61] or the 1853 Y casgl [The compilement, item 71]). It appears to have been printed by Davis at the request of Margaret Jones, or perhaps of her family.

It is strange that of all the poetry printed in Udgorn Seion over the years, none of it is by Margaret Jones. Davis was very selective in what he allowed to appear in his periodical and often complained about the inferior quality of the verses sent to him. The verses of Can newydd, with their imperfect rhyme and rather prosaic vocabulary, appear to have been printed by John Davis for pay, not because of their literary qualities.

The only extant copy of this pamphlet is owned by the Brigham Young University Library.

UPB

Flake no. 4491

Duw mawr y sectariaid.

(Great God of the sectarians.)

Merthyr Tydfil: J. Davis, Printer, Georgetown, [1851].

1 p. 17 cm.

This poem appears first in the 25 January 1851 Udgorn Seion (pp. 35-36) and again, six years later, in the 15 August 1857 issue (pp. 258-59). It is a portrayal of God as interpreted by the sectarians, or, in other words, by all non-Mormons in Wales. The poet scoffs at the numerous misconceptions about God and ends with an appeal to Him to hasten in bringing all His children to a knowledge of the "covenant" (Mormonism), in order for them to have a clearer understanding of His nature.

There are 10 stanzas of 4 lines each. The fact that John Davis printed it in Udgorn Seion and included it in both volumes of Y casgl (The compilement, items 61 and 71) would suggest that he viewed it as high-quality verse.

Advertised in the 26 July 1851 book list, its price was a halfpenny.

MH, USlC, WN

Flake no. 7244

Father, son, daughter. A trio.

Merthyr Tydfil: J. Davis, Printer, [1851?].

1 p. 17 cm.

Y tad, y mab, a'r ferch.

(Father, son, and daughter.)

Merthyr Tydfil: Printed by J. Davis, Georgetown, [1851].

1 p. 17 cm.

On the occasion of Apostle John Taylor's visit to Wales in June 1850, John Davis composed and printed A welcome hymn (item 43) in his honor. When John Taylor returned six months later, Davis published some of Taylor's own poetry (Father, son, daughter) in English. The non-English-speaking Mormons in Wales would naturally have wanted a Welsh version of the poem, since it was written by such a high-ranking official of the Church. A translation of it by Benjamin Davies appeared in the 8 February 1851 Udgorn Seion (pp. 51-52). The translation was then published as a broadside.

In 1851 Udgorn Seion began to be published biweekly, without wrappers. The book lists, which had frequently been part of the printed wrappers during 1849 and 1850, ceased to appear. Consequently, there is no mention of the publication of Taylor's poem in either language until the printing of the separate book list of 26 July 1851 (item 58), in which both are advertised.

The poem has six 4-line verses, each followed by a 2-line chorus. The content is as follows:

Verse 1: The son declares his desire to go to the "land of the West" and asks the father to take the family there.

Verse 2: The daughter echoes her brother's wish and request.

Verse 3: The father reminds his children that the journey might be too arduous for him and their mother, both suffering from ill health.

Verse 4: The son reminds his father that it was the Lord's will that they go.

Verse 5: The daughter promises to help her parents.

Verse 6: The father, son, and daughter join together in this last verse in affirming their willingness to "trust in the Lord" and make the journey.

Item 51: MH, USlC, WN

Flake no. 8835

Item 52: CU-B, MH, USlC, WN

Flake no. 8836

Yr achos mawr cyntaf, neu alluoedd hunan-symudawl y bydyssawd.

(The great first cause, or the self-moving forces of the universe.)

Merthyr Tydfil: J. Davis, Printer, 1851.

28 pp. 17 cm.

The English original of Yr achos mawr cyntaf, dated 1 January 1851, was published in Liverpool, then the headquarters of the Church in Great Britain. John Davis must have read Orson Pratt's pamphlet and liked it immediately, as in the 8 March 1851 Udgorn Seion (p. 84) he declared his intention to publish a Welsh translation, priced at twopence. Two weeks later, in the next issue of Udgorn Seion, Davis amended the price to two-and-one-half pence and said the publication would be ready in a week's time.

No further mention is made of Yr achos mawr cyntaf until the 3 May 1851 Udgorn Seion (p. 148), when Davis declared, in answer to "J. D.," that the Welsh translation had been ready for some time.

Pratt's philosophical reasoning in the pamphlet led him to the conclusion that "a self-moving substance is the great first cause and governor of all things." His abstract reasoning is difficult to follow and must have posed a considerable challenge for the humble Welsh miner. In 1865 the pamphlet was declared nondoctrinal by Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and eleven members of the Council of the Twelve (Millennial Star, 21 October 1865, pp. 657-63).

MH, UPB, USlC, WB, WN

Flake no. 6494

Dwy gan.

(Two songs.)

Merthyr Tydfil: J. Davis, Printer, Georgetown, 1851.

4 pp. 17 cm.

"Published, by permission, April 26, 1851" follows the two songs on page 4. Whether the publication was made at the request of the author or the printer is not clear. Unlike the poetry of Margaret Jones (item 49) Dwy gan was included in the 1853 Y casgl (The compilement, item 71). Other poetry of Jonathan J. Thomas (or "Nathan Ddu" [Black Nathan], his pseudonym) appeared in Udgorn Seion over the years.

The first of the two songs is entitled "Y genadwri" (The message) and is presented in 7 stanzas of 6 lines each. The subject matter is the restoration of the eternal gospel in modern times.

The second song, entitled "Y trysor o'r mynydd" (The treasure from the mountain), has 2 major divisions of 24 lines each. It deals with the significance of the "treasure" (the gold plates which an angel delivered to Joseph Smith) that came out of the "mountain" (the Hill Cumorah, where the gold plates were hidden) for the benefit of mankind.

UPB, USlC, WN

Flake no. 8908

Traethawd ar wyrthiau, yn darlunio pa beth ydynt, eu dyben, y pryd eu cyflawnir, a'u safonolrwydd i brofi dwyfoldeb crefydd.

(Treatise on miracles, describing what they are, their purpose, when they are effected, and their basis for proving the divinity of a religion.)

Merthyr Tydfil: Printed and for sale by J. Davis, Georgetown, 1851.

12 pp. 17 cm.

Dated 5 May 1851, Traethodau ar wyrthiau represents Davis's attempt to clarify the great confusion that existed throughout Wales with respect to miracles, a topic that was widely discussed but not widely understood. There are 4 basic headings, as suggested in the title: (1) "Pa beth yw gwyrthiau?" (What are miracles?), (2) "Pa beth yw dyben gwyrthiau?" (What is the purpose of miracles?), (3) "A all gwyrthiau gael eu cyflawni ar ol dyddiau Crist a'r Apostolion?" (Can miracles be effected after the days of Christ and the Apostles?), (4) "A yw gwyrthiau yn ddigon o safon i brofi dwyfoldeb crefydd?" (Are miracles a sufficient basis for proving the divinity of a religion?).

Davis uses logic and the scriptures for his arguments in the first two sections. In the third section, as a counter to the assertions of the Protestants that miracles no longer exist, Davis quotes several accounts of miracles that had been published in the religious periodicals a few years before. And in the fourth section, he concludes that miracles do not prove that a religion is of God, since even the false prophets are capable of working miracles. Consequently, if anyone wishes to know the truth of a religion, he will have to follow the advice given by the Savior in John 7:17 and do the will of the Father.

Traethawd ar wyrthiau sold for one penny.

CSmH, CU-B, MH, UPB, USlC, WN

Flake no. 2709

Hymnau, wedi eu cyfansoddi a'u casglu, yn fwyaf neillduol, at wasanaeth Saint y Dyddiau Diweddaf.

(Hymns, composed and collected most particularly for the use of the Latter-day Saints.)

Merthyr Tydfil: Printed and for sale by J. Davis, Georgetown, 1851. 2nd printing.

vii-[56] pp. 7 cm. x 10.5 cm.

Except for the typesetting, this little hymnal is identical to the one Dan Jones produced in 1846 (item 7). In printing this second edition John Davis retained the pagination of the first edition and even included Jones's foreword.

In his 1849 hymnal (item 28) Davis had purposely omitted all of the hymns in Jones's 1846 hymnal (item 7) so the two books would complement each other. Because of the scarcity of the earlier hymnal by 1850 and because its contents were popular with Welsh Mormons, Davis decided to print a second edition.

In the 31 May 1851 Udgorn Seion (p. 180) was an announcement that this second edition, which Davis calls the "Old Hymn Book," was ready, unbound. It was not advertised in the 26 July 1851 book list (item 58), nor was it mentioned further until the 9 August 1851 Udgorn Seion (p. 260), when Davis advertised that "the two hymn books," bound together, were for sale for one shilling and fourpence. Three months later, it was bound with the 1849 hymnal and the ninth edition (1851) of the Mormon hymnal in English (see item 64).

Only two copies of the 1851 Welsh Mormon hymnal are extant—one at the LDS Church Archives and the other in the hands of a private collector in Provo, Utah.

USlC

Flake no. 1872

Llythyr oddiwrth Capt. D. Jones at Wm. Phillips, yn cynnwys newyddion o Seion.

(A letter from Capt. D. Jones to Wm. Phillips, containing news from Zion.)

Merthyr Tydfil: John Davis, Printer, [1851].

8 pp. 17 cm.

Llythyr oddiwrth Capt. D. Jones has something that no other Welsh Mormon pamphlet has—on the last page, just preceding the name of the printer, is this information: "Published and for sale by Wm. Phillips, 14, Castle Street, Glebeland, Merthyr Tydfil." Although nothing in the publication was written by William Phillips, he received credit probably because the letter quoted in the pamphlet had been sent to him.

Dan Jones's letter is dated March 1851 and was sent from Manti, Utah, a settlement about 150 miles south of Salt Lake City. The previous fall, Brigham Young had requested that Jones settle there. In this rather lengthy letter Jones relates news of Welsh Mormons in Utah that he thought would be of interest to Mormons in Wales.

John Davis advertised the letter's availability in the 12 July 1851 Udgorn Seion (p. 228) with this comment: "Its price is one penny, and it contains splendid news."

MH, UPB, USlC

Flake no. 4478

Llyfrau Saint y Dyddiau Diweddaf, ar werth gan J. Davis, Argraffydd, Georgetown, Merthyr, a chan y Saint trwy Gymru.

(Books of the Latter-day Saints, for sale by J. Davis, Printer, Georgetown, Merthyr, and by the Saints throughout Wales.)

Merthyr Tydfil: Printed and for sale by J. Davis, Georgetown, 1851.

2 pp. 17.5 cm.

On one side of Llyfrau Saint y Dyddiau Diweddaf is a list of available Mormon publications; on the other is a prospectus for the Book of Mormon in Welsh.

Contained in this book list are 31 titles available for purchase through John Davis and Mormon book distributors throughout Wales. The date at the bottom is 26 July 1851.

The printed wrappers for Udgorn Seion during 1849 and 1850 regularly advertised Mormon publications for sale. With the cessation of these printed wrappers at the beginning of 1851, however, only a few titles were advertised on the last page of each issue. Llyfrau Saint y Dyddiau Diweddaf appears to be Davis's effort to furnish the Saints with more complete information as to the available items.

The list has 2 parts: the first contains 30 titles and their full prices; the second provides information as to the discount prices of publications for the distributors if purchased in quantities of twenty-five or more.

In the first part, 16 of the 20 signatures of Llyfr Athrawiaeth a Chyfammodau (The book of Doctrine and Covenants, item 60) are advertised for one-and-a-half-pence each, and Udgorn Seion, a biweekly containing 16 pages, is priced at one penny per issue. Bound volumes of Udgorn Seion for 1850 were available for four shillings. The following titles, listed in Davis's order but with my item numbers, are also named: items 20, 5, 35, 31, 28, 41, 26, 24, 25, 17, 18, 4, 42, 38, 37, 30, 36, 46, 40, 45, 44, 52, 50, D, 51, 43, 53, 55.

In the second part, there is only one title that is not mentioned in the first—Ewch, a dysgwch (Go, and teach, item 39). Titles listed (again in Davis's order, but with my numbers) are items 35, 31, 26, 36, 30, 28, 37, 38, 39, 40, 42, 46, 45, 44.

On the verso of the book list is a prospectus: "To be published without delay, in Welsh, in signatures priced at one-and-a-half-pence each, the Book of Mormon: that is, an account written by the hand of Mormon, on pages which were taken from the plates of Nephi."

The English edition used as the basis for the announced translation was the second European edition of the Book of Mormon. Davis lists four conditions:

Davis then makes an appeal to all the "Brethren" in Wales to publicize Llyfr Mormon (The Book of Mormon, item 65) widely, even to the "world" (non-Mormons). If the number of subscribers reached two thousand, there would be a reduction of a halfpenny in the price of all signatures past number twenty.

The only two extant copies of this book list and prospectus are bound with the 1851 Y casgl (The compilement, item 61).

MH, USlC

(Testament of the twelve patriarchs, the sons of Jacob. To this was added the epistle of the Apostle Paul to the Laodicians. And also something about the death of Paul in Rome, under Nero Caesar.)

Merthyr Tydfil: Printed and for sale by J. Davis, 1851. Third edition revised.

74 pp. 18.5 cm.

This "third edition" of Testament y deuddeg patriarch is a verbatim printing done by John Davis from a "second edition," which was printed in Caernarfon by L. E. Jones in 1822, also in Welsh. Because of page and print size, Davis's version contains fewer than half the 167 pages of the 1822 edition.

Except for a small segment of 1 1/2 pages (Testament, pp. 68-69), the entire contents of Davis's Testament first appeared in Udgorn Seion, in the first twelve issues of 1851 (pp. 10-14, 29-32, 42-46, 64-67, 73-81, 86-95, 105-8, 124-31, 138-41, 158-61, 170-79, 187-93, 204-9, 225-26). Later that same year the following announcement appeared in the 9 August 1851 Udgorn Seion (p. 260): "We have about one hundred copies of Testament y deuddeg patriarch published in book form, price tenpence, sewn."

The only extant copy of this book is owned by one of John Davis's descendants in Salt Lake City.

(The book of Doctrine and Covenants pertaining to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; collected from the revelations of God.)

Merthyr Tydfil: Published and for sale by J. Davis, Georgetown, 1851. Translated from the 2nd European edition, by John Davis.

xvi-304 pp. 17.6 cm.

The first indication that the Doctrine and Covenants was to be published in Welsh was John Davis's comment in the August 1850 Udgorn Seion (wrapper, p. 3): "We have been counseled to translate the Doctrines and the Covenants, and we shall give further information about it." When the book was published, the title Athrawiaethau a'r Cyfammodau (The Doctrines and the Covenants) was somewhat altered.

A full-page prospectus appeared on page 4 of the wrapper of Udgorn Seion for both the November and December issues of 1850. Here Davis announces that he intends to publish the book in about 20 signatures which would be sent out one or two at a time with the biweekly issues of Udgorn Seion. In the December prospectus, Davis makes an appeal for more subscriptions than the 750 received.

Davis proudly announces in the 22 February 1851 Udgorn Seion (p. 68) that the first signature of Llyfr Athrawiaeth a Chyfammodau was off the press. He also says: "If the Saints in general wish it to be published every week instead of every fortnight for one-and-a-half pence, let us know." Such a statement suggests that Davis was ahead of schedule with his translation. Apparently the response to Davis's idea was positive, inasmuch as in twenty-seven weeks from that time, the twentieth and last signature was sent out with the 23 August 1851 Udgorn Seion. These 20 signatures were then bound together for the final product.

CSmH, MH, UPB, USl, USlC, UU, WB, WN, WSW

Flake no. 2942

Y casgl; neu grynhoad o draethodau, caniadau, a llythyron, perthynol i Saint y Dyddiau Diweddaf.

(The compilement; or a collection of treatises, songs, and letters, pertaining to the Latter-day Saints.)

Merthyr Tydfil: Printed and for sale by J. Davis, Georgetown, 1851.

[276] pp. 17 cm.

Having served for nearly three years as printer of all Welsh Mormon materials, John Davis had accumulated a very impressive list of publications, most of which he himself had authored. The likelihood of survival for his numerous pamphlets and poems was minimal at best; consequently, Davis determined to put a binding around 28 items which his press had produced. Thus they would not only be preserved for posterity, but their sale at three shillings for each bound volume would add to Davis's own income.

In the 6 September 1851 Udgorn Seion, Davis advertised the availability of Y casgl. Only two weeks before, he had finished the translation and publication of Llyfr Athrawiaeth a Chyfammodau (The book of Doctrine and Covenants, item 60), and two weeks later he would send out the first signature of Llyfr Mormon (The Book of Mormon, item 65). On 8 December 1851, his wife of one year would give birth to their daughter, Julia Elizabeth. In the midst of all this, subscribers expected their 16 pages of Udgorn Seion every other week. Life was moving at a very fast pace indeed for John Davis.

Quoted on the title page are the words of the Savior after he had fed the five thousand: "Gather up the fragments" (John 6:12). Three months before, the number of church members in Wales had been reported at 5,204 (Udgorn Seion, 28 June 1851, p. 211). Whether Davis was drawing a parallel between the two groups of five thousand, he having fed one of the groups with his publications, is only conjectural.

In his table of contents, Davis divides the 28 items into 3 categories: treatises, songs, and letters. Listed (with Davis's order and according to my item numbers) are the following: treatises—41, 30, 22, 31, 42, 35, 37, 38, 55, 53, 26, 36, 46, 39; songs—24, 25, 40, 44, 45, 51, 52, 43, 50; letters—32, 27, 47, 48, 57.

Although advertised in the book list (item 58) bound with Y casgl, item D (We'll see Joseph and Hyrum) was omitted from Y casgl. For the historian, this exclusion is most unfortunate, since there is no extant copy of this halfpenny poem.

Listed in the table of contents but not in the book list is Davis's first pamphlet (item 22) and all the items under the heading of "Letters." One would surmise that Davis had only enough of these items on hand for inclusion in Y casgl, but not enough to offer for sale.

Although published early enough for inclusion, 4 items are not included in Y Casgl or the book list: 29, 33, 29, 54. The last 3 items are poems written by others and printed by Davis. Dwy gan (Two songs, item 54) was bound with the 1853 Y casgl (The compilement, item 71), and L'Evangile (The gospel, item 29), the little French leaflet Davis had printed for William Howells, was also bound with some copies of the 1853 Y casgl (item 71).

Although Yr epistol cyffredinol (The first general epistle, item 32) is listed in the table of contents of both extant copies of the 1851 Y casgl, it is not bound with the copy at USlC.

MH, USlC

Flake no. 2696

Adolygiad ar draethawd W. Jones, Bethesda, yr hwn a elwir "Egwyddorion Saint y Dyddiau Diweddaf yn cael eu pwyso yn nghlorianau rhesymau ac ysgrythyrau."

(A review of the treatise of W. Jones, Bethesda, which is called "The principles of the Latter-day Saints weighed on the scales of reason and scriptures.")

Merthyr Tydfil: J. Davis, Printer, [1851].

16 pp. 17 cm.

The contents of Adolygiad ar draethawd first appeared in Udgorn Seion for 6 September 1851 (pp. 282-87) and 20 September 1851 (pp. 293-303). As the title suggests, John Davis is reviewing a pamphlet about the Mormons which had been published by a W. Jones a short time before; it had been sent by a fellow Mormon for Davis's evaluation.

In the polemic fashion of the nineteenth century, Davis refutes W. Jones's observations and conclusions one by one, all the while calling attention to Jones's ignorance and lack of perception and preparation.

Jones, on the title page of his 24-page pamphlet, quotes Daniel 5:27, "Tekel; Thou art weighed in the balances, and art found wanting." Davis counters this apparent reference to Mormonism at the conclusion of Adolygiad ar draethawd by advising that no one should shout "Tekel" until he has examined more carefully what is being weighed. Jones concludes his publication with some lines of poetry; Davis does likewise, but with this difference: where Jones predicts that Mormonism will soon be buried and forgotten, Davis prophesies its triumph.

UPB, USlC, WN

Flake no. 2692

Welcome song.

Merthyr Tydfil: [John Davis], 1851.

1 p. 17 cm.

Dated 3 November 1851, Welcome song was composed in English by John Davis to honor Apostle Lorenzo Snow on the occasion of his visit to Wales. The poem consists of 3 stanzas of 8 lines each.

The first three lines of the second stanza ("Welcome, brother, to the people who received the truth from you through the mission you appointed") refer to the call Elder Snow had issued to William Henshaw, in late 1842 or early 1843, to take the gospel to Merthyr Tydfil and environs. From Henshaw's efforts came several hundred converts in the following three years.

In his journal, Lorenzo Snow recorded his reaction to Davis's poem:

During my stay in Wales, I attended a number of very interesting meetings. On the evening of the fourth of November, I addressed a very large assembly, convened in a hall in Tredegar, in Monmouthshire. In the course of the meeting, Elder J. S. Davies [sic] arose, unanticipated by me, and read a poem composed by him, in which he alluded to my visit in Wales as an Apostle, as a very remarkable and wonderful event. I gave him full credit for his good motive and generous feelings, but at the same time felt not a little annoyed that he should have chosen such an unseasonable occasion—in the presence of a large congregation, nine-tenths of which were Gentiles, to read an article of that character. (Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow, Salt Lake City, 1884, p. 189)

No Welsh translation of Welcome song ever appeared in the pages of Udgorn Seion.

USlC, WN

Flake no. 2713

(Bilingual hymnal, containing the two Welsh hymnals and the new English edition.)

[1851.]

7 cm. x 10.5 cm.

Among the converts to Mormonism in Wales were some who spoke only Welsh, some who spoke only English, and some who spoke both languages. This created a rather awkward situation in the religious meetings. Those who spoke only one language just had to be patient when talks were given in the language they did not understand. Eventually, English-speaking branches were formed in Merthyr Tydfil and Swansea to alleviate the situation.

As a partial solution to the singing of hymns in meetings where both languages were represented, John Davis put one binding around three different hymnals: his 1849 Welsh hymnal (item 28), his 1851 printing of Dan Jones's earlier Welsh hymnal (item 56), and Sacred hymns and spiritual songs, for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, in Europe (the ninth edition of the English-language hymnal, published in 1851 in Liverpool).

In the 4 October 1851 Udgorn Seion (p. 324) Davis announced that the Llyfr hymnau dwyieithog would be ready soon. Six weeks later he announced that it was available in calfskin for three shillings (Udgorn Seion, 15 November 1851, p. 372). There is no special title page for this unique publication.

The only extant copy is in the hands of a private collector in Provo, Utah.

(The Book of Mormon; a history written by the hand of Mormon, on plates taken from the plates of Nephi.)

Merthyr Tydfil: Published and for sale by J. Davis, Georgetown, 1852. Translated into English by Joseph Smith, Jr.; and translated from the 2nd European English edition by John Davis.

xii-483 pp. 17 cm.

That the keystone of the Mormon faith did not become available to the several thousand Welsh converts in their own language until after dozens of other items had been produced, including pamphlets, periodicals, a 288-page scriptural commentary, and the Doctrine and Covenants (one of the standard works of Mormonism) is ironic. But the Welsh Mormons (over 5,000 of them by 1851) wanted very much for the Book of Mormon to be translated into the language they could understand. A Brother Thomas Conway even put the desire into verse (Udgorn Seion, June 1850, wrapper, p. 2):

O, that we, the Welsh, might have

The Book of Mormon in our own tongue,

So that we might have greater light

And comforts on our sojourn.

Having finally received authorization from President Franklin D. Richards, who presided over the Church in Great Britain, John Davis set about translating and publishing Llyfr Mormon. As with Llyfr Athrawiaeth a Chyfammodau (The book of Doctrine and Covenants, item 60) he published signatures of 16 pages. On 26 July 1851, about a month before finishing the Doctrine and Covenants, Davis published a prospectus for the Book of Mormon and outlined the procedure he proposed to follow (see item 58). Two weeks later, in the 9 August 1851 Udgorn Seion (p. 260), Davis made a second appeal to his book dealers to take as many subscriptions as possible and to have the information back to him by 31 August 1851. Davis mentioned that he had already begun the translation, and on 20 September 1851, just four weeks after the last signature of Llyfr Athrawiaeth a Chyfammodau had been sent out with Udgorn Seion, the first signature of Llyfr Mormon was sent out. The number of subscriptions had reached 1,500, plus an order in Liverpool for 200 copies of the finished product. Davis renewed the prospectus promise that if the number were to reach 2,000 by the tenth signature, there would be a price reduction by a halfpenny for all signatures after the nineteenth.

On 17 April 1852, thirty-one weeks after the distribution of the initial signatures, the last signatures were sent out with Udgorn Seion. The periodical was then biweekly; so it appears that an average of two signatures of Llyfr Mormon, were sent out with each issue of Udgorn Seion.

In his foreword to the Welsh (Llyfr Mormon, p. iii) dated 6 April 1852 (probably in commemoration of the organization of the Church on that date twenty-two years earlier), Davis stated that the translation was "the best that could be done under disadvantages which the majority of translators do not labor under." He explained that "perspicuity and plain language" had been sought more than "any kind of adornment." Davis also declared to the antagonists of Mormonism in Wales: "Many of you have freely given your opinion of this book and condemned it without ever having seen it; but now after laboring so long under disadvantages, you can read it for yourselves and see whether your former opinions were correct."

Two interesting sidelights to the translation are preserved in a biographical sketch of John Davis in Orson F. Whitney's History of Utah: first, the entire translation was written with one quill pen; second, Samuel Evans, editor of Seren Gomer (Star of Gomer), a Baptist periodical for which Davis had formerly worked, said that it was a "pity such valuable labor in producing so perfect a translation had been bestowed upon so worthless a work as the Book of Mormon" (Salt Lake City, 1904, 4:352).

CSmH, MH, NjP, UPB, USl, USlC, UU, WB, WN

Flake no. 747

A dialogue between the reverend and the boy.

[Merthyr Tydfil: J. Davis], 1852.

1 p. 17 cm.

A dialogue has the date of 28 May 1852 at the bottom as well as the name of the poet "J. Davis." Missing, however, is the bottom line of information which Davis normally included with his publications: "J. Davis, Georgetown, Merthyr Tydfil."

This is an English translation of Davis's first and very successful poem (see item 24). Although the Welsh version of this poem has four variants, no variant has been found for the English version.

A dialogue is advertised in the 12 May 1855 Udgorn Seion (p. 160) for three shillings per hundred.

USlC, WN

Flake no. 2715

Traethodau ar wyrthiau, yn cynnwys adolygiad ar ddarlithiau y Parch. J. Jones, Llangollen, a llyfryn y Parch. J. Davies, Llanelli, ar yr un pwnc.

(Treatises on miracles, containing a review of the lectures of the Rev. J. Jones, Llangollen, and the pamphlet of the Rev. J. Davies, Llanelli, on the same subject.)

Merthyr Tydfil: Printed, published and for sale by J. Davis, John Street, Georgetown, 1852.

[ii]-70 pp. 17 cm.

In early 1852 the Reverend John Jones of Llangollen, the brother of Captain Dan Jones, gave three lectures in Merthyr Tydfil at the Bethesda Chapel (25 February, 3 March, and 17 March). His purpose was to shed light on the topic of miracles and to disprove the Mormon stance concerning them. Jones was countered immediately afterwards by William Phillips and John Davis, who gave public lectures of their own in the White Lion Inn in the center of Merthyr Tydfil.

Controversy was nothing new to John Jones, as he had been involved in debate and conflict for a number of years and was himself a controversial figure who was fairly well known throughout Wales. His press in Rhydybont had been labeled a "prostitute press" by his colleagues of the cloth because he had agreed to publish Mormon materials on it (Seren Gomer, December 1847, p. 375).

It was while working for Jones about six years earlier that John Davis had become acquainted with Mormonism. Although Davis converted to the new religion, Jones continued his life as a Protestant minister and, after moving from Rhydybont (near Llanybydder in Carmarthenshire) to Merthyr Tydfil in about 1850, effectively shed his image as a Mormon sympathizer by preaching vehemently against the tenets of Mormonism. His lectures on miracles gained considerable popularity, and Jones decided to go on tour with them.

Rather than combat Jones with lectures, Davis decided to publish the arguments against him in a series of pamphlets. Because Jones's ideas were similar to those of the Reverend John Davies, Breconshire (see Y doniau gwyrthiol fel eu darlunir yn yr ysgrythyrau sanctaidd [The spiritual gifts as portrayed in the holy scriptures], Brynmawr, 1851), Davis dealt with both these ministers in his writings.

Although it is unclear how many copies Davis printed of this series of treatises, apparently he needed to increase the number, judging from this comment at the end of the second treatise: "And by the way, the first treatise will have a second printing" (p. 24).

Davis's involvement in translating and publishing the Book of Mormon in Welsh somewhat delayed the appearance of the treatises. The last signature of Llyfr Mormon was sent out with the 17 April 1852 Udgorn Seion, and the first treatise on miracles is dated 21 May 1852; the other five are dated 3 June, 15 June, 19 June, 2 July, and 15 July 1852. Each sold for one penny.

In the foreword Davis quotes Jones as having said: "It has to be something before it can cause me to fall." Davis's retort: "Even though we are but a small 'shepherd boy' beside the Giant of Llangollen, yet we feel totally unafraid. . . . Who knows but what the sharp stones of truth from our insignificant slingshot will affect his skull and cause him to fall to the ground?"

CtY, UPB, USlC, WB, WN, WS

Flake no. 2710

Sylwadau ar yr hyn sydd o ran, a'r hyn sydd berffaith.

(Observations on that which is in part, and that which is perfect.)

Merthyr Tydfil: Printed, published and for sale by J. Davis, [1852?].

12 pp. 17 cm.

Although not identified as such, this is simply a second printing of item 35, published in 1850. The contents are identical but were reduced from 16 to 12 pages. The reduction was made by spacing the lines closer together and omitting the separate title page. The price was also reduced from one-and-a-half pence to one penny.

The exact date of this second printing of Sylwadau is not clear. The only time it was advertised (at the second-edition price of one penny) was on the outside back wrapper of Y Perl o Fawr Bris (The Pearl of Great Price, item 69), thus putting its publication at some time prior to 7 September 1852.

USlC, WN

Flake no. 2707

(The Pearl of Great Price; a choice selection from the revelations, translations, and narrations of the late Joseph Smith, first prophet, seer and revelator to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.)

Merthyr Tydfil: Published, printed, and for sale by John Davis, John Street, Georgetown, 1852. Translated from the English by John Davis.

vi-76 pp. 16.8 cm.

Printed wrapper—except for the double straight-lined border, the contents of the outside front are identical to the title page. The outside back has a book list. Nothing is printed on the inside pages of the wrapper.

In the 20 March 1852 Udgorn Seion (p. 100), John Davis announced his intention of publishing this small book, considered scripture by the Mormons, in a Welsh translation. By this time, Davis was nearly finished with his translation of the Book of Mormon, and with the publication of an edition of Y Perl o Fawr Bris the Welsh would have all the Mormon standard works in their own language.

Had Davis begun immediately, Y Perl o Fawr Bris would have been ready within a few weeks; he reordered his priorities, however, and gave his attention instead to the six Traethodau ar wyrthiau (Treatises on miracles, item 67). Only after finishing that project, on 15 July 1852, did Davis begin work on Y Perl o Fawr Bris, which he completed by 7 September 1852, less than eight weeks later.

This edition of the Pearl of Great Price, the first in any language other than English, is nearly identical in content to the Liverpool edition that Franklin D. Richards had published the year before. The only difference is that the Welsh edition also contains what is now section 136 of the Doctrine and Covenants. This 3-page revelation, given to Brigham Young about the trek across the plains, was received 14 January 1847, but not printed until 1 May 1852, when it appeared in the Millennial Star (pp. 150-51).

In addition to the contents of the present-day edition of the Pearl of Great Price, the 1851 Liverpool edition and Y Perl o Fawr Bris contain sections 20, 27, 77, 87, and 107 of today's Doctrine and Covenants. In place of the poem "O, say what is truth?" by John Jaques, which appeared in the Liverpool edition, Y Perl o Fawr Bris has on its last page a poem of 6 stanzas of 4 lines each by John Davis, written especially for the publication of Y Perl o Fawr Bris.

There are several extant copies of Y Perl o Fawr Bris; only one of these, however (the one at USlC), has the printed yellow wrapper preserved. Printed on the outside back of the wrapper is a book list containing 35 items. These are (according to Davis's order and my item numbers) items 65, 60, 23, 20, 5, 68, 31, 28 and 56 bound together, 56 bound separately, 41, 26, 24, 25, 17, 18, 4, 42, 38, 37, 30, 46, 63, 45, 44, 52, 50, D, 51, 53, 55, 59, 62, 27, 67, 69.

Davis borrowed the three woodcuts associated with the "Book of Abraham" (one of the sections of the Pearl of Great Price) from Franklin D. Richards for adaptation in Y Perl o Fawr Bris. Two of these have just one fold; the other has three folds. The USlC copy has bound with it at the end these "Directions to the binder": "Put the first cut to face page 23, the second to face page 30, and the third to face page 35"—instructions written in English and not intended to be bound with the final product. Y Perl o Fawr Bris originally sold for one shilling and twopence.

UPB, USlC, WB, WCC, WCS, WN, WSW

Flake no. 6204

Casgliad o hymnau, caniadau, ac odlau ysbrydol, at wasanaeth Saint y Dyddiau Diweddaf, yn Nghymru.

(Collection of hymns, songs, and spiritual verses, for the use of the Latter-day Saints in Wales.)

Merthyr Tydfil: Published and for sale by J. Davis, in Georgetown, 1852.

xxxii-[5]-[356] pp. 7 cm. x 10.5 cm.

The Welsh Latter-day Saints attached much importance to hymn singing. Even when they numbered fewer than a thousand members, they already had their own set of hymns. By November 1846 Dan Jones had assembled a 64-page collection of 133 hymns (item 7) especially for Mormon services. In July 1849 John Davis added his 112-page hymnal (item 28), which contains 194 hymns. The mutual exclusiveness of the Jones and Davis hymnals complicated matters somewhat, inasmuch as new converts could obtain only the latter, and old members had favorites from each. In 1851 Davis reprinted Jones's 1846 hymnal so that all could have both; the 1849 and the 1851 hymnals were often bound together. And to accommodate congregations in which there were non-Welsh speakers, Davis eventually put into one binding what he called the Llyfr hymnau dwyieithog (Bilingual hymnal, item 64), which contained his 1849 collection, his 1851 reprint of Jones's 1846 collection, and the 1851 Liverpool edition of Sacred hymns and spiritual songs.

With the influx of new converts, the supply of Welsh hymnals became exhausted, and Davis issued an appeal for any new hymns which members thought should be included in yet another hymnal. The date of 29 November 1852 is attached to the preface of the new and final Welsh hymnal. The names of W. S. Phillips, John Davis, and Thomas Pugh are printed following the preface, but the work appears to be largely Davis's.

Jones's 1846 hymnal has a first-line index; Davis's 1849 hymnal has a category-index; the 1852 collection of 575 hymns has both kinds of indexes. With 157 different categories in the one index it may have been a bit confusing to use.

Davis incorporated nearly all the contents of his 1849 hymnal into this new one in 1852, omitting only hymn number 36 and the last five hymns (numbers 190-94), which were in English. Davis used nearly two-thirds of Jones's 1846 hymns—84 of 133. This new, expanded hymnal contains 303 hymns not found in either of its predecessors.

Davis employs a method similar to the one used in his 1849 hymnal for identifying the composer of each hymn: an asterisk indicates that he is the composer; a "-" signifies that the composer is unknown; initials of the composer are used for the remainder.

As with the others, there are only words in the hymnal. Seven basic meters are listed in the two indexes, and the meter of each hymn is indicated immediately following the hymn number.

Page numbers, except for the first and last pages of the hymns, [5] and [356], are indicated at the bottom of each page. The numbers at the top of each page refer to the hymn itself, and often some of the pages have parts of two or three hymns. There are some mispaginations: 230 for 229, 369 for 269, 471 for 271, and 227 for 327. These, however, do not alter the sequential pagination.

The book list on the back of the wrapper for Y wir ffydd (The true faith, item 100) advertises this hymnal at three different prices: the best binding is priced at three shillings and fivepence, the next best at two shillings and twopence, and the least expensive at one shilling and eleven pence.

NjP, UPB, USlC, WN

Flake no. 1873

Y casgl; neu grynhoad o draethodau, caniadau, a llythyron, perthynol i Saint y Dyddiau Diweddaf.

(The compilement; or a collection of treatises, songs, and letters, pertaining to the Latter-day Saints.)

Merthyr Tydfil: Printed and for sale by J. Davis, Georgetown, 1853. 2nd edition.

17 cm.

In the 11 June 1853 Udgorn Seion (p. 388), John Davis advertised his second edition of Y casgl. For most of the twenty-one months since the publication of the first edition, Davis had been occupied with translating and publishing Llyfr Mormon (The Book of Mormon, item 65) and Y Perl o Fawr Bris (The Pearl of Great Price, item 69), as well as with writing his 72-page Traethodau ar wyrthiau (Treatises on miracles, item 67) and assembling his new hymnal (item 70). Davis had written and published a few other things, however, which he wished to include in a second edition of what could be termed his "complete works."

The 11 June 1853 announcement in Udgorn Seion contains a rather curious statement: "Its price varies from three shillings to three shillings and sixpence according to the contents of the book." Apparently some items were in short stock and could not be included in all of the volumes. The two extant copies of Y casgl (1853) are in public repositories: one at the LDS Church Archives in Salt Lake City, containing 34 items; and one at the National Library of Wales, containing only 26. Each has a different table of contents, although each bears the same title and date.

1853 1853 1851

copy copy copies

Item Abbreviated title USlC WN MH, USlC

22 Sylwadau ar bregeth x x

24 Ymddyddan . . . parchedig

. . . bachgenyn x x x

25 Can pregethwr x x

26 Profwch bob peth x x x

27 Hanes ymfudiad y Saint x x x

29 L'Evangile x

30 Y doniau ysbrydol x x x

31 Bedydd x x x

32 Yr epistol cyffredinol cyntaf x

35 Sylwadau ar yr hyn sydd o ran

(1850) x

36 Athrawiaeth iachus x x x

37 Pregethu i'r ysbrydion x x x

38 Ffordd y bywyd tragywyddol x x x

39 Ewch, a dysgwch x x x

40 Crefydd a grym x x

41 Darlithiau ar ffydd x x x

42 Corff Crist, neu yr eglwys x x x

43 A welcome hymn x x

44 Tystiolaeth y Sant x x x

45 Dyddiau Noah x x x

46 Ymddyddanion x x x

47 Cyfarwyddiadau i'r ymfudwyr x x

48 Tri llythyr oddiwrth Capt.

D. Jones x x

50 Duw mawr y sectariaid x x x

51 Father, son, daughter x x x

52 Y tad, y mab, a'r ferch x x x

53 Yr achos mawr cyntaf x x x

54 Dwy gan x x

55 Traethawd ar wyrthiau x x x

57 Llythr oddiwrth Capt. D. Jones x x

62 Adolygiad ar draethawd W. Jones x x

63 Welcome song x x

66 A dialogue . . . reverend

. . . boy x x

67 Traethodau ar wyrthiau x x

68 Sylwadau ar yr hyn sydd o

ran (1852) x x

Even though the title indicates that the items in Y casgl pertain to the Latter-day Saints, there is one poem that appears to fall outside that heading. The 1-page poem entitled Tom's escape is printed on the verso of Dialogue between the reverend and the boy (item 66) and is the story of a caged bird named Tom which escapes and gains his freedom. It is dated 27 April 1848, ten months before Davis moved his press from Carmarthen to Merthyr Tydfil, yet the place of publication at the bottom is given as Georgetown, Merthyr Tydfil. It appears that Davis was simply fond of the poem and wished to have it preserved for posterity even though it does not seem to belong in a collection of Mormon publications. It has not been given a separate discussion herein.

The preceding table is a comparison of contents of the various extant copies of Y casgl; items are listed according to the order of their binding in the USlC 1853 copy.

USlC, WN

Traethodau ar ail-ddyfodiad Crist, yr adgyfodiad, a'r mil blynyddau.

(Treatises on the second coming of Christ, the resurrection, and the thousand years.)

Llanelli: Published and for sale by Thomas Jones. J. Davis, Printer, Merthyr, 1853.

12 pp 17.5 cm.

While Dan Jones was having his writings printed at Rhydybont, he was living in Merthyr Tydfil; he consistently identified himself as the publisher of those items and the place of publication as Merthyr Tydfil. With this and the following pamphlet, Thomas Jones has used an analogous procedure—although printed by John Davis at Merthyr Tydfil, on the title page the pamphlets identify the place of publication as Llanelli and the publisher as Thomas Jones. It would appear that a member of the Church by the name of Thomas Jones, living in Llanelli, requested that John Davis do the printing for two pamphlets he (Jones) had prepared.

Neither this nor the following pamphlet was ever advertised in Udgorn Seion, nor did either appear in any of the book lists. Had they been printed before Davis issued his second edition of Y casgl (The compilement, item 71), they would probably have been included along with other publications which, although not authored by Davis, were printed on his press and were in defense of Mormonism.

The first of the 3 segments of Traethodau ar ail-ddyfodiad Crist bears the same title as the pamphlet itself and had originally appeared in the September 1831 Seren Gomer (Star of Gomer, pp. 265-68), published by the Baptists. The author, who identifies himself only as "C," is writing to "Mr. Gomer," presumably the editor, in order to correct some erroneous ideas which he had heard from Welsh ministers concerning the Second Coming, the Resurrection, and the Millennium.

The next segment, entitled "Yr adgyfodiad, y mil blynyddoedd, etc." (The Resurrection, the thousand years, etc.), is a continuation of the first. It appeared in the November 1831 Seren Gomer, pp. 296-98). Although the author's ideas are in harmony with Mormon doctrine, it is unlikely that he had ever heard of the Mormons, considering the 1831 date of publication. Because the Baptists were among the most vociferous opponents of the Latter-day Saints in Wales, it would appear that this pamphlet was published to show the lack of unanimity in the Baptist ranks.

The third and final segment of Traethodau ar ail-ddyfodiad Crist is entitled "Barn y Parch. D. Peters, Caerfyrddin, am 'Gwymp Babilon'" (The opinion of the Rev. D. Peters, Carmarthen, about the "Fall of Babylon") and is taken from a sermon Peters had delivered at Bwlchnewydd (a town near Carmarthen) on 25 August 1809. His conclusion, after a series of calculations based on the prophecies of the Old Testament prophet Daniel, was that Christians could expect the fall of Catholicism within seventy-five years.

Traethodau ar y doniau gwyrthiol, a'r mil blynyddoedd, etc.

(Treatises on the spiritual gifts, and the thousand years, etc.)

Llanelli: Published and for sale by Thomas Jones. J. Davis, Printer, Merthyr, 1853.

12 pp. 17.5 cm.

This pamphlet is very similar to item 72 in its content and purpose (see discussion for item 72). The first of its 4 segments bears the same title, Traethodau ar y doniau gwyrthiol, as the pamphlet as a whole and appeared in the April 1832 Seren Gomer (Star of Gomer, pp. 103-5) as well as in the September 1850 Udgorn Seion (pp. 241-44). Here again the author is "C," no doubt the same as the "C" in segments of item 72. He argues strongly in favor of the existence of modern-day miracles and uses a line of logic strikingly similar to that used by Mormon missionaries in Wales more than ten years later.

The second segment, entitled "Doniau gwyrthiol" (Spiritual gifts), is again by "C" and is an answer to "Omicron," who took exception to the observations of "C" in his April article. "C" defends his stance and adds further scriptural evidence to his argument. This defense was published in the August 1832 Seren Gomer (pp. 233-35) but did not appear in Udgorn Seion.

The third segment is entitled "Barn Azariah Shadrach am adferiad Eglwys Crist" (Opinion of Azariah Shadrach about the restoration of the Church of Christ) and had appeared in the June 1848 Prophwyd y Jubili (pp. 81-82). A Mormon by the name of Abednego Williams had submitted these observations of Azariah Shadrach, a well-known minister in early nineteenth-century Wales, because Shadrach's views so nicely paralleled those of Mormonism. Shadrach declared that the rebuilding of the temple in Jerusalem by Zerubbabel represented a foreshadowing as to how the Savior would reestablish his church according to the apostolic manner during the Millennium. Williams declared that such a restoration had already taken place, under the name of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

The fourth segment is a quote from the writings of John Wesley concerning spiritual gifts. Wesley says that those gifts had been taken from the earth because of wickedness, not because they were no longer needed. Although not specifically stated by Wesley, the implication is that righteousness of the same quality that had existed among the members of the apostolic church would open the way for renewed spiritual gifts—an interpretation which coincided with the Mormon position. Wesley's statement was also printed in Prophwyd y Jubili (October 1847, pp. 158-59).

Neither this pamphlet nor the previous one contains any comment by the publisher or the printer.

WN

Flake no. A47

Annerchiad ar ymadawiad W. S. Phillips a J. Davis, ynghyd a lliaws o'r Saint, i dir Seion.

(Greeting on the departure of W. S. Phillips and J. Davis, together with a host of the Saints, to the land of Zion.)

Llanelli: John Thomas, Printer, [1854?].

4 pp. 17.0 cm.

There are 14 verses of 8 lines each to Annerchiad, verses which were to be sung to the tune of "Ye banks and braes." The departure of William Phillips and John Davis, for which occasion the song was composed, took place on 27 January 1854, from Liverpool on board the Golconda. Although Annerchiad bears no date, it was most likely published a few weeks (or at least a few days) before the departure of Phillips and Davis from Wales.

The author's wish to preserve the element of surprise would explain why the song had not been given to John Davis himself to print. This pamphlet is one of only three Welsh Mormon items identified as being printed at Llanelli.

Dewi Elfed Jones, the author's name, is the pseudonym of David Bevan Jones, a colorful figure in Mormon history. Before his conversion to Mormonism, Jones had been an ordained Baptist minister for the Gwawr Chapel in Aberdare, about seven miles from Merthyr Tydfil (see Millennial Star for 1 April 1851 [pp. 109-10] and 1 June 1851 [pp. 172-73] for an account of his conversion to Mormonism). The fact that William Phillips had been instrumental in Jones's conversion would explain the almost desperate emotion throughout this farewell poem.

The only extant copy is bound with Harvard University's volume 6 of Udgorn Seion.

MH

Traethawd yn egluro pwy yw Duw y Saint.

(Treatise clarifying who is the God of the Saints.)

Merthyr Tydfil: Printed and published by D. Jones, 14 Castle Street, Merthyr, [1854].

24 pp. 17.3 cm.

Dan Jones, Thomas Jeremy, and Daniel Daniels received a call from President Brigham Young to return to Wales in late 1852—after less than three years in Utah. Following a year of missionary work in various parts of Wales, the three were called as the First Presidency of the Church in Wales. Jones replaced William Phillips as the leader of all Church activity throughout Wales, as well as replacing John Davis as editor of Udgorn Seion. Jeremy and Daniels became his counselors.

Jones purchased Davis's press (see item 23) in December of 1853, and during the next two years he published about two dozen items in defense of Mormonism, in addition to Udgorn Seion. In 1854 and 1855 nearly all his pamphlets were doctrinal in nature, whereas during his first mission (1845 through 1848), only half his publications were doctrinal and the other half polemical.

Traethawd is Jones's first pamphlet of his second mission; it first appeared in serial fashion in Udgorn Seion between 4 February 1854 and 4 March 1854 (pp. 69-72, 85-90, 101-106, 117-21, 133-40), under the title "Y Duw a addolir!—Pwy yw?" (The God who is worshipped!—Who is he?). In the 5-line introduction to this treatise in Udgorn Seion, Jones openly states that his source is Orson Pratt, a credit not given in the pamphlet.

The contents of the pamphlet are nearly identical with the Udgorn Seion version; only the introductory paragraphs and the typesetting are different. The lines on the last three pages of the pamphlet are spaced more closely together than the preceding ones (49 lines to the page as opposed to 39), apparently to avoid having more than 24 pages.

Traethawd is advertised for sale at threepence in the 11 March 1854 Udgorn Seion (p. 164), just one week following the final installment in the periodical.

CSmH, UPB, USl, USlC, UU, WN

Flake no. 4480

Dadl rhwng Bedyddiwr ac anffyddiwr.

(A debate between a Baptist and an atheist.)

Merthyr Tydfil: Printed and published by D. Jones, 14 Castle-street, Merthyr, [1854].

16 pp. 17.5 cm.

Dadl was first advertised in the 18 March 1854 Udgorn Seion (p. 180) as coming off the press soon. Three weeks later (Udgorn Seion, 8 April 1854, p. 211) it was announced as "newly off the press" and something that would give "more than twopence worth of entertainment to the reader."

The pamphlet is nothing more than an expansion of a Millennial Star article published four years earlier by John Hyde (1 January 1850, pp. 4-9). No credit is given to Hyde in Jones's pamphlet, however—such practices of "borrowing without recognizing" being rather common and apparently accepted in the last century.

Throughout the dialogue the "atheist" is chiding the "Baptist" for blatant discrepancies between Christ's teachings in the Bible and Baptist doctrine and practices. All the Bible concepts ignored or altered by the Baptists are shown to be central to the message of Mormonism, a representative of which enters the conversation toward the end and issues an invitation to the other participants to listen to the message of the Latter-day Saints.

Almost everything which Dan Jones published during 1854, as well as several items printed during the first part of 1855, are bound in a volume called Capt. Jones ar Formoniaeth, yn 1854 (Capt. Jones on Mormonism, in 1854, item 92). Dadl, however, is not included in any of the four such volumes extant. The only extant copy of Dadl is bound in the Capt. Jones ar Formoniaeth, yn 1855 (Capt. Jones on Mormonism, in 1855, item 97) owned by the LDS Church Archives.

USlC

Anffyddiaeth sectyddiaeth!

(Atheism of sectarianism!)

Merthyr Tydfil: Printed and published by D. Jones, 14 Castle Street, Merthyr, [1854].

8 pp. 19 cm.

Anffyddiaeth sectyddiaeth! is advertised in the 8 April 1854 Udgorn Seion (p. 211) as a treatise in which "the barrier of the supposed difference between the two [atheism and sectarianism] is eliminated, and they are found shaking hands as two sisters of the same father, for only a penny!!"

Dan Jones's initial statement in the pamphlet is that it is illogical for more than one religion to be true. He then takes the reader through a line of logic and scripture to determine the characteristics of the one true religion. It was to be as Jesus Christ himself organized it, having apostles and prophets. The spiritual gifts of old, writes Jones, are still an essential ingredient of Christ's church. He concludes that the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the one true religion and that all are welcome to prove that for themselves.

UPB, UU, WN

Flake no. 4460

Y farw yn fyw, neu yr hen grefydd newydd; sef, traethawd yn dangos adferiad teyrnas Dduw.

(The dead alive, or the old religion anew; treatise showing the restoration of the kingdom of God.)

Merthyr Tydfil: Printed and for sale by D. Jones, Castle-Street, 1854. 2nd edition, expanded.

48 pp. 17.3 cm.

Virtually all the contents of item 1, Y farw wedi ei chyfodi yn fyw (The dead raised to life), are in this second, expanded edition. Both have 48 pages; however, a much smaller print size is used in the 1854 edition, so that by page 38 all of the earlier edition has been covered. The 10 new pages are basically further elaborations on the themes already introduced in the first 38 pages.

The "Rhagymadrodd i'r argraffiad cyntaf" (Foreword to the first edition), printed on the third page of the second edition, is far from being a word-for-word replication. Some of the same basic ideas are repeated, but many are omitted; consequently, the 2-page foreword of the 1845 edition is reduced to only a page in 1854. The title of the pamphlet is also somewhat altered.

Also included in the second edition is a "Rhagymadrodd i'r argraffiad presennol" (Foreword to the present edition), in which Dan Jones comments on the growth of Mormonism in Wales during the preceding nine years. He also explains that numerous calls for a reprint of the 1845 pamphlet prompted him to do a second edition.

In the 15 April 1854 Udgorn Seion (p. 228) Jones declared that Y farw yn fyw was "at the press" and would be ready soon. A Mormon from North Wales, who had been influenced by the 1845 edition, sent an 8-line poem in praise of Jones's pamphlet upon hearing of the plans for a second edition, and Jones printed the verses in the 20 May 1854 Udgorn Seion (p. 308). The announcement of the pamphlet's availability, "at last," appeared in the 27 May 1854 Udgorn Seion (p. 324). Although the pamphlet contained about 20 percent more material than the first edition, its price continued to be sixpence.

CSmH, UPB, USl, USlC, UU, WN, WSW

Flake no. 4470

Annerchiad at offeiriaid, parchedigion, pregethwyr, a holl athrawon crefydd yn Nghymru.

(Proclamation to priests, reverends, preachers, and all teachers of religion in Wales.)

Merthyr Tydfil: D. Jones, Printer, [1854]. 2nd edition. The eighth thousand.

16 pp. 17.3 cm.

The contents of Annerchiad first appeared in Udgorn Seion for 10 June (pp. 341-48), 17 June (pp. 357-62), and 24 June 1854 (pp. 375-79). There is no further mention of it until the 12 May 1855 Udgorn Seion (p. 159), when it constitutes one of the items of a price list of Welsh Mormon publications. If Dan Jones was true to the procedure he had followed for other pamphlets first done in serial form, Annerchiad was likely available in pamphlet form a week or two after its last segment appeared in the 24 June 1854 Udgorn Seion.

No first printing of Annerchiad is extant—if, in fact, one was ever done besides the Udgorn Seion appearance. It was not Jones's practice to label as second editions those pamphlets that had first appeared in Udgorn Seion. Perhaps he did so with Annerchiad in order to impress the intended audience. A similar motive may have prompted him to indicate "the eighth thousand" on the pamphlet, nothing similar having been done on any other of his publications.

Jones presents his message in Annerchiad in the form of an open letter to all the people indicated in the title. The established procedure among this elite group throughout Wales was simply to ignore Mormons and their publications. A few, however, gave public lectures and wrote pamphlets against them, and these Jones addressed directly in hopes of receiving more attention. Despite the best efforts of Jones and others, however, only a handful of ordained ministers ever converted to Mormonism in Wales.

No price is indicated on the pamphlet, but according to the book list, it sold for eleven shillings and sixpence per hundred, or ten shillings per hundred to branches and book dealers.

CSmH, UPB, USl, USlC, UU, WN, WSW

Flake no. 4462

Amddiffyniad y Saint; sef, gwrth-brofion o gam-gyhuddiadau maleis-ddrwg dyn o'r enw Rees Davies, o New Orleans, yn erbyn y Saint.

(A defense of the Saints; refutations of the false and malicious accusations of a man by the name of Rees Davies, from New Orleans, against the Saints.)

Swansea: Printed and published by D. Jones, [1854?].

12 pp. 17.3 cm.

Among the Mormons on board the Golconda when it set sail from Liverpool on 4 February 1854 were two individuals pertinent to this discussion—young Margaret Williams from Aberystwyth and 84-year-old Esther Jones from Llanarth, Cardiganshire.

Shortly after the ship landed at New Orleans on 18 March 1854, Rees Davies, a resident of New Orleans from Wales, went on board. A week later on 26 March he wrote to his parents in Wales, making the following claims:

Davies's letter was printed in the 3 August 1854 Gwron Cymreig (Welsh Hero), a widely circulated newspaper in Wales. In the same issue was a follow-up letter from Davies, dated 20 June 1854, along with some introductory comments by the editor. In his second letter, Davies made the following claims:

In his refutation of Davies's claims, Dan Jones appeals to the common sense of his readers and states that he knew such actions would not be allowed among the men of good standing on board the ship, many of whom Jones had known for years. He also quotes a letter from Thomas Morris, another passenger on the Golconda, that had been written to a friend in Wales; in that letter, Morris states that Margaret Williams had stayed in St. Louis, a thousand miles upriver from New Orleans. This had to be the same Margaret of the Davies letters, explains Jones, since there was only one Margaret from Aberystwyth on board; consequently, Davies could not have shown his father's letter to her, as claimed, since she was no longer in New Orleans at the time the letter reached him.

Jones uses the last two pages of his pamphlet to quote in its entirety a letter from Margaret Williams to her mother. The fact that she had written her own letter, Jones points out, indicates that she did not need Davies to write for her, as Davies had claimed. The letter is dated 17 March 1854 "on board the ship Golconda" but was finished after landing at New Orleans. In the letter, Margaret bears testimony of Mormonism and encourages her mother to join the true Church and leave "Babylon" to join her in "Zion." She gives a few details about the journey and mentions that Esther Jones, who is "hale and hearty," wishes Margaret's mother were there with her in New Orleans, thus countering the claim made by Davies that Esther wanted to return to Wales.

Jones concludes that Davies is a liar purposely denigrating Mormons and encourages his readers to reach the same conclusion.

It is strange that no mention is made of Amddiffyniad in Udgorn Seion. That the pamphlet was printed in Swansea would put the publication date at September 1854 or afterwards, since the entire printing operation was transferred from Merthyr Tydfil to Swansea in late August or early September 1854. And because Jones normally responded posthaste to such charges as those made by Rees Davies, one would expect Amddiffyniad to have been available by September or October 1854.

CSmH, UPB, USl, USlC, UU

Flake no. 9879

Gwahoddiad!

(Invitation!)

Swansea: Printed by D. Jones, [1854].

2 pp. 17.3 cm.

The full text of Gwahoddiad! appears in the 23 September 1854 Udgorn Seion (pp. 506-7). In the same issue is a 7-line announcement of its availability for two shillings per hundred. As conference presidents were encouraged to send in the names of branch presidents and to identify the places where they would be preaching, it appears that the intention was to print those details in the blank spaces provided on Gwahoddiad! as the quantities were ordered for each branch.

There are three variants to Gwahoddiad!. I have found no extant copy of the first variant outside the pages of Udgorn Seion. The other two do not have a blank space for the name of the branch president. In order to simplify matters and to avoid special printings, the leaflets were apparently distributed to the various branches, which could then fill in the one blank space with the location where the preaching would take place.

In the first paragraph of Gwahoddiad!, the following exhortation is given to the reader: "For the sake of your immortal soul, believe the testimony of a truthful witness, that the following are principles of the only godly religion which has ever been and which is now on the earth." Ten different aspects of Mormon belief are then given. The final 5 lines of Gwahoddiad! constitute an advertisement for all the pamphlets and publications then available at the Udgorn Seion office or from any of the Saints. No specifics as to title or price are given.

Differences between the second and third states are minimal; only the typesetting and two words are different. However, it is likely that there were other variants because of the nature of the leaflet.

Second state: WN

Third state: CSmH, UPB, USl, USlC, UU

Flake no. 4473

"Peidiwch a'u gwrando."

("Do not listen to them.")

Swansea: Published and printed by D. Jones, [1854].

8 pp. 17.3 cm.

The title of this pamphlet is put in quotes, because it serves as the subject of the first sentence of the text: "'Do not listen to them,' is the most popular theme of the preachers of our country now, I suppose," Dan Jones states, "which compels us to review their sermons concerning it as follows: I. Who is ordering; II. Who is being ordered; III. What is being ordered; IV. Why such an order is being given; V. The results of this order and of obeying it."

After exploring each of the 5 major areas in some detail, the author concludes that it was a form of slavery for ministers to instruct their congregations as to what they could and could not hear. His final sentence is: "Why talk about the black slaves of America while there are so many slaves in our midst, as much more wretched as their skins are whiter!"

The 21 October 1854 Udgorn Seion (p. 547) carries an announcement for "Peidiwch a'u gwrando" with an appeal for Welsh Mormons to present copies of the pamphlet as gifts to members of the clergy. The price to book distributors was three shillings and fourpence per hundred; to assistant distributors, three shillings and tenpence per hundred; and to individuals, a halfpenny per copy.

CSmH, UPB, USl, USlC, UU, WCC, WN

Flake no. 6224

Pa beth yw "Mormoniaeth?"

(What is "Mormonism"?)

Swansea: Printed and published by D. Jones, [1854].

4 pp. 17.3 cm.

Except for the first two paragraphs, all the contents of Pa beth yw "Mormoniaeth?" are in the pamphlet of a similar title that Jones published about eight years earlier (Beth yw Mormoniaeth?, item 6). A long quote from the Book of Mormon that appeared in the first edition is omitted in the 1854 Swansea printing, as are three other paragraphs. Also a different introduction is used. Because a larger print and wider spacing are used in the 1854 printing, the quantity of content is substantially reduced, although both editions consist of 4 pages.

The later edition has an extra word in the Welsh title—but since both beth and pa beth mean "what," the meaning is unaltered. It was advertised in the 21 October 1854 Udgorn Seion (p. 547) as having come "off the press lately." Its price was three shillings per hundred to distributors, three shillings and ninepence to assistant distributors, and it was to be sold to individuals for a halfpenny.

CSmH, UPB, USl, USlC, UU, WCC, WN

Flake no. 4467

Tystioliaethau diwrthbrawf nad o'r "Spaulding Romance" y gwnaed Llyfr Mormon!!!

(Irrefutable proofs that the Book of Mormon was not obtained from the "Spaulding Romance"!!!)

Swansea: Published and printed by D. Jones, [1854].

24 pp. 17.3 cm.

Nearly 90 percent of the contents of Tystioliaethau diwrthbrawf was taken from Adolygiad ar ddarlithoedd y Parch. E. Roberts (A review of the lectures of the Rev. E. Roberts, pp. 21-35), a pamphlet also published by Dan Jones seven years earlier in Merthyr Tydfil (item 17). Only the first 2 1/2 pages, plus an occasional editorial comment, are new to the 1854 pamphlet, though wider spacing between lines in the later version results in several more pages.

For the 1847 Adolygiad (A review, item 17), Jones had obtained his information about the "Spaulding manuscript" from a variety of sources, since he was not a personal witness to any of the goings-on. About half came from Benjamin Winchester's 24-page pamphlet, The origin of the Spaulding story (Philadelphia, 1840); the remainder was gathered from several other sources, including letters by Sidney Rigdon and Parley P. Pratt.

The 21 October 1854 Udgorn Seion (p. 548) announced that Tystiolaeth an diwrthbrawf was on the press and would be out the following week. The 18 November 1854 Udgorn Seion (p. 575) carries the announcement that the pamphlet was available for twopence.

CSmH, UPB, USl, USlC, UU, WCC, WN

Flake no. 4482

Beth yw "gras cadwedigol?"

(What is "saving grace"?)

Swansea: Published and printed by D. Jones, [1854].

8 pp. 17.3 cm.

This pamphlet's first 4 pages are printed in the 18 November 1854 Udgorn Seion (pp. 565-69), as a "Quoted segment of the treatise that is now in the press." No further mention is made of it until the 12 May 1855 price list in Udgorn Seion (pp. 159-60). Its price was three shillings and sixpence per hundred for distributors, and three shillings and eleven pence for assistant distributors.

The contents of Beth yw "gras cadwedigol?" are purely doctrinal. Dan Jones explains the Mormon interpretation of grace as a divine gift, but one which does not exclude the importance and necessity of works. Jones's doctrinal explanations appear to have been borrowed from some other writer or writers within Mormonism; the source, however, has not yet been identified.

CSmH, UPB, USl, USlC, UU, WCC, WN, WS

Flake no. 4465

Traddodir darlithiau gan Capt. Jones, yn Neuadd y Saint, Heol Orange, Abertawy.

(Lectures to be delivered by Capt. Jones, in the Saints' Hall, Orange Street, Swansea.)

4 pp. 17.3 cm.

The lectures mentioned in the title of this publication were to begin Tuesday evening, 9 January 1855, at seven o'clock. A series of 7 lectures is listed on the first page, all to be given on successive Tuesday evenings until 20 February 1855. The topics were the "Anti-Christ" and various aspects of him.

A number of other topics are listed on the following page. These were to be addressed as a continuation of those previously mentioned, also on Tuesday evenings. The remainder of Traddodir darlithiau is identical, except for 9 omitted lines, with Gwahoddiad! (Invitation!, item 81), printed several weeks before.

Traddodir darlithiau also contains information concerning other meetings held in Swansea, the new Mormon headquarters in Wales. Meetings in Welsh were held every Sunday at 11:00 and 7:00; meetings in English were scheduled for Sundays at 2:00 and 6:00, and for Thursday evenings at 7:00.

This pamphlet is not mentioned in Udgorn Seion, perhaps because of its regional nature. It was probably published a few weeks before the date of the first lecture, advertised for 9 January 1855.

CSmH, UPB, USl, USlC, UU, WN

Flake no. 4479

Yr arweinydd i Seion.

(The guide to Zion.)

[Swansea: Dan Jones, 1855.]

16 pp. 17.3 cm.

In the initial plans Yr arweinydd i Seion was to be a substantial publication that would sell for approximately sixpence. This is apparent in the 7 January 1854 issue of Udgorn Seion (pp. 18-19), where Dan Jones printed 1 1/2 pages of information outlining the contents of his proposed guide. Having been to the Salt Lake Valley and all points along the way, Jones was qualified to share a firsthand experience with future emigrants. He hoped to have the booklet printed and available within a few weeks.

In the 28 January 1854 Udgorn Seion (p. 61), Jones announced that the first part of Yr arweinydd i Seion was off the press in sufficient quantity for that year's emigrants. He apologized for not having prepared more and asked for patience from those who had been disappointed. There is no extant copy of this first segment, nor was the project ever completed as originally planned.

By 4 March 1854 Jones had decided to delay any further work on the publication because of possible changes being discussed by Church leaders concerning the route of the emigrants (Udgorn Seion, 4 March 1854, p. 143).

No further mention is made of Yr arweinydd i Seion until the 21 October 1854 Udgorn Seion (p. 548), in which Jones announced that there would be no more delays. He said that since no final decision had been made as to the route the emigrants would be taking, he was going ahead with the publication so that those departing in early 1855 could benefit from it.

In the 20 January 1855 Udgorn Seion (pp. 31-32), Jones announced that Yr arweinydd i Seion was finally off the press. The booklet is much smaller than he had intended it to be, and it sold for far less—just one-and-a-half pence each. It contains detailed instructions for passing through New Orleans, but ironically, the large group of Welsh emigrants that year were routed through Philadelphia.

The pamphlet has 12 divisions of varying sizes with the following headings: preparations before starting from Wales, women's preparations, furniture, instructions for the l 13 company, instructions for the "Perpetual Emigrating" group (those who borrowed money for the journey, to be repaid once the emigrants became established in Utah), instructions to various craftsmen, instructions while in Liverpool, instructions while on the ocean, things to purchase in St. Louis, instructions for choosing horned animals, instructions for driving a team of oxen, and directions for camping.

The group of more than five hundred Welsh Mormons that Dan Jones himself led to Zion in 1856 went by way of Boston. There is no indication of what effect this alteration of route had on sales of the pamphlet, but its contents were never changed.

CSmH, UPB, USl, USlC, UU, WCC, WN

Flake no. 4463

Llofruddiad Joseph a Hyrum Smith!

(Assassination of Joseph and Hyrum Smith!)

Swansea: Printed and published by D. Jones, [1855].

16 pp. 17.3 cm.

Dan Jones was with Joseph and Hyrum Smith in Carthage Jail the two nights before their martydom on 27 June 1844. A few hours before the shots were fired, Jones was sent to Quincy to enlist the services of a defense lawyer; consequently, he was an eyewitness to most of the events immediately preceding the onrush of the mob at about 5:00 P.M.

Jones's first published account of the Martyrdom appeared in 1847, in his Hanes Saint y Dyddiau Diweddaf (History of the Latter-day Saints, pp. 73-83, item 16). By official request from Thomas Bullock in Salt Lake City, Dan Jones wrote a lengthy account in English of events surrounding the Martyrdom; this account is dated 20 January 1855 and is housed in the LDS Church Archives in Salt Lake City. (The letter from Jones to Bullock is printed in its entirety, together with the English translation of his 1847 account of the Martyrdom, in Brigham Young University Studies 24 [Winter 1984]: 78-109.)

In the 3 February 1855 Udgorn Seion (pp. 42-46), Jones printed a segment of Llofruddiad Joseph a Hyrum Smith! which he said was then "on the press." Apparently, while writing an answer in English to Bullock's request, Jones was prompted to publish a separate pamphlet on the same topic in Welsh. It is strange, however, that except for the first page, the contents of the 1855 pamphlet are almost word-for-word identical with the 1847 account. The account in English is by far the more complete, although there are many things which are common to both.

The first eleven pages of Llofruddiad are originally by Jones; the final five, however, are translations of writings about the Martyrdom by Willard Richards and Thomas Ford.

The pamphlet sold for one penny.

CSmH, UPB, USl, USlC, UU, WN, WS

Flake no. 4477

Ai Duw a ddanfonodd Joseph Smith? (Also: Ai dwyfol oedd cenadwri Joseph Smith?)

(Was it God who sent Joseph Smith? [Also: Was Joseph Smith's mission divine?])

Swansea: Printed and published by D. Jones, [1855].

16 pp. 17.6 cm.

A segment of Ai Duw a ddanfonodd Joseph Smith? appeared in the 3 May 1855 Udgorn Seion (pp. 78-80). It was identified as a "treatise which is now on the press."

There are two states for this pamphlet, both identical in every respect except the title. The first state is entitled Ai Duw a ddanfonodd Joseph Smith? (Was it God who sent Joseph Smith?), the second, Ai dwyfol oedd cenadwri Joseph Smith? (Was Joseph Smith's mission divine?)

The contents of this pamphlet are simply a reworking and translation of much of Orson Pratt's Was Joseph Smith Sent of God?, a 23-page booklet published at Liverpool in 1848. Orson Pratt skillfully combines logic, scripture, and eloquence in his defense of the divine calling of Joseph Smith.

Ai Duw a ddanfonodd Joseph Smith?: MH, USlC, WN, WS

Ai dwyfol oedd cenadwri Joseph Smith?: MH, USlC, WN

Flake no. A41

Anmhoblogrwydd "Mormoniaeth?"

(Unpopularity of "Mormonism"?)

Swansea: Printed and published by D. Jones, [1855?].

12 pp. 17.3 cm.

Dan Jones attempts to answer the question posed by the title of this pamphlet by proceeding with an inquiry of sorts. By the end of the fourth page he has reached the conclusion that the so-called unpopularity of Mormonism is not intrinsic, nor have the Mormons themselves brought it about; rather, the many accusers of Mormonism are the cause.

He devotes the remaining 8 pages to analyzing Mormonism's opponents and their motives, but without mentioning anyone by name. Jones chastises them for uniting their forces against Mormonism and for instructing their parishioners not to listen to the Mormons. Do not the scriptures encourage all to "prove all things and hold fast that which is good"? (1 Thessalonians 5:21). One can easily detect Jones's frustration, having suffered years of verbal abuse for his religious beliefs, as he writes:

Would not the Baptist congregations be ashamed if they were to hear one of their preachers maligning the Independents or the Wesleyans in the same horrible way as they torture Mormonism? Yet, with regard to the latter, there is nothing which is too wicked to say or believe about it! (P. 8)

Jones ends the pamphlet with a stern warning to all of Mormonism's persecutors, a warning similar in nature to the kind he had been giving to his compatriots (and especially to the clergy and the men of the press) since his first pamphlet in 1845:

But yet, we say to the Reverends and the Editors who are so desirous of having a popular religion—Gentlemen!—Do not blame us and our religion, for it was not we or our religion that caused the unpopularity, rather it was you yourselves; and thus if there is fault for that, it is at your door that it lies, for you yourselves alone can change it. If it is wealth and a good name that you consider popularity, that you have; we all lost that upon joining with Mormonism, and thus we cannot make her popular; but you are respected and have "a good word from everyone"—bring your popular; and respected congregations to Mormonism and make her popular; she deserves that, for she is the true gospel of Christ, and we are WITNESSES of that. Just as surely as you are ashamed to embrace Mormonism now, its godly author will be ashamed to embrace you when He comes on the clouds of heaven to bid His obedient subjects to join with the truly popular hosts on His right hand—this the testimony of your friend, D. JONES.

Anmhoblogrwydd "Mormoniaeth?" is not mentioned in Udgorn Seion until the price list dated 12 May 1855 (pp. 159-60). The price for the pamphlet was one penny.

CSmH, UPB, USl, USlC, UU, WN

Flake no. 4461

Y "lleidr ar y groes."

(The "thief on the cross.")

Swansea: Printed and published by D. Jones, [1855?].

4 pp. 17.3 cm.

In this pamphlet, Dan Jones argues against the idea, which was common among the other religions, that baptism for the remission of sins was not essential for salvation. The scripture most often quoted against the necessity of baptism was the declaration of Jesus to the thief on the cross: "Today shalt thou be with me in paradise" (Luke 23:43). Jones explains, however, that paradise and heaven are not the same place; when Jesus appeared to Mary three days after his crucifixion he instructed her not to touch him, for he had "not yet ascended to [his] Father" (John 20:17).

Jones quotes 1 Peter 3:18-21 and argues that the spirits in prison were in a place known as paradise, where they awaited their opportunity to be resurrected. Therefore, since the thief had not gone to heaven, he was not saved and still needed baptism. Jones's objective in the pamphlet was simply to show that the ordinance of baptism was required of all mortals; thus he does not elaborate on the Mormon belief that vicarious baptism may be performed on earth for those in the spirit prison but merely quotes 1 Peter 4:6 and 1 Corinthians 15:29, which suggest preaching to the dead and baptism for the dead.

Y "lleidr ar y groes" is not mentioned anywhere in Udgorn Seion prior to Jones's 1856 departure from Wales. It is included in Capt. Jones ar Formoniaeth, yn 1854 (Capt. Jones on Mormonism, in 1854, item 92), which was probably bound in early 1855, thus suggesting a publication date during the first quarter of 1855. Its price was a halfpenny.

CSmH, UPB, USl, USlC, UU, WCC, WN

Flake no. 4476

Capt. Jones ar Formoniaeth, yn 1854.

(Capt. Jones on Mormonism, in 1854.)

(A collection of previously published items bound together.)

Unlike similar volumes bound in 1847 and 1848, this one for 1854 was not advertised in the periodical for the following year; consequently it is not clear when the volume was bound and made available. The most logical time, of course, was during the first few months of 1855.

The five extant copies of this volume have nearly identical contents, though not arranged in the same order. All contain the following items: 75, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, and Udgorn Seion, volume 7, 1854. Only the copy owned by the University of Utah Library has item 77.

The gilt-edged pages and the handsome leather binding on all five volumes were probably the best available.

CSmH, UPB, USl, USlC, UU

Dammeg y pren a ddwg naw math o ffrwythau!

(Parable of the tree which bears nine kinds of fruit!)

Swansea: Printed and published by D. Jones, [1855?].

4 pp. 17.6 cm.

All the contents of Dammeg y pren were first printed in the May 1847 Prophwyd y Jubili (pp. 79-84). About half a page of material contained in the periodical was omitted in the pamphlet, presumably in order to fit everything onto 4 pages. There is no indication that the material had appeared in pamphlet form prior to the Swansea printing in 1855.

The tree mentioned in the title is Christ's gospel, according to the key which occupies the last portion of page 4. This key identifies 29 different items indicated in the text by 23 letters of the English alphabet (all but j, x, and z) and 6 other symbols.

The nine kinds of fruit are the nine gifts of the Holy Ghost as mentioned in 1 Corinthians 12. The entire parable is an account of Christ's gospel——how it was established originally, how it was corrupted and ceased to exist on the earth, and finally, how it was restored in the latter days by the angel mentioned in Revelation 14:6.

This title does not appear in Udgorn Seion, not even in the 12 May 1855 Udgorn Seion book list (pp. 159-60), but it is bound in Capt. Jones ar Formoniaeth, yn 1855 (Capt. Jones on Mormonism, in 1855, item 97). And since the USlC volume of this collection of publications bears a dedication dated January 1856, it appears that Dammeg y pren was published some time after the 12 May 1855 book list and before or during January 1856.

MH, UPB, USlC, WN, WS

Flake no. A43

Darlun o'r byd crefyddol.

(Picture of the religious world.)

Swansea: Published and printed by D. Jones, [1855?].

4 pp. 17.6 cm.

Darlun o'r byd crefyddol is presented as a dream the author had experienced, wherein he found himself surrounded by all the religions of the world, which were somehow assembled together. After sorting through their various doctrines he was not totally satisfied with any of them, but finally settled for one that seemed more acceptable than the rest.

At that point, all were overshadowed by a large cloud in which a man-like creature from another planet stood. Since he knew nothing about religion, they all approached him and endeavored to convert him to their various beliefs. He listened attentively and read the Bible offered to him. When he inquired after the apostles, prophets, and spiritual gifts mentioned in the New Testament, he was told that such things were foolishness in that age. The "hosts" became angry with him, and he had to flee to the top of a high mountain for safety.

The author observed the proceedings and found himself in agreement with the being from outer space. The result was his own persecution, from which he was forced to flee. He then awoke.

Darlun o'r byd crefyddol first appeared in the April 1847 Prophwyd y Jubili (pp. 61-65) with only a few differences from the pamphlet; the title at that time was Darluniad o'r byd crefyddol mewn breuddwyd! (Portrayal of the religious world in a dream!). There is no mention of the pamphlet in Udgorn Seion; it was most likely published during the second half of 1855 (see item 93 for publication date reckoning).

MH, USlC, WN, WS

Flake no. A44

Llyfr Mormon, ei darddiad. Traethawd 1af.

(The Book of Mormon, its origin. First treatise.)

Swansea: Printed and published by D. Jones, [1855?].

12 pp. 17.6 cm.

Llyfr Mormon, ei darddiad. Traethawd 2il.

(The Book of Mormon, its origin. Second treatise.)

Swansea: Printed and published by D. Jones, [1855?].

12 pp. 17.6 cm.

At the end of the first of these two treatises (item 95), Dan Jones boldy announces his intention to publish a series of pamphlets about the Book of Mormon: "It is intended to prove the truth of the Book of Mormon and defend it against the false accusations of the so-called 'Priests' and others, through various treatises as soon as it is convenient" (p. 12). It appears, however, that only these two were ever published. They most likely appeared during the second half of 1855. The price was one penny each.

In Wales, attacks on the Book of Mormon increased in proportion to the growth of Mormonism in that country. An exasperated Jones exclaimed on page 2 of his first treatise: "Never before has there been a book . . . which has had so much said against it by those who know so little about it, as the Book of Mormon."

The first half of the first treatise consists of a general survey of the Book of Mormon's reception since its publication twenty-five years earlier. Some of the opposition to it in Wales is mentioned, but few details are given. On pages 4 and 5, there is a bit of borrowing from Orson Pratt's 1850 Divine authenticity of the Book of Mormon.

The second half is a translation of the early history of Joseph Smith, as written by Orson Pratt in his Remarkable visions (Edinburgh, 1840). Jones had used this material on two previous occasions——once in the July 1846 Prophwyd y Jubili (pp. 17-21) and again in his Hanes Saint y Dyddiau Diweddaf (History of the Latter-day Saints, pp. 14-20, item 16).

Nearly all the contents of the second treatise were printed several years earlier, in the July 1846 Prophwyd y Jubili (pp. 7-16) and again in Hanes Saint y Dyddiau Diweddaf (History of the Latter-day Saints, pp. 4-12, item 16). The logic of modern-day angelic visitations is the main thrust; the source is unclear but was probably the writings of Orson Pratt.

Item 95: MH, UPB, USlC, WN

Flake no. A45

Item 96: MH, UPB, USlC, WN

Flake no. A46

Capt. Jones ar Formoniaeth, yn 1855.

(Capt. Jones on Mormonism, in 1855.)

(A collection of previously published items bound together.)

The two extant volumes of this title differ in their contents. The copy housed at the LDS Church Archives, in addition to volume 8 (1855) of Udgorn Seion, has the following items (in Jones's order and according to my item numbers): 16, 18, 76, 48, 57, 95, 96, 89 (first state), 89 (second state), 93, 94.

The copy housed at the Harry Elkins Widener Library at Harvard University has all the same items except for 76, 48, and 57. Also their volume 8 of Udgorn Seion is lacking pages 369-84. (Harvard has a complete volume 8, however, bound with volume 9.)

The USlC copy has the following dedication: "Presented to the Church Historians [sic] Office by the Author, Dan Jones." The date of the dedication, January 1856, would indicate that all the items had been published during 1855 or before. The pre-1855 items were probably unsold pamphlets which Jones simply decided to bind with the 1855 items.

MH, USlC

Gweithiau awdurol D. Jones.

(Works authored by D. Jones.)

(A collection of previously published items bound together.)

The three extant copies of this item, two owned by the National Library of Wales and one in the hands of a private collector in Provo, Utah, vary in their contents. Furthermore, the title suggested in the book lists bound with items 102, 104, 105, 106, and 107——Gweithiau awdurol D. Jones——is not used for any of the three. All have "Traeth. Capt. Jones" (Treatises of Capt. Jones) on the spine, traeth. being an abbreviation for traethodau, the Welsh word for treatises.

Item Abbreviated title WN-1 WN-2 Private

20 Yr eurgrawn ysgrythyrol x x x

72 Traethodau ar ail-ddyfodiad Crist x

78 Y farw yn fyw, neu yr hen greyfydd

newydd x x x

90 Anmhoblogrwydd "Mormoniaeth?" x x x

82 "Peidiwch a'u gwrando" x x x

81 Gwahoddiad! x x x

79 Annerchiad at offeiriaid x x x

85 Beth yw "gras cadwedigol?" x x x

91 Y "lleidr ar y groes" x x x

93 Dammeg y pren x x x

94 Darlun o'r byd crefyddol x x x

89 Ai dwyfol oedd cenadwri Joseph

Smith? x

95 Llyfr Mormon, ei darddiad,

Traethawd 1af x x x

96 Llyfr Mormon, ei darddiad,

Traethawd 2il x x x

15 Profion o eirwiredd Llyfr Mormon x x

84 Tystiolaethau diwrthbrawf nad o'r

"Spaulding Romance" x x x

16 Hanes Saint y Dyddiau Diweddaf x x

88 Llofruddiad Joseph a Hyrum Smith! x x x

18 Adolygiad ar ddarlith olaf y

Parch. E. Roberts x x x

80 Amddiffyniad y Saint . . . Rees Davies x x

75 Traethawd yn egluro pwy yw

Duw y Saint x x x

86 Traddodir darlithiau gan Capt. Jones x x x

87 Yr arweinydd i Seion x x x

83 Pa beth yw "Mormoniaeth?" x x

73 Traethodau ar y doniau gwyrthiol x x

89 Ai Duw a ddanfonodd Joseph Smith? x x

There is no table of contents in any of the three.

The preceding table is a comparison of the contents of the three copies; items are listed according to the order of their binding in the larger of the WN copies.

WN

Priodas a moesau yn Utah.

(Marriage and morals in Utah.)

Swansea: Printed and published by Daniel Daniels, 1856. Translated from the Deseret News by Dewi Elfed Jones, Swansea.

[ii]-12-[14] pp. 18.8 cm.

The practice of plural marriage among Mormons was officially announced to the Welsh in the 1 January 1853 Udgorn Seion (pp. 8-16). During the next several months, considerable attention was focused on this topic in the periodical. The first separate publication in Welsh on plural marriage, however, was the translation of Parley P. Pratt's Marriage and morals in Utah.

The translation of Pratt's pamphlet first appeared in Udgorn Seion for 7 June 1856 (pp. 177-83) and 21 June 1856 (pp. 193-201). The 13 September 1856 Udgorn Seion (p. 304) carried the announcement that Priodas a moesau yn Utah was off the press and available for purchase at the price of one penny. The translator, Dewi Elfed Jones, was a former Baptist minister who had converted to Mormonism in 1851 in Aberdare. The wording of the translation was somewhat changed from the periodical to the pamphlet. The basic meaning, however, remains unaltered.

Daniel Daniels, Dan Jones's replacement in 1856 as the Mormons' ecclesiastical leader and printer, included a brief preface to the pamphlet in which he encouraged the Welsh to read what the Mormons had to say about themselves instead of relying solely on their preachers to learn of Mormonism. The preface is dated 2 September 1856.

The last leaf consists of a book list on the recto and a proclamation on the verso. The former advertises the following 24 items (in order listed and according to my item numbers): 65, 60, 70, 23 (volumes 1-8), 5 (volume 3 only), 20, 75, 78, 79, 84, 90, 87, 83, 85, 81, 34, 65, 32, 55, 67, 37, 39, 46, 26.

The proclamation on the verso has a Latin title: "Pro bono publico" (For the public good). It is an appeal to all Welshmen to keep their feet "free from the traditional fetters" and open their doors to the Mormon missionaries in their neighborhoods.

USlC, WN

Y wir ffydd.

(The true faith.)

Swansea: Published and printed by Daniel Daniels, 1856.

[iv-1]-28 pp. 17.5 cm.

Printed wrappers——the title page on the front is enclosed in a double straight-lined border. On the rear is a book list and a list of fifteen Mormon meeting places in Wales. The inside pages are blank.

The true faith, the first of a series of pamphlets written in English by Apostle Orson Pratt, was published in Liverpool in August 1856. In the 8 November 1856 Udgorn Seion (p. 363), Daniel Daniels declared his intention to have the entire series translated into Welsh and published in Swansea. At the time of the announcement Daniels mentioned that the first of the eight pamphlets was almost ready. A month later, in the 6 December 1856 Udgorn Seion (p. 394), he said that the second pamphlet was on the press and that the first would be in the hands of the readers before long.

On the title page of the blue printed wrapper for Y wir ffydd, in bold capital letters two-thirds of the way down, is "Pris dwy geiniog" (Price twopence). In the middle of the page is "A gyfieithwyd o'r Saesneg gan Dewi Elfed Jones" (Translated from the English by Dewi Elfed Jones). The book list on the back occupies about three-quarters of the space, with a list of fifteen meeting places for Mormons in Wales in the bottom quarter. The 25 items mentioned in the book list (in Daniels's order and according to my item numbers) are 65, 60, 70 (with three different kinds of binding), 23 (volumes 1-8), 5 (volume 3 only), 20, 75, 78, 79, 84, 90, 87, 83, 85, 81, 34, 68, 32, 55, 67, 37, 39, 46, 26, 98.

Also bound with the pamphlet is a 4-page Catalogue of works published in Liverpool.

Although he does not indicate how many copies of the pamphlet were printed in the first edition of Y wir ffydd, Daniels mentions in his journal (p. [62], in private hands) a second edition of 800 of the first and second pamphlets of the series. And since he indicates a quantity of 3,800 for the other six pamphlets, the first two of the series probably numbered 3,000 in their first printings.

WB, WN

Gwir edifeirwch.

(True repentance.)

Swansea: Published and printed by Daniel Daniels, 1856.

[iv-29]-56 pp. 17.5 cm.

Printed wrapper——the title page on the front is enclosed in a double straight-lined border. On the rear is a list of ninety-eight Mormon meeting places in Wales. The inside pages are blank.

The 22 November 1856 Udgorn Seion carries a segment of Gwir edifeirwch (pp. 373-77). The 6 December 1856 Udgorn Seion (p. 394) mentions that the pamphlet was on the press.

The bluish-green wrapper is similar in format to the wrapper of the first pamphlet of the series (item 100); the back of the wrapper, however, is devoted entirely to a list of ninety-eight Mormon meeting places in Wales. The Catalogue of works, the English listing of Mormon publications, was bound with Gwir edifeirwch, but there is no list of the Welsh.

WB, WN

Bedydd dwfr.

(Water baptism.)

Swansea: Published and printed by Daniel Daniels, 1857.

[iv-57]-84 pp. 17.5 cm.

Printed wrapper——the title page on the front is enclosed in a double straight-lined border. On the rear is a list of ninety-eight Mormon meeting places in Wales. The inside pages are blank.

In the 10 January 1857 Udgorn Seion (p. 9), the editor states that Bedydd dwfr was nearly ready.

The light blue wrapper is similar in content to those of the earlier pamphlets of the Orson Pratt series.

The Catalogue of works bound with Bedydd dwfr is only 2 pages in length. Included also is a 2-page list of more than 40 Welsh publications. These are (in Daniels's order and according to my item numbers): 65, 60, 70, 23 (volumes 1-9), 5, 20, 75, 78, 79, 84, 90, 87, 83, 85, 76, 77, 80, 91, 82, 81, 89, 88, 95 (this could be either 95 or 96 or both, since the title given is simply Tarddiad Llyfr Mormon [Origin of the Book of Mormon]), 93 (the title is altered to Dammeg y pren ffrwythlawn [Parable of the fruitful tree]), 98, 34, 69, 68, 37, 55, 67, 53, 62, 41 (erroneously entitled Darlithiau ar fedydd [Lectures on baptism] instead of Darlithiau ar ffydd [Lectures on faith]), 26, 39, 32, 71 (four items are then listed as being contained in item 71, a compilation of John Davis's works: 31, 42, 38, 36——presumably because they were not available separately), 99. The last Welsh item listed is the series of pamphlets by Apostle Orson Pratt——the first three were available and the other five were being translated and prepared for publication.

Daniel Daniels then lists 9 newspapers and periodicals which were being published at that time by the Mormons in various languages (including the Welsh Udgorn Seion). He also mentions that the Book of Mormon and "various other works" were available in several languages. Details were in the Catalogue of works, the English listing that was bound with the pamphlet.

The last item on the page is a declaration of intent to make a second printing of Y wir ffydd (The true faith) and Gwir edifeirwch (True repentance), the first and second pamphlets in the Orson Pratt series. There was apparently a greater demand than the first printing had satisfied.

WB, WN

Yr Ysbryd Glan.

(The Holy Spirit.)

Swansea: Published and printed by Daniel Daniels, 1857.

[iv-85]-112 pp. 17.5 cm.

Printed wrapper——the title page on the front is enclosed in a double straight-lined border. On the rear is a list of ninety-seven Mormon meeting places in Wales. The inside pages are blank.

Doniau ysbrydol.

(Spiritual gifts.)

Swansea: Published and printed by Daniel Daniels, 1857.

[iv-113]-140 pp. 17.5 cm.

Printed wrapper——the title page on the front is enclosed in a double straight-lined border. On the rear is a list of ninety-seven Mormon meeting places in Wales. The inside pages are blank.

Angenrheidrwydd am wyrthiau.

(Necessity for miracles.)

Swansea: Published and printed by Daniel Daniels, 1857.

[iv-141]-168 pp. 17.5 cm.

Printed wrapper——the title page on the front is enclosed in a double straight-lined border. On the rear is a list of ninety-seven Mormon meeting places in Wales. The inside pages are blank.

Gwrthgiliad cyffredinol.

(Universal apostasy.)

Swansea: Published and printed by Daniel Daniels, 1857.

[iv-169]-196 pp. 17.5 cm.

Printed wrapper——the title page on the front is enclosed in a double straight-lined border. On the rear is a list of ninety-seven Mormon meeting places in Wales. The inside pages are blank.

Breniniaeth y dyddiau diweddaf.

(Latter-day kingdom.)

Swansea: Published and printed by Daniel Daniels, 1857.

[iv-197]-224 pp. 17.5 cm.

Printed wrapper——the title page on the front is enclosed in a double straight-lined border. On the rear is a list of ninety-seven Mormon meeting places in Wales. The inside pages are blank.

After one brief statement in the 10 January 1857 Udgorn Seion (p. 9) concerning Bedydd dwfr (Water baptism, item 102), the only other mention made of the Orson Pratt series of pamphlets in extant issues is in the 13 June 1857 issue (p. 204). There Daniel Daniels states that he was sending the seventh and eighth pamphlets of the series with that issue of Udgorn Seion, and so it appears that the process of translating and publishing the entire series required approximately seven months.

These last five pamphlets are grouped together for discussion because all the available information about them is similar. The printed wrappers differ only in title and color. Those owned by the National Library of Wales have wrappers of the following colors: pink (item 103), pink (104), pink (105), yellow (106); their copy of the final pamphlet of the series is missing its wrapper. Those owned by the University College of North Wales at Bangor differ slightly: pink (103), pink (104), blue (105), light blue (106), pale orange (107).

Item 103 has no Catalogue of works or Welsh book list bound with it; all of the remaining four, however, have both, 2 pages each.

Items 103-107: WB, WN

Footnotes
