Allan K. Burgess, Teens, Temple Marriage, and Eternity ( 1988)

CHAPTER 1

Spiritual Price Tags

Recently I went into a store to buy a toaster. Our toaster, the one that had been given us when we were married, had toasted its last piece of day-old bread. I was amazed to find that there were over twenty toasters to choose from.

If you were the one buying the toaster, what would you look at first? Almost the first thing I did was to look at the price tag attached to each toaster. That cut my selection down from twenty toasters to only two. I do have some pride, so I did not buy the cheapest toaster in the store. I bought the one that cost $1.95 more.

Because I was willing only to pay a small amount, I ended up with a cheap product. It toasts bread so slowly that it almost turns green before it turns brown. I have considered putting the bread in the toaster just before I go to bed at night so it will be toasted when I get up in the morning.

Let's face it! Anything of real value has an equivalent price attached. This pertains to spiritual things as well as to physical ones. All things of value have a price.

This principle was demonstrated very well by a young couple named Tiffany and Scott. They were deeply in love with each other and engaged to be married. As their marriage day approached, however, they found themselves physically attracted to the point that they felt that their temple marriage was in jeopardy. They had already been involved in light petting, and it was becoming more and more difficult for them to control themselves.

Spiritual Price Tags

Because their temple marriage meant so much to them, they went to see their bishop. After a long discussion they decided that they would have to establish some personal price tags if they really desired a temple marriage. Although they wanted to be alone with each other and show their affection, they desired a temple marriage more. They realized that they would have to sacrifice some things now in order to have what they desired the most, so they established two personal price tags and promised to help each other have self-control. The price tags they decided on were that they would never be in a place where they could be totally alone and that they would allow themselves only three kisses per date. They could have them all at once or spread them out, but three was the limit.

As they put their plan into operation, they found it difficult to become very romantic because, as they finished a kiss, one of them would say, "One down and two to go!" It was difficult at times, but because they wanted something more, they were willing to pay the price. Six weeks later they were married in the Salt Lake Temple.

Just as Tiffany and Scott did, so do we need to establish personal price tags in order to ensure that we are worthy to marry in the temple. Sometimes we feel that we are different—that we are stronger than our physical drives. I've found through twenty years of counseling teenagers that no one is stronger than his or her hormones. Even General Authorities, stake presidents, and bishops have safeguards to protect them from these temptations. None of them is allowed to go somewhere alone with a Church member of the opposite sex, not even the Relief Society president. Heavenly Father realizes just how strong our physical drives are and wants us never to put ourselves in a position where they can take over.

The importance of having these safeguards, or establishing these price tags, is supported by a survey that was given to several hundred seminary students. They were asked, "Most of you have relatives or close friends who have married out of the temple. In your opinion, why do you feel that they decided against a temple marriage?" Here are their responses to that question.

1.Fifty-one percent said that they were afraid to be interviewed because of moral or Word of Wisdom problems.

2.Twenty-one percent said that they did not understand the importance of a temple marriage.

3.Nine percent thought they should find out whether they were really in love before getting stuck for eternity.

4.Seven percent said they could not marry in the temple because one of the marriage partners was not a Latter- day Saint.

5.Six percent said that they married too young and could not get a recommend.

6.Six percent said that they did not want to wear temple garments.

Probably most of us would like to be married in the temple. We know that we should be married in the temple, but as you can see by this survey, by the time marriage rolls around, too many of us may no longer be worthy to enter the temple. Too many young people in the past have simply not paid the price to enjoy a temple marriage. Being worthy to enter the temple really takes a combination of personal spiritual growth and the establishment of price tags, or practical guidelines and barriers against temptation. We can think ahead to avoid placing ourselves in situations where we can be overcome by temptation.

We need to establish both general price tags and personal price tags. General price tags can apply to all young people. Personal price tags are specific ones for problems that individuals may be facing.

General Price Tags

Here are some price tags that can help all of us remain worthy to enter the temple:

1.Never go into a house alone with someone of the opposite sex.

2.Definitely never enter a bedroom alone with someone of the opposite sex.

3.Do not neck or pet.

4.Never park on a lonely road, in a driveway, or anywhere else where you can be totally undisturbed.

5.Do not read or look at pornographic literature.

6.Do not attend R- or X-rated movies, and avoid drive- ins.

7.Do not go to parties where alcohol is being consumed.

8.Always dress modestly but especially when going on a date.(See Hartman Rector, Jr., in Conference Report, Oct. 1972, p. 173.)

Once we have made a list of general price tags of our own, it helps to post it in a conspicuous place. These price tags represent the things we are willing to give up in order to remain worthy to marry in the temple.

Personal Price Tags

We should establish personal price tags as soon as we see some temptation arising in our lives that may have the possibility of destroying our future goals. Each person's price tags will be different because they are based on individual experiences and weaknesses.

Here are some examples of personal price tags that were established because of individuals' problems or experiences. You can easily guess at the reasons for these particular price tags.

1.I'll never go on another date with Jill.

2.I'll avoid any future parties at Bob's house.

3.I'll get out of the car as soon as we stop in the driveway, and we can do our talking on the porch.

4.I won't watch television again with Fred in his downstairs family room, even if his parents are home.

Remaining morally clean and worthy to enter the temple won't just happen. Like all other things of worth, moral cleanliness takes planning and effort and sacrifice.

Other Requirements

Of course, morality is not the only area that we need to work on in order to obtain a temple recommend. If you are not sure what the other requirements are, you should discuss the temple recommend questions with your bishop. This way you will be sure what is expected of you. The temple recommend questions cover the following topics:

1.Moral cleanliness and worthiness

2.Acceptance of general and local authorities

3.Payment of a full and honest tithing

4.Observance of the Word of Wisdom

5.The proper wearing of the temple garment

6.Attendance at sacrament and other church meetings

7.Striving to obey all of the rules and doctrines of the Church.

8.Willingness to serve and help the kingdom of God grow.

Our Own Signature

As we prepare ourselves for the temple, it is important to realize that it is not the bishop we are trying to please but the Lord. We should strive to keep the commandments in such a way that we can sign our recommends knowing that we are worthy in the eyes of our Father in Heaven. I have always felt that my own signature on the temple recommend is the most important one because I know my own worthiness better than does either the bishop or the stake president. President N. Eldon Tanner stressed the importance of our own signature when he suggested that bishops and stake presidents begin an interview for a temple recommend by saying, "You have come to me for a recommend to enter the temple. I have the responsibility of representing the Lord in interviewing you. At the conclusion of the interview there is provision for me to sign your recommend; but mine is not the only important signature on your recommend. Before the recommend is valid, you must sign it yourself.

"When you sign your recommend, you make a commitment to the Lord that you are worthy of the privileges granted to those who hold such a recommend." (Ensign, Nov. 1978, p. 42.)

Personal Interviews

There is one other thing we can do to help us prepare spiritually for the temple. Because Heavenly Father loves us and knows us so well, it helps to have interviews with him regularly. This is done by asking him in prayer what we can do to better prepare ourselves spiritually for the temple. After we ask this question, we should stop and wait for the answer. If we are sincere and need to work on something, ideas will come into our minds. We may feel that we need to quit dating someone, be more consistent in paying our tithing, or read the scriptures more often. Once we know what the Lord wants us to do, we can then commit to him that we will do these things and ask him for his help. These commitments become more meaningful if they are recorded and, perhaps, shared with someone close to us.

Summary

1.Everything of value has a price, including temple marriage.

2.Many young people do not marry in the temple because they are not worthy to do so.

3.It is important to set general price tags that will help us stay morally clean.

4.We need to set personal price tags based on our experiences and needs.

5.We need to become aware of the requirements for going to the temple and establish them as our personal goals.

6.Our signature is the most important one on the temple recommend. It is the Lord, not the bishop, we should be trying to please.

7.Interviews with the Lord can help us spiritually prepare for the temple.

Many young people labor and live under false notions, feeling that a marriage contract, and especially if it is a temple marriage, solves all the problems. —Spencer W. Kimball
