Allan K. Burgess, Teens, Temple Marriage, and Eternity ( 1988)

CHAPTER 2

Temple Wedding or Celestial Marriage?

Some years ago, a twenty-year-old girl named Susan was married in the temple. Her story is a very common one, one that will probably sound familiar to you.

She had started dating Brett several months before. He was twenty-two years old, good-looking, very attentive and considerate, and inactive in the Church. As the months passed, they became more and more serious until one night after an especially enjoyable date, Brett pulled a ring out of his pocket and asked Susan to marry him.

Susan had always wanted to be married in the temple. She had set that as a goal before she was even in her teens and had promised herself that she would not marry anywhere else. She had known that she and Brett were getting more and more serious but had refused to face the fact that he would eventually ask her to marry him. She had tried to avoid the problem by deciding not to think about it.

When Brett did ask her to marry him, she realized that no matter how much she felt she loved him, she could not marry him outside of the temple. Her lifetime goal meant too much to her. She told Brett that she really loved him and wanted to marry him, but he would have to get active in the Church and make himself worthy of a temple recommend.

Temple Wedding or Celestial Marriage?

Because Brett really wanted to marry Susan, he went through the motions of activity in the Church. He attended his meetings, paid tithing, said he was keeping the Word of Wisdom, and did the other things the bishop told him he must do in order to receive a recommend. The problem was that it was all for Susan, not for the Lord or for himself.

Before we go any further with this story, it would be good to ask yourself a few questions:

How long do you think Brett will live the gospel after they are married?

Does Brett have a testimony or a desire to serve the Lord?

What is wrong with the goal that Susan has set for herself?

Now back to our story. Within a few months, Brett had met the minimum requirements for a temple recommend. Susan was happy and excited. She felt that her lifelong dream was finally going to come true.

On a beautiful spring morning in June, Susan and Brett knelt across the temple altar and were sealed for eternity as husband and wife. Seven days later, Brett removed his temple garments and said that he was through living the "religious life." He quit attending church, no longer paid tithing, and told Susan that he had never really stopped smoking or drinking.

Susan was devastated. She could not understand what had gone wrong. Hadn't she done what she was supposed to do? Hadn't she insisted on a temple marriage?

Within two months, the couple had separated and Susan had filed for divorce. Her "eternal marriage" had not even lasted for time. Shortly after they filed for divorce, Susan found that she was pregnant and had the added responsibility of raising a child without the help of a husband. It was many years later that Susan found someone who had a strong testimony and finally became happily and successfully married for eternity.

One of the main ingredients that led to this unhappy situation was that Susan had the wrong goal. Susan's goal was to be married in the temple. She wanted a temple wedding. Having this goal is much better than having no goal at all, and it seems like a good goal on the surface, but it can be a very shallow one. The temple wedding is an event. It takes place at a given hour on a given day and then it is over. Too many teenagers set a temple wedding as their goal.

A better and more meaningful goal than a temple wedding is the goal of having a celestial marriage. Celestial marriage is a process that begins with a temple wedding and continues day after day as a couple grows and develops spiritually together.

Seek to Marry a Spiritually Motivated Person

When we have a celestial marriage as our goal, we look for more than just someone who will marry us in the temple, someone who can meet the minimum requirements. We look for someone who is committed to the Lord and wants to live the gospel for the rest of his or her life. President Spencer W. Kimball said that the proper approach to marriage "contemplates the selection of a spouse who reaches as nearly as possible the pinnacle of perfection in all the matters which are of importance to the individuals. And then those two parties must come to the altar in the temple realizing that they must work hard toward this successful joint living." ("Oneness in Marriage," Ensign, Mar. 1977, p. 3.)

Checklist for a Prospective Mate

President Kimball said that we should choose someone to marry who is strong in the areas that matter most to us. Have you thought about the qualities and attitudes that are important for your mate to have if you're going to have a celestial marriage? It might be a good idea to write them down to use as a checklist when you begin to feel serious about someone. Here is a sample checklist. Each question should be answered yes or no.

1.He or she seems to have a strong testimony of the gospel.

2.He or she treats his or her own family members with respect.

3.He or she is considerate of the feelings of others and doesn't always have to be right.

4.He or she is not usually moody or depressed but seems to be basically happy.

5.He or she has a positive outlook on life and sees the good in others.

6.He or she is honest in dealings with others and seems to have strong feelings of integrity and responsibility.

7.He or she pitches in and helps without being asked.

8.He or she desires to learn the gospel and studies the scriptures regularly.

9.He or she gives time in church service and pays an honest tithe.

10.He or she shows that a personal relationship with the Lord is important by actions such as personal prayers, scripture study, language, choice of entertainment, and day-to-day gospel living.

We could also write down some of the attitudes and actions that might be warning signs that the person we are considering marrying may not have the spiritual commitment we desire. Some possible warning signs are these:

1.Doesn't want to serve a mission.

2.Misses church meetings once in a while.

3.Uses bad language.

4.Doesn't show much concern for family members or other people.

5.Doesn't show much dedication in his or her present church assignment.

6.Attends movies, concerts, and other activities that do not meet Church standards.

7.Wants to become more physical in the dating relationship than we ought to.

A person's dedication to the Lord is always questionable when he or she says, "I'll become active and marry you in the temple, if that is what you really want." This is the attitude that led to Susan's serious mistake.

Be the Right Person

In order to marry the right person in the right place, we need to be a "right person" ourselves. As you are growing through your teen years and preparing for marriage, it is not as important for you to find the right person as it is for you to work on becoming the right person for someone else. As we become more spiritual, obedient, and prayerful, we tend to attract those with similar qualities.

Imagine for a moment that you are twenty-one years old. Imagine that someone of the opposite sex is praying to the Lord for help in finding someone worthy and dedicated that he or she can marry, with assurance, in the temple. Are you living in such a way that the Lord could answer that prayer by arranging for that person to meet you? Would you fill the requirements if you were living the same way at age twenty-one as you are living right now?

Develop Skills That Will Help Your Marriage

Although the most important things in having a successful temple marriage are spiritual in nature, there are temporal skills that can contribute greatly to a happy marriage. The more of these skills a couple takes into marriage, the easier the adjustment will be. The teen years are a good time to develop some of those skills:

1.Cooking

2.Housekeeping

3.Making home repairs

4.Budgeting

5.Shopping

6.Sewing

7.Gardening and yardwork

8.Child care (changing diapers, bathing babies, etc.)

9.Bottling fruit, making jam, etc.

10.Scheduling and good time management

The importance of developing basic practical skills was demonstrated by two friends of mine named Phyllis and Carl. After dating for several months, they were married in the temple and left for their honeymoon. I believe they really loved each other, and both desired to live the gospel. The problem was that Carl had never learned to do anything on his own. His mother had always taken care of every one of his needs, and he had never developed the ability or the confidence to do things himself.

Not only had Carl's mother done everything for him but she had also made most of his decisions for him. You can imagine how surprised Phyllis was when, on the first morning of their honeymoon, she heard Carl in the next room calling his mother on the phone to find out what they should do that day. Her surprise grew as he called every morning to receive instructions. This habit continued when they returned home.

If Phyllis asked Carl to do something, he would immediately call his mother, who would usually come over to their apartment and do it for him. The final straw was the day that Phyllis asked him to oil the bathroom door hinge because it squeaked. When Carl said that he didn't know how to do it but he would have his mother come over, Phyllis couldn't stand it any longer. Their eternal marriage lasted only six weeks.

This, of course, is an extreme case, but it does show how important basic skills can be to a marriage. The more skills we have developed, the easier and more enjoyable our marriage will be.

Cleave to Your Husband or Wife

The story of Phyllis and Carl introduces another potential problem as well. Heavenly Father has told us that when we are married, we should leave our father and mother and cleave to (be close to) our husband or wife. (See Genesis 2:24.) President Spencer W. Kimball warned us that "sometimes in marriage there are other cleavings" in spite of what the Lord has counseled us. "Frequently, people continue to cleave unto their mothers and their fathers and their friends. Sometimes mothers will not relinquish the hold they have had upon their children, and husbands as well as wives return to their mothers and fathers for advice and counsel and to confide; whereas cleaving should be to the wife or husband in most things, and all intimacies should be kept in great secrecy and privacy from others." (Marriage and Divorce [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976],

pp. 24- 25.)

Avoid the Pressures of Debt

Another important area to consider is finances. Career choices need to be made that will make it possible for your family to have an adequate and dependable income. Education or training in some vocational area is vital in today's world. Although the Lord has given the husband the primary responsibility of meeting the financial needs of the family, the wife needs to be trained in some area so she can meet the financial needs of herself or her family if circumstances require it.

The Church also strongly urges us to stay away from credit buying except for our home and possibly our transportation. As a bishop I saw several couples suffer serious problems in their marriages because of financial pressures. Many studies have indicated that this is one of the main reasons for divorce. The following true story illustrates the all too common effects that debt can have on a marriage. (See Rulon T. Burton, "The Dangers of Debt in Marriage," Ensign, Sept. 1984, pp. 49-52.)

Boyd and Connie were a happily married couple. Both worked at well-paying jobs. They bought a home and two nice cars on credit but weren't concerned because they had good jobs. They used credit cards to buy furniture, clothing, and other things they desired. They even borrowed extra money to pay for a good Christmas, a vacation, and some home improvements. They couldn't see any sense in waiting for these things because of their steady incomes. They felt very secure and enjoyed almost anything they desired.

Then things began to turn sour on them. When Connie left work to have their first baby, which they both really wanted, they began to realize just how dependent they had become on both incomes. Connie really wanted to stay home with their baby, but financial pressures forced her to go back to work after only two months. She began to realize that the things they had purchased on credit had become their masters and were preventing her from doing the things she really wanted to do.

Then Boyd suddenly found himself out of work. For several months they struggled on Connie's income alone while sinking deeper and deeper into debt. Their creditors began to hound them for their money. They tried to avoid their calls and their visits to their home.

Boyd found another job but at a lesser income. There was no way that they could meet their current bills, let alone get out from under the bills they were past due on. Many of their belongings were repossessed. They were harassed constantly, and lawsuits were brought against them.

While he was Presiding Bishop of the Church, Elder John H. Vandenberg said: "When a family finds itself too far in debt, the atmosphere of discouragement enters the home, relationships become tense, tempers become short, and marital troubles begin to erupt. To meet the indebtedness, the mother may frequently leave her children to themselves while she finds employment out of the home. Irregularities in the home follow: service to God is disregarded, tithing is neglected, prayers become less frequent, persons begin to feel separated and apart from God and church." (In Conference Report, Oct. 1966, p. 66.)

That is just what happened to Boyd and Connie. Having no apparent solution to their financial problems, they turned against each other and against their creditors. They separated temporarily, and during this time, creditors called Connie at work to find out where Boyd was living. The creditors hounded Boyd and Connie's relatives and neighbors and even questioned their children and baby-sitters. These actions caused a great deal of hurt and embarrassment.

Even though Boyd and Connie got back together again, their marriage continued to slip as they blamed each other for their financial problems. They finally received financial counseling that helped them work their way out of debt. But it would take a lot of time, effort, and love to repair the damage that had been done to their marriage.

A good thing to remember is that it took your parents twenty to thirty years to accumulate what they have now. They didn't buy everything their first year of marriage. Neither did a friend who recently told me about his first few years of marriage. He and his wife could afford only an old car whose floorboards had rusted through.They had to tie the doors shut so they wouldn't fly open. They trained their children to keep their feet off the floor and not to lean against the doors. They had no television or stereo or nice furniture, but they stayed out of debt and, little by little, added to their home. Their family has always been close, and the bond between husband and wife is very strong. They now own a comfortable home and many luxuries after thirty years of sensible buying. They have demonstrated that the Lord's way is the best way. Avoid debt and the financial pressures that it brings at all costs.

The Holy Spirit of Promise

Once two people are married in the temple, it takes two things to make that marriage eternal: they both need to work hard to help their love grow, and they both need to keep the commandments so that the Holy Spirit of Promise, or the Holy Ghost, can seal their marriage. When the Holy Ghost seals an ordinance, it means that ordinance is approved by the Lord and all of the promised blessings will be received. Someone who is unworthy to enter the temple may be able to deceive the bishop, but no one can lie to the Holy Ghost. That person's marriage is not sealed for eternity until the person becomes worthy through repentance and obedience. Similarly, if a person is worthy at the time of his or her marriage and the marriage is sealed by the Holy Ghost, the seal may be broken if the marriage partners do not stay worthy.

Marriage Takes Constant Nourishment

Some people feel that once they are married in the temple, their problems will be over. President Spencer W. Kimball referred to this attitude when he said: "Many young people labor and live under false notions, feeling that a marriage contract, and especially if it is a temple marriage, solves all the problems; and many people further think that marriage is a sort of perpetual motion program. Once set in motion by a marriage ceremony, it will never run down. I want to tell you that there are no marriages that can ever be happy ones unless two people work at it." (The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, ed. Edward L. Kimball [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982], p. 307.)

Elder Marion D. Hanks testified that an eternal marriage "never just happens. It is brought about not simply by ceremony or circumstance or chance, but by two mature, loving adults who are able and willing to learn the principles upon which a vital and durable marriage may be fashioned and who, day by day, year by year, work on that process." (Ensign, Nov. 1984, p. 35.)

Summary

1.A better goal than a temple wedding is the goal of a celestial marriage.

2.We need to marry someone who is committed to the Lord.

3.It helps to make a list of qualities that we feel our prospective mate should have.

4.We also need to be aware of attitudes and actions that could be warning signs to us.

5.We should never marry a person who says, "I'll become active and marry you in the temple, if that is what you really want."

6.Through the teen years, it is more important to work on becoming the right person than it is to find the right person.

7.Many skills can be developed that will help our marriage be happier and more successful.

8.After we are married, we should cleave to our husband or wife.

9.It is difficult for a marriage to be happy if it is not economically sound.

10.Successful marriage takes hard work and living the gospel so that the Holy Ghost can seal the marriage for eternity.

[One] may say, "Oh, I do not intend to marry this person. It is just a 'fun' date." But one cannot afford to take a chance on falling in love with someone who may never accept the gospel. —Spencer W. Kimball
