Allan K. Burgess, Teens, Temple Marriage, and Eternity ( 1988)

CHAPTER 3

Russian Roulette

Russian roulette is a game that most of us wouldn't be interested in playing. Although there are several ways to play the game, this is the most exciting way:

1.Obtain a six-shooter and load bullets into five of the six chambers.

2.Spin the cylinder until you have no idea where the one empty chamber is.

3.Put the gun to your head and pull the trigger. There is a 16 percent chance that you will still be alive.

This game has a lot of suspense, but most people do not like the ending. Many members of the Church play a variation of Russian roulette called "he (or she) isn't a member of the Church yet, but I know that he (or she) will join after we get married." This game has odds that are even less appealing than Russian roulette, and most people don't like the way it ends, either. President Spencer W. Kimball gave the odds for this very dangerous game: "Surveys have indicated that only one of seven finally joins the Church— the odds are against the others. And nearly half of those who marry out of the Church become inactive. As parents give up their religion, an increasing number of their children are brought up without any religion.

"So you are taking a desperate chance if you say, 'Well, maybe he will join after we are married. We will go ahead and try it and see.' It is a pretty serious thing to take a chance on." (Ensign, Oct. 1979, p. 3.)

If we marry out of the Church, we have only about a 14 percent chance of ending up with an eternal marriage. When we make this decision, in all reality, we are playing Russian roulette with our exaltation.

Russian Roulette

President Kimball also spoke of two other side effects of marrying out of the Church: half of those who are active slip into inactivity, and numerous children are brought up without the gospel. In effect, we play Russian roulette with our children's lives as well. The attitude of "We will be able to go to the temple someday" leads to much heartbreak and sorrow. It is nothing more than rationalization and procrastination.

Date Temple People

One of the best ways to avoid marrying a person who is not worthy to go to the temple is never to date one. This statement may seem somewhat rash at first, but it has a lot of merit. We may, sometime, find ourselves thinking that it is all right to date a less active person or a nonmember because that person is one of the nicest people in the school and treats us a lot better than most of the active people do. That is the very reason why we shouldn't date that person. We already like and appreciate him or her. If we date that person, we may end up really liking or even loving him or her. Then it will be much more difficult to stop the relationship. The best time to say no to someone is before we have become emotionally involved. With each succeeding date it becomes harder and harder to break off the relationship.

I know that is a very difficult thing to do. We are not planning on falling in love but are just going out to have a good time. Nevertheless, if we date only those people who are active in the Church and who maintain temple standards, our chances of marrying in the temple are greatly increased. President Kimball said that "right marriage begins with right dating. A person generally marries someone from among those with whom he associates, with whom he goes to school, with whom he goes to church, with whom he socializes. Therefore, this warning comes with great emphasis. Do not take the chance of dating nonmembers, or members who are untrained and faithless. A girl may say, 'Oh, I do not intend to marry this person. It is just a "fun" date.' But one cannot afford to take a chance on falling in love with someone who may never accept the gospel." (Miracle of Forgiveness, pp. 241-42.)

Steps That Lead to Marriage outside the Temple

These are some steps that many people follow into marriage outside the temple:

1.We begin dating nonmembers or less active members of the Church.

2.We think that we can keep our relationships with our dates from becoming serious.

3.We develop a more serious relationship with one of our nonmember or less active dates.

4.We then rationalize that we are not moving away from Church standards or home training when we regularly and continually date this person who cannot marry in the temple.

5.We honestly believe that the person we are dating will become active in the Church.

6.We compromise and eventually decide to marry out of the temple under certain conditions: the person will prepare for the temple, our children will be active, and so on.

7.We think that our relationship is different from the norm and that we will be the one out of seven who will succeed. (See "That You May Know" [seminary booklet], n.p., n.d., p. 36.)

Sue's courtship experiences followed this pattern, and she married outside the Church. Sue (not her real name) wrote her story to help others who are facing the decision of whether or not to marry a nonmember. Many who marry less active members face similar challenges. As you read this story, see if you can identify the seven steps that are outlined above.

"We began to date. I thought it would be a casual relationship. I didn't intend that anything serious should come of it. I was an active church member and had no intention of marrying out of my faith. . . . Mother counseled me against dating a nonmember and had others counsel with me, but I continued to delude myself into thinking it would never become a serious relationship, until it was too late.

"When I had come to love Fred, nothing doubting, I rationalized that I was not 'throwing over' my excellent home and church training. I was naive enough to believe because he attended church with me and seemed very interested that within a few months he would be converted. . . .

"Each courtship is so individual, yet I am sure there are common tendencies, one of the strongest of which is for the young couple to be firmly convinced that their 'special love' is the most unique, the most sincere, the deepest yet known to man, that without doubt it can surmount any problem. . . . We decided to marry—on condition.

". . . The conditions I set down were: 1. We were to be married by an LDS bishop. 2. Our children were to be trained in the LDS faith and baptized members when of age. 3. I was to be free to serve in callings in my Church. 4. The Word of Wisdom was to be practised in our home. . . .

"It is impossible to describe the emotions that well up within you as you rise each Sunday morning, prepare the children and yourself for church services, and look once more before leaving your bedroom at your husband who is still sleeping or, having risen, is sitting with a morning cup of coffee and the newspaper and seemingly couldn't care less that he is not a part of the family group departing for church. It is one of the loneliest feelings I've ever known and one to which familiarity lends no softening.

"It is emphasized more so when your eldest son, who now holds the priesthood, sets his alarm clock, arises, and goes off alone to priesthood meeting faithfully Sunday after Sunday. What are his thoughts and what does he feel as he sees other boys arriving in the company of their fathers?

"With this feeling a tumult in your heart, you find your seat in church and with the opening announcements hear there is to be a temple excursion or an elders' party. You know again the yearning realization that you are necessarily excluded because of lack of priesthood and temple marriage. . . .

"Have you thought of your despair when your sick child cries out in faith in the night for a blessing from the priesthood, and your husband stands by, helpless and unqualified?

"Think of fast day or occasions which call for a special fast when you must prepare food for your mate and he feels inclined to flaunt before you his appetite. How would you train your children to observe the principles of the kingdom when one parent does one thing and one another? Have you considered how you would explain your mate's behavior to your children without making them lose respect for him? It is indeed a touchy, delicate responsibility. I say responsibility because it cannot be ignored if you are to train and teach them gospel principles.

"What would you do if your husband saw nothing wrong in taking his sons to a Sunday ball game or movie, thus failing to keep the Sabbath day holy?

"Here again it is evident that different basic values in parents cause conflict, making necessary a stream of constant decisions which would be unnecessary if unity of purpose reigned.

"Also it is true that one does not marry just his or her mate, but the beloved's family as well. . . . After my in- laws visited us, I found apostate Mormon literature had been placed in the hands of my eldest child. As like incidents continued, I felt that my loving hospitality had been betrayed. Fred said he was ashamed of his parents' behavior, but he made no effort to set them straight. It became my task to undo the damage of each situation patiently with the help of Heavenly Father. . . .

"There was a time when [Fred] drank with his business associates, not when he was in my company. Then that phase ended, and he would sheepishly order a soft drink for me and an alcoholic drink for himself. Then it progressed to two for himself, and on upward. When I asked him to try to curtail the number for his own sake as well as mine and the children's, he answered by snapping his fingers in my face to summon the waiter, ordering what he pleased and as much as he pleased, and telling me to live my life and let him live his. 'Living his own life' now included smoking.

"My thoughts constantly returned to our courting days and early days of marriage and how completely I had believed in his well-meant promises—and how I had relied on his love and mine to mean so much, to be so complete that living the Word of Wisdom would never be a problem. I was heart-breakingly wrong. . . .

"Probably every person who faces the decision of whether or not to marry a nonmember thinks, 'My love and I are different. I look at him and see the potential, and I know with us it will be different.' . . .

"The word I would leave with the young is this: Mark well my experience, for it is not unique. Right around me are several men and women in our ward whose marriages, because they married nonmembers, are patterned much like ours. How many are there throughout the Church, then?

"We not only ache at the negative experiences we must bear, but also for the loss of the positive blessings a unified living of the gospel generates in the home.

"I now face another grave decision. The strain of this un-unified living has had its effect, and not long ago, I suffered a heart attack. After a slow recuperative period, my doctor informed me that I must remove myself from the emotional pressure under which I live or recognize the possibility of not living to raise our three lovely children.

"Even in consideration of this, my husband is still unrepentant.

"If you were in my place, what would you do?" (Anonymous, "That Others May Know (I Married a Non- Member)," Improvement Era, Oct. 1964, pp. 832-33, 860- 65.)

Steps That Lead to Marriage in the Temple

The seven steps that lead to marriage outside the temple can be reworded into seven steps that help lead to a marriage in the temple:

1.We will date only active members of the Church.

2.We realize that we will become emotionally involved with some of the people that we date.

3.We will make sure that we don't consistently or seriously date someone if we find that he or she is not worthy to go to the temple.

4.We realize that we are going against the direct counsel of the prophet when we date someone not worthy of a temple marriage.

5.We are aware that only one out of seven ever responds to the gospel after marriage and that the one we are dating is probably no exception.

6.We will never compromise our goals or lower our standards in order to marry someone.

7.We realize that our feelings and emotions are very similar to others' and that therefore we will date and marry the Lord's way.

Summary

1."We will marry out of the temple now but will go to the temple someday" is like playing Russian roulette with our eternal future.

2.Only one out of seven who marry out of the Church ends up with a temple marriage.

3.Our chances of marrying in the temple are greatly increased when we date only those who are living Church standards.

Love is far more than physical attraction. It is inclusive and comprehensive. Physical attraction is only one of the many elements, but there must be faith and confidence and understanding and partnership. There must be common ideals and standards. There must be a great devotion and companionship. —Spencer W. Kimball
