Allan K. Burgess, Teens, Temple Marriage, and Eternity ( 1988)

CHAPTER 4

Like Is As Important As Love

As a bishop sat in his office one Tuesday evening, a hesitant knock came at the door. He opened the door, and there stood Christine, a former seminary student of his. She was usually a very pretty young woman, but that evening she had red eyes and tear-stained cheeks. She asked haltingly if he had time to talk with her for a few minutes, and he assured her that he did. While he escorted her to a chair next to his desk, his mind raced in high gear. Christine did not live in his ward, but he had taught her in seminary for three years. During those years they had been close friends, but he had not seen much of her since that time. He did know that she had been married, and he thought that she had two children.

When he was seated behind his desk, they started to talk. He found out that Christine was seriously considering divorce and needed someone to talk to. As she shared some of her feelings with him, she described a very important reality. She said, "I still love my husband very much, but I can't stand the thought of living with him any more. Even though I love him, I don't think I like him very much."

When Christine said that she still loved her husband, she seemed to mean that she was still physically attracted to him. Her statement illustrates a problem that is quite common. Too many people confuse physical attraction with love. Thousands of young people marry every day and, if you were to ask them why they were getting married, most of them would probably say that it was because they were in love.

Like Is As Important As Love

In spite of the feelings of most people that love will solve all problems, more than 50 percent of those entering marriage today will end up in divorce. Many of those who remain married will do so for reasons of security or for their children. Most of these people were married because they felt that they were in love. But these statistics show that thinking that we are in love is just not a very good reason to get married. It takes a lot more than physical attraction to make a marriage successful.

The Chinese used to have an interesting approach to marriage that is explained in the following story.

"One day Eddie Wu telephoned me. He had finished college the year before and was now in business with his father.

" 'My bride is coming to town tomorrow,' he announced. 'Come with me to the Grand Central. I want to see what she looks like.'

" 'Don't you know?' I asked, somewhat bewildered.

" 'Certainly not,' and he hung up.

"I met Eddie at the appointed time. Though it was midwinter, tiny beads of perspiration stood on his forehead. He hid himself in the crowd, growing visibly more nervous as the moments passed. Suddenly he stopped fidgeting. Coming from the train was an elderly Chinese man, and following respectfully a few feet behind him a young Chinese girl. Eddie stepped impulsively forward. The girl gave him a quick glance, then demurely lowered her eyes and continued on her way.

" 'Whew!' said Eddie. 'I shouldn't have done that. Very bad manners. My father would be cross if he knew.'

"As I learned later, this was no mail-order bride. Eddie Wu's marriage had been arranged in the orthodox Chinese manner, and the selection of his wife had involved many months of careful research.

"Mr. Wu explained it to me: 'Americans fall in love and then marry. We Chinese marry first—then fall in love. It is much better that way. More lasting.'

"I knew that divorce among the Chinese was so rare as to be practically non-existent. But to marry a girl you'd never spoken to!

"I asked Eddie how he felt about it, and his answer was surprising. 'My grandfather selected my mother for my father. He didn't see her until his wedding day—and I'm here. So it's all right. My father has good judgment. I trust him. I shall be happy with the wife he chooses for me.' " (Carl Glick, "Shake Hands with the Dragon," Reader's Digest, Sept. 1941, p. 125.)

The Chinese method was to have parents, who were not emotionally involved, choose proper mates for their children. They believed that if they made a good match, the couple would fall in love with each other after they were married. Many parents hired professional matchmakers to assist them in their important selection. The expert would find out everything he or she could about the prospective groom and then select a bride who would be a perfect mate.

Our method of dating, in which each person chooses his or her own mate, does not seem to be proving out too well. Yet I doubt that many of us would vote for our mate to be chosen by our parents. But if we ourselves are going to choose the person we are going to marry, we need to do a better job than many have done in the past.

The physical attraction that most couples call love is just not adequate to solve all of the problems associated with living together. Although we should love the person whom we marry, there are other things of equal importance and value. We need to use our head as well as our heart when choosing a marriage companion. That is brought out by the following newspaper story:

"DATELINE: MILAN, ITALY—A young Milan couple who separated three hours after their wedding may have broken the Italian record for the shortest-lived marriage, court sources said Thursday.

"The couple—the man is 23 and the girl 21—had a civil wedding three days after meeting at a nightclub. Then they celebrated in a park with a sandwich and a soft drink, talked, realized they had neither house nor job nor future and separated at a bus stop." (Reuters News Agency, Deseret News.)

If this couple had talked before they were married, they would have saved themselves a lot of embarrassment and problems. There are several things other than love that should be considered when making the decision to get married.

Look for Things in Common

Let's return to our story about Christine. Christine ended up getting a divorce because she had nothing in common with her husband. Because they had different interests, he would go off with the boys and she would stay home with the children. If she did do anything socially, it was not with him but with a girl friend. They had little to talk about because they shared very few common interests. It would have been so much less painful for both themselves and their children if they had realized these things before they were married.

We can't afford to let this happen to us. We need to make sure that we are more than physically attracted to someone. We need to marry someone we like a great deal. We should have similar interests, goals, and desires. The person we marry should be our best friend—the person that we want to spend the rest of eternity with. Eternity is a long time to spend with someone that we like to kiss but find boring to talk to or do things with.

Here is a checklist that we can use when we begin having serious feelings about someone. It can help us determine whether or not we have enough in common. It would be helpful to have our parents or a close friend also mark the checklist and then compare answers. Sometimes we are so emotionally involved that it is hard for us to be objective.

Each of the statements should be marked yes or no. If many of the statements receive a no, we should be very careful about continuing the relationship. (See Ernest Eberhard, Jr., What Shall We Do with Love? [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1961], pp. 218-21.)

Questions

2.We have the same degree of interest in the Church.

3.Both of us have a strong desire to be married in the temple.

4.Both of us have prayed about our marriage, and we both feel Heavenly Father wants us to marry.

5.Our economic interests and backgrounds are similar.

6.We are both mature and old enough to support and take care of a family properly.

7.Neither of us is trying to get away from a home or other environment that we dislike.

8.We are both honest with each other as well as with other people.

9.We are morally clean. Restitution has been made with a bishop if there has been a problem in the past.

10.We both have clean personal habits of dress and grooming.

11.We can discuss problems with each other without getting angry.

12.We accept each other as we are, and neither of us is planning on trying to change the other person once we are married.

13.We are usually very happy and do not argue when we are together.

14.We could both get temple recommends without having to break bad habits.

15.We have discussed each other's basic ideals and attitudes and agree with them.

16.We trust each other completely.

17.We have both dated enough other people that we can make a reasonable comparison.

18.Our recreational interests are similar.

19.We have about the same educational background and interests.

20.We enjoy talking with each other about a variety of topics.

21.We have both shown respect toward each other during our courtship.

22.We are both proud to present each other to the people that we like and respect the most.

23.Our personalities are enough alike that we can work as a team.

24.We are about equally energetic, or motivated, in our approach to life.

25.We have both had the ideal of a temple marriage for some time.

26.Our dating has been free of serious emotional and prolonged quarrels.

27.Our parents approve of our dating and possibly marrying one another.

Physical Attraction Versus Love

When we find someone who has similar interests, goals, desires, and priorities, we have a much better chance of having the strong physical attraction that we feel grow into an even stronger love. Because love is a commonly misunderstood term, we need to make sure that we know the difference between love and physical attraction. President Spencer W. Kimball clarified these two terms when he said:

"What is love? Many think of it as mere physical attraction, and they casually speak of 'falling in love' and 'love at first sight.' True love is not wrapped in such flimsy material. One might become immediately attracted to another individual, but love is far more than physical attraction. It is inclusive and comprehensive. Physical attraction is only one of the many elements, but there must be faith and confidence and understanding and partnership. There must be common ideals and standards. There must be a great devotion and companionship. Love is cleanliness and progress and sacrifice and selflessness. This kind of love never tires nor wanes but lives through sickness and sorrow, poverty and privation, accomplishment and disappointment, time and eternity. For the love to continue, there must be an increase constantly of confidence and understanding, of frequent and sincere expression of appreciation and affection. There must be a forgetting of self and a constant concern for the other. Interests, hopes, objectives must be constantly focused into a single channel." (Love vs. Lust [Provo: Brigham Young University Publications, 1975], p. 14.)

The following outline of President Kimball's statement can help us focus in on what love is and what we can do to help love grow.

What Is Love?

1.Physical attraction

2.Faith

3.Confidence

4.Understanding

5.Partnership

6.Common ideals and standards

7.Devotion

8.Companionship

9.Cleanliness

10.Progress

11.Sacrifice

12.Selflessness

13.Endurance through trials and disappointments

For Love to Increase It Needs—

1.Confidence

2.Understanding

3.Frequent appreciation and affection

4.Forgetting of self

5.Constant concern for the other

6.Interests, hopes, and objectives constantly focused into a single channel.

Thirty-day Love Test

If we feel strongly attracted to someone and we are not sure whether we are just physically attracted or really have things in common and love that person, we can try the thirty-day love test. For thirty days we still date and do what we would usually do except we don't touch one another (no hand holding or kissing). If we find that we have nothing to talk about and enjoy each other's company only when we become physical, we will realize that it is only physical attraction. If we have little to talk about during the month, what are we going to talk about for the next fifty years if we are married?

Summary

1.Physical attraction is not a good enough reason to marry.

2.It is as important to like the person we marry as it is to love that person.

3.Our love can grow only if we marry someone with similar interests, goals, and priorities.

4.It is important to realize the difference between physical attraction and love.

5.If we are not sure whether we have something in common or are just physically attracted, we can try the thirty- day love test.

In true marriage there must be a union of minds as well as of hearts. Emotions must not wholly determine decisions, but the mind and the heart, strengthened by fasting and prayer and serious consideration, will give one a maximum chance of marital happiness. —Spencer W. Kimball
