Allan K. Burgess, Teens, Temple Marriage, and Eternity ( 1988)

CHAPTER 5

Take Out Insurance

In previous chapters we have discussed the importance of making sure that we are in love, that we have many things in common, and that we marry someone who is dedicated to the Lord. But even if all those things are present, it is important to take out a little insurance to make sure that our marriage can be successful. An experience I had before I was married taught me the importance of taking out "marriage insurance."

I had been dating a special young woman named Jean. She was very religious, and I loved her a great deal. After several months of dating, I finally got up enough courage to ask her to be my wife. Much to my surprise, she accepted. Jean called her parents, who lived in California, and told them about her engagement to a terrific-looking guy. (I added the terrific-looking part.)

About two weeks later my phone rang. It was a young woman named Cheryl I had met in Australia when I served there on my mission. I had really liked her but had never said anything about my feelings to her. She must have liked me also because she had come twelve thousand miles to see me. Some close friends of mine told me that she had come hoping that we would be married.

When I saw her, I realized that I still liked her a lot and possibly even loved her! I knew that this was not the way an engaged person is supposed to feel about someone he or she is not engaged to, and I felt very confused. I realized something I had never even considered before. I realized that we can love more than one person and, even worse, love them at the same time. Both Jean and Cheryl were religious, pretty, and talented, and—the most confusing thing of all—both were willing to marry me. I found that I was asking myself questions like, "If two people who love one another should marry, should I marry them both?" (I really knew that wouldn't work.) "Which one should I marry?" "What if Cheryl had come a few months later, after I had married Jean? Would I have still had these feelings and been filled with doubts?" I felt extremely guilty because I was engaged to Jean and had these strong feelings for Cheryl.

What would you have done? I decided that it wasn't fair to either of them or to me not to be sure about something as important as marriage. After many hours of nerve-racking thought, I made the decision to break my engagement with Jean. I knew that this would be very difficult for me and really embarrassing for her, but I couldn't go through the rest of my life wondering if I had made a mistake.

That night after a movie, I told Jean about my feelings and about my confusion. I told her that I felt that we should become unengaged until I was sure what I should do.

Jean sat quietly and looked at me in total disbelief for what seemed several minutes but was probably several seconds. She then said, "If you were not sure what you should do, why did you ask me to marry you in the first place?" I had just started my attempt to splutter out some excuse when she looked me straight in the eyes and said, "Didn't you ask Heavenly Father about it before you asked me?"

I really spluttered and mumbled then, and finally I admitted that I hadn't prayed about it. I even admitted that I hadn't even thought about praying about it. After all, I had felt that we were in love and that was all that was necessary.

Jean told me that she had prayed about it and received an answer before I had ever asked her. She then told me that I had better pray about it because she was going to give me only two weeks to make my decision.

During the next two weeks, I dated Cheryl almost every day but became more and more confused. I knew that I had to make a decision and, for the first time, I realized that the decision was too important to make without the help of the Lord. I finally did what I should have done earlier and made my marriage decision a matter of prayer.

I found a quiet place, knelt down in real humility, and poured out my heart to my Heavenly Father. He must have known how much I needed his help because, before I got up off my knees, I had my answer. Although it is difficult to explain how the answer came, I knew, without any doubt, that I should marry Jean. The answer was accompanied with a feeling of peace and calm that I hadn't felt since the day that I had originally asked Jean to marry me.

That night, as I explained my feelings to Cheryl, she told me that she had received the same answer when she had knelt down for her morning prayers. We both knew that the Lord was looking out for us and helping us to make the right decision.

Jean and I were soon married in the Salt Lake Temple, and we have never had a doubt or a negative thought about our marriage. We have always been grateful for the assurance we both received that we were making the right decision. It has brought a sense of confidence and sureness into our marriage that could not come in any other way.

Take Out Insurance—"Marry the Proper 'Whom' "

Before any of us make this extremely important decision, it would be foolish for us not to pray about it. We do not need to pray about where to marry. The scriptures and the prophets have been very clear on the importance of marrying in the temple. But we do need to pray about the person we are going to marry. When we are in love, we are so emotionally involved that we need to make sure that we are doing the right thing. Every person is so different and has so many different needs, desires, and characteristics that only Heavenly Father can tell whether or not two people will be good for each other. Not only does he know but he wants us to know also. And in order for us to know, we need to ask him.

President Spencer W. Kimball stressed the importance of praying about whom we marry when he taught: "The question 'whom shall I marry?' is an important one to ask, for the proper answer to this question brings a proper answer to many others. If you marry the proper 'whom' and if you marry in the proper 'where,' then you will have an infinitely better chance of happiness throughout all eternity.

"Therefore, the decision is not made on the spur of the moment. It is something you plan all your life. Certainly the most careful planning and thinking and praying and fasting should be done to be sure that of all decisions, this one is not wrong.

"In true marriage there must be a union of minds as well as of hearts. Emotions must not wholly determine decisions but the mind and the heart, strengthened by fasting and prayer and serious consideration, will give one a maximum chance of marital happiness." (The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, ed. Edward L. Kimball [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982], pp. 301-2.)

Prayer ensures that your marriage can be successful. It does not ensure that it will be successful. Once a couple is married, each partner needs to continue to grow spiritually and to show love, understanding, and unselfishness in order for the marriage to be successful.

Summary

Even if the best-looking, richest, most spiritual, most considerate, most wonderful person that you have ever met loves you a great deal and you love him or her, you should not marry without praying first and receiving a confirmation from our Father in Heaven. He knows what is best for us.

He helped her kneel at the altar and then walked around to the other side of the altar where he knelt across from her. As their eyes met, I noticed tears begin to trickle down their cheeks.
