Allan K. Burgess, Teens, Temple Marriage, and Eternity ( 1988)

CHAPTER 6

Sharing a Temple Wedding

During the seven years I served as a bishop, I was asked to perform many weddings. Fourteen times I said to young couples, "Till death do you part." I did my best to make those weddings special, but it was difficult to feel very good on such occasions.

Part of my problem may have been that I had felt the Spirit many times when I had attended weddings in holy temples. These temple weddings were experiences that were not soon forgotten, and, no matter how hard I tried to make special the marriages I performed, I always had an empty feeling inside. I knew what each couple was missing, and, because I loved these couples, it hurt me a great deal. Besides missing the beauty and simplicity of a temple wedding, they were missing the great joy and spiritual blessings that could have been theirs. I have always felt that if a couple could somehow see what a temple wedding is really like, they would not want to settle for less.

Sharing a Temple Wedding

Recently I attended the temple wedding of two young friends of mine named Brent and Janet. Brent was dressed in his white temple clothes, and Janet looked radiant in a simple but beautiful white wedding gown. Their proud mothers were sitting next to them with tears running down their cheeks as they looked around the small sealing room and observed the family members and close friends that were worthy to be in the holy temple on such a special occasion. Two proud fathers sat in the front of the room, one on each side of the temple officiator. They had been chosen to be the witnesses who would sign the marriage certificate and make sure that everything was done properly.

The temple officiator (let's call him Brother Sanders) was a righteous man in his sixties who had been given the priesthood authority to seal the couple for eternity.

In the center of the room was a holy altar covered with a beautiful white lace cloth. There the bride and groom would soon kneel and make special covenants with each other and with their Father in Heaven. On opposite walls were mirrors that were hung so that as the bride and groom looked into them, they could see their images go on forever.

Brother Sanders spoke to the bride and groom for a few minutes and explained the significance of the temple ordinances. He also gave them some wise and inspired counsel about how to enjoy a happy and successful marriage. The Spirit was strong, and tears glistened in the eyes of those present. This was not surprising because tears often accompany a spiritual experience. Those present knew that they were sharing in a spiritual occasion and felt very grateful to be worthy to be in attendance. As I sat there, I thought of how different this experience was from the marriages that I had performed.

Following Brother Sanders's counsel, Brent took Janet, his lovely, radiant bride, by the hand and escorted her to the holy altar. He helped her kneel at the altar, and then he walked around to the other side of the altar where he knelt across from her. As their eyes met, I noticed tears begin to trickle down their cheeks. You could both see and feel the joy that they felt at that moment.

They were instructed to hold hands across the altar, and the actual wedding ceremony began. With power and authority from God, Brother Sanders sealed them for time and all eternity. He promised them that they would have exaltations without end if they were faithful to their covenants. He sealed many other promises and blessings upon them as well.

As Brother Sanders performed the ceremony, a sweet spirit of love filled the room, and those present received a conviction within their hearts that Brother Sanders truly did represent the Lord. What a thrill it was to see these two young people, who had kept themselves clean and pure, kneel at the temple altar and participate in this holy ordinance.

Following the ceremony, Brent and Janet kissed across the altar as an eternal husband and wife. Everyone then had an opportunity to hug and congratulate the couple. As I stood in front of Janet, she threw her arms around me and thanked me for being her bishop and seminary teacher. Brent grabbed my hand, and the three of us enjoyed the sweet spirit of friendship and love.

Thought Questions

1.How do you think you will feel when you kneel at the holy altar in the temple, knowing that you are worthy to be there?

2.How do you think it would feel to kneel at the altar if you had lied in order to get there?

3.How do you think you will feel about the person you are marrying as you take his or her hand across the altar, knowing that he or she is clean and pure and worthy to be there?

4.Do you feel that knowing your marriage partner is worthy would help you have more trust and confidence in him or her as your husband or wife?

5.When you and your prospective mate marry in the temple, the Lord becomes part of your marriage. Why do you feel this partnership would be important?

6.A much higher percentage of temple marriages are successful than marriages performed outside the temple. Can you see why this is the case?

Summary

If we could attend a temple wedding before we were married and see the beauty and feel the Spirit that is there, it is doubtful that any of us would want to settle for anything less.

And in order to obtain the highest, a man must enter into this order of the priesthood [meaning the new and everlasting covenant of marriage]; And if he does not, he cannot obtain it. He may enter into the other, but that is the end of his kingdom; he cannot have an increase. —Doctrine and Covenants
