Allan K. Burgess, Teens, Temple Marriage, and Eternity ( 1988)

CHAPTER 7

Why? Why? Why?

During my twenty years as a seminary teacher, many young people have asked me the question, "But why do I need to be married in the temple in order to have eternal life? Why can't I keep the commandments but marry out of the temple and still be exalted?" Many of these young friends seemed to think that to marry in the temple in order to be exalted was an arbitrary rule that God had established. They did not realize that all of God's commandments, including temple marriage, are based on eternal laws.

In a recent survey, 94 percent of the teenagers questioned did not have a correct idea of why temple marriage is necessary for exaltation. It is very important for us to understand the relationship between temple marriage and exaltation because most of us work harder and better when we understand why we are asked to do something. We will be much more likely to work for a temple marriage when we understand just how important it really is.

Clarify Terms

To understand the relationship between temple marriage and exaltation, or eternal life, we first need to understand what these terms mean. Exaltation means to live in the highest degree of the celestial kingdom, and eternal life is God's life, or living like God lives. (See D&C 19:7-12.) These two terms, exaltation and eternal life, mean the same thing, which is becoming like our Mother and Father in Heaven. When we are exalted or receive eternal life, we eventually become gods ourselves. So in other words, exaltation and eternal life are other terms for godhood.

The Purpose of This Life

We also need to understand the purpose of this life in order to understand the relationship between temple marriage and exaltation, or godhood. Sometimes the purpose of this life is discussed in such generalities that we never really appreciate and understand our real, divine purpose and destiny. Here are three purposes that are often given for coming to this earth. See if these sound familiar to you:

1.To gain a body

2.To prove ourselves

3.To learn to live by faith

Although these purposes are partly correct, they do not clearly teach us the main purpose for our earthly existence. As we discussed previously, exaltation and eternal life refer to godhood, and we have really come to this earth in order to become gods. Gaining a body, proving ourselves, and living by faith are just means to that end.

Why Temple Marriage Is Necessary for Godhood

With this background we can now discuss why temple marriage is necessary for godhood. Please think through the following logical concepts with me.

1.If we have no mate, we will not be able to have spirit children (the scriptures speak of having spirit children as having an eternal increase).

2.If we cannot have spirit children, we will have no one of our own to love and help to grow toward eternal life as our Father in Heaven loves and helps us.

3.If we have no spirit children of our own to love and assist and help to live righteously, we will go to the celestial kingdom and work with the spirit children of others. Those who work with the spirit children of others are called ministering angels.

Doctrine and Covenants 131 emphasizes the importance of being able to have an eternal increase: "In the celestial glory there are three heavens or degrees; and in order to obtain the highest, a man must enter into this order of the priesthood [meaning the new and everlasting covenant of marriage]; and if he does not, he cannot obtain it. He may enter into the other, but that is the end of his kingdom; He cannot have an increase." (D&C 131:1-4.)

The Godhood Ordinance

President Spencer W. Kimball said that "any of you would go around the world for the sealing ordinance if you knew its importance, if you realized how great it is. No distance, no shortage of funds, no situation would ever keep you from being married in the holy temple of the Lord." ("The Importance of Celestial Marriage," Ensign, Oct. 1979, pp. 4-5.)

The temple, then, isn't just a nice place to marry but is a place where we receive the authority and keys of godhood. When we kneel across the altar in a holy temple, we are not just being married but we are partaking of the godhood ordinance—the priesthood ordinance that gives us the power and authority to eventually become like our Mother or Father in Heaven. We are promised in this ordinance that we will become, in effect, gods and goddesses if we will but keep our temple covenants.

Other Advantages of a Temple Marriage

Although we have discussed by far the most important reasons for a temple marriage, there are other good reasons for planning for and choosing a temple marriage. Here are some other advantages for your consideration.

1.When a couple marries in the temple, they are forming a partnership with God. They have the assurance of his help and guidance as they strive to keep their marriage covenants.

2.Statistics indicate that a temple marriage greatly increases a couple's chances for a happy marriage.

3.Young people who have firmly established the goal of a temple marriage are strengthened against the temptation to lower their standards.

4.Temple marriage puts at the service of the family the powers of the priesthood for inspiration, guidance, healing of the sick, and so forth.

5.Those who marry in the temple must achieve above average strength of character, which will be of great benefit in marriage.

6.A temple wedding ceremony is surrounded with beauty and accompanied by the Holy Ghost. The world of turmoil and sin is shut out, and all thoughts are turned toward making the marriage a special and eternal one.

Summary

1.The terms exaltation and eternal

life refer to living in the highest degree of the celestial kingdom as a god.

2.In order to become like God, we need to have a husband or wife so that we can have spirit children of our own.

3.Temple marriage is actually the godhood ordinance that eventually, along with our obedience, makes the blessing of godhood possible.

Why hast thou conceived this thing in thine heart? thou hast not lied unto men, but unto God. —Acts 5:4
