Allan K. Burgess, Teens, Temple Marriage, and Eternity ( 1988)

CHAPTER 8

A Lie unto God

There is a story in the New Testament that has always fascinated me. It is about a married couple named Ananias and Sapphira. They had agreed to sell a certain piece of land and give the money to the church. After they had sold the land, Ananias and Sapphira decided that they would give only part of the money to the church and would keep the rest for themselves. Then they made a decision that got them into real trouble. They decided to lie to the Apostle Peter about how much money they had received from the sale of the land.

When Ananias gave the money to Peter, he told him that it was the full amount he had received from the sale of the land. "But Peter said, Ananias, why hath Satan filled thine heart to lie to the Holy Ghost, and to keep back part of the price of the land? . . . Thou hast not lied unto men, but unto God." (Acts 5:3-4.)

When Peter said this, Ananias fell down to the ground and, as the scripture puts it, "gave up the ghost." (V. 5.) Several young men wrapped his body in burial linen and carried him out and buried him.

About three hours later, his wife, not knowing what had taken place, came into the home where Peter was. Peter asked her if she and Ananias had given the church the full price from the sale of the land, and she assured Peter that they had. Then Peter asked her why they had decided to lie in order to "tempt the Spirit of the Lord." He then told her that those who had buried her husband were at the door to carry her out, and she "fell down straightway at his feet, and yielded up the ghost." She was buried next to her husband. (Vv. 9-10.)

This story has always impressed upon me the importance of being honest with those who represent the Lord. When we lie to a bishop or stake president, we are, as Peter taught, lying to the Holy Ghost and to the Lord. I'm not suggesting that those who lie to their Church leaders will usually be struck dead, but there are serious consequences involved.

A Lie unto God

It is especially serious to lie to a Church leader in order to enter the temple. Because of the sacred and special nature of the temple, the Lord is especially offended when those who are not worthy enter his holy house. There is no possible way to enter the temple unworthily and get away with it.

A young couple named Karla and Eric were preparing for a temple marriage, but they didn't use good judgment and became more and more physical in their relationship. About two weeks before they were to go to the temple to be married, they had sexual intercourse. Their announcements had already been mailed, and they were going to see their bishops the following Sunday to receive their recommends.

What would you do if you were in their place? It would be really embarrassing to cancel your temple wedding and notify everyone that you were going to be married civilly. Everyone would know that something was wrong. There would be pressure to lie about it and go to the temple anyway.

This is just what Eric and Karla did. They rationalized that they could repent without telling their bishop and everything would be all right. Karla felt much stronger about lying about it than Eric did, but he finally went along with her.

The temple is probably the most sacred place on earth. How do you think Eric and Karla felt in the temple as they made covenants concerning chastity and obedience and stipulated that they were worthy to be there? What do you think they felt like when the priesthood leader who married them congratulated them on keeping themselves clean and pure and worthy to be married in the temple? How would you feel as you looked around the marriage room and saw your close friends and family with smiles on their faces and knew that you were living a lie and were not really worthy to be there? What feelings do you think came to them as they knelt across that holy altar of God and were promised that they would be together forever if they were faithful to their covenants?

That special marriage day should have been one of the happiest, most joyful days in their lives. Instead, it was the most miserable day they had ever experienced. Even today, they look back upon it with great pain and regret.

For eight years they continued to live the lie, and each year when the bishop asked them if there had been any moral transgression in their lives that had not been confessed properly to a priesthood leader, they would lie again. Finally they could stand the guilt and the pain no longer, and they discussed with their bishop their immorality and dishonesty. After eight years of guilt and bickering about what to do, they began to make their marriage an eternal one—one that could be sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise.

They still have many regrets, however, because repentance is never as good or as easy as doing it right the first time. They can't change that miserable marriage day in the temple. They can't go back to the temple and be married again now that they are right with the Lord. They have lost the opportunity to have sweet and joyful memories of their wedding day. It would have been much easier, in the long run, to have been honest with the bishop and have put off their temple wedding until their lives were in order.

Eric and Karla actually are lucky compared to some couples who go to the temple unworthily. They finally faced up to the whisperings of their conscience and are on the road to repentance and eternal life. Many wait until it is almost too late to finally be honest with the Lord.

One active Church member named Sarah waited until she was seventy years old to be honest with her bishop. She had been immoral several times as a teenager and then lied to her bishop, her husband, and to the Lord in order to be married in the temple. For over fifty years she had carried this great burden of guilt and continued to promulgate the lie. Seven days after she had finally confessed to her bishop, at age seventy, she came into his office and thanked him for helping her get rid of her guilt. She said that for more than fifty years—some 18,350 nights—she had lain in bed and struggled to get to sleep because of her guilt. The past seven nights were the only nights she had felt peace since she was married. She felt she was finally right with the Lord.

A doctor who was also a bishop was treating an older woman whose physical health was rapidly deteriorating. Even though she was in great physical pain, he could find nothing that would cause such intense suffering. Finally, after running numerous tests, he sat down with her in his office and asked her what had happened in her personal life that was causing so much mental anguish that she actually hurt physically. She broke down and started to weep. She told him that she was a member of the LDS church and had been immoral with her husband several times before they were married. They had lied to get their temple recommends and continued the lie throughout their lives.

Recently her husband had passed away, and she felt that he was in spirit prison, suffering for their immorality and dishonesty. She felt that it was her fault that he was suffering because she had been part of the sin and had helped keep the lie going.

On a happier note, I know a young couple who canceled their temple wedding the day of the wedding. We were actually in the temple, waiting for the wedding to begin when we found out that it was canceled. They had the courage and the wisdom to put their lives in order before they made holy covenants with the Lord and with each other. When they finally did go to the temple, they had a day that they can always look back upon with feelings of satisfaction and peace and joy.

One step better, of course, is to keep ourselves worthy to enter the temple so we are not faced with the pressures of lying to our leaders or canceling our wedding plans.

We have been discussing immorality as the reason these couples were not worthy to enter the temple. It is just as important to be worthy in other areas as well. Heavenly Father wants us to be married in the temple, but he wants us to be worthy to be there. Only then can we truly feel the joy of becoming partners with God and receive the promises of an eternal marriage. Most of us have only one day in our lives when we can kneel across that holy altar in the temple. We need to live in such a way that we can always look back on that day with warmth and peace and joy.

Summary

1.A lie to a priesthood leader is a lie to the Lord.

2.Because of the sacred nature of the temple, only those who are worthy should enter.

3.Our experience in the temple will be determined by our attitude and worthiness to be there.

4.It would be much better to put off our temple wedding than to enter the temple unworthily.

Ninety percent of all returned missionaries eventually marry or are sealed in the temple. A high percentage of seminary graduates are married in the temple. —Church News
