Allan K. Burgess, Teens, Temple Marriage, and Eternity ( 1988)

CHAPTER 9

Circles of Exaltation

While President Spencer W. Kimball was a member of the Quorum of the Twelve, he had the responsibility of presiding over numerous stake conferences. At most of these conferences he emphasized what he felt were three of the most important things that lead to eternal life. Using a chalkboard, he drew four circles, stacked one above the other, and named them Circles of Exaltation.

In the top circle, President Kimball wrote Eternal Life, which is the main goal that all of us share. He then drew a line representing the strait and narrow path from the second circle to the first one. In the second circle he wrote the words Eternal Marriage to remind everyone that this ordinance is essential in our quest for eternal life. If we are not married in the temple, we cannot receive eternal life.

In the third circle he wrote Mission. He knew that those who serve honorable missions nearly always marry in the temple. President Kimball felt that honorable missions did more to lead young people to temple marriages than any other single thing. Because of the overwhelming correlation between missions and temple marriage, if young men are really serious about marrying in the temple, they will definitely set the goal of going on a mission.

In the fourth circle he wrote Seminary and Institute Program. He never failed to give this program that important place because he was convinced that the seminaries and institutes do much to get young people to go on missions and marry in the temple. (See Circles of Exaltation [address to seminary and institute of religion personnel, Provo, Utah, 28 June 1968] and the pamphlet A Message of Importance from the Prophet, n.d.)

Important Statistics

Several studies have clearly demonstrated the relationship between seminary, missions, and temple marriage. Joe J. Christensen, who was the mission president of the Missionary Training Center in Provo, Utah, found in 1983 that over 90 percent of the missionaries in the training center had taken seminary.

According to a study that was conducted by the Church, 95 percent of all returned missionaries eventually marry or are sealed in the temple. (Letter from the First Presidency to all stake, mission, and district presidents, bishops, and branch presidents, 4 Jan. 1978.)

In 1984 the Church News editorial page indicated that "most recent estimates (in 1980) show approximately 85 percent of young men completing seminary fulfill missions. Similarly, a high percentage of graduates are married in the temple." (27 May 1984.)

Because of the high correlation between seminary and institute, missions, and temple marriage, it might be valuable to briefly examine these programs and discuss how we might better use them in our lives.

Released-Time Seminary

Three different seminary programs are offered by the Church: released-time seminary, early-morning seminary, and home-study seminary.

If you live in an area where you are lucky enough to have released-time seminary, be sure to take advantage of it. Because of the current emphasis on high school education and college preparation, some young people have honestly felt that seminary could not be worked into their schedule. This is usually not true. By careful planning with school counselors, almost every young person can receive the blessings that come from seminary participation. It is simply a matter of choosing between electives with an eternal perspective in mind. (In spite of the pressures to take academic classes and prepare for college, one study found that those who had graduated from seminary, having taken four fewer classes in high school, actually had a higher college grade point average than college students who had not graduated from seminary.)

Of course, just enrolling in seminary is not enough. Be sure you get the most out of it by attending and fully participating. Elder Boyd K. Packer said: "Students, if your values are in place, you will not hesitate to forego an elective class that may decorate your life in favor of instruction which can hold together the very foundation of it. Then, once enrolled, attend, study and learn. Persuade your friends to do the same. You will never regret it; this I promise you." (Ensign, May 1983, p. 67.)

Early-Morning Seminary

Where released-time seminary is not available and there are enough Church members, early-morning seminary is often held. If there is not a seminary class in your area, you can encourage your ward or stake leaders to establish one. One family with two daughters desired an early-morning class but there was not one available in their area. The father approached the bishop and asked him if the ward would organize an early-morning class. The bishop contacted the young people in the ward and reported to the family that there was not enough interest for a class to be held. The father asked permission to teach an early-morning class if he could find at least five young people who were interested. The bishop gave him permission to do so. The father ended up teaching a class made up of his two daughters and five nonmember friends. Before the school year was over, four of the five nonmembers were converted and baptized into the Church.

If a class is already available in your area, be sure to take advantage of it. If one is not available, you may want to encourage your local leaders to organize one.

Home-Study Seminary

If released-time or early-morning seminary is not available, we can participate in home-study seminary. Home- study students have found that it is helpful to set a specific time and place to study each day and then stick to it. The lessons take about forty minutes each day, four days a week, and monthly activities are usually held, involving many home-study seminary students.

If you become involved in home-study seminary, you may want to encourage your parents to set aside the same time of day for their gospel study. It is much more enjoyable to have someone else to study with.

Institute of Religion

Institute of religion classes are available on most major campuses throughout the United States and Canada and in many other countries as well. Students who participate in institute soon come to appreciate the classes and the social and spiritual opportunities that the institute program offers.

Preparing for Your Mission

There are many things that we can do in our teen years to make our mission a more successful and enjoyable one. Here are just a few ideas:

1.Suggest to your family that you learn the missionary scriptures together. If that isn't possible, learn them on your own.

2.Mark and cross-reference the missionary scriptures in your own standard works.

3.Pray for missionary work often in both your individual and your family prayers.

4.Share positive personal experiences with your friends and family.

5.Establish a mission fund.

6.Start a missionary quick-recipe file, and make the things in the file. Add recipes regularly. A mission is always more enjoyable when you recognize the food you are eating.

7.Learn to think and talk positively about others and look for the good in them.

8.Purchase the missionary discussions, and become acquainted with them. You may want to start learning them, and practice by giving them to your family or even to your dog.

9.Obtain the addresses of missionaries from your area, and write to them often.

10.Avoid serious dating until after your mission.

11.Read your patriarchal blessing often, and attempt to understand what it means to have been chosen to be a member of the Lord's church and have the responsibility of taking the gospel to the nations of the world.

12.Establish a daily habit of scripture study and individual prayer. Nothing is more important than this for your spiritual growth.

13.Attend your meetings regularly, and find opportunities to serve. Accept any assignment that is given to you, and do it to the best of your ability.

14.Keep yourself worthy to serve a mission by living the gospel and following the promptings of the Holy Ghost.

Summary

There is a strong correlation between seminary and institute, missions, and temple marriage. If we are serious about marrying in the temple, we will desire to make seminary, institute, and missions a part of our lives.

There is such a thing as having pure intelligence poured into the mind. In the temple the meditation and contemplation that comes from a quietly observed reverence frequently results in such a pouring-in of intelligence and spiritual learning. —Boyd K. Packer
