Allan K. Burgess, Teens, Temple Marriage, and Eternity ( 1988)

CHAPTER 10

Your First Visit to the Temple

We talk a great deal about the importance of going to the temple, but very little is said about what actually happens there. One reason more is not said about what takes place in the temple is that it is such a sacred place. Because of this, young people sometimes enter the temple who do not know enough to really appreciate its holy ordinances and symbolism. You have the right to ask questions about the temple of your bishop and parents, and they will try to explain the things that they are allowed to discuss outside the temple. Some of the questions you have can be discussed in more detail after you have obtained your temple recommend and are preparing to go for the first time.

The symbolism and dress of the temple are so much different from what we are used to that it takes some preparation to make our first visit to the temple a positive one. Because of the sacred nature of the ordinances that are performed in the temple, we should be aware of some of the covenants that we are going to make and understand some of the ordinances that we will participate in.

Elder John A. Widtsoe said that we should learn about some of the things that take place in the temple so we will be better prepared to appreciate the temple when we go for the first time. (Temple Worship [address

delivered in Temple Square Assembly Hall, 12 Oct. 1920].)

It would be a sad thing for us to look forward to being married in the temple all through our younger years and then not have a positive experience when we finally go. Here are some ideas that may help you better prepare yourself for your first visit as well as succeeding visits to the temple.

The Ordinances

Ordinances are performed in the temple for both the living and the dead. When we go through the temple the first time, we participate in our own ordinances, which, of course, are the ordinances for the living. During future visits to the temple, we then have the opportunity to participate in ordinances for those who have died. Here is a list of the ordinances that are performed in the temple.

Ordinances for the Dead

1.Baptism

2.Priesthood ordination

3.Washing and anointing

4.Endowment

5.Sealings (of husband and wife and of children and parents)

Ordinances for the Living

1.Washing and anointing

2.Endowment

3.Sealings

We have discussed the marriage ceremony several times in previous chapters. Let's just briefly discuss the other two ordinances that are performed for the living: washing and anointing and the endowment.

Washing and Anointing

The first ordinance that is performed in your behalf is the ordinance of washing and anointing. It is often overlooked in the excitement of getting married or going on a mission because it is very short compared to the endowment ceremony. It is a beautiful ordinance because you are promised so many wonderful things. Make sure that you listen to the promises as you participate in this special ordinance.

Endowment

The next ordinance that we participate in is the endowment ordinance. All of us receive both the washing and anointing and the endowment before we are married in the temple. The endowment ceremony lasts approximately two hours.

One definition of endow is to enrich or to give something of much worth. When we receive our endowment, the Lord promises to give to us many special blessings. Some of the blessings that he promises us are:

1.Extra power to overcome sin and live righteously.

2.Knowledge and understanding that will help us return to God.

3.In conjunction with our temple sealing, the power and opportunity to have an eternal family and become like God.

In order to receive the blessings that we are promised in the endowment, we need to do our part by keeping the promises that we make during the ordinances of the endowment. Elder James E. Talmage explained some of these promises:

"The ordinances of the endowment embody certain obligations on the part of the individual, such as covenant and promise to observe the law of strict virtue and chastity, to be charitable, benevolent, tolerant and pure; to devote both talent and material means to the spread of truth and the uplifting of the race; to maintain devotion to the cause of truth; and to seek in every way to contribute to the great preparation that the earth may be made ready to receive her King,—the Lord Jesus Christ." (The House of the Lord [Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1912], p. 100.)

As you noticed, some of the promises that we make are—

1.To observe the law of virtue and chastity.

2.To be charitable and benevolent.

3.To be tolerant and pure.

4.To give of our talent and material wealth to spread the gospel and uplift others.

5.To stay devoted to the Lord.

6.To help prepare the earth for the second coming of Christ.

As we keep the covenants that we make in the temple, rich blessings will come into our lives, and we really will be endowed with things of much worth.

Dress and Grooming Standards

Have you ever thought about the reason why the Aaronic Priesthood is asked to wear their best dress, including a tie, when they participate in the ordinance of the sacrament? It is because they are representatives of the Lord and because the sacrament is a sacred ordinance. Many times, how we dress is an indication of how we feel about something or someone. How would you dress if you were asked to meet with the President of the Church? Do you think you would wear your grubbies? Would you wear Levi's and a tee shirt? I'm positive that all of us would make sure that we bathed, put on our best clothes, and had our hair looking perfect. Some of us would even check our fingernails.

When we go to the temple, we are going there to present ourselves to the Lord. Another name for the temple that is actually engraved on the temple wall is "The House of the Lord." We want to make sure that we look our best when we enter his house.

Why White Clothes?

All of those in the temple wear white clothes when they participate in the temple ordinances. There are at least two reasons for wearing white clothing: white is a symbol of cleanliness and purity, and dressing alike symbolizes that all of us are equal in the sight of God. The rich and the poor, the educated and the unlearned, the boss and the worker, the General Authority and the new Church member all sit side by side in the temple and are of equal importance to the Lord.

Elder Hugh B. Brown taught that in the temple we "will not only lay aside the clothing of the street, but the thoughts of the street, and will try not only to clothe our bodies in clean white linen but our minds in purity of thought." (Quoted by ElRay L. Christiansen, "Some Things You Need to Know about the Temple," Ensign, Jan. 1972, p. 65.)

The Importance of the Temple Garment

It is important to understand the importance and sacred nature of the temple garment. The full purpose of the garment is revealed in the temple and should not be discussed outside the temple. We can, however, share some information that will help us appreciate and respect the temple garment.

Elder Boyd K. Packer said: "The garment, covering the body, is a visual and tactile reminder of these [temple] covenants. For many Church members the garment has formed a barrier of protection when the wearer has been faced with temptation. Among other things it symbolizes our deep respect for the laws of God—among them the moral standard." (The Holy Temple [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1980], p. 79.)

The promise that the garment can remind us of our covenants and help protect us from temptation is very important and very real. This was demonstrated well by an active Church member named Marie. She was in her twenties, had been married in the temple, and had two children. Marie had been feeling depressed and unappreciated for several weeks.

A man where Marie worked part-time had noticed her vulnerability, and he began to show her a lot of attention. As she looked back on it later, she realized that he wanted only a physical relationship, but, at the time, she really thought that he cared for her. He listened to her problems and gave her the attention that she felt she needed. She shared a few secret lunches with him at fancy restaurants (just to discuss her problems), and they started to share a few kisses at the office.

Then one Friday morning when she was at home alone he called her on the phone. He told her how much he loved her and wanted to be with her. By the time she had hung up the phone, she had actually agreed to meet him at a motel in one hour. She packed a small bag and quickly showered. As she began to dress and went to put on her garments, her heart was flooded with pain and guilt. Those garments reminded her of all that was really special and dear to her. For the first time in several weeks she thought about her temple wedding, her husband and children, and the promises she had made to the Lord. As she sat down on the edge of the bed she began to shake and cry with relief. She was so grateful that she had come to her senses before she had gone any further.

Marie called the man and told him that she wouldn't be meeting him at the motel or any other place. She apologized to him for the things she had done with him in the past and told him that she loved her husband and children.

That night, Marie and her husband had a long talk, and they both began to do things to strengthen their marriage. Just as it was for Marie, the garment can be a great reminder and a great strength to us.

An important thing we can do to prepare ourselves to wear the temple garment is to apply the ideals of modesty all through our lives. By establishing the temple garment as our standard of dress from the time we are young we will not have to alter our wardrobe or adjust our style of dress when we enter the temple. Some people have been left with a closet full of clothes that they can no longer wear. Even before we enter the temple, the garment can be a great guide to us in determining what is modest and appropriate to wear.

Once we enter the temple, the garment will determine our dress standards for the rest of our lives. We should not pin or alter our garments so that we can wear something that does not cover the garment. Joseph F. Smith said that Church members should consider their temple garments the "most sacred of all things in the world, next to their own virtue, next to their own purity of life." (Editorial, Improvement Era, Aug. 1906, p. 813.)

Even though all of us will find ourselves in public dressing rooms at one time or another, we should never feel ashamed or embarrassed about our garments. George D. Durrant shared the following story, which has helped me explain to others why I wear temple garments.

"I recall once speaking about the temple garment. I related an experience I had while I was in the army in Korea, where dressing facilities were not very private. In those circumstances I tried to be discreet, but at times some of my friends noticed that I wore temple garments. They would smile and say, 'What are those?' I would merely explain, 'They are part of my religion and someday I'll tell you more about them.' One night in the barracks one of my friends said, 'You've said you would tell us about your underwear. What is the story?' It was a small barracks and housed about fourteen men whom I had come to love over the months we were together. None of them was a member of the Church. I said, 'This seems like a good time to tell all of you my feelings about life and my religion.' Everyone in the barracks waited quietly. 'You know how much letters from my wife and pictures of our little boy mean to me. I miss them more than I can say. That has something to do with why I wear these sacred garments.

" 'When I met my wife prior to our marriage, I fell deeply in love with her. She agreed to become my wife.' I paused from the narrative and asked, 'Have any of you men ever seen a temple of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter- day Saints?' Most of them said that they had seen a temple in one place or another. Each declared that he felt that those buildings were beautiful. I said, 'Yes, they are beautiful from the outside and they are even more beautiful inside.'

"I continued, 'To go into a temple is quite an experience because, you see, it is the house of the Lord. Only members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints can enter. My sweetheart and I went to the Salt Lake Temple some years ago. It was there that we were married. There are certain things that happen inside a temple. These things aren't secret things, but they are sacred. They are things about which we are not to speak outside of the temple. But I can say this much—while I was in the temple I promised our Heavenly Father that I would keep his commandments in every way. He, in return, promised me in that holy house that if I would keep his commandments my family, my wife, my children, and I would never—even after death—be separated, but we would be a family forever.

"Because I went to the temple I was thereafter privileged to wear these garments. They are sacred and holy and they are a constant reminder to me of the promises the Lord made to me.

"So you see, my friends, as long as I wear these garments I have a constant reminder of things of an eternal nature. They help me to remember always that if I keep the covenants that I made in the Lord's holy house I will be with my family forever. While here in Korea I miss my wife and little boy more than words can tell. I never want to be separated from them again. . . . I know what I have told you is true and I want you to know it is true. And that's the answer to your question about why I wear this underwear. . . .

"Later, when new men came to live in our barracks some would ask about the underwear. I didn't have to answer again, for in response to such a question one or the other of my own friends who had been there on that night would say, 'If you knew why he wore the underwear, you wouldn't smile. Those are sacred. They're part of his religion.' " (Ensign, Jan. 1977, pp. 57-58.)

Use the Waiting Time

Going to the temple involves waiting, and this waiting time can be extremely valuable to us if we will look upon it as an opportunity instead of a problem. When we enter the temple we are asked to be reverent. We are to conduct any necessary conversations in very subdued tones. While we are receiving instruction, we are asked to be completely reverent and quiet. There are very few places in our busy world that give us the opportunity to quietly meditate and evaluate our lives.

While we are waiting for the ordinance work to begin, we will have time to sit quietly and ponder the things of the Spirit. Many times we become impatient or irritated with waiting. In the temple it should be just the opposite. If we handle this time correctly, it may become some of our most productive time.

Some of the things that I find myself thinking about while waiting are self-evaluation of how I am living the gospel, personal problems and how to solve them, up- coming decisions and how best to make them, the covenants I have made in the temple and whether or not I am keeping them, my relationship with my wife and children and with others, and so on.

The value of using this waiting time in a positive way was brought out by Elder Packer when he said: "There is such a thing as learning to listen spiritually. There is such a thing as having pure intelligence poured into the mind. In the temple the meditation and contemplation that comes from a quietly observed reverence frequently results in such a pouring-in of intelligence and spiritual learning." (Holy Temple, p. 79.)

Although we don't usually go to the temple for this reason, many times we may actually receive personal revelation that can help us in our lives. Our attitude is really the key to this great blessing. We can decide to enter the temple with a desire to do the will of the Lord and spend our waiting time in gratitude and meditation.

Return to the Temple Often

One of the great functions of the temple is not recreation but service. When we return to the temple, we serve those who have died and are waiting for us to do their temple work for them. These people cannot continue in their progression until their work is done. Going to the temple also reminds us of the covenants we have made and helps us recommit ourselves to keeping them.

It is especially important to return to the temple shortly after our first visit. Actually it is good to go several times in quick succession so that we better understand the important covenants we have made.

Concentrate on the Covenants

All of us are nervous on our first visit to the temple. There is so much to see, and everything is so different from a church meeting. It helps to know that there is nothing to worry about. Your first experience in the temple is as important to those who serve in the temple as it is to you. They make a special effort to make it a happy and spiritual experience so that you will desire to return to the temple soon. From the time that you first step through the door you will not be left without assistance. Someone will be there to help you every step of the way. You can be assured that nothing takes place in the temple that will cause you embarrassment or concern.

Persons there for the first time have some identification pinned to their temple clothes so that they can receive any help that they need. If you desire, you can have a parent or friend accompany you every step of the way. If you come to the temple alone, and desire it, a temple worker would be glad to choose someone to accompany you and answer your questions.

A special meeting is held in the temple just before the endowment session for those who are going through the temple for the first time. What you will see and do in the temple that day is explained to you, and you will have the opportunity to ask any questions that you may have.

I feel very strongly about helping you to relax and enjoy your first visit to the temple because my unnecessary worry the first time I went to the temple detracted from the Spirit and the enjoyment that I could have felt. I spent my time worrying that I would do or say something wrong or somehow get lost or maybe even "flunk out" in some unknown way. When my day was over and I saw that there had been nothing to worry about, I could have kicked me around the block.

As a bishop, I always took the time to explain some of the things that are discussed in this chapter with young couples who were going to the temple for the first time. I would tell them to relax and enjoy the spirit of the temple. I would point out to them that we have all of our lives to come to understand the symbolism and other things associated with the temple. I would encourage them to enjoy the quiet spirit that is present there and think about the covenants that they are making. Many of these couples came back and thanked me for helping them enjoy their temple experience. They said that they were able to feel the Spirit of the Lord there and appreciated the great blessings that they were receiving.

The Symbolism in the Temple

Symbolism has always played an important part in the Lord's church, and the temple ordinances involve much symbolism. Other ordinances, such as baptism and the sacrament, also involve symbolism. Symbolism can teach us something about the covenants that we are making. It can also make the covenants more meaningful to us.

For instance, think of the symbolism involved in baptism by immersion for the remission of sins. Going under the water represents the burial and coming out of the water represents the resurrection of Christ. Going under the water also represents the death of an old way of living and the rebirth of a new person with new goals and standards. Baptism is actually called being "born again."

The symbolism of the sacrament is also important. The bread represents the body of Christ, his suffering on the cross (the breaking of the bread), and his resurrection, which made it possible for all of us to be resurrected. The water represents the blood of Christ, which was shed for us as he suffered for our sins and bled from every pore. Because of his suffering, through our repentance we can be forgiven.

As we come to understand the symbolism of baptism and the sacrament, these ordinances become much more meaningful to us. The symbolism of the temple will also become more meaningful as we return to the temple often and become more familiar with it.

Summary

1.Our first visit to the temple can be more positive when we have some understanding of what takes place there.

2.The ordinances for the living are washing and anointing, endowment, and sealings.

3.When we receive our endowment, the Lord promises us special blessings if we keep the promises that we make.

4.How we dress when we go to the temple indicates how we feel about the Lord.

5.The temple garment represents the covenants we make with the Lord.

6.We can use the garment as a guideline for dressing modestly before we go to the temple.

7.After we go to the temple, we should never alter the garment in any way in order to wear inappropriate clothing.

8.Much spiritual learning can take place in the temple if we will use the "quiet time" to meditate and pray.

9.It is important to return to the temple several times soon after going for the first time.

10.Returning to the temple helps us remember our covenants and gives us the opportunity to serve those who have passed on.

11.On our first visit to the temple, it will help if we just relax, feel the Spirit, and think about the covenants we are making.

12.As we continue to go back to the temple, the symbolism will become more meaningful and helpful to us.

Importance of the Temple Garment

It is important to understand the importance and sacred nature of the temple garment. The full purpose of the garment is revealed in the temple and should not be discussed outside the temple. We can, however, share some information that will help us appreciate and respect the temple garment.

Elder Boyd K. Packer said: The garment, covering the body, is a visual and tactile reminder of these [temple] covenants. For many Church members the garment has formed a barrier of protection when the wearer has been faced with temptation. Among other things it symbolizes our deep respect for the laws of God—among them the moral standard." (The Holy Temple [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1980], p. 79.)

The promise that the garment can remind us of our covenants and help protect us from temptation is very important and very real. This was demonstrated well by an active Church member named Marie. She was in her twenties, had been married in the temple, and had two children. Marie had been feeling depressed and unappreciated for several weeks.

A man where Marie worked part- time had noticed her vulnerability and began to show her a lot of attention. As she looked back on it later, she realized that he wanted only a physical relationship, but, at the time, she really thought that he cared for her. He listened to her problems and gave her the attention that she felt she needed. She shared a few secret lunches with him at fancy restaurants (just to discuss her problems), and they started to share a few kisses at the office.

Then one Friday morning when she was at home alone he called her on the phone. He told her how much he loved her and wanted to be with her. By the time she had hung up the phone, she had actually agreed to meet him at a motel in one hour. She packed a small bag and quickly showered. As she began to dress and went to put on her garments, her heart was flooded with pain and guilt. Those garments reminded her of all that was really special and dear to her. For the first time in several weeks she thought about her temple wedding, her husband and children, and the promises she had made to the Lord. As she sat down on the edge of the bed she began to shake and cry with relief. She was so grateful that she had come to her senses before she had gone any further.

Marie called the man and told him that she wouldn't be meeting him at the motel or any other place. She apologized to him for the things she had done with him in the past and told him that she loved her husband and children.

That night, Marie and her husband had a long talk, and they both began to do things to strengthen their marriage. Just as it was for Marie, the garment can be a great reminder and a great strength to us.

An important thing we can do to prepare ourselves to wear the temple garment is to apply the ideals of modesty all through our lives. By establishing the temple garment as our standard of dress from the time we are young we will not have to alter our wardrobe or adjust our style of dress when we enter the temple. Some people have been left with a closet full of clothes that they can no longer wear. Even before we enter the temple, the garment can be a great guide to us in determining what is modest and appropriate to wear.

Once we enter the temple, the garment will determine our dress standards for the rest of our lives. We should not pin or alter our garments so that we can wear something that does not cover the garment. Joseph F. Smith said that church members should consider their temple garments the most sacred of all things in the world, next to their own virtue, next to their own purity of life." (Editorial, Improvement Era, Aug. 1906, p. 813.)

Even though all of us will find ourselves in public dressing rooms at one time or another, we should never feel ashamed or embarrassed about our garments. George D. Durrant shared the following story, which has helped me explain to others why I wear temple garments.

I recall once speaking about the temple garment. I related an experience I had while I was in the army in Korea, where dressing facilities were not very private. In those circumstances I tried to be discreet, but at times some of my friends noticed that I wore temple garments. They would smile and say, What are those?' I would merely explain, They are part of my religion and someday I'll tell you more about them.' One night in the barracks one of my friends said, You've said you would tell us about your underwear. What is the story?' It was a small barracks and housed about fourteen men whom I had come to love over the months we were together. Nome of them was a member of the Church. I said This seems like a good time to tell all of you my feelings about life and my religion.' Everyone in the barracks waited quietly. You know how much letters from my wife and pictures of our little boy mean to me. I miss them more than I can say. That has something to do with why I wear these sacred garments.

When I met my wife prior to our marriage, I fell deeply in love with her. She agreed to become my wife.' I paused from the narrative and asked, Have any of you men ever seen a temple of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints?' Most of them said that they had seen a temple in one place or another. Each declared that he felt that those buildings were beautiful. I said, Yes, they are beautiful from the outside and they are even more beautiful inside.'

I continued, To go into a temple is quite an experience because, you see, it is the house of the Lord. Only members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints can enter. My sweetheart and I went to the Salt Lake Temple some years ago. It was there that we were married. There are certain things that happen inside a temple. These things aren't secret things, but they are sacred. They are things about which we are not to speak outside of the temple. But I can say this much—while I was in the temple I promised our Heavenly Father that I would keep his commandments in every way. He, in return, promised me in that holy house that if I would keep his commandments my family, my wife, my children, and I would never— even after death—be separated, but we would be a family forever.

Because I went to the temple I was thereafter privileged to wear these garments. They are sacred and holy and they are a constant reminder to me of the promises the Lord made to me.

So you see, my friends, as long as I wear these garments I have a constant reminder of things of an eternal nature. They help me to remember always that if I keep the covenants that I made in the Lord's holy house I will be with my family forever. While here in Korea I miss my wife and little boy more than words can tell. I never want to be separated from them again. . . . I know what I have told you is true and I want you to know it is true. And that's the answer to your question about why I wear this underwear. . . .

Later, when new men came to live in our barracks some would ask about the underwear. I didn't have to answer again, for in response to such a question one or the other of my own friends who had been there on that night would say, If you knew why he wore the underwear, you wouldn't smile. Those are sacred. They're part of his religion.' " (Ensign Jan. 1977, pp. 57-58.) Use the Waiting Time

Going to the temple involves waiting, and this waiting time can be extremely valuable to us if we will look upon it as an opportunity instead of a problem. When we enter the temple we are asked to be reverent. We are to conduct any necessary conversations in very subdued tones. While we are receiving instruction, we are asked to be completely reverent and quiet. There are very few places in our busy world that give us the opportunity to quietly mediatate and evaluate our lives.

While we are waiting for the ordinance work to begin, we will have time to sit quietly and ponder the things of the Spirit. Many times we become impatient or irritated with waiting. In the temple it should be just the opposite. If we handle this time correctly, it may become some of our most productive time.

Some of the things that I find myself thinking about while waiting are self-evaluation of how I am living the gospel, personal problems and how to solve them, up-coming decisions and how best to make them, the covenants I have made in the temple and whether or not I am keeping them, my relationship with my wife and children and with others, and so on.

The value of using this waiting time in a positive way was brought out by Elder Packer when he said: There is such a thing as learning to listen spiritually. There is such a thing as having pure intelligence poured into the mind. In the temple the meditation and contemplation that comes from a quietly observed reverence frequently results in such a pouring-in of intelligence and spiritual learning." (Holy Temple, p. 79.)

Although we don't usually go to the temple for this reason, many times we may actually receive personal revelation that can help us in our lives. Our attitude is really the key to this great blessing. We can decide to enter the temple with a desire to do the will of the Lord and spend our waiting time in gratitude and meditation.

Return to the Temple Often

One of the great functions of the temple is not recreation but service. When we return to the temple, we serve those who have died and are waiting for us to do their temple work for them. These people cannot continue in their progression until their work is done. Going to the temple also reminds us of the covenants we have made and helps us recommit ourselves to keeping them.

It is especially important to return to the temple shortly after our first visit. Actually it is good to go several times in quick succession so that we better understand the important covenants we have made.

Concentrate on the Covenants

All of us are nervous on our first trip to the temple. There is so much to see, and everything is so different from a church meeting. It helps to know that there is nothing to worry about. Your first experience in the temple is as important to those who serve in the temple as it is to you. They make a special effort to make it a happy and spiritual experience so that you will desire to return to the temple soon. From the time that you first step through the door you will not be left without assistance. Someone will be there to help you every step of the way. You can be assured that nothing takes place in the temple that will cause you embarrassment or concern.

Each person there for the first time has some identification pinned to their temple clothes so that they can receive any help that they need. If you desire, you can have a parent or friend accompany you every step of the way. If you come to the temple alone, and desire it, a temple worker would be glad to choose someone to accompany you and answer any of your questions.

A special meeting is held in the temple just before the endowment session for those who are going through the temple for the first time. What you will see and do in the temple that day is explained to you, and you will have the opportunity to ask any questions that you may have.

I feel very strongly about helping you to relax and enjoy you first visit to the temple because my unnecessary worry the first time I went to the temple detracted from the Spirit and the enjoyment that I could have felt. I spent my time worrying that I would do or say something wrong or somehow get lost or maybe even flunk out" in some unknown way. When my day was over and I saw that there had been nothing to worry about, I could have kicked me around the block.

As a bishop, I always took the time to explain some of the things that are discussed in this chapter with young couples who were going to the temple for the first time. I would tell them to relax and enjoy the spirit of the temple. I would point out to them that we have all of our lives to come to understand the symbolism and other things associated with the temple. I would encourage them to enjoy the quiet spirit that is present there and think about the covenants that they are making. Many of these couples came back and thanked me for helping them enjoy their temple experience. They said that they were able to feel the Spirit of the Lord there and appreciated the great blessings that they were receiving.

The Symbolism in the Temple

Symbolism has always played an important part in the Lord's church, and the temple ordinances involve much symbolism. Other ordinances, such as baptism and the sacrament, also involve symbolism. Symbolism can teach us something about the covenants that we are making. It can also make the covenants more meaningful to us.

For instance, think of the symbolism involved in baptism by immersion for the remission of sins. Going under the water represents the burial and coming out of the water represents the resurrection of Christ. Going under the water also represents the death of an old way of living and the rebirth of a new person with new goals and standards. Baptism is actually called being born again."

The symbolism of the sacrament is also important. The bread represents the body of Christ, his suffering on the cross ( the breaking of the bread), and his resurrection, which made it possible for all of us to be resurrected. The water represents the blood of Christ, which was shed for us as he suffered for our sins and bled from every pore. Because of his suffering, through our repentance we can be forgiven.

As we come to understand the sybolism of baptism and the sacrament, these ordinances become much more meaningful to us. The symbolism of the temple will also become more meaningful as we return to the temple often and become more familiar with it.

Summary

The two of you will, as the years go by, fall ever more in love. And as you love her, she will return that love in full and more. From the love of the two of you, your children will be blessed with the best. They will see "beauty all around" because they will know "love at home." —George Durrant
