Allan K. Burgess, Teens, Temple Marriage, and Eternity ( 1988)

CHAPTER 11

Are the Fruits Sour or Sweet?

After you are married in the temple and have children of your own, your attitude can greatly affect how your children view a temple marriage. Recently some young people were asked why they desired a temple marriage. Many of them responded that they desired a temple marriage because their parents had been married in the temple and they seemed to be so happy.

The Fruit Should Be Good

The Savior indicated that we should be able to recognize something good by the fruit it produces. (See Matthew 7:16.) Our children can come to know the sweet fruits of a celestial marriage when we radiate these fruits in our own homes. It's not really enough just to tell our children how wonderful eternal marriage is. More than anything we say, our children will judge temple marriage on how they perceive our temple marriage. If we are happy most of the time, they will feel that temple marriage brings happiness. If we go to the temple often, they will believe that the temple is a good place to go. If we wear our garments properly, they will realize that modesty is not uncomfortable. If we show love for them and for each other, they will learn to demonstrate and feel love. If we put our companion first in our lives, they will desire to be true and faithful to their spouses. What a benefit it is to them when they can see the fruits of a temple marriage firsthand. President Spencer W. Kimball said: "A child will carry into his own life much that he sees in his family home life. If he sees his parents going to the temple frequently, he will begin to plan a temple life." (" 'Train Up a Child,' " Ensign, Apr. 1978, p. 5.)

Give the Best

Children expect parents who have been married in the temple to love each other. As our children sense this love, they will be motivated to go to the temple. Brother George D. Durrant gave the following advice to husbands, but it applies equally well to wives:

"Your whole purpose in life should be to give your wife the best. That means, to give her the very best you that is possible. As you live honorably and faithfully, you will bring her great joy. The two of you will, as the years go by, fall ever more in love. And as you love her, she will return that love in full and more. From the love of the two of you, your children will be blessed with the best. They will see 'beauty all around' because they will know 'love at home.' As fathers, we are universal in acclaiming the fact that our children deserve the best, and love at home is indeed the best gift, the best memory, and the best inheritance a child can receive." (Love At Home Starring Father [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1976], p. 75.)

One of the most important elements in raising happy and successful children is for our children to realize that their parents love each other.

Quiz

Here is a quiz that you can take after you are married to help you analyze the effect you may be having on your children. Each statement should be answered yes, no, or sometimes.

1.We go out alone as a couple once a week.

2.My husband/wife is my best friend.

3.We are considerate of each other's feelings, and we very seldom raise our voices at one another.

4.We attend the temple often.

5.We are positive in our feelings and discussions about the Church and Church leaders.

6.We wear our garments properly.

7.We are trying to live the gospel to the very best of our ability.

8.We show affection openly for each other and for our children.

9.We are basically happy and act it.

10.We demonstrate positive attitudes as we serve in the Church.

If you can answer yes to most of these ten questions, you will probably be setting a worthwhile example for your children because they will be seeing firsthand the fruits of a successful temple marriage.

Summary

1.Children tend to want to marry in the temple if their parents demonstrate a happy temple marriage.

2.The best gift that we can give our children is to love them and love our spouse.

3.It is helpful to evaluate what kind of example we are setting.

"Why do I need to be married in the temple in order to have eternal life?" "What happens when I go to the temple for the first time?" "Why are the covenants made there so important?"

In Teens, Temple Marriage, and Eternity, Allan K. Burgess, a seminary teacher with considerable experience in counseling teenagers and young adults, answers these questions and puts to rest some of the myths and concerns you may have about the temple. Besides learning how to prepare for your first visit to the temple and what to expect from it, you will also learn the importance of the covenants you make and the rich blessings in store for you if you honor those covenants.

The author gives very specific suggestions to help you achieve your goal of worthy temple marriage:

Become the right person to be an eternal marriage partner

Develop skills that will help you have a successful marriage

Understand how a temple wedding is the beginning of a celestial marriage

Date only worthy Latter-day Saints

Ask the Lord for confirmation of your choice of a spouse

Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote: "The most important things that any member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ever does in this world are: 1. To marry the right person, in the right place, by the right authority; and 2. To keep the covenant made in connection with this holy and perfect order of matrimony—thus assuring the obedient persons of an inheritance of exaltation in the celestial kingdom." This book will help you prepare to do both.
