John W. Welch, Reexploring the Book of Mormon ( 1992)

Chapter 22

VIEW OF THE HEBREWS: "AN UNPARALLEL"

2 Nephi 33:2 "Wherefore, they cast many things away which are written and esteem them as things of naught."

The claim has been made before, and has recently been raised again, that Joseph Smith specifically copied the main structure and many details in the Book of Mormon from Ethan Smith's 1823 View of the Hebrews. Alleged parallels between these two books have led some to esteem the Book of Mormon lightly, "as a thing of naught."

Since the alleged points of contact are scattered throughout View of the Hebrews and in some cases are claimed to be quite specific, this assertion becomes plausible only if we assume that Joseph knew View of the Hebrews quite well and implicitly accepted it as accurate. If he did so, then he should have followed it—or at least should have not contradicted it—on its major points.

But this does not turn out to be the case. Since several people have pointed out alleged "parallels" between the Book of Mormon and View of the Hebrews, consider the following "unparallels" that weaken, if not completely undermine, the foregoing hypothesis:

From there View of the Hebrews claims that the Israelites spread from north to east and then to the south at a very late date. These are critical points for View of the Hebrews, since Amos 8:11-12 prophesies that the tribes would go from the north to the east. Population migrations in the Book of Mormon, however, always move from the south to the north.

Furthermore, a table showing thirty-four Indian words or sentence fragments with Hebrew equivalents appears in View of the Hebrews. [^4] No reader of the book could have missed this chart. If Joseph Smith had wanted to make up names to use in the Book of Mormon that would substantiate his claim that he had found some authentic western hemisphere Hebrew words, he would have jumped at such a ready-made list! Yet not one of these thirty-four Hebrew/Indian words (e.g., Keah, Lani, Uwoh, Phale, Kurbet, etc.) has even the remotest resemblance to any of the 175 words that appear for the first time in the Book of Mormon.

The foregoing twelve points could be multiplied literally seven times over. In the face of these differences, the few vague similarities pale. Both speak of long migrations for religious reasons; both report wars; both say the people knew how to write and work with metals; and both praise generosity and denounce pride. View of the Hebrews speaks of Indian lore that they left a "lost book" back in Palestine. But these points are rather general and inconsequential.

The question has been asked: "Can such numerous and startling points of resemblance and suggestive contact be merely coincidence?" The answer is "yes," not only because the points of resemblance are neither numerous nor startling, but also because the differences far outweigh the similarities. Why would Joseph have contradicted and ignored View of the Hebrews at virtually every turn, if indeed he gave it basic credence? [^6]

An expanded version of this October 1985 research by John W. Welch was published that same year by F.A.R.M.S., entitled "An Unparallel." It and Spencer Palmer's and William Knecht's 1964 article in BYU Studies are now available together under the title "View of the Hebrews: Substitute for Inspiration?"

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^4] In many ways, Lehi is acting here like Jacob of old. Both Jacob and Lehi pronounced their blessings to "all [their] household," who had gathered around them shortly before they died. The aim was to organize a household of God in a new land of promise (see 2 Nephi 4:12; Genesis 49). Both organized their posterity into tribal groups in the patriarchal tradition of ancient Israel. The claim that Lehi chose that patriarchal role is borne out by the fact that to the end the Nephites remembered Lehi as "Father Lehi." As the Israelites speak of Abraham as "Father Abraham," so the Nephites, including Enos, Benjamin, Alma, Helaman, Nephi, and Mormon, uniformly remembered Lehi as "our father Lehi" (Enos 1:25; Mosiah 1:4; 2:34; Alma 9:9; 18:36; 36:22; 56:3; Helaman 8:22; 3 Nephi 10:17). Indeed, Lehi is the only figure in Nephite history called "our father," apparently in reference to his position at the head of Nephite society and religion.
[^6] View of the Hebrews says the Indians are Israelites because they carry small boxes with them into battle. These are to protect them against injury. They are sure signs that the Indians' ancestors knew of the Ark of the Covenant! How could Joseph Smith pass up such a distinguished and oft-attested Hebraism as this?! Yet in all Book of Mormon battle scenes, there is not one hint of any such ark, box, or bag serving as a military fetish. Further discussion is available in Spencer Palmer and William Knecht, "View of the Hebrews: Substitute for Inspiration?'' BYU Studies 5 (1964): 105-13; and Hugh Nibley, "The Comparative Method,'' Improvement Era 62 (October-November 1959), 744-47, 759, 848, 854, 856, reprinted in The Collected Works of Hugh Nibley (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and F.A.R.M.S., 1989), 8:193-206.
