“We all need guidance through life. We obtain it best from the standard works and teachings of the prophets of God.”
Elder Russell M. Nelson of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, “Living by Scriptural Guidance,” Liahona, Jan. 2001, 22; Ensign, Nov. 2000, 18.

Aaronic Priesthood holders in the Abeokuta Nigeria District gathered last year for an Aaronic Priesthood commemoration activity. All priesthood holders and their friends were invited. Fathers and sons, brothers and guests, enjoyed games and a dinner of jollof, a popular Nigerian rice dish. Symbolizing leader service, branch presidents served the meal. After eating, each attendee washed his own dish. “Go practice these skills in your own homes,” the young men were advised.

Hearts were touched as young men dramatized the event they were celebrating—the restoration of the Aaronic Priesthood by John the Baptist to the Prophet Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, on May 15, 1829.

As they followed President Gordon B. Hinckley’s counsel to “make the gospel and the Church fun for the young people of the Church” (from an address given at Radio City Music Hall, New York City, New York, June 12, 2005), these Nigerian deacons, teachers, priests, and elders found great delight playing and serving side by side.

Millennium: A millennium is a period of 1,000 years. In the Church, when we speak of “the Millennium,” we refer to the 1,000 years following the Savior’s Second Coming, when “Christ will reign personally upon the earth” (Articles of Faith 1:10).

The Millennium will be a time of righteousness and peace on the earth when all people will be good and just. Church members will be busy during this time with missionary and temple work.

At the end of the 1,000 years Satan “shall be loosed for a little season, that he may gather together his armies.” They will fight against the hosts of heaven, led by Adam. Satan and his followers will be defeated and cast out forever. (See D&C 88:111–15.)

August 25, 1829: Martin Harris (right) agreed to mortgage his farm to cover the printing costs of the Book of Mormon. Five thousand copies were printed in 1830.

August 5, 1953: President David O. McKay broke ground for the Swiss Temple (now called the Bern Switzerland Temple). It was the first temple in Europe.

August 1, 1973: The Japan Nagoya Mission and the Thailand Bangkok Mission were organized.

August 2, 1985: The Church released the first new English hymnbook in 37 years. Translated into 21 languages, it’s the one in use today.
