Even though we know that we will be blessed for being obedient, sometimes it might seem hard to keep the commandments. The scriptures give us examples of people who kept the commandments even when it was hard.

After Lehi and his family left Jerusalem they traveled for several days in the wilderness. Then the Lord commanded that Nephi and his brothers return to Jerusalem to get the brass plates, the scriptures, from Laban. Laman and Lemuel murmured, or complained, saying that it was a hard thing to go all the way back to Jerusalem. Nephi did not murmur. He said, “I will go and do the things which the Lord hath commanded, for I know that the Lord giveth no commandments unto the children of men, save he shall prepare a way for them that they may accomplish the thing which he commandeth them” (1 Nephi 3:7). The Lord helped Nephi. Even though it was hard, he was able to get the brass plates.

Daniel was ordered not to do something that was right—he was told not to pray! Wicked men tricked the king into making a law that required anyone who prayed to be thrown into the lions’ den. Daniel still prayed three times a day. When the men caught Daniel praying, Daniel was cast into the lions’ den. Did the lions kill Daniel? No. Daniel was protected by an angel sent from God. God blessed Daniel for keeping His commandment to pray.

We can follow Nephi’s and Daniel’s examples of obedience. We can obey our parents, dress modestly, use appropriate language, and read our scriptures—even when it is hard!

1.  Cut out the pictures on this page.

2.  Glue or tape the pictures to heavier paper.

3.  Attach a piece of flannel or rough material to the back of the heavy paper if you would like the figures to stick to a flannel board.

4.  Using the scripture figures, tell the stories of Nephi, Daniel, the stripling warriors, and Ruth. (See 1 Nephi 3–4; Daniel 6; Alma 57:19–27; Ruth 1.)

Note: If you do not wish to remove pages from the magazine, this activity may be copied, traced, or printed from the Internet at www.lds.org. For English, click on “Gospel Library.” For other languages, click on the world map.

1. Read aloud together 1 Nephi 19:23. Ask, “What does it mean to ‘liken all scriptures’ to ourselves and our families?” Liken means “to compare.” We see how our lives are like the lives of the people we are reading about. We see how the Lord’s word can help us today. (See “Likening,” Teaching, No Greater Call [1999], 170–71.) Pass out scripture references to illustrate the following principles: Mosiah 2:17–18 (serve others); Mosiah 4:16 (help the poor); Alma 37:36–37 (pray always); Exodus 20:12 (honor our mothers and fathers); Mosiah 5:5, 7 (make and keep baptismal covenants). Ask the children to do three things: (1) read the scripture, (2) find the gospel principle and be prepared to explain it in their own words, and (3) tell how they can apply (or liken) the message in their lives today. Discuss how they and their families are blessed as they liken the scriptures to themselves. Ask, “Of all the people who have ever lived on the earth, whom do you want to be most like?” Bear testimony of the Savior.

2. Draw a simple game board on the chalkboard with the beginning space in the bottom left corner and the finish space in the upper right corner. Draw a water line just below the finish square. Use a cutout of Noah’s ark as a marker. Explain that the object of the game is to get the ark out of the water. Position various animal cutouts around the room. On the backs of the cutouts write a 1, 2, or the name of a song or hymn about obedience. Retell the story of Noah (see Genesis 6–8). Emphasize that Noah’s family was blessed because of their obedience. Invite the children to take turns finding an animal. If a song is listed on the back, sing the song, place the animal in the ark, and move the marker three spaces. If a 1 or a 2 is selected, have the child share something our modern prophets have asked us to do, then place the animal on the ark, and move the marker the designated number of spaces. When the ark is out of the water, sing a song or hymn about prophets. Explain that we and our families will be blessed when we follow our prophet.
