To make this game to add to your Sunday Box (see Liahona, June 2006, F16) or for family home evening, you will need glue, scissors, a magnet, wire paper clips, a string 39 inches (1 m) long, and a stick short enough to fit into the Sunday Box.

1.  To make a fishing pole, tie one end of the string to the stick and the other end to the magnet.

2.  Glue these two pages to heavy paper, and cut out the fish. Attach a paper clip to the nose of each fish.

3.  Scatter fish in your empty Sunday Box or in another box (for your fishpond). Take turns catching the fish and answering the questions. If the player doesn’t know the answer or the answer is incorrect, he or she looks up the scripture reference to find the correct answer.

4.  On the three blank fish you can write your own Old Testament questions or other gospel questions. You can also make additional fish for your fishpond.

Where did Adam first live? (See Genesis 2:8.)

Who slew Goliath? (See 1 Samuel 17:50.)

What is the name of the first book in the Old Testament? (See Bible.)

What is the name of the last book in the Old Testament? (See Bible.)

Who was commanded to sacrifice his son? (See Genesis 22:1–2.)

What city did Enoch and the righteous people build? (See Moses 7:19.)

Who led the Israelites from Egypt? (See Exodus 3:11–12.)

What food did the Lord provide for the Israelites when they were living in the wilderness? (See Exodus 16:11–15.)

What happened to Daniel when he prayed in defiance of King Darius’s decree? (See Daniel 6:16.)

Name one of the Ten Commandments received by Moses. (See Exodus 20:3–17.)

Who called young Samuel in his sleep? (See 1 Samuel 3:4.)

What did Queen Esther ask her people, the Jews, to do to help her save their lives? (See Esther 4:16.)

What did Jonah do when he was in the belly of the great fish? (See Jonah 2:1.)

What did Joseph tell Pharaoh about Joseph’s ability to interpret dreams? (See Genesis 41:16.)

Note: If you do not wish to remove pages from the magazine, this activity may be copied, traced, or printed from the Internet at www.lds.org. For English, click on “Gospel Library.” For other languages, click on the world map.
