Jaroldeen Edwards, Things I Wish I'd Known Sooner ( 1991)

Preface

This is not a "how-to" book.

It is not a book with tidy answers to untidy questions.

It is not a "perfect person" book.

It is not an easy book.

What this book is, is a book of personal discoveries, expressed as precious, albeit one-sided, conversations we might have had through the years, as friends. Our conversations would probably have touched on the full spectrum of our lives—intellectual knowledge, scriptural insights, personal anecdotes, observations from other cherished and admired friends, shared housekeeping hints, and all of the glorious, myriad "stuff" (as Shakespeare called it) of which our dreams are made.

Women's conversations are splendid things—diverse, profound, humorous, complex, and vivid. But if women's conversations are diverse, it is only because they reflect the fact that we, as women, are diverse. Our lives are individual and kaleidoscopic, filled with changing seasons and unique, personal challenges. By accepting, understanding, and learning from this shared and wondrous diversity, we gain greater joy, truer purpose, and a wider vision of the endless chain of our own possibilities.

The conversation of true friends, properly heard—without envy, defensiveness, false barriers, comparisons, or criticism—is good for the soul.

As I began to write this book I remembered something my mother-in-law once told me. She was talking about her own mother, Caroline Romney Eyring, and she said, "Mother was an impatient cook, but, as a result, she made wonderful pies." I was a new bride and the comment startled me, since I regarded pie making as postdoctoral cooking. I could see no possible relationship between a cook's impatience and the ability to produce something as complex and delectable as a pie.

"You see," Weston's mother went on to explain, "the less you handle pie crust, the more tender and flaky it is."

I think that what is true of pie crust is true of conversation as well. The more directly our thoughts come from our hearts, the more tender and true they will be.

So I have rolled out my pie crust . . .

Know thyself . . . The glory, jest, and riddle of the world. —Alexander Pope
