Jaroldeen Edwards, Things I Wish I'd Known Sooner ( 1991)

Chapter One

Magic Windows of Light

I was the guest speaker at a women's conference. After the meetings an energetic, no-nonsense sort of a young woman came up to me, looked me squarely in the eye, and said, "You know, Sister Edwards, when I heard you were going to be our speaker, I almost decided not to come."

Needless to say, she had my instant attention. But before I could respond, she continued: "I didn't know you, of course, and I had never heard you speak, but when I read your biography in the publicity materials the stake sent out—that you have twelve children, and have published five novels, and have served as ward Relief Society president, and have a wonderful marriage, and on and on—well, all I could think was, 'Oh no! Here comes another of those women with a perfectly organized house and brilliant children, who is successful in the world, and who is coming to tell me how easily she does it all!'

"To be perfectly honest, Sister Edwards, I didn't want to hear it—not when I'm struggling just to manage my four children and help my husband with our small business. My house is never organized, my children can drive me wild, and it's hard for me to find time to prepare a decent Primary lesson. I couldn't stand the thought of spending a precious morning-off listening to some impossibly successful woman tell me what I'm doing wrong."

She paused, and for the first time she smiled at me. Her smile illuminated her face as though she had stepped from a dark room into the sunlight. She grasped my hand and continued warmly, "But, Sister Edwards, after hearing you speak I feel very close to you. Why, you are so ordinary that nobody could hate you!"

Ordinary. That was one of the best compliments I had ever received because it was more than a compliment. It was actually a gift of knowledge and insight. Without realizing it, this woman had made a profound observation about our mortal experience and eternal spiritual relationship. (I had obviously succeeded in communicating to her the fact that my home was not always organized, that I had very real children, and that I, too, struggled to find both time and identity.) However, the concept implied in her words went further than a comfortable recognition of my imperfections. She had meant her comments to be a deep, sincere, and specific compliment. I loved it, and it spurred me to contemplate the idea of ordinariness in an entirely new light.

My thoughts reinforced my already deep conviction about human relationships. I have always felt that although the circumstances of individual lives—personalities, patterns, abilities, place—may be dramatically different, still, in meaningful ways, we are all much alike. Those things we have in common are far greater than those things that divide us. Only when we are wise enough, trusting enough, loving enough, and generous enough to see through the outward trappings of another person's life—to see instead the bedrock of shared needs, desires, struggles, and spiritual aspirations—are we able to truly recognize one another. Then we can feel more comfortable with our own lives and more appreciative and accepting of others.

In such moments of insight, in a brief window of light, we see and understand that we are all gloriously ordinary. I say gloriously because the most common characteristic shared by ordinary people is that each one has an individual life that is splendidly unique and in some wonderful and mysterious way extraordinary. One of the great miracles of Heavenly Father is that he somehow made each of us extraordinary and ordinary at the same time.

As we begin to explore this fascinating dichotomy, discovering both the eternal and unchanging principles of truth that apply to all and the incredible sweep and complexity of individual challenge, we begin to comprehend the magnificent harvest of hidden treasures of knowledge that have been promised and that lie within the scope of our own personal lives. One of the primary goals of mortality is to learn. Mortality serves as our laboratory; our own individual life is our learning tray; and the lives of others can be like a resource library.

Learning trays were given to early students of science. Each student had an individual tray with an array of artifacts and specimens on it. The challenge was for the scholar to discover scientific truths through personal study, experimentation, and observations based upon his or her own particular tray. Tutors, other students, libraries, and other resources were available if the pupil chose to use them. Those students who succeeded quickly developed methods and systems of inquiry. They were eager and persistent. They focused on the tray given to them, but asked questions and gained knowledge from others. They observed others and learned from them. Using creativity, trial and error, and enthusiasm for the process, they remained motivated. Sometimes, in the midst of dutiful effort, they would have a brief moment of surprised light when they would suddenly grasp an elusive truth. Such moments came unexpectedly—but in the midst of the fray. The least productive students spent their time gazing at their classmates' trays, wishing they had gotten the nautilus shell, the turquoise rock, or the ant farm.

We must hunger and thirst after knowledge, which is the real treasure, and when we do, we become more grateful for individual life, for it is the means to that end. True principles, once identified, are true, and it does not matter the tray by which they are discovered. Molecular structure can be learned from a daisy or from a snail.

Thus it is that the mother in Lapland who gently rocks her child to sleep shielding his eyes from a never-setting sun, or the Bedouin mother who feeds her child goat's-milk yogurt in the blazing heat, or the Andean mother who straps her child close to her body so he may sleep as she climbs the mountain path in the thin, cold air—each may learn the identical knowledge of love.

I remember vividly the day my eighth child was placed in my arms. Why then? Why the eighth time? Not a new thought or a new feeling—but one that I suddenly felt and knew in that instant so profoundly that I shook with the knowledge. As I held that dear baby, he opened his eyes and looked at me, and in that ordinary moment, deep within his eyes, as though I were actually looking through a telescope I saw the whole vision of eternity. I gasped. I cannot describe it any better than that. For a brief instant, in the direct and silent intelligence of those brand-new eyes from which gazed a spirit as everlastingly old and young as my own, I saw a microcosm of premortal life; the love of my Heavenly Father, the mature soul in that infant's body, and the truth of our binding and eternal covenants. I felt I had been privileged to look through his eyes to see a glimpse of heaven. For just one brief instant, all the walls had fallen away.

Later that night I wrote the following words:

A child's eyes are the cathedral of a mother's soul: Through them she worships flawlessly. In them she sees eternity.

Knowledge may come in many ways, but it is those sudden, unexpected moments of insight that particularly intrigue me, those moments in our questing when a veil is suddenly torn from our eyes and we see clearly. I am fascinated, for example, to know that the principles of physics have always existed, since the creation of the world, and are demonstrated daily in the workings of the earth. Through the centuries, how many apples do you suppose had fallen right in front of people's eyes—and yet no one saw them? Then Isaac Newton observed a falling apple with a vision that somehow penetrated its simplicity and dailiness, and because he truly saw, the world was changed forever. He identified a truth that had always been there, just waiting to be seen—universal truth, but discovered through individual experience in an individual life.

A number of years ago, when we contemplated placing our children in a Montessori school, I decided to make a study of the life of Maria Montessori. At the turn of the century, Maria worked with mentally handicapped children in the slums of Rome. There she discovered the great principle of learning upon which she based her schools. She found that if children are placed in an environment completely filled with learning opportunities, they will gain knowledge inadvertently, at their own pace, in their own patterns.

Everything in the Montessori classroom is designed to have the potential for teaching a concept. The height of the windows, the squares on the floor, the places where things are kept—everything is designed for teaching sequencing, motor control, spatial concepts, categorization, and other essential skills.

One example I found especially creative was that all the little girls in Madame Montessori's boarding school wore dresses with buttons from neck to hem and were taught to button and unbutton their dresses in precise order. Thus, the natural and repetitive function of daily dressing became an automatic learning experience in manual dexterity, sequencing, and patterning.

As I read I had a burst of personal insight. "This is the very principle," I thought to myself, "upon which the Lord has designed this earth and our experience in mortality." I could visualize our earthly existence as a vast, splendidly designed classroom in which every single thing both abstract and concrete is designed as a means for us to gain knowledge. I could also see that for the most part we play, work, and interact like the children in a classroom, largely unaware of the bounty of knowledge at our fingertips.

Our lack of full comprehension is not an indictment. It is one of the realities of our mortal limitations. We live through this span of existence with the veil drawn so that knowledge must be gained through living with faith, through keeping the commandments, and through dependence upon revelation and the guidance of the Holy Ghost.

Not until the earth is celestialized will it become a Urim and Thummim to reveal all the vast knowledge it holds in store. At that time we shall see clearly, as though through a crystal, and through that crystal the mysteries that the earth has to teach will unfold before the righteous as a scroll. The earth will then become its own translator.

Paul, in explaining this to the Corinthians, alluded to the great knowledge that lies about us: "For now we see through a glass, darkly; but then face to face: now I know in part; but then shall I know even as also I am known." (1 Corinthians 13:12.) But the wonderful part is that even though it is through a dark glass, we do see! Every once in a while, even in this telestial phase of our eternal journey, disguised in the ordinary substance of our daily experience, we catch a glimpse of the knowledge that lies all about us. In such brief moments we are blessed to see with Urim and Thummim eyes. Pure knowledge sends a sudden ray and we learn a truth that gives meaning, substance, and beauty to our lives. We can develop eyes that will see those moments more clearly, and the wisdom to remember them more vividly.

It is some of these glimpses of surprised light in my own life that I would like to share with you. James Joyce calls such moments epiphanies. I rather like that word. It has a rich, important sound to it—and a touch of exaltation as well. A word like epiphany, however, cannot take itself too seriously, because it has kind of a homely sound, too, like piffle or funny. I like that because moments of enlightenment can be pretty down-to-earth and humorous. Epiphany literally means a flash of pure light and understanding—one of those rare moments when nature, people, emotions, and spirit coalesce to create an instant of total comprehension.

Tennyson understood this. In "Flower in the Crannied Wall" he wrote:

I pluck you out of the crannies, I hold you here, root and all, in my hand, Little flower—but if I could understand What you are, root and all, and all in all, I should know what God and man is.

So there you are! The things of eternity revealed in the humdrum. The extraordinary, flowering in the most ordinary.

I have gathered, like a bouquet of memory, some of my own moments of epiphany, gleaned from my own learning tray. These are certainly not all glorious lessons about celestial things. Some of my epiphanies are as simple and valuable as the way my ten-year-old daughter taught me how to make cookies more efficiently. (I have to confess that I believe the principles of truth apply to cookie making as much as to a better understanding of the eternal nature of womanhood.)

Truth and knowledge seem to have an incredible gamut of subjects. We cannot be saved in ignorance, but sometimes learning comes in unexpected ways: from the eyes of our children, the words of a friend, or the hum of a washing machine.

Light from this window:

The most ordinary things can become windows of light.

The time to be happy is now, The place to be happy is here, The way to be happy is to make others so. —Robert Green Ingersoll
