Jaroldeen Edwards, Things I Wish I'd Known Sooner ( 1991)

Chapter Three

A Full House

Preamble: It would be hard to explain to women who did not live through it what it was like to be a woman, a wife, and a mother in the 1970s. There was a harsh, divisive, strident movement in the ranks of feminism. The media, society, schools, universities, newspapers, magazines, and the voices of highly visible men and women proclaimed that there were too many children in the world and that women should not allow themselves to be chained to the home, husbands, or children. It was the "me" generation, with women crying "my turn" the loudest of anyone.

Zero Population Growth, the Population Boom, and the Feminine Mystique were all catch phrases under which a mix of lies, personal angers, unproven theories, and destructive attitudes were packaged and sold to an impressionable generation of women.

There is no question that some good came from this upheaval. Women's issues were opened, discussed, and acknowledged, and many rights were established. New directions became possible. But many bitter legacies from that decade linger still: a devaluing of children both in society and in personal lives, diminished respect for the traditional roles of women, the proliferation of abortion, divorce in epidemic proportions, and a polarization of men and women.

It was a time of what I like to call "The Big Lie," when slogans masqueraded as ideas, and propaganda and emotion were disguised to look like thoughtful analysis. The tasks of homemaking and motherhood were demeaned as drudgery while jobs were referred to as careers and glorified out of all proportion—certainly with very little relationship to the realities of most jobs. Few women were able to refrain from being influenced by the pervasive anti-child and anti-family-role themes.

In the disguise of freeing women, this new movement was actually brilliantly forging new "manacles of the mind" (as John W. Gardner, the author of Self-Renewal, calls it). There are, of course, many ways to manacle minds, but none so cleverly used in the decade of the seventies as the catchy phrase masquerading as a responsible and established truth. For example, almost always when writers or speakers referred to the role of motherhood they would characterize it by the phrase "dirty diapers and dirty dishes." Now that's smart strategy. In a single phrase they had captured two of the universally necessary but unappealing activities of mothering, had stripped motherhood to what they (and many others) considered to be its lowest common denominator, and by so doing had neatly denigrated the role and diminished the mother and the child by reducing them to menial functions.

It didn't work on me because I understood that mothering was infinitely more than any ridiculous catch phrase. I also knew something about diapering a child that none of those clever feminists knew—or could probably even understand. I refuse to let my mind be manacled—and certainly not by women who don't even know what they are talking about. If there is one thing in this world upon which I am an expert, it is probably changing diapers. When I was confronted with this ad-campaign level of thinking, I decided to evaluate for myself what it really means to change diapers. Is it really a demeaning activity for a Phi Beta Phi college graduate?

To begin with, there is no question that caring for an infant is a godlike endeavor. Without the thoughtful, gentle care of a loving adult, babies die. They die of starvation, disease, filth, and emotional neglect. There is no alternative. Babies must be cared for—and well cared for—or there is no continuation of life on this planet. It is the single imperative of continued mortal existence. When we care for a fragile infant, we deal with matters of life and death; there is nothing demeaning or unimportant in anything we do.

So we come to the changing of diapers, an inevitable interface of caretaker and child. Of course it is a distasteful task, but in it a bonding of service, of love, and of cleanliness. It is much more than that, however. When we change a child's diaper, it is necessary to look that baby squarely in the eye; to talk to it; to charm it; to woo it; to distract it; to entertain it—to do everything within our power to keep the child content, happy, and entertained while we perform the tricky task. So it is that changing diapers requires a mother, several times a day, to interact with her baby, face to face, with all the charm and delight of which she is capable.

T. Barry Brazelton, a great pediatric authority, discovered a direct correlation between the effectiveness of mothers and the frequency of eye-to-eye contact. Changing diapers is prime eye-to-eye time. Physically and emotionally such daily activities as feeding, bathing, and diapering become the taproots of the eternal relationship of mother and child. These functions contain the quality time of infancy. I have witnessed a mother diapering her baby while being so charming, adorable, vivid, and exuberant that she and the child rang with laughter like golden bells. Only those who have never analyzed the value and purpose of such activities can look at them with contemptuous eyes.

Some time ago a journal published for the Mormon audience was preparing an issue devoted to women's concerns and many of the difficult and valid problems that were part of the whirlwind. I was asked by the editors to write an essay on motherhood. We were in the thick of the seventies and the women's movement, and to write at that time in praise of motherhood—especially of a large family—was a little like being asked to write an essay on democracy for a newspaper in China. I had been a tournament debater in college, and my natural instinct was to write a defense of motherhood. On point after point I planned to best the adversary.

As I wrote and rewrote the essay, in my mind I came to a firm conviction that I still hold: There are true principles upon which one must base the decisions of one's life. When we receive blessings it is by obedience to true principles. There are many true principles, however, and many different decisions can be derived from them, and each person has the right to choose for himself or herself. I cannot judge for anyone else.

In the end, I decided that all I could do was write the truth about my own experience and feelings—tell others what I felt about the joys and challenges of my life, and let them take from my words whatever might be of value and truth to them. So, rather than a long defense of children, motherhood, and apple pie, I wrote, as honestly as I could, the account of a day in my life. I had just had my eleventh child and we were living in California at the time. What I hoped was that I could show, rather than advocate, how I felt about my profession. When the article was published the editors wrote and told me that "people who read your essay either loved it or hated it—there was no in between." (Did I mention that women were polarized in the 1970s?)

Here are some thoughts from that essay, which includes many of the windows of light I have discovered managing a house full of children.

A Full House

I wake up in the morning to the sound of my husband's voice. But it is not really an awakening; rather it is a continuing. For night as we used to know it no longer comes to our home. There is a lull in activity, yes; but in the way of our youth, when night and sleep were a total experience that blocked the chain of days, a precious all-in-one piece of unconsciousness, an ending and a forgetting—in that sense night does not come. Even in sleep there is a consciousness of caring, a wakefulness that tests the murmur of the house through the darkened hours. The hum of the refrigerator, a last dryer of clothes with one clonking sneaker, water flushing, a cough, children padding on pajamaed feet through the always lighted halls, requests for drinks, solace from bad dreams, or a short diagnosis of unidentified aches.

Sometimes I open my eyes in response to an eerie sense of presence and see a face an inch from mine, staring. Child standing, me lying, eye to eye. "I can't sleep," and then the blissful snuggle in. Or there will be a gentle arising to the surface of sleep, a sudden awareness of silence, a listening . . . listening . . . listening . . . and settling back to sleep in the wonder and reassurance of our burgeoned home.

Not yet six in the morning. My husband is shaving and calls over the running water—something from the train of his thoughts. He assumes that I am (a) awake and (b) fully aware of his mental preamble, even though he knows that we have an unspoken agreement: "I never wake to the sound of an alarm, and he never wakes to the crying of a baby." He cannot resist this brief empty piece of time—no more can I, so I rouse and prop in bed and we continue the delicious conversation of our marriage. Fifteen minutes. Then up, making the bed, hair, slippers, robe, and a quick glance at our baby sleeping like a moist rose. Such beauty in our cluttered bedroom!

Morning husbands are so elegant. He comes from the dressing room in his starched white shirt, bright tie, polished shoes, face shining from shower and shave. All the beautiful odors, soap, shaving lotion, starch, and the masculine smell of his suit, mingle in that early morning embrace.

Breakfast with our seminary daughters is eggnog, toast, and orange juice. Never time for more. The girls hurtle into the kitchen, shoes in hand, long shining hair, books a-clutter, hunting for gym suits or brushes or pens. Their day fresh and new. I never get used to seeing them grown so tall and beautiful. I love their becoming, but I miss the little girls gone. It is a constant challenge to keep my relationship to them in the proper balance since it must change and develop as they do. Too often the childhood mother rises to the surface and makes a flat evaluation: "Change those stockings!" "Skirt's too short." "Please take a sweater." "Do you have your homework and lunch?" Compromises reached, plans exchanged. As they fling out the door, with coats, books, and purses, I give each a brief kiss and a careful compliment, the ritual that says, "I love you. Hurry home."

Then one last apostrophe of time with my husband. Six-thirty a.m. He looking like Brooks Brothers and me like the Earth Mother.

The next half hour is my own sweet time. It's gorgeous to read in a still-sleeping house, prepare a church assignment, or spend quiet minutes with an early-awakened baby. At seven I must be fully dressed with makeup and hair done, ready for the official day of the family to begin. The children are wakened, first time cheerfully, second time firmly, and, if a third time is necessary, sharply.

I dress the preschool children and babies in my bedroom. This bedroom is the hub of our home in the morning and evening. Here I keep a drawer with the stockings for the entire family. This serves two purposes. Naturally it saves a lot of sorting time, but it also makes it necessary for each child to come from the corners of the house to this room to complete dressing. I can make all the necessary checks—hair, teeth, clothes, homework, and morning chores. The stocking drawer is a siphon and it draws all the early-morning family to me while I am busy changing diapers, tying shoes, and snapping trousers for the four youngest.

Breakfast and lunches are prepared with practiced swiftness. Simple meals. Bowls of hot cereal, milk, and oranges. Lunches crackling in brown paper sacks with each name in marker pen—Catherine, Charles, Christine, Robin, Carolyn. Sandwiches all the same ("Sorry you don't like cheese, Robin; I'll make peanut butter tomorrow." Carolyn says she doesn't like peanut butter and we all laugh. "Tuna on Wednesday!" I promise.), cookies, apples, and milk money. Gathered around the kitchen table, the children and I cram these last minutes with talking, facts, ideas, compliments, appointments, schedules. Family prayer and momentary silence as they start to eat.

The clock is inexorable. So is the school bus. Again at the door the farewells. My cheek is kissed and I forget to wipe off the cereal and milk. Midday I will sometimes touch my cheek and find it still sticky.

Catherine's junior high starts later and so we do dishes and have a rare private talk. She practices flute or piano and, long dark hair bouncing, strides off to school. It would be wonderful to have eleven children and have each an only child.

Bless Sesame Street! That psychedelic learning feast! My three little boys sit in a rapt row. Fifteen minutes of hard exercise for me while they watch; the misery of middle-age, eleven children, and all that car-driving is that muscle tone is no longer inherent—it has to be earned.

I fill the sink to bathe the baby. It is a time of savoring. Maybe it has taken me all these children to appreciate how short these first months are. The glories of a new baby are beyond description. Hardly mortal! I revel in this tactile, subtle, exquisite, and complex experience. One unexpected bonus of motherhood is the visual beauty. I am enchanted by the sights of my children, the tones of skin, the clear eyes, the grace, the curve of hand and cheek—to see them racing across the back lawn in a certain slant of light.

At about ten o'clock the baby is cared for and the discretionary part of the day begins. There is no one to tell me what I must do, only my own sense of responsibility and achievement. People often ask me how I manage with such a large family and I reply, "By a simple method of selective neglect." Which is just a way of saying that I manage through a system of compelling priorities. My present life as a mother has three profound purposes. (This aside from the relationship with my husband, which is my eternal and consistent preoccupation.) The first is to fulfill all my spiritual obligations as I understand them. The second is to educate my children. Educate in the broadest sense, not just helping them achieve skill and success in school, but giving them a sense of awareness, responsibility, and joy. By far the greatest amount of my time is spent in this endeavor. Third is my responsibility to give the best possible physical care to children and home. If any of these three purposes is neglected, the balance and richness of our family is impaired.

Basic order is essential. This to me means beds, dishes, and general pick-up must be done consistently and directly. Each child makes his bed on rising and clears his own dishes. Clothes washing is done early and late. Hurrah for the men who invented dishwashers, dryers, and permanent press! I am a compulsive picker-upper and throw-awayer; ask any child who has made the mistake of leaving a valuable piece of paper lying around. So the house is mostly neat. Once a week the house is cleaned royally by the entire family. The rest of the time no real cleaning except for accidents or VIP company.

Because the center of the day is too important to be expended on unenduring things, all the routine must be compressed into the early and late hours. Then we can spend the rest of the morning, my little ones and I, reading, doing projects, going to Relief Society, visiting friends, gardening, or singing. The pattern of life is greatly shaped by the houses in which we live.

This California house with its open kitchen and adjoining family room and glass doors is suited to supervising activities with my preschoolers and still working in the kitchen—preparing food, folding clothes, doing dishes, and so forth. My table is piled with papers, crayons, books, and glue. Along one wall are a blackboard and a bulletin board. Teaching is so much a part of my interaction with my children—so many to teach—so much for them to learn. "There are four seasons." "Rains happens this way." "Who is Abraham Lincoln?" "This is how you catch the ball."

I always try to hold at least one church job, not only because it is essential for my own individual spiritual, social, and developmental needs, but also as an example to the children. I love being involved, busy, serving in different ways. My young children often go to the church with me to my meetings. My children feel at home in the church.

At three o'clock the children burst in from school and the house becomes vibrant with them. Imagine how many sheets of school assignments seven children bring home! We are inundated with smudged, gray, blue-lined papers. Practicing, homework, roller-skating, friends, basketball, driving to lessons—and always talking, talking, talking. Ours is a noisy home.

At about seven o'clock my husband arrives home. There is a crescendo of delighted welcome. He is the big event of the day. He makes his way into our bedroom with children clinging to his legs, pockets, and coattails. An audience congregates as he struggles into indestructible home clothes while he is assailed by simultaneous accounts of daily activities, demands for justice, homework problems, and general claims for attention. Those nights when he is gone (traveling, working, or church), the excitement is gone too.

Supper is special because it is the one time we are all together. My recipes are easy and served in stove-to-table cooking pots. I prepare meals with a minimum of utensils and time. The table is set by the children, with a red bowl filled with leaves or flowers and candles in the center. Our nod to gracious living. Evening prayer is held kneeling around the table.

All the children are bathed each night. It is the easiest way to say, "That's the end of the day, my dears!" Our biggest bathroom is awash with clothes, shoes, sand, water, wet towels, and suds. After the little ones are storied to bed, the school children and I gather in a circle on the living-room floor. That is the theory anyway. There is always a feeling of coming and going. We take turns reading from the New Testament and then a short chapter from an older children's book.

Thus begin the long good-nights. Suffice it to say that no one goes to bed without individual encouragement. Gradually the house begins to settle. "I have to finish this page." "I have to give a talk this Sunday." "My report is due tomorrow." "What shall I wear?" "I need another drink." "I forgot my prayer." Another round of kisses. "Good night. We love you." "Go to sleep." "Go to sleep." "Go to sleep."

When my husband is not traveling, we close the day as it began, sharing, laughing, discussing, recreating one another's enthusiasm, love, and joy. One last reassuring look in each room. We love you. We are here.

Precious commitment, eternal vigilance, limitless caring: I think this is the essence of Mormon parenthood. It is the Latter-day Saint concept of eternity that shapes our commitment, sharpens our satisfactions, and enlarges our responsibility. We know the endless nature of parenthood and live with a profound knowledge of the bitter cost if we fail.

Of course, not all days follow this pattern. Weekends are another world, and sometimes the whole system comes to a grinding halt. Illness, an unusual church or community job, a child with a special need, or just an overwhelming day of weariness or frustration can destroy the whole chain. Some days I choose to ignore routine and steal a day for my own use. That is always the day visitors drop in. I wade through the toys, dishes, and children to greet them, knowing that they cannot know all the things I have done that day because what I have not done is so apparent.

It is an irony that motherhood is the one profession that a dedicated and educated adult can practice for a decade and still not be considered an expert. Yet I confess I have confidence in myself and in my role. I believe I do it as well as I am capable of doing anything. I have chosen this life; it does not master me, I master it. I am not its victim, I am its recipient. And if there are times when I wistfully read a university catalogue, or wish that I could run instead of pushing a stroller and observing each leaf and stone, or get tired of the litany of "no's" and "do this's," those times are not frequent and they just serve to confirm that life is a banquet, and, even when filled, we hunger and thirst.

So it is that each day runs its course, filled with being, many things undone, many just begun. And thus to bed . . . and a continuing into the night.

Light from this window:

The time is so brief, we must make it count.

The known is finite, the unknown, infinite. . . . We stand on an islet in the midst of an illimitable ocean. . . . Our business in every generation is to reclaim a little more land. —Thomas Henry Huxley
