Jaroldeen Edwards, Things I Wish I'd Known Sooner ( 1991)

Chapter Four

Things I Wish I'd Known Sooner

When my husband was graduating from Harvard Business School, on the last day of classes General George Doriot, one of his professors, invited students to bring their wives to his final lecture. During the hour and a half in which we sat in the amphitheater of Baker Hall listening to General Doriot, we heard a most astonishing collection of thoughts, advice, wisdom, and personal observations gathered by this remarkable man through a long career of achievement and distinguished business and political connections.

General Doriot did not attempt to connect his advice or give it a pattern. He merely said, "These are some things a successful man should know and do." I remember distinctly his words, delivered in his elegant, French- accented English. "You will take three newspapers wherever you live—the Wall Street Journal because you cannot succeed in business without its information; your local newspaper because you must be informed about the community in which you live; and the New York Times because it is the most brilliant paper written."

Then he pulled out a copy of the New York Times and said, "Now, I will teach you how to read a newspaper so that you will not look undignified, you will not make undo fuss or noise, and you will not get your hands dirty. You must always read the New York Times obituary section first because only the lives of significant people are reported there. If you read about how they succeeded, you will be more able to succeed yourselves."

General Doriot then proceeded to show the men and women in the room how to read a newspaper, neatly, crisply, efficiently. For many years when we lived in New York and commuted by train to the city, I was struck with the difference I noted between people who knew how to handle a newspaper well and those who struggled, rattled, and crumpled. General Doriot was right! The ones who knew his "method" looked more composed, and yes, successful.

Many other pieces of advice, as specific and seemingly trivial, were shared: thoughts on dressing, on interviewing, on how to take vacations, on how to eat a business lunch. Each idea was little more than a snippet of advice, and yet each one was applicable to the real lives and challenges these bright, budding executives were soon to face.

Years later perhaps most of those students would be unable to recall the many lessons on business theory and accounting techniques, but most of them would still remember General Doriot's advice on pocket handker- chiefs and what to order at a business lunch (fish— because it is easy to chew and easy to swallow, and thus you can talk more freely).

It has occurred to me that there are many little things I have learned that could have improved the quality of my life had I known them earlier. So perhaps I, like General Doriot, may share some of these scattered bits of knowledge.

I believe it is essential for every woman to recognize that one of her most important roles in life is the creation of homes. This is a cherished gift we can give, both to ourselves and to others. In a lifetime we we will create many homes, beginning with the influence we exert in our childhood homes and the memory and perception of that home that we carry with us into adulthood. We must also create comprehension of our spiritual home, our eternal home, a place of home within our own soul that goes with us wherever we are, in whatever circumstance. We must learn self-esteem and self-motivation so that we are at home with the person we are, and feel comfort and security within that person. Finally, we need to create our physical home, the four walls and the roof within which we live and where we have the opportunity to create something wonderful, something intangible, something that gives a sense of wel- come, order, love, and vitality, something that becomes a home. Whether we live in a one-room studio, a basement apartment, a small tract home, or a stately home does not matter: the creation of a home within those walls is a demanding challenge. It is a challenge I have faced eighteen times in my marriage.

I have been in great mansions and have felt the cold, hollow echo of rooms where no home existed—only a collection of things. I have been in other magnificent homes where a loving and caring person with generosity and warmth has created the sweetness of a cottage. I have been in small apartments where friends have welcomed me with such graciousness and love that I have felt I was in Kolob—and did not want to leave. From the cluttered, sparsely furnished first homes of young families, to the quiet, memory-filled two-room apartment of an elderly valiant mother—in each place there is a remarkable and unique feeling of home, each created by a remarkable and unique woman.

If we succeed in creating that subtle miracle called a home, what we create will become the rock that gives substance, meaning, and purpose to life. A home is the beginning of the promises of eternity. It will be the thing that will stand, cherished, productive, and valued, long after job changes, mergers, economic cycles, and retirement. Even though the location may change, the four walls come down, the rooms shrink from ten to three, the home that is made within changed confines will remain with the same cherished ingredients still intact as long as we, as women, comprehend our unique stewardship.

Married or single, parent, professional, student—whatever the circumstance of our life, we can create a home that will bless our own life and the lives of others. In ancient England Gothic cathedrals were called the pillars of the earth. The homes we create are the pillars of heaven; they are also the pillars of our mortal society. Winston Churchill said it well when he said, "We create our homes and then our homes create us." What we are, as individuals and as families, is reflected in our homes, measured by our homes, and established in our homes.

Homemaking does not need to be the only thing we do. Many excellent homemakers are productive in far-flung activities and professions, but the priority of home must remain. Without homes where values are learned, emotions are acknowledged, people are cherished, and joyous times are created, our society, as we know it, is lost.

Since this function is undervalued by the world today, women must comprehend, as primary makers of homes, the significance of the task and be self-confirmed in its importance. Inner conviction and knowledge of truth are the great motivators. There may be times when frustrations, loneliness, weariness, other responsibilities, and lack of support will rob the task of its satisfactions and cloud our understanding, but we must never lose our inner conviction of the importance of what we are doing.

I wish I had understood this, clear to the marrow of my bones, much sooner.

Recently while attending some business meetings in Chicago with my husband, I went to a museum with the wife of a prominent mortgage banker. She is a woman whom I admire and like a great deal. She has character, charm, education, wit, and a wonderful sense of self.

Polly was raised in New England and lived there with her husband for many years. More recently she had moved to the Southwest because of her husband's work. With typical flair, good cheer, and optimism Polly had accepted this upheaval in her life. Almost immediately upon moving she set herself the task of designing and building a home. When it was completed, it was a place of warmth and beauty, a contemporary adaptation of a New England Colonial, with fireplaces, high ceilings, and a spacious entrance hall—everything designed to welcome and embrace, not to impress. She furnished the home with antiques collected by generations of her family, includ- ing a mahogany dining room set made by her great- grandfather, a New England cabinetmaker.

The home was as charming, appealing, lovely, and impressive as Polly herself. But the thing that made her home unique was shown in the open house she gave as soon as it was completed. It was a great party, brimming with flowers, food, music, and conversation. Polly invited all of her wide circle of old and new friends—including business associates, neighbors, fellow volunteers from various charity organizations where she worked, members of her book club, grocery store clerks, her doctor and dentist, and many others with whom she came in contact.

Also included in the party were the men who had helped to build the house. These men were the honored guests, from the ditch-diggers to the painters, the carpenters, the men who installed the carpets, the plumbers, and the electricians. She knew them all by name, knew their wives and children, and welcomed them with open arms. As she introduced these people with gratitude and warm affection, Polly commented, "This is really their house, you know. They made it. Without them it wouldn't exist."

Polly has bounteous energy, capability, and creativity. I imagine she could be successful at anything she chose to do.

As we rode to the museum, Polly and I talked about many things. Assuming that a woman with Polly's resources must be involved in some impressive endeavor, I asked, "Well, now that your new home is finished and your youngest son is off to college, what new challenge are you going to take on?" (I know now how many false assumptions are contained in that question.) Polly sat quietly for a moment, then turned to me with a smile and a slight shrug of her shoulders. What she then said pierced me to the quick. It was a moment of insight that I believe every wife and mother should experience with all her heart and spirit, as I did then.

"I just want to keep doing the most important thing, the thing which I love above everything else," she said. "But I want to keep finding ways to do it better. All my life, for the rest of my life, I want to keep being the finest wife, the most loving and caring mother—and, I hope, someday grandmother—it is possible to be. To me, nothing else holds a candle to this in terms of satisfaction and importance. Anything else I do is just my way of saying thank you for the privilege of being a mother."

I was overwhelmed by the strength and depth of the conviction of this sophisticated woman of the world. I thought, "Here I am, a member of a church that has taught me doctrinal truths concerning the eternal nature of these things, and yet I have been so influenced by the pressures of society that I would have been reluctant to give the same answer in this setting. But here is a woman who has spoken these values proudly, knowing them only from the convictions of her own heart."

Thus I was taught something I wish I had known sooner: never to apologize for or waver in the joy and dedication of what I do as a wife and mother, nor to let false voices deter me from a straightforward, inner sense of value and commitment to those roles.

The rest of my list of things I wish I had known sooner are not quite so abstract or noble as this one. They also have very little pattern or organization, since most of them come as unexpectedly as windows of light. I recognize that these are personal learning insights and some of them may be things that apply only to my own life—but they may serve as examples of how we learn from our personal lives, and the varieties of insights that can come through individual experiences.

Lesson One: Have a credit card for identification purposes only. Use it sparingly. Don't even call it a "credit" card; call it an "identification" card. Lives can quickly become enmeshed in indebtedness and bondage when a credit card is used as though it were money. If we do not have the money to pay for an item this month, what makes us believe we will have the money next month—unless we consciously save it up? It is just too easy to flip out the card and buy something we desire. Often the thing we have bought will be used-up or worn-out before the debt is paid.

Lesson Two: Save at least a little money every month. Even a few dollars a month can make a difference. One of the greatest satisfactions in life is to watch a savings account grow. It is somewhat like dieting. At first we love watching the progress; then we hit plateaus when we think we will never reach the next goal. A sudden emergency can deplete the hard-earned total, and the process begins again. However, it is the process that is important. Clark Hinckley, a banker, advises that if we are in debt, we should save rigorously (paying the interest on the debt) until we have saved twice the amount of the debt. Then, as soon as possible, we should pay the debt in full. The reason is that we will still have savings left, and therefore maintain our incentive to save. We need to save for self-discipline, save for security, save for freedom. The amount does not matter. The principle does. At least that is what I have come to believe.

Lesson Three: Try to live within, or even below your means, if possible. A wise woman in a suburb of New York, a person who could have afforded the most expensive home in town, lived in a small, attractive, frugal house, drove a modest car, dressed simply, and was by far the most successful real estate executive in the area. One day she said to me, "You know, Jaroldeen, it is what you keep, not what you make, that makes you wealthy."

Her quiet generosity to countless others, distributed from her wisely managed wealth, gave her far more personal satisfaction than any showy display of money could possibly have done.

Lesson Four: Learn to manage your money—don't just spend it.

I wish I had learned earlier to do without longer. An empty room is better than one filled with hurriedly bought junk. If I had known earlier what I know now, I would have waited longer and bought better things that would last a lifetime. I wish I had realized that space in a home does not need to be filled. Open rooms are pleasant, especially when the children are small. Undraped rooms and uncarpeted floors can be fresh and bright and very liveable, especially when children are small. One quality piece of furniture is worth several that will be discarded.

Lesson Five: Have at least one good-quality, attractive, conservative outfit to wear whenever it is necessary to meet business or professional groups. Had I known this lesson earlier, it might have saved me many frantic, last-minute, and often unwise purchases. In the early years of my marriage I was careful to see that my husband had a good-quality wardrobe, one appropriate to his work. This was not an extravagance; we felt that it was important if he was to succeed in the business world. I now realize that it is also important for wives to understand that they need to have at least one outfit in which they will feel comfortable in any setting. It is important for self-esteem as well as for practical purposes.

Lesson Six: Make your home, no matter how modest, as lovely as possible. Discover for yourself the gracious touches that are possible and important to you in your own particular circumstances. For the first ten years of our marriage, my husband was a student. Until he obtained his doctorate we lived in truly frugal conditions. We had six children when he received his degree from Harvard, and we had lived in student housing on limited funds for all those years, but my memory of those years is that we lived in comfort and style. This is because I learned to enjoy inexpensive "luxuries." Candles, flowers, ribbons, paper doilies, shiny and clean surfaces, art books and art prints borrowed from the library, beautiful music, soft lights—all of these things give the touch of gracious living in the most simple home and can come within even the most limited budget. Rolls of inexpensive ribbon purchased at a discount house, a spray of parsley in a cup on the kitchen windowsill, jelly beans in a pretty jar, candles on the dinner table, a paper lace doily under a plate of homemade cookies, lemon oil gleaming on scarred wood—all give the feeling of peace, beauty, and plenty.

Lesson Seven: Learn early the principles of order and cleanliness. Details make the difference. Shiny windows and glass doors with fingerprints rubbed off, showers that are scrubbed, floors that shine, a front door that is freshly painted—these are some of the things that make a home look valued and cared-for. We need to focus our efforts. Often we don't need to dust everything; just dusting a table regularly will give the feeling of order. Above all, I have learned and relearned that clutter is the enemy of order and sanity. I wish I had learned earlier to sort, discard, and organize.

Lesson Eight: Buy white linens and white towels. I learned this after years of making ten beds and cleaning four to five bathrooms a day and sorting tons and tons of laundry. When we visited the Plaza Hotel in New York, I noticed that every piece of linen was white. A window of light. Of course! No sorting. I could use bleach in every load and keep white towels looking like new. No more faded rose, dingy blue, blurred designs, trying to sort darks and lights—in fact, no more sorting at all! All my linens could go in the same load of wash! And nothing is so elegant, or matches every bathroom and bedroom decor so well, as white. No more trying to match the striped sheets, or the Flintstone pillowcases, or the green towels, or giving up in despair and putting the pink flowered top sheet with the navy plaid fitted sheet. It took many years to phase out my old linens, but every time I see a white sale or need to replace old and worn linens, I buy white. This lesson has been a lessening of work and an increase in beauty in my home.

Lesson Nine: Learn to prepare food with aesthetic sense of its beauty, texture, and possibilities. I learned this far too late. For years, without household help, I prepared meals for fifteen people daily. Then I attended a memorable Relief Society homemaking lesson. The long table at the front of the room was covered with a lovely plaid cloth, and on it were displayed beautifully arranged baskets filled with many varieties of apples. The sister who taught the lesson spoke to us of the miracle of apples, described the different varieties, and demonstrated how to prepare several apple dishes. As I watched her hands caress the fruit and create pies, strudels, and dumplings, I suddenly saw the preparation of food in a whole new light. It was an act of artistic creation, a spiritual, tactile, and visual feast. Each apple had become a precious jewel. That vision has not left me.

In summary, I wish I had understood much earlier that home is not a thing to be looked at. It is not something we create to impress others. It is not an object. Home is a living, breathing thing—a laboratory for living. I believe we should each create a home that makes people think, "I want to be in that home," not "I wish I owned that home."

And finally, I should like to share two things that I learned soon enough, and I have practiced them as well as I could all of my life. The first of these discoveries is that I have loved raising children. Even the challenges—and there have been many—have given me abiding joy mixed with the sorrow and pain. A friend who had experienced the most tragic event a parent could live through said to me, "Even knowing the end from the beginning, I would not have missed one moment of it." That is how I too feel. I do wish, though, I had known from the first moment of parenting what my father-in-law taught me. "Let 'yes' be your natural response rather than 'no,' " he counseled. I would like to have learned earlier to want to serve more as my children's "facilitator" and less as their "controller."

Last of all, I have known from the moment my life joined my husband's that my greatest joy would come from loving, supporting, and involving myself in his life. The relationship and our functions within it change as the circumstances of our life change, but the priority is constant. We are committed to each other, and we have spent our lives together feeling that we are each involved completely in the cares, concerns, and responsibilities of the other. With patience and interest he has explained his career to me and has allowed me to feel knowledgeable and aware of its many exciting and demanding challenges. In the same way I have woven him into the life of our home, even with his extensive travels and long, long hours of work, so that our children have felt his presence even when he has been away, and he has been completely aware of their concerns and activities.

We are a very normal family. We have done some things well and we struggle to overcome our faults and difficulties, but we are joined together by love, and we each do our part toward achieving our common goals.

What I have learned is perhaps best summarized in an experience we had a few years ago. We were living in Los Angeles, and my husband came home one Saturday after some early meetings and said, "Let's go kite flying."

Off we drove to the Santa Monica beach, about an hour's drive. We sang favorite family songs in the car and laughed and talked. When we arrived at the beach we stared in disbelief at the ocean. There was hardly a wave on the surface. The air was hot and muggy, and, for the first time in our memory, not so much as a breath of air was coming across the water. The children got out their kites and ran, huffing and puffing, along the beach, but the kites simply dragged in the sand. They turned to their father with disappointment in their faces as listless as the kites.

"There has to be wind somewhere in Los Angeles," Weston said with conviction and enthusiasm. "Get back in the car and we'll find it." So all fourteen of us piled back in.

Through the long afternoon we drove through the streets of Los Angeles, stopping at parks and open lots. No wind. But we never lost heart. Father was driving, and I poured my energy into the time we spent in the car, telling stories, pointing out the sights, laughing, talking, singing. At last, late in the afternoon, we arrived at Griffith Park.

"There it is," my husband said, pointing upward, "the highest point in the city. There must be some wind up there!"

And so we climbed up the highest hill in the park. There, perched on the very roof of the city, overlooking the park, the planetarium, and the great stretches of streets, houses, and skyscrapers, we clung to the narrow summit of a treeless mountain and felt the gentle updraft of warm air. My husband took the ball of string and played one of the kites into the air. The soft breeze caught the bright wings of the kite and carried it upward, and we all stood together on the crowded hilltop, holding one another and smiling upward as our kite flew bravely into the sun.

Light from this window:

When we know what we are searching for, and if we refuse to give up, there will be many times when we will be privileged to find the lift of the rising air, and oh, how our kites will soar!

The seed however broadcast will catch somewhere and produce its hundredfold. —Theodore Parker
