Jaroldeen Edwards, Things I Wish I'd Known Sooner ( 1991)

Chapter Five

Wildflower Seeds

For many years we lived in Connecticut in a wonderful house that looked like a converted barn, with lawn in the front and a backyard of natural woods. Brambles of wild blackberries and rhododendron bushes were hidden in the tangled growth, while volunteer wisteria vine trailed the front of our fence. Old, moth-eaten dogwood trees lined the road and the stone fence that fronted the property.

We loved that house, the village, our neighbors, and the glorious display of nature as each season tried to outdo the others. It was impossible to choose a favorite time of year. Spring, with daffodils blanketing the clear fields and rimming the houses, the fresh green fuzz on the dark branches of the trees that arched the narrow, winding roads, and the balmy ocean-scented breezes coming across Long Island Sound. Summer, with its deeply shaded woodlands, the sun filtering through the rustling leaves, the lush lawns and exuberant growth of vine, bush, and flower, and the hot, lazy afternoons. Autumn, unrestrained, lavish, a kaleidoscope of colors too brilliant and vibrant for the eye to hold, prodigal in harvest and in beauty. Winter, with the gentle silence of falling snow, blue, silver, and white, winds that chased us indoors to the sweet warmth of a crackling fire. Who could choose a favorite season from these bounties?

In such surroundings the symbiotic relationship of man and nature becomes very natural, and, as a result, I spent a great deal of time in the local nursery and garden shop, looking for something to grow, either indoors or outdoors, depending on the season. It was there that I bought my first flower bulbs, and I watched with maternal joy as the tulips, daffodils, and jonquils sprang from the earth the following spring. It was there that I learned that zucchini will grow when nothing else in the world will.

It was there that I discovered, for my indoor, winter plants, the wonders of Aspergris fern, Reiger begonias, cyclamen, grape hyacinth, and paper-white narcissus for Christmas, and a massive wreath of dried bay-leaves for my kitchen. I loved that garden shop!

One spring day I was browsing while the clerk wrote up my order for some bedding plants. I noticed on a table that featured a number of sale items a dusty plastic bag full of something that looked like grass seed. The bag was not large, about the size of a pound of confectioner's sugar, and it had no commercial label, only a piece of paper glued to the plastic. The label read "Wildflower Seeds." And under that title was this explanation: "These seeds are indigenous to this part of Connecticut. If you broadcast these seeds in a meadow, swampy area, or wooded grove, flowers will grow. The flowers which grow will vary according to the season; sunlight, soil, and moisture conditions of the place they are planted. Only those flowers will grow which flourish in those specific condi- tions. The other seeds will remain dormant. However, it is guaranteed that wherever you broadcast these seeds, some flowers will grow."

I was absolutely intrigued. In my imagination I had already broadcast the seeds across the lower reaches of our front lawn, and I could see the results—flowers dancing in the sun, in all shades and varieties. I could imagine charming bouquets of wildflowers on my dining room table, such a wonderful conversation piece, and another part of nature brought into the circle of our everyday experience.

I glanced once again at the dusty little bag. The price tag was old and blurred, but it was decipherable. "One-ninety-eight." How wonderful! A dollar and ninety-eight cents. Not much to pay for an experiment that could be so rewarding. I placed the bag next to my other purchases. "I'll take this too, Jim," I said to the clerk.

He glanced up at me with a surprised look. "Are you sure, Mrs. Edwards?" he asked.

"Well, I know it's a bit of a gamble, and probably none of the flowers will grow," I answered, "but I figure it's still worth a dollar ninety-eight."

"Look again," Jim said, pointing at the label.

I looked again, and this time I saw more clearly.

"A hundred and ninety-eight dollars!" I gasped. "For this little bag? Why on earth would it be so expensive?"

Jim smiled. "It isn't easy to gather wildflower seeds," he said. "They are very rare and precious."

As I drove home without the wildflower seeds, I contemplated how much women are like wildflowers. To our Heavenly Father we are each rare and precious. When we are born our nature is sown with dormant seeds. Talents, wisdoms, questions, characteristics, dreams, capabilities—all broadcast within us as silent, fragrant possibilities. Each condition and season of our lives causes different seeds to sprout within us. And many still continue to lie dormant, just waiting for the right conditions to bloom with unexpected beauty.

Who knows what will bloom within us during the open, sunny-meadow days of our lives? What quiet seeds lie waiting for the dark, shadowed, wooded days? Or what generous and hardy plant will suddenly sprout when our life turns into a treacherous swamp? Perhaps the darkest moment is when the most glorious flowers burst into blossom.

We once moved into a home in California with a garden planted with unfamiliar tropical flora. Late one night, having spent a long day doing laundry, tending a sick child, and trying to unpack boxes, I turned off the last light and prepared to go upstairs to bed. Before locking the front door, I opened it for a moment to take a deep breath of the cool night air. The moon was silver on the trees, but the night had a warm, dark feeling. I breathed deeply, and a sweet fragrance filled my lungs. The night seemed to sing with perfume, and I looked about me in wonder.

Next to the door, a plant that had hitherto escaped my notice, a rather straggly bush, had shot forth a tall, white stalk covered with blossoms. During the day the stalk had looked like a green knobby spike that needed to be pruned. But here, in the night, its green buds had opened and the white flowers were filling the blackness with a fragrance so sweet it was like a balm. The plant was night-blooming ginger, which flowers only in the darkest hours. During the day it would merit scarcely a glance.

It is this unexpectedness in ourselves and in our lives that makes the revelations of mortality so precious. The discovery of truth and knowledge, the discovery of the possibilities within us, requires that we be tested in every season, in every clime, in every condition. It is the only way that the dormant seeds within us will have the opportunity to flower.

Light from this window:

We are like gardens sown with endless possibilities. We should not fear the changing seasons.

Be our joys three parts pain! Strive, and hold cheap the strain; Learn, nor account the pang; dare, never grudge the throw! —Robert Browning
