Jaroldeen Edwards, Things I Wish I'd Known Sooner ( 1991)

Chapter Six

Three Lessons from Pain

My favorite novel is My Lady of Cleves by Margaret Campbell Barnes. In the final scene of the novel, Anne of Cleves is comforting Henry the Eighth as he lies dying. She realizes that this monarch, who has been the most powerful man on the earth, is afraid to die.

"Henry," she says softly, "it has been my experience that the things we fear the most are often the things which come to happen. I have found that if we turn to meet them, and walk toward them with our head held high, we can walk right through them. And we are always better on the other side."

Never has a mother feared streets more than I did. My children were not allowed to cross streets by themselves until they were old enough to drive! Even then, I still preferred to hold my teenagers' hands and tell them, "Look both ways." My idea of an ideal world was one in which children and cars never had to be on the same thoroughfare—sort of like a big block with everything on it, so no one ever had to cross the street.

I suspect it was inevitable, then, that I would be the one who would get hit by a car.

On a bright, sunny, summer morning, out for a healthy walk, I crossed my street on a green light just as a young man in a big car decided to make a righthand turn on his red light. I had seen his car stopped at the intersection and was sure he had seen me, but as I stepped off the curb, to my astonishment I saw the glint of something moving. I glanced back over my left shoulder. It was the hood ornament—and it was coming toward me!

In the next instant the bumper hit my knee and I felt my leg explode beneath me. I fell under the car like a stone and lay there, pinned, as the turning wheel moved straight toward my head. By now I was fully aware that the driver had not seen me and was still unaware that I was under his car. A terrible death seemed certain. But then I heard his passenger scream at him to stop, and even though he did not know why, he stopped. I am so thankful for those seconds in which my life was surely spared.

As the ambulance carried me to the hospital, I began what would be months of operations, complications, disability, confinement, and profound pain. There were many nights when, in the lonely darkness of my room, I wept to be spared the agony—to be able to find some relief. I watched precious time slip through my helpless fingers. I despaired of ever walking again. I chafed at my weakness and longed to be myself again.

Only slowly did I come to an acceptance of what I had been taught since childhood: that adversity brings strength, sorrow brings joy, and pain brings us the most priceless gifts. The value of something is often the equal of its price, so it is logical that the gifts of pain are infinitely precious—they are so dearly bought.

John Donne declared that we should never try to take another's tribulations from them. We would just as well rob the gold from their pockets.

I would like to share with you three of the lessons that pain has taught me in these past months.

The first lesson is perhaps the most valuable in a practical sense. It is the lesson I learned from the wisdom of a dear friend, an immensely busy person, who had taken the time to come and sit beside me. From the depths of my pain, in that precious quiet moment of friendship I felt free to ask her a difficult question, something that had puzzled me during the years I had known her.

"Ruth," I said (this is not her real name), "I'm not handling this experience very well. My feelings and attitudes are all wrong. May I ask you a very personal question? Since we have been friends I have watched you go through many of the worst experiences it is possible to experience—grave financial reverses, a dramatic change of life-style, challenges with your children, a death in your family. Through it all, you never change. You're always gentle, kind, generous with your home and your possessions, loving toward all whom you know, and faithful in your church callings. I know these things affect you deeply, yet you never show fear, anger, bitterness, disappointment, or gloom. I must know how you meet life with such steadfast faith and good cheer."

She looked at me for a long moment as she thought, and then she gave me a beautiful smile. "Jaroldeen," she answered, "whenever something difficult happens to me, I never question what has happened. I never ask, 'Why did this have to happen to me?' or 'Why must I go through this?' or 'Why would the Lord let this happen?' or 'Why won't this go away?' or 'Why aren't my prayers being answered?'

"I don't let myself worry about what can't be changed. All I worry about is 'What is my role?' and 'How does the Lord want me to act?' and 'What does the Lord want me to do?' and 'What goals must I set to change this?' and 'What must I do to turn this into a building experience for me and my family?' "

As I listened to her, I realized that not one of the questions she asked began with why. She understood that any growth that comes from pain and challenge can come only after we have stopped asking why. Growth begins when we have accepted what now is and what is past. Asking questions of ourselves and the Lord that begin with why is like racing the motor of our car without put- ting it in gear.

My son returned from his mission many weeks after my accident. I was still very weak, restricted in my activities, and unable to walk. As we drove past the intersection where the accident had occurred, I said, rather dramatically, "On that very spot! On June 21, my life was changed."

"Don't do that, Mother," my son said gently.

"What?" I asked, surprised.

"Don't make an occasion out of it. Don't remember it that way. It gives it too much power over you."

He was right. The first thing we must do in order to begin to gain the lessons from pain is to accept what is past and let it go. Then we must begin to ask ourselves the what questions: What am I still able to do? What is the Lord teaching me? What goals should I set?

The wonder of asking questions that begin with "What" is that it puts our life back in our own hands, with the Lord guiding us. We are no longer the victim of circumstances—we are now in control of our future. We have taken the reins of our free agency back in our own hands. Fear, anger, resentment, bitterness, confusion, and frustration only steal free agency from us.

The second great gift from pain is love.

Pain is the catalyst that breaks the heart open and teaches the spirit to be contrite. As one's heart is opened, it can be taught the immensity of love.

When do we feel the greatest love for the Savior? Of course we love and adore him as we think of his glorious birth. We praise and love him as we think of his baptism, of his obedience, of his striding across the hills of Galilee, performing miracles, and feeding the five thousand. We love and feel anguish for him in the last week of his ministry as he once again teaches in Jerusalem. For many, our love for him almost overwhelms us when we contemplate him in the Garden of Gethsemane. As we think of the time of his bitterest pain, when he bore our sins and griefs, our hearts burn with love.

It was such love, born of pain, that gave Orson Whitney a vision of the Savior in the Garden. At the end of the vision, Elder Whitney was privileged to see the Lord preparing to return to His Father. So great was Elder Whitney's love at that moment that he threw himself at the Savior's feet and begged to go with him. The Savior looked into his eyes with such love, understanding, and compassion that to read of it makes us weep.

Joseph Smith, in Liberty jail, also caught a glimpse of the Savior's plan and of his boundless love. When Joseph cried out in agony, "O Lord, how long shall they [the Saints] suffer," the Lord spoke to him and reminded him that he, the Son of God, had "descended below them all." He then reassured the Prophet, "All these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good." (D&C 121:3; 122:8, 7.)

It is when our hearts are full of sorrow that we are able to borrow the "balm of Gilead," which balm is a deepened understanding of our Savior's love for us.

Through trial, we may gain greater love for our family and a greater appreciation of their love for us. Even after all the years of serving my husband and my children and loving them as deeply as I thought it was possible for anyone to love, I have found that through the process of being served by them, I have gained a sweet and tender enlargement of my emotions that I had not dreamed before.

Pain requires that we let those who love us serve us. In times of dependence, beautiful things occur.

On the night of my bone-grafting operation, my three daughters came to my hospital room. Because of my reaction to the medication, the room was kept bitterly cold. It was a very small, dreary private room, crammed with machines, tubes, bottles, and monitors. Heavily sedated, I could barely make out the faces of my daughters, two of them teenagers and the other a newly called missionary. They had each brought a light blanket or quilt, and all through the long night and the next day they remained with me, talking quietly, coming to my bedside at the slightest sound, sweetly encouraging me, and carrying on conversation even though I could not speak. Although my eyes were closed I was acutely aware of their presence. It was immeasurably reassuring to me, more beautiful than I can say. I shall never forget it.

Weeks later I was still unable to reach my feet. They were rough and dry, and I could not care for them. Although it was one of the most humbling things I have ever done, I asked my husband if he would care for my feet. He looked at me with tears in his eyes and said, "Thank you." As he cared for my feet I understood the meaning of the ordinance of the washing of feet. I have never felt so loved, or loved so much in return.

Only through pain, and the humility that comes from adversity, can such cherished and unspeakably dear moments pierce our hearts. We would not choose to have such experiences, but we would not part with the gifts of such moments at any price.

Through suffering, we gain an increased awareness of love for all mankind. It illuminates our hearts and minds and gives us a burning desire to help, lift, and protect. Once harmed or hurt, we gain a great desire to care for others who are in need or pain.

The third gift of pain is recognition of the need to cherish each moment. Right now is the best we have—it is all we have.

A friend called from Arizona to see how I was doing. She had just attended a women's conference and was a little discouraged. "You know," she said, "the young mothers were just not happy about their lives. They seemed to feel trapped and unappreciated and unchallenged. One of them said, 'I get so tired of trying to fix supper with one child clinging to my leg, another on my hip, and the third one crying to be picked up.' "

I understand how that young woman felt, but a great sense of sadness came over me. Have we so failed today's generation of mothers that they see the years of bearing and rearing children as punishment rather than privilege?

For just a few years in a whole lifetime, there is that brief window to tenderly raise—and enjoy—the individuals who will be the most important to us throughout eternity. Yet how many women spend those years resenting the limitations, wishing the children were grown up and away from home?

The important principle of life is that each moment, each season carries within it its own special rewards, joys, and efforts. The greater the efforts, the greater the rewards. The secret is to see each moment for what it has to yield and then grasp it.

For example, during the child-rearing years, what do we complain about? Chauffeuring. "Oh," we say, "all I do is drive the children places. This year I have to drive Johnny every day from kindergarten. I feel like I'm in prison!"

In reality, what is driving but the best opportunity to get a child's news "hot off the griddle"? For nine months we have the splendid chance to sit next to someone we love with all our heart—away from the phone and other chores—and listen.

One day, as I was driving my son home from kindergarten, he looked up at me and said, "I've got to do homework today."

"What homework?" I asked.

"We have to do an oral report on an animal. We have to tell three facts about it. I've chosen polar bears."

"Wonderful!" I replied, eager to teach him research skills. "We'll go right home and get out the encyclopedia."

This was beginning to sound like work to William. "I don't need the encyclopedia," he said firmly. "I already have my facts. Remember when we went to the San Diego zoo? They told me all about polar bears and I remember."

I decided to call his bluff.

"All right," I said. "What are your three facts?"

He began confidently. "Do you know why polar bears are white?"

"Why?"

"So they can blend in with the snow and their predators won't see them."

"Good," I said. "What's the next fact?"

"Do you know that polar bears have fur on the bottoms of their feet so they won't stick to the ice?"

This was a fact I hadn't known so I applauded. "Good fact! And what's the third one?"

From the look on his face I could tell he didn't have a third one, but the specter of being chained to an afternoon with the encyclopedia spurred him on.

"Well," he said, after a little pause. "Do you know why polar bears have blue eyes?"

This was a fact I was sure I had never heard. "No," I said. "Why?"

"So that," William said slowly and carefully, "when they dive into the water, they can open their eyes and it camouflages them in the blue water, and the seals can't see them and they can catch them." His smile was triumphant.

I looked him in the eye and shook my head, and we both started to laugh. To this day I love the image of blue-eyed polar bears swimming around in the ocean with eyes open so no one can see them. Who would miss such a moment!

If we wish away the moments, they will be gone. The things we have wanted to leave—the mess, the noise, the obligations—will be gone, but so will the children! This is true of every moment of life. If we do not see its joys, if we do not make the most of it, it will pass—and so will its opportunities.

I remember a day, when I was a young girl, when my father came home early in the afternoon. It must have been a Saturday, because my brothers and I were home from school. Mother was at the sink, doing the dishes, and wearing a pretty apron with a big bow in the back.

Father came in and said, "Come on, let's drive up to Livingston and I'll show you the new ranch."

He had just bought a new ranch and none of us had seen it. It was about eighty miles away, up in the foothills of the Canadian Rockies.

"No, Charles," Mother said. "There's too much work to be done. I haven't finished the dishes and the children haven't done their chores. We have to shop and get ready for tomorrow. We just can't go."

Father went over to Mother, untied her apron, and, with a little laugh, twirled her around. Then he kissed her and said, "The dishes will wait."

We couldn't believe that Mother agreed! But off we went. We didn't even have time to change our clothes. We picked up cold cuts, bread, and fruit at a little general store in one of the small towns we drove through after we left the city, and by midafternoon we arrived at the ranch property. We had not seen any signs of habitation for miles, only the great mountains coming closer, and the lush green foothills, and the dusty road winding between the long barbed-wire fences.

"This is where our property starts," Father said, waving his hand. "I think there's a stream beyond that little hill. Why don't we go down there to have our lunch?"

We grabbed the grocery bags and a blanket, squeezed through the barbed wire, and started up the hill. At the crest we stopped in astonishment. The whole slope of the field as it fell away toward the sparkling stream was a blanket of wild tiger lilies, as crimson as a king's velvet robe. It was like coming across the poppy field in The Wizard of Oz. Such unexpected glory! Such treasured memories! A parent will never say with regret, "I wish I hadn't done so much with my children," or "I wish I hadn't spent so much time caring for my family," or "I wish we hadn't had so much fun together," or "I wish I hadn't loved them so much."

It is through prayer that the blessings of pain can be perceived and realized. Many times I have wept and the words of the children's song have come unbidden to my mind: "Heavenly Father, are you really there? And do you hear and answer every child's prayer?" This song was sung by my grandchildren, and when they sang it, their mother sang in response in her loving voice, "Pray, he is there. Speak, he is listening." As I wept, I heard my daughter's voice in song, and her testimony lifted my faith, and I could pray.

And so, I try to turn and face the hard things, to walk toward them with my head held high. I wish to remember the three lessons I have learned: (1) Accept what has happened and concern myself only with what the Lord wishes me to do now. (2) Let my heart rejoice in the renewed awareness of being loved and of loving my Savior, my family, and my fellowmen. (3) Discover and enrich each glorious moment.

Light from this window:

The lessons of pain are dearly learned but are doubly sweet.

I feel very strongly about putting questions; You start a question and it is like starting a stone. You sit quietly on the top of a hill; And away the stone goes. —Robert Louis Stevenson
