Jaroldeen Edwards, Things I Wish I'd Known Sooner ( 1991)

Chapter Seven

My First "What" Question

My tenth child was almost born on an airplane somewhere between New York and California. Weston had taken a new position in Los Angeles, and the plan was simple. He would drive the nine children across the country and get into our new house, while I remained behind in the East, had the baby, and then flew to join the family within two to three weeks.

Great plan. The only problem was, the baby had other ideas. Three weeks went by, the children were safely in Los Angeles, the furniture had arrived, but not the baby. I remained in New Jersey.

Finally Weston had to report to work, so our two oldest daughters, young teenagers, were having to manage the family. Every night I would call. "What are you eating?" I'd ask.

"Oh, soup and junk," was the answer. (The soup sounded okay, but the "junk" was a concern.)

"Why only soup?" I asked.

"The stove isn't working," was the response. "We have to use a hot plate."

"We don't have a hot plate," I objected.

"We borrowed one from the neighbors," the children replied cheerfully.

"What are you doing about keeping your clothes clean?" I asked.

"No problem," they answered blithely. "We just swim in our shorts and T-shirts and then the sun dries them."

At this point I had an image of my poor, motherless children in wet clothes, barefoot, walking from door to door, begging for hot plates. I immediately decided that I would never be able to face our new neighbors. When and if I ever got to Los Angeles, we would just have to move!

The next day I went to my obstetrician and begged him to write a note to get me aboard an airplane. He could see how desperate I was and so he said, "I think it would be all right. After all, you'll be in Los Angeles in five hours. What can happen in five hours?"

He was an obstetrician, and he knew perfectly well what could happen in five hours.

No sooner had the plane taken off than I thought to myself, "It's nothing but indigestion." A few minutes later I muttered, "Nerves. It's just nerves." Another few minutes later, however, I had to acknowledge what it really was. I was in labor!

I wish I could tell you that my only concern was for the baby. And, in all honesty, I was very concerned for the baby—but my greatest concern at that moment was the fact that I felt I was about to be the star in a real-life documentary. I was seriously asking myself if it might be possible to have a baby on an airplane and not have anybody notice. However, giving up that line of thinking as futile, I stopped a passing flight attendant and whispered to her, "I'm having a baby." She looked at me with an impatient sigh and a look that said, "That's rather obvious."

"No," I whispered. "I mean, I think I'm having the baby right now."

I'll give her credit that she didn't drop her tray, but she did lose her smile. She roared up the aisle, grabbed the microphone, and shouted, "Is there a doctor on board?"

Everyone on the plane stood up and stared at me, then began whispering. So much for anonymity. As it turned out, there was a doctor aboard the plane. She was sitting right next to me.

I was moved into first class with the doctor, and she sat and timed my pains as the plane continued to wing across the continent. We talked quietly, and the pains continued but did not get worse.

At last the captain announced that we were approaching the Los Angeles airport. We both heaved a sigh of relief. At about the same time, the pains stopped. "Probably the pressurized cabin," the doctor said.

I prepared to deplane but was told to keep my seat until the plane was empty. The passengers filing by gave me very disappointed looks, as though they had been reading a book and hadn't been able to read the last chapter.

After the passengers had left the plane, four men in white leaped on board. Before I knew what was happening, they had me strapped to a hospital gurney and were wheeling me through the terminal building.

I protested that I was fine, and begged to join my husband and family, but they wouldn't listen or stop. You can imagine what a ten-month pregnant woman lying flat on her back on a gurney cart looks like!

One of my children caught sight of me as I sped past, and she cried, "Mother, where are you going?" Then all nine children started racing after the gurney. Weston turned and joined the running procession in his three-piece suit, carrying his briefcase—but he was also trying to look like he didn't know who any of these people were!

As I was whisked into an ambulance I called to him, "Find out where they're taking me, and come and get me." The next thing I knew, I was speeding through the heart of Los Angeles, explaining to the medics that I was no longer in labor, and watching palm trees whip by the windows.

At the hospital the admitting clerk was very impatient. "Who is your doctor?" she asked.

I tried to explain that I had just arrived in town and had no doctor.

She stared at me, disbelieving, and angrily repeated, "Who is your doctor?"

"I am planning to call an old friend who practices obstetrics somewhere in the metropolitan area," I said. "But I have no idea what suburb he practices in. I was going to look him up."

"What's his name?" she snapped.

"Keith Merrill," I snapped back, having lost patience by now. "I'll call him as soon as you let me out of here."

Without a word she wheeled me into a small examination room, closed the door, and left me.

By now I was thoroughly frustrated. "Please, Weston," I whispered to myself. "Find me, and spring me!"

Just then I heard a voice over the hospital intercom: "Dr. Keith Merrill. Dr. Keith Merrill."

That did it. Hadn't anyone listened to me? I told that woman I had no idea where he practiced. Why on earth were they paging him?

Just then the door opened and Dr. Keith Merrill walked in with a nurse. "I don't have a patient named Mrs. Edwards," he was saying in an exasperated voice, and then he stopped and stared at me lying on the table.

We had not seen each other for more than fifteen years, not since high school. "Jaroldeen!" he exclaimed. "Jaroldeen Edwards! What are you doing here . . . and in that condition?"

I knew I had just been asked one of life's great questions. It took me nearly two days of pondering to come up with the true and satisfying answer. "Creating," is what I should have replied. "Creating a new life. Creating a new home. Creating a wiser and better 'me.' " At that particular phase of my life, at that time of frustration and uncertainty, hard work and upheaval, discovering the answer to Keith's seminal question gave me great peace of mind. Everything fell into a meaningful direction.

Since that day I have thought of Keith's question many times. I have found that if I can answer it to my own satisfaction—and to the satisfaction of the Lord—I feel a sense of well-being. When I start to lose my grip on who and what I am, when life begins to lose its edge or fades into something close to chaos or anarchy, I ask myself Keith's question. What am I doing here? and what is my condition? The answer, when I am able to think through to it, reimbues my life with a sense of purpose and worth.

Sometimes, when my life is off course, the answer brings me up short. I find that I am where I am for the wrong reasons, or with the wrong attitude, or I have wandered away from my real purposes. The answer to the question sometimes enables me to walk away from wrong choices when I ask, "What am I doing here?" and the answer reveals a lost sense of direction.

My daughter experienced the strength of this question when she pledged for a social club her freshman year at a university. One evening, in the midst of pledge activities, she overheard a remark made by a member of the club's pledge committee. "She's pretty enough and rich enough to be a good member," the young woman said, speaking of one of the potential candidates.

Suddenly my daughter asked herself, "What am I doing here?" She looked down at the items of clothing the pledges had been required to wear. "And in this condition?"

The answer was clear to her. She was sitting in a place where values that mattered to her and goals that she felt were important were not well served. "I'm in the wrong place," she concluded. She simply stood up and walked out. "I don't think I'm a good candidate for membership," she later told us with a smile.

On the other hand, the answer to Keith's question can sometimes be enormously satisfying, ratifying, and give meaning to the most unexpected events.

One day I sat on a small kindergarten-size chair, with my knees up to my chin, listening to the rhythm band of my twelfth child's preschool group. It was really a dreadful concert, slow and out of tune. I had a dozen important things to do, and this little concert was not an important event, sort of a "come if you like" activity—a practice, actually. Only a handful of other mothers had bothered to come. I rubbed my aching back and thought that I could not even count the number of such concerts I had attended through the years. Who would remember? Not me, and probably not my children. Surely now, in my mature years, it wasn't necessary to attend everything.

As I squirmed impatiently in the little chair, I heard Keith's question pop unbidden into my mind. What am I doing here?

Just then my little daughter looked over at me and smiled. My answer to the question came, as solid and satisfying as the rock on which the wise man placed his house. I'm building a child. Suddenly the chair became comfortable and the concert seemed rare, precious, and fleeting.

Nothing in my life has been very predictable. I am consistently astonished when I pause to think about it. The places I have lived, the people I have known, the problems that have arisen, the opportunities that have opened, and the possibilities that have remained closed—all of these things are a source of amazement to me. But if I am in my spot, for the right purposes, and in the right condition, all is well.

Light from this window:

The right questions form the bedrock for the right answers.

Love is enough, though the world be a-waning. —William Morris
