Jaroldeen Edwards, Things I Wish I'd Known Sooner ( 1991)

Chapter Eight

Niagara Falls

After seven years of marriage and five children, my husband finished his doctoral degree and we headed for the "real world," (The "real world," in our case, was Chicago and a job with an investment firm.)

In the years of our marriage we had lived on Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Ohio and then in Harvard student housing—always in apartments. In the last months before Weston's degree was completed, I discovered we were expecting our sixth child, and I began to be impatient. I wanted to live in a real home. The weeks seemed to drag as he finished his dissertation, and when, at last, his doctoral committee heard his final arguments and the dissertation was accepted, I rejoiced—not only because of Weston's wonderful achievement, but also because it signaled my opportunity to finally have a home in which to live.

Weston was flown to Chicago, where he accepted a wonderful job offer. He also rented a large, old home in Wilmette. Then he flew back to Cambridge to gather us up in our old Chevrolet to make the trip to Illinois.

It was the dead of winter. The skies were gray and leaden, the roads treacherous, and our little car overcrowded. Our youngest child, who was then seven months old, was very irritable. She was recovering from an ear infection and had to be given medicine every four hours. She hated the taste of the bright pink liquid and persisted in spitting it up, so that everything in the front seat seemed to be spotted with the sticky, pink stuff.

I know now that adding to the stress of the trip was my own mental attitude. I felt, deep inside, that I had waited longer than was reasonable to have a home of my own. The long wait had caused in me an intense yearning, a feeling of entitlement, almost an obsession, to get settled, to have space, stability, and the chance to create a substantial nest. Perhaps the best way to say it would be that I was home-sick, that is, I was sick with the desire to be in my own home.

As the miles passed I became increasingly anxious to have the trip over. I wanted desperately to be someplace where I could begin to make a home. If I did not feel resentment, I certainly felt justified impatience.

When we neared Niagara Falls, Weston said, "I know it's winter, but I still think we should stop and let the children see the falls. They may never have another chance."

"No, please," I said. "Let's just keep going. The sooner we get to Wilmette the better. I just want to get settled!"

"Dear," Weston said reasonably, "let's try to make this trip a bit of a vacation for the children. We won't have another break for a long time."

Late in the afternoon we turned off the highway and drove through the deserted streets of Niagara Falls and out onto Goat Island. Except for the parking-lot attendant, we were the only people on the island. Weston parked near the entrance, where the lone attendant huddled in his heated booth.

The baby was crying. We were out of milk. The sun was beginning to go down. But, with his infectious enthusiasm, Weston ran with the children across the empty parking lot to the viewing platform. There, in the bitter cold wind, they looked down on the ice-rimmed glory of the falls.

Soon they came running back toward the car, laughing and excited, their cheeks rosy with the cold. Weston insisted that I must go and look at the falls. He took the crying baby, and, with great reluctance, I climbed out of the car and went over to look.

The sight was glorious, but as I came back, I looked at our car. Something didn't seem right. The luggage rack looked like a crazy hat tilted on top. Then I realized. The rear tire was as flat as an airless balloon!

By now the three youngest children were crying. When he opened the trunk, Weston discovered that our spare tire was also flat. We caught the parking attendant just as he was preparing to leave, and he put in a call to a garage. Then he left for home. We sat, alone, in the vast parking lot, staring at the thundering falls as the sun set and night gathered in the surrounding trees.

It was almost an hour before we saw the flickering lights of a wrecker coming toward us. We were towed off the island and taken to a garage, where quick repairs were made. Then we hunted for a motel. The city of Niagara Falls is like a ghost town in the winter, with most motels closed, but we finally found a small establishment that had a vacant two-bedroom unit with two cribs. Obviously the motel was not expecting guests, for the room was dusty and cold. We did get the heat working, and Weston ran down the street to a diner and brought back hot soup, crackers, and milk. After feeding the children, I prepared to give them baths.

We had seen a drugstore a block away, and Weston said he would go down to it and get some more medicine for the baby. I was busy running water into the tub, so I called my thanks to him over my shoulder.

After I bathed the five children, I zippered them into their fluffy pajama suits. I tucked the older ones in bed and put the two youngest in the cribs. One of the cribs was broken, and I spent some time figuring how to prop it up on some chairs.

The children were excited and restless so we talked, and I sang songs with them, and finally I told them a story. I turned off all the lights in the room, leaving just a tiny glow from the adjoining room, and lay down on the bed with them. One by one they finally fell asleep.

As the room became quiet, I began to feel uneasy. Where was Weston? I didn't have a watch with me, but it seemed to me it had been well over an hour since he had left, and the drugstore was less than a block away.

I took a bath and prepared for bed. At any moment I expected him to walk in, but time moved slowly, endlessly, and he did not come. Finally I got up and got dressed again. I sat by the window and watched the road. There was very little traffic, and as a set of headlights would start down the block my hopes would rise, only to be dashed when the vehicle moved on. The motel was in a rundown section of the city, and the streets looked dreary, deserted, and mean.

There was no phone in our rooms and I was terrified to leave the children alone, but by now I was certain that Weston had been gone for over three hours, and I knew the drugstore was closed. I could think of no explanation for his absence. Fear had grown in me that something dreadful had happened to him. Maybe he had been mugged or had been in an automobile accident.

Finally I left the room, locked it, and went to the manager's office to ask if I could use his phone. He had been sleeping and was very curt. "No," he said. "Guests are required to use the pay phone at the corner."

Since the pay booth was in view of our doorway, I ran to use the phone. It was bitterly cold and my voice was shaking with chill and fear. I found the number for the police department in the phone book and dialed. "Officer," I said, when a voice answered. "Could you please tell me if there have been any automobile accidents or crimes reported in the last three hours. My husband left our motel room over three hours ago to do a brief errand and he hasn't returned. I'm afraid something might have happened."

"Lady," said a bored voice, "does your husband drink?"

"No," I cried. "No. He is the most wonderful, responsible, caring man in the world."

"Well, there haven't been any auto accidents. That's all I can tell you."

As I walked back toward the room, I felt a heavy cloak of fear and worry, but piercing the weight of my fear was a sudden overwhelming realization of how precious my husband was to me. It was as though my heart was filled to bursting with the power of my love for him, my gratitude and joy for his strength and goodness, and the immensity of my need for him. I understood, perhaps for the first time, that everything good, sweet, and secure in my life came from and through him. Standing there in the dark, I had never felt my love for him more strongly—and I had also never felt more bereft and alone.

Just then a pair of headlights shone through the window, and I turned to see our car pulling into the motel. Weston climbed wearily out of the driver's seat.

"Where have you been?" I asked, tears streaming down my face as I opened the door.

With tenderness he held me close. "Didn't you hear me?" he asked, astonished. "I called to you as I was leaving. I went back to the garage to pick up the other tire, and they hadn't even started working on it. I've never seen slower mechanics, but we couldn't leave tomorrow without a working spare."

I couldn't even answer him, I was crying so hard from relief and exhaustion.

"I'm so sorry," he said. "I couldn't phone you, because there's no phone in the room. I just thought you'd know I'd run into a snag at the garage."

"I didn't hear you—the water was running," I managed to gulp. "I thought you were just going down the street for m-m-medicine."

We didn't say any more. More tired than we knew, we lay down on the bed, and I cried until the warmth of his arms and the quiet of the room calmed my heart. Weston fell asleep, but I lay there beside him in that wretched, dusty room, in that alien city, with the lumpy beds, the broken crib, and the unknown world surrounding us, and I knew something that I have never forgotten. I was home.

Light from this window:

We don't need walls, or rooms, or gardens, or furniture, or flowers, or familiar scenes and neighborhoods in order to be home. Wherever those we love are, there it is.

We do not ask for what useful purpose the birds do sing, for song is their pleasure— since they were created for singing. —Johannes Kepler
