Jaroldeen Edwards, Things I Wish I'd Known Sooner ( 1991)

Chapter Nine

Things I Have Learned from My Children

Children have a refreshing way of looking at things, and many of the lessons I have learned as a mother have come from them, often in unexpected ways.

Lesson One: The Blocks

We had moved to Connecticut and were building a house. In the meantime we were living in a rented house, with furniture and packing boxes stacked in the rooms and garage. It was a complicated time, with children in several different schools and needing chauffeuring at varying hours of the day, and with the house under construction.

Our oldest son, Charles, who had graduated a semester early from high school, had come to us and asked if he could work for our contractor on the construction of the house. Then he could feel that it was truly his home, even though he would be leaving soon for college.

My tentative grip on household organization slipped further and further as the weeks went by. Things that normally seemed simple to me, such as getting the dishes done, the beds made, and the laundry folded, were suddenly monumental tasks that had to be sandwiched between endless errands, and unexpected demands. I felt as if nothing was under control. In the confusion I began to lose motivation and let things slide.

My son came home every day for lunch. Sometimes he would have to fix his own, for I was often driving back and forth to the various schools, or out looking at hardware for the new cabinets. This made me feel cheated, since I knew these few precious weeks were the last weeks I would have this wonderful young man at home.

One day I dashed in the door, with two of the younger children in tow, and saw him just finishing the peanut butter sandwich and milk he had fixed for himself. I had left the kitchen a mess. I hadn't even had time to finish the breakfast dishes, and the makings from the school lunches were still spread over the counters. It was demeaning to me to look at so much evidence that I was not handling my life well.

I sat down next to Charles with a sigh and asked, "Charles, do you think I've changed? I mean, as I'm getting older, do you think my personality is changing? I feel like I'm a different person."

For a moment Charles thought and then he looked me straight in the eye and said, "No, I don't think you're a different person. You see, I have this theory that everybody is born with a whole set of 'blocks' in their personalities—all different colors and shapes—but they each have their own individual set, and it's theirs for a lifetime. Then, as we live, we shape those blocks into a certain pattern, and for a time that pattern is fairly stable. Then something comes along, like adolescence, or graduation, or a mission—some big change—and it's as if all of our blocks get knocked down, and we have to build up our 'personhood' again.

"In a sense," he added, "I guess we change, because we usually build a new pattern—and maybe a new block comes out on top. But we are still building with the same basic blocks. So, in answer to your question, Mother, I don't think you've basically changed. I just think someone has knocked down your blocks."

Light from this window:

Times of change and upheaval are invaluable. They give us a chance to redesign our blocks.

Lesson Two: The Cookies

I used to triple the cookie dough recipes, and it would take me a whole afternoon to bake the cookies. I would keep both ovens busy, putting in double cookie sheets, then removing the sheets, taking off the hot cookies, forming the new cookies, placing them on the sheets, and putting the next batch on to cook.

One day I asked Catherine, who was about thirteen years old, if she would bake the cookies since I had to go visiting teaching. She was happy to accept the assignment. I left her with a huge batch of dough and expected I would be home before she had finished even half of it.

When I returned, I was amazed to see the table, lined with fresh dish towels. Perfect cookies, beautifully arranged, cooled along its entire expanse. I was astonished at how quickly she had moved the cookies through the process! I watched and soon discovered how she had cut the time of the task in half.

As sheets of cookies baked in the oven (a time during which I fidgeted or was pulled away on another task—often burning the cookies because of lack of attention), Catherine placed waxed paper on the counters and busily spooned out the dough into cookie portions. The minute a sheet of cookies was removed from the oven and the baked cookies were removed from the sheet, she simply picked up the pre-formed cookies, placed them quickly on the sheet, and returned it to the oven. There was no time delay at all. She had the four cookie sheets rotating constantly, and her own time was continuously and effectively used.

Watching the simplicity of her solution and the smoothness and efficiency with which she completed her task, I knew I had not only learned how to bake cookies more efficiently, but I had also learned a principle upon which to base my approach to all habitual tasks.

Light from this window:

Almost every task we do can be done more efficiently if we will give it fresh, analytical, and creative thought.

Lesson Three: The Chair

I walked into the family room at four o'clock, the end of a busy afternoon. It was almost time to start preparing supper, the baby would need attention, and in an hour I had to pick up Charles from his friend's house.

The family room was a mess. Toys were scattered widely, and the floor needed vacuuming desperately. There was just enough time to accomplish the task. But I took a second look and sighed. Somehow the job seemed more than I could do. On a whim I walked across the room, sat down in the armchair, and stared at the disarray.

Just then my five-year-old daughter came through the door and crossed the room on the way to the stairs, heading for her bedroom with an armload of papers and crayons. Her sisters were playing school upstairs. Intent on her errand, she walked right past me. Then, with one foot on the stairway, she whirled around and came back and stood in front of me. Our faces were level with one another, and she looked me directly in the eye. "Mother!" she exclaimed. "What are you doing sitting down?"

The question startled me, and I answered facetiously, "Wishing I had a maid."

She did not laugh. She cocked her head to one side, very seriously, and climbed up on the arm of my chair. "Would you really like to have a maid?" she asked.

I remember with such pleasure the conversation that followed. We sat and talked deeply, seriously, about housework, about my feelings toward my home and children, about work itself, about the concept of others working for us or with us.

After a few minutes she reached over and kissed me and said her sisters were waiting for her upstairs. As I watched her go, I thought with pleasure, "I not only have a daughter, I have just discovered a friend in my own house."

Light from this window:

Let your children see you sitting down once in a while. You are much more approachable. Amazing things can happen when you become still.

Lesson Four: The Letter

Dearest Marianna:

You are three years old today, almost four, and I have just given you permission, for the first time, to walk down our lane to your friend's house, five doors from ours.

The weather is cold. It is March, and, although most of the snow is gone, it has rained this morning, and there are some icy puddles of water in the lane.

When the phone call came inviting you to come for lunch, we went up to your room and you chose your favorite dress to wear. I wonder if you will remember it. It was a rich brown cotton print, with tiny roses on it, and a pretty lace collar. You put on white tights and the fluffy white crinoline that makes your dress puff out from its wide-bowed waistband. I had just polished your little white Mary Jane shoes, and you wanted to wear those too. Then we put on your warm red coat and your white hat with the pom-pom. As I put the mittens on your hands, I thought how small and sweet they are. Your golden hair curls down your back and is almost long enough to reach the hem of your coat.

How dear you are to me! I am very worried about you walking to the neighbors' alone. But no cars are allowed in the lane, and each of the townhouses of Holden Green has its own door and stoop, so you have only to walk past five familiar doors and knock on your friend's house. They are watching for you.

Still, it is very hard for me to let you go on your own. I wouldn't do it except that the baby is very sick, and I cannot take her outside. Over and over again I explained what you must do, and then I kissed you good-bye. The last thing I said was, "Your shoes are so white and clean. Please don't walk in the water and get them muddy."

The minute you left the door, I hurried to the window to watch until I could see you safely into your friend's door. You had no idea that I was watching. You truly thought you were alone—on your own—and so you were. But I was watching, loving you, thinking how dear and precious and wonderful you are, praying that all would go well.

At the first puddle you paused, and I saw you looking at it with yearning eyes. Such a lovely puddle! So perfect for splashing! I was certain that my last admonition would be completely forgotten.

Then I saw the most wonderful thing. With meticulous care you skirted the puddle. On down the lane, with dozens of puddles—big ones, small ones, irregular ones—you zigzagged, skipped, walked sideways, tiptoed, did everything humanly possible to see that not one drop of water touched your polished shoes.

Never realizing you were being watched, you took your first step toward true independence. By your own choice, you obeyed with full heart the things you had been taught.

As I watched you, my heart nearly broke with love, admiration, and tenderness. And I thought that I must write this story down for you and give it to you now, on your sixteenth birthday.

You have become a beautiful young woman. As you continue your journey toward independence, as you begin to date young men and to prepare yourself for the great possibilities of your life, I hope that you will remember the little girl you once were and will follow her example. There will be many puddles and pitfalls that will tempt you, but if you will follow the teachings of the gospel and the guidance of those who love you, and remember those guidelines, even when you think that no one is watching, that no one cares, you will arrive at your destination unspotted from the world.

You can do it, Marianna, for I saw you do it once, as a cherished, wise, and obedient three-year-old.

Thank you for the example, and joy you have been to me.

Love, Mother

Light from this window:

Keep the records of your life. For you and your family they become your own personal scriptures.

A noble type of good, Heroic womanhood. —Henry Wadsworth Longfellow
