Jaroldeen Edwards, Things I Wish I'd Known Sooner ( 1991)

Chapter Eleven

The Desire to Know More

An understanding of the relationship between our heritage and ourselves gives us the desire to know more about the past and our debt to it. We need to comprehend the responsibility to gain this knowledge and pass it to others.

A few years ago I was driving my mother from our home in Connecticut to John F. Kennedy Airport on Long Island, New York. In order to get to the airport you must cross the Whitestone Bridge. At the apex of the bridge span is a magnificent view down the East River to the tip of Manhattan Island. A dozen bridges span the river, and the graceful towers of that beautiful city rise against the sky. I relish that view and always gaze at it as I cross the bridge.

My mother, however, was not looking at the view. She was staring speculatively at the intricate, vaulted trusswork of the bridge that spanned the sky over our heads. "My goodness," she murmured, "we have no comprehension of the debts we owe."

Brought back from the view, I looked at her with puzzlement. "What on earth are you talking about?" I asked.

"I'm talking about this bridge," she said. "Do you realize that we drive over this mighty structure without a thought? Who made it? What sacrifices and creativity were involved? What did each individual contribute? And . . . is it safe?"

We laughed at the progression of the questions, but she made me think about how casual we are about the debts we owe to others who have left the work of their hands and minds to enrich our lives.

Living for many years on the East Coast was a privilege in that it developed in me and in my children a lively sense of interest in the historic heritage of our nation. The intellectual heritage represented by libraries; the spiritual heritage by scriptures, journals, and church buildings; the family heritage in records, places, pictures, and inheritances; the unknown heritage of roads, bridges, trails, and cities. Maps, atlases, dictionaries, computers, television, radio, cars—all the heritage of those who have gone before.

Pursuing that thought, I decided to make a study of the Brooklyn Bridge in the year of the Bridge's Centennial. What incredible things I learned.

The Brooklyn Bridge was built by the Roebling family. The father, John, was a German immigrant who developed the concept of wire-rope or cable, an invention that was necessary for the design of suspension bridges because it was essential to have a support system made of flexible strands that could support tremendous weights.

In the first months of work on the bridge, John Roebling was standing on the dock when a ferry came up to the pier and crushed his foot. He believed in hydrotherapy and thought water could cure anything, so each day he bathed the foot in plain water and drank gallons of water. And he died a cruel death of tetanus.

After his death his son, Washington Augustus, took over the construction of the bridge. Shortly afterwards, he went down in a caisson one day to inspect the pilings. People did not understand the bends in those days, and so he was brought up too quickly and was disabled with what was called caisson disease. Nitrogen had invaded his joints, nervous system, and brain.

For the remainder of the time the bridge was being built, Washington remained in his apartment, which overlooked the building site, and watched progress on the bridge through a telescope by the window. From this vantage point he made suggestions, which his wife wrote down and took to the foreman. In reality, his wife was the moving force. Many people have speculated that the direction and ideas might have been her own, since Washington was so badly disabled.

The story is fraught with drama, tragedy, and heroism, and the bridge itself is like a cathedral, with its great Gothic stone columns and graceful necklaces of cables. A splendid walkway above the traffic lanes allows people to stroll or jog along the mile-long span, floating in the air high above the wide expanse of the East River. Such a legacy! And so symbolic of all the bridges left for us to cross and climb and reach new places.

The burden—and joy—of the past is that we must preserve it, learn from it, glean from it, and pass it on to the next generation.

As we prepared to celebrate the birthday of Relief Society one year, I recommended that the sego lily be used as our symbol. One of the younger women on the committee looked confused and asked, "What's a sego lily, and why should we use it for this?" She had never heard the story of the sego lilies and the role they played in feeding the starving Saints in the early days of the Church in Utah.

In our families these stories should be known, told, and retold. One of my favorite stories of family heritage is a story of my grandmother, who was deathly afraid of water. Her own mother had drowned, and Grandmother had never learned to swim.

My grandparents, William and Ellen Russell, lived in Provo, Utah. In those days a steamship took people on excursions across Utah Lake for a day of picnicking and fun; however, the lake was so shallow that passengers had to go out to the boat in a dinghy. One day my grandparents, with their new baby, decided to take one of these excursions. That day Grandmother wore a large hat, held on with netting, and a long white dress, with embroidery and a high, stiff lace collar. She was young, slender, beautiful—and very worried about going on a boat. Carrying her baby, who was also dressed in a long white dress, she was lifted from the dock to the dinghy that would take them out to the steam paddler. As she was arranging her skirt to sit down, another passenger stepped into the boat and Grandmother lost her balance. Still holding the baby, she fell over backwards into the water, which was over her head.

Instantly Grandfather and some other men lifted her out of the lake, back onto the dock. Dripping wet and in total shock, she stood on the dock, speechless. Someone tried to take the baby away so that they could towel her and the baby off, but they could not pry the baby out of her arms. Finally Grandfather gently loosened her hold and took the baby in his arms. The amazing thing was that Grandma had held the baby so closely and so protectively that the front of her dress was bone dry. Such love! What a wonderful heritage!

My husband's grandmother, Anna Rhodelia, was left a widow at the age of twenty-one. She had two little boys under the age of three and a third one was born four months after her husband's death. The family was destitute, living in a small log cabin and with no close relatives or friends.

When Anna's baby was born, Anna became terribly ill. She had a raging fever, had lost a great deal of blood, and was clinging to life by a thread. A few relatives who visited her, seeing her in what they thought was a comatose state, began reluctantly to decide who should raise the children. None of them could take all three. Listening to them, Anna felt a great fire building within her, and she spoke directly to the Lord. "You have taken my mother and my father. You have taken my brothers and sisters. You have taken my husband. You must not take me. I must be allowed to live and raise my sons. I will not let them be raised without love—without one another."

Miraculously Anna rose from her death bed and, through years of incredible sacrifice and work, managed to raise her three sons.

Within womanhood is magnificent spiritual power. We are descended from women who understood that power, and we must learn about them and teach their stories to our children.

America's Secret Aristocracy by Stephen Birmingham is a fascinating chronicle of some of the oldest, most aristocratic families of America, families that have quietly amassed and used power and wealth. These families form an unpublicized and private network, with subtle (and some not-so-subtle) speech patterns, mores, and social traditions. (Parenthetically, most Mormons would understand such cultural subtleties. We recognize a number of them in our own infrastructure.)

As I read the book, it was interesting to note that one of the traditions that keeps these aristocratic families cohesive is that they have a pattern of remembering their ancestry. Their homes are filled with family portraits, heirlooms, mementos of the past, and photographs. Their conversation is peppered with reference to their ancestors—eccentric, respected, and impressive men and women. Children are taught that the family's past is part of their present.

This is an example we should follow. As women we have a unique, vibrant, and rich heritage that must be preserved. We should weave it into our daily lives and teach it to our children. It is the gold that we should garner from the ashes.

I recently researched the life of the first Mormon woman in Dallas. Eliza was converted by missionaries in Rockwall, a small community about thirty miles east of Dallas. At seventeen she married a neighbor's son, whom she fell in love with at first sight.

Eliza tells in her journal of the struggle she and Kelsey had to support themselves on a poor cotton farm. She described how she gave birth to her third baby without anyone in attendance except Kelsey (who had no idea what to do) after a full day of labor picking cotton in the heat of the Texas summer.

How Eliza loved the gospel! When she and Kelsey finally decided they must move to Dallas to find work, she wept all the way, feeling she was going to the ends of the earth. On the wagon trip, she took a pile of church tracts and dropped them from the wagon as they traveled, leaving a trail of "missionary opportunities" from Rockwall to Dallas. She prayed people would find the pamphlets on the road, pick them up, read them, and then search out the Church. I think, too, that she left the tracts like Hansel and Gretel left the bread crumbs, hoping perhaps someday she could follow them back to Rockwall.

The first tiny church meetings in Dallas were held in Eliza's home. She has lived to see seven stakes organized in Dallas, and her own beloved grandson, Floyd Humphries, was the architect of the Dallas Temple.

In women such as Eliza, we see the patterns of aspiring to grow, yearning to know more, and bequeathing a meaningful legacy.

Light from this window:

We are the bridge over which the next generation will cross from the past to the future.

Out of our . . . lineage, minds will spring that will reach back to us . . . to know us better than we know ourselves. [They] shall stand upon this earth . . . and shall laugh and reach out their hands amidst the stars. —H. G. Wells
