Jaroldeen Edwards, Things I Wish I'd Known Sooner ( 1991)

Chapter Twelve

Building Our Tomorrows

Parley's ghost came to Scrooge with the symbols of his past clanging like cymbals around him—weighted, chained, burdened by past mistakes, omissions, false goals, and desires. Too often this is our view of our own past, and it creates prisons of self-doubt, old habits, and childhood perceptions of our own limitations and flaws.

The reality is, however, that when his past became real to Marley, when he truly understood it, for the first time he had the opportunity to become free. If he had remained ignorant of it, he would have remained unchanged. Knowledge became for him the means of salvation, and the means for the salvation of others, too.

With an understanding of our own past, each of us may start where we are and build our future on solid foundations. First we must learn to remember the good things, to forgive others, and to forgive ourselves for past error. We must view the little child within us with love, compassion, and understanding for past mistakes and trials.

If something in our personal past is amiss, we should face it clearly. If we have repented, we should forget; if it was a wrong, we should forgive; if it is something requiring repentance, we should get about the task of doing so—and repent with joy and gratitude for that window which allows us to use even the mistakes of the past an opportunity to grow. In his inaugural address in January 1989, President George Bush quoted a phrase that goes something like this: "Though our flaws may be endless, God's love is bounteous." We must believe in forgiveness as much as we believe in love.

In our building of our own future, we should choose those things from our past that will build and lift us up. The stumbling block of despair and discontent occurs when we perceive that we have become powerless—powerless to change; powerless to do; powerless to be happy; powerless to lift our spirits. The one thing we as Latter-day Saint women must know, without question, is that no one can rob us of our free agency. It is a divinely given gift. We, and we alone, can rob ourselves of that attribute given to us by our Heavenly Father.

Terry Anderson was a hostage in captivity in Beirut for five years. Though he was imprisoned all that time in a dark cell, he was able to keep his mind and spirit strong. Another prisoner who was placed briefly in the same room with Terry recounted how Terry had lifted his spirits and told him over and over again, "Do not lose courage."

Life can constrain us in ways that seem as difficult as a prison, but our will remains free, and we have control over how we will act and feel. We must not lose courage. All this is for our own good. The blessings will come.

Many people say things like "Seize the day!" "Live life to the fullest!" and, instead of making us feel eager, the words make us feel overwhelmed. We feel we don't have any day to seize—it is all used up with obligations and tasks. But the secret to enjoying those obligations is to seize control, to seize the obligations and the tasks and see them as things we have chosen to do, and then to do them in the ways we choose.

Each of us can find ways to measure even the smallest accomplishments. The joyous vantage point is to envision our own spiral and to see ourselves each day gradually building upon that and moving upward. The pace is absolutely our own, the direction is our own. As we see ourselves moving forward, feeling our past firmly beneath us, we can then go forth with faith and relish our own individuality.

Once we have begun to spiral upward, we need to watch for stumbling blocks from our past life. The best signal is when we feel unrest in our hearts. I believe that unrest of the heart is the impression of the Holy Ghost guiding us to something that must be resolved before we can move forward again. Rather than fearing unease or avoiding it, we can search it out and use it to discover what is troubling us. Then we should pray and ask the Lord to help us solve it. We should use our own wisdom, garnered from our past experiences and our own knowledge. If necessary, we can consult with friends or advisers. Then we can act—change direction, apologize, move, learn, study, or enliven, whatever the need is.

As we look into our past, we will find, surprisingly, courage and resources that we never dreamed we had. The important thing is not to allow our past to place limitations on us or discourage us. That is not the purpose of experience.

Lillian Gilbreth, whose story is told in the book Cheaper by the Dozen and the play of the same name, was born to a wealthy California family in the last decade of the nineteenth century. As a child, she was so painfully shy that she was incapable of attending school. Each year her parents enrolled her in school, but after a few days of her suffering they would allow her to remain at home with a tutor. Finally she was able to return to high school to complete her education.

At the turn of the century it was rare for young women to attend college, but Lillian had such a passion for knowledge that she convinced her parents to allow her to attend the University of California. Though she was tall and slender, she was still enormously shy and carried herself in a slightly hunched posture, with her head down.

But Lillian had great strength of will when it came to doing something she felt was right. And so, when she was the top graduate of her class and therefore eligible to be the valedictorian, she rose above her natural diffidence and determined to fulfill that role. The president of the university was uncomfortable with having a woman speak to a mixed assembly, so he gave her some strict instructions: She could speak—he couldn't deny her that privilege—but she must wear something frilly around the collar of her robe, wear her hair in a very feminine style, use no hand gestures, and read her talk from small notecards. "Nothing in your manner or deportment should suggest you are trying to appear like a man," he decreed.

Soon after her graduation, while on her way to Europe, Lillian met and fell in love with a charismatic whirlwind of a man, Frank Gilbreth. Though he had a scanty education, he had discovered a whole new field of engineering—time management. He swept her off her feet and they were soon married. This catapulted her into a world of a new baby every year, a domineering mother-in-law, and, eventually, a huge house in New Jersey, filled with eleven children (one child died in infancy). The Gilbreths had servants to do the cooking and cleaning, which was a blessing because Lillian did not know how to cook—and, indeed, never learned. She spent her days interacting, primarily one on one, with her children, and serving as a behind-the-scenes adviser, consultant, and ghost writer for her husband. She also obtained a doctorate, but in those years her life remained very private and constrained.

In 1924 Frank was invited to attend a worldwide conference of engineers. He called Lillian from the train station, and while they were speaking he collapsed and died. At age forty-seven, Lillian was left alone, with very little money, to raise a huge family.

But her past was her prologue. And while the most visible thing in her personality for years had been her shyness and her shrinking from public interchange, that part of her past had to be ignored and forgotten. The other part of her past—the courage, the stubbornness, the love of her children, her brilliant intellect, and the knowledge she had gained of her husband's work—those were the things from her past that she drew from and on which she built her next thirty years.

After organizing her children and her household, she began a career in a field dominated by men. She convinced the major clients of Frank's company that she could perform the services for which they had hired her husband. She also held training seminars in her own home, and gradually she gained the whole-hearted admiration and respect of the engineering community. She became, in her own right, one of the most celebrated time- management engineers in the world. Even into her seventies she fulfilled scores of speaking engagements throughout the world each year. Although she herself never learned to use a kitchen, we benefit from her vision of what a kitchen should be. The style of cabinetry and design of applicances and lighting in our modern kitchens are a result largely of her research.

What a great lesson! We must not let our past limit us. Within it are the clues to our own personal possibilities.

Lastly, as we build our future, the timeless structures of the gospel can give us confidence and a sense of peace. So often we want to make life more complex than it really is. My husband has set a powerful example in this. Whenever my life seems shaken and unfocused, I know the rock upon which to stand to bring back order. This rock includes personal prayer every morning and evening, scripture reading every day, and journal keeping.

In the movie How Green Was My Valley is a scene that takes place at the Welsh mining family's dinner table. At the head of the table the father listens in anguish as his four grown sons declare their fury at the coal mine owners, and they leave the table to pack their things to go to America. The heartbroken father remains in the darkened room with his head bowed. At the far end of the table the youngest son sits in silence, looking lovingly at his father. Finally he clears his throat so his father will notice him. Without raising his head the father says tenderly, "Yes, my son, I know you are there."

And that, ultimately, is the greatest measure of our past and our future—that we are where the Lord would have us be, where we are needed and expected, and where we desire to be. How I admire the women of the Church who stand upon the mark. "Yes, my daughters," our Heavenly Father says, "I know you are there."

And so we continue in that great and glorious enigma of womanhood, at the same time so simple and yet so complex. The past, the present, and the future mingling in our vision; the joys so intense, the sorrows so poignant, and the days so full.

I once saw a little painting at the Museum of Church History and Art in Salt Lake City that depicted a pioneer mother with her two little daughters. The mother and children stand on the prairie in the foreground, with the wagon train making camp in the distance. The long skirts and hair of the woman and girls are windblown. In the sunshine, the little girls are filling their sunbonnets full of the bright sunflowers that dot the prairie. The mother is smiling at them, her face so full of love that it almost hurts to look at her. But the irony is that she has a wooden spade in her hands and is piling buffalo chips into a small wheelbarrow to take back to camp for the evening fire.

As I looked at the picture, so full of beauty, duty, sacrifice, and love, I smiled to myself and thought, "That's exactly what a woman's life is—sunflowers and buffalo chips." I am grateful for a heritage that makes me see these things more clearly.

Light from this window:

A book, a challenge, a friend, a child, a chore, a tale, a word, an act, a moment of stillness, a trial, a blessing, a prayer. All are windows into the light.

The patient stars Lean from their lattices, content to wait, Wait for the day that maketh All things clear. —Bret Harte 1991
