Michele R. Sorensen, Chainbreakers ( 1993)

1

I love the hymns so much that when our bishop called me to teach the Spiritual Living lessons in Relief Society, I asked if I could continue being the chorister, too. Singing the hymns inspires me. I love the spirit they bring into our lives. But sometimes, when I'm teaching a particularly sensitive lesson or leading a tender song, I look into the upturned faces of my sisters and see a pair of sorrowing eyes in which hope has been lost, trust has been torn.

In those moments, my own memories rush to the surface in a wave of compassion. I sing harder, more fervently. Or, if I'm teaching a lesson, I bring it straight back to the core of the gospel: our Redeemer, His love and His sacrifice for us. Even the small seeds planted by a single hymn or a humble testimony can be critically important when a person's trust has been violated.

Some of those women may have kicked, raged, and rebelled against the Savior and His gospel. They may still be fighting against the pricks or stumbling around in a fog of confusion and fear, but I know that He will never stop whispering to them. He keeps calling to them, as He has always been calling to them, in a voice of love—sometimes the only voice of love—from a time they don't want to remember.

But yesterday I wasn't in the Relief Society room to lead the singing or teach a lesson. I had attended a stake meeting there, and I was waiting for my husband to pick me up for a date. Everyone else had left quickly, and I thought I was alone, until I gathered my things and stepped into the hall. Farther down the corridor, a friend of mine was leaning against a doorjamb, as unaware of my presence as I'd been of his. He was looking back into the office where—he's the bishop of a neighboring ward—I supposed he'd recently concluded an interview. His hand was on the doorknob; a set of keys swung in the lock.

"Hello, Dr. Lorenz," I said, my voice breaking the hush of the empty hall. Besides being a bishop, Ben was also our family physician and friend. "I've never seen you alone before, much less standing still."

He looked up suddenly, a comfortable grin spreading across his face. "Elizabeth! Hello! I didn't see you." He pulled the door shut firmly as he spoke, retrieving the jingling keys from the lock, and then turned to shake my hand. "How are you?"

"Fine," I answered. "Fine. But a moment ago, you looked like you were carrying a weighty load."

"Oh, that." He smiled again. "Just wishing and thinking—not a luxury I indulge in very often." It seemed he intended to change the subject quickly, but then he fell silent.

When you've known someone a long time, you can do that. You can opt not to interrupt your thoughts for their arrival . . . just share them. After a moment, Ben looked at me again. I thought he was going to ask after my husband or one of my children, but instead he sighed.

"Someone ill?" I prompted, suddenly realizing how dumb my question sounded. If you're a physician, you're always seeing someone who's sick.

But he didn't laugh. "Not just someone. The problem is that there are so many."

I was about to comment on the flu that seemed to have hit every family I knew, when he went on.

"There are so many," he repeated, "and I can't just give them an antibiotic and put them to bed. No pills can take the pain and hurt away."

He took a deep breath and smiled at me. "How come I've known you all these years and only this week I hear that you're a journalist?"

"Well, I'm not really. I'm a mother right now."

"Majored in journalism?"

"No. I never went to college, but I did work in that field for a while."

"Ever published?" he asked.

"Newspaper want ads," I laughed. "Nothing like a book. How about you?"

"No." He spoke slowly. "I've never written a book, but I've been wanting to for years."

"Me too," I answered, surprised at my own openness. Quickly I asked, "What would you write about?"

Now, Ben Lorenz is my boys' idea of an "awesome cowboy." He has a neatly trimmed beard and wears flannel shirts and big belt buckles with fancy beaded designs or shiny stones and intricate metalwork. Some of those first impressions must have rubbed off on me, too, because I expected he'd write some sort of gun-slinging western.

"I'd write a book on abuse," he said, looking right at me. "Something like a survival book for those who were molested as children."

"Really?" I said, almost jumping out of my shoes.

"Yes." His face was serious. Until that moment, I had thought him an easygoing, unexcitable man. I'd never seen him so somber, so deeply concerned.

"One in four of all the women I treat has been abused. Yet most of them feel so isolated. This isn't something people usually talk about freely."

Boy, you're not kidding! I thought.

"They don't compare notes and say, 'Hey! We have incest in common.' "

It was all I could do to smile at him, though there were hundreds—thousands—of things I could have said.

"I suppose the cause of their loneliness goes back a long way," he continued. "When safety and love are denied to a child by the persons most responsible to provide them, the child's ability to trust is stunted or even lost. That's when the first feelings of being alone begin."

"You're right," I answered, surprising myself again, for I rarely talked openly about a time that ran so deep and dark within me. "Children are remarkable. They understand lots of things without being able to put them into words. They can sense good and evil whenever they really want to."

Ben was looking at me, not too closely but intently. I thought, What a good feeling it is to be listened to—really listened to.

"Children give their trust so freely," I heard myself say. "They want to give their devotion to the person who is their caregiver. They want more than anything to be safe in that person's love." I paused to see if Ben was still listening. He was. "Then, when their trust is betrayed . . . well, it's like chaos and confusion exploding on their world. That betrayal twists and distorts their vision of everything."

"They become afraid to trust," he said softly.

"They become afraid to trust."

The church building was now entirely empty except for us. Outside the winter air was bitter cold, but the hallway where we stood was warm and well lit, uncluttered and orderly. Ben was thoughtful, listening to what I'd said and thinking. My mind was as calm as our surroundings, yet it hurtled back over years with intense clarity. Recollections focused in my thoughts with such power that not only could I see the incidents of my life but I could feel and smell and taste them as well.

The memories swept backward to the first time I met the man who was to be my "protector." Somehow I knew that all the things a father is supposed to be were missing from his character, yet I was told to call him Daddy.

/ / / / /

My baby sister, Maria, and I came shuffling out of our bedroom. Our too-big slippers made a fun, flopping sound as we walked across the kitchen linoleum through the front room to the bathroom door. My flowered jammies felt soft and warm as the last rich rays of the sun.

Tonight we were going to sleep over at Nanny Julie's house. And we'd gotten ready all by ourselves, just as Mama had asked. I had my favorite stuffed bunny, and Maria had her fuzzy blankie. Together we peeked around the corner into the bathroom.

Mama was looking in the mirror and singing. She was so pretty! Her long auburn hair reached past her waist, and her eyes were a deep, sparkly green, like a piece of wet Navajo jade. Nowadays I would describe her as very petite—almost five feet tall and not quite ninety pounds—but if anyone had asked me to describe her back then, I would have said she was like the china dolls I'd seen in the windows of fancy stores.

"She's doing that beauty school thing again," I whispered to Maria. "Mommy's going to a date."

Maria stifled a giggle—she giggled at everything.

I knew how to read the little hand on the clock, and Mama had been in the bathroom for at least two hours. She'd taken her morning bath again in the evening, styled and restyled her hair, painted her face, changed her clothes three times, and finally chosen jewelry that would do. She looked in the mirror and turned from side to side, examining every inch of her appearance and criticizing it colorfully under her breath. Finally she turned around and looked at us. "Well?"

Our grins could have burst our faces as we cheered. "You're bootiful," Maria beamed.

"You sure?" Mommy asked, turning to me.

"Oh, yes," I said. "Oh, yes! Oh, yes!"

Someone knocked loudly at the door, and Mommy jumped. Maria and I went to answer it, while she did the proper thing by waiting in her room so as not to look anxious. Mama had told me exactly what to do and say, but before I let him in, I pulled the door open a bit and peeked through the crack.

The man looked just as Mommy had described him over the telephone to Nanny Julie. He was tall and slender but not skinny. His light brown hair was cut so short I thought maybe he was bald under his baseball cap. Disrespectfully, I wondered if his big ears were holding the cap in place. But I didn't wonder long, because he was staring down at me with impatient gray eyes.

Mommy was right. He wasn't ugly, but he wasn't handsome. He sure didn't look anything like the little picture she kept on her nightstand. That man had gentle dark eyes and wavy black hair, and Mommy always called him her first love.

I pulled back on the knob, and the door creaked wide open.

The man seemed surprised that someone taller hadn't opened it. But rather than bend over, he looked down his nose and through the screen door at me.

"Hello. How do you do, sir?" I recited just as I had been instructed. "Would you please come in?"

He swung the screen door open abruptly and took a large step into the house. When I offered him a chair, he said he didn't want to sit down. He spread his feet apart and stood by the door, his arms crossed over his chest.

Maria and I ran for our mother's bedroom. "He's here!" she chirped. "He's here!"

"And he's wearing perfume, too!" I added, feeling very important.

Swinging her hair back over her shoulder, Mommy took a deep breath. Then, holding each of us by the hand, she walked out into the front room.

For the next several weeks, these events were repeated over and over until they became almost routine. Even though the man (Mommy called him Chuck) never spoke to Maria and me, we talked a lot about him between ourselves. I couldn't have explained why, but there was one thing I knew for sure: I didn't like him. Maria didn't like him, either, so surely Mama couldn't. He would quit coming soon. Besides, she had other friends. She was pretty, and all the guys at the grocery store thought so, too.

But Chuck kept coming over more and more often. Soon he was hanging around our house a lot, and it was making Mama nervous.

We had a little secret at our house, and Mommy didn't want him to find out about it. She tried hard to keep Chuck in the front room. She always changed the radio to his favorite station whenever he came in. She brought him ice water right away and kept a bowl of extra ice in the freezer just for him. She made sure he never had to get up for anything.

But one afternoon she goofed and excused herself to go to the bathroom. Maria and I were playing together in our room, so no one was around when Chuck ran out of ice water. Our bedroom was at the opposite end of the hall from the kitchen, so we both looked up when we suddenly heard his footsteps on the linoleum. He helped himself to a second glass of water. We watched silently as he opened both doors on the fridge. Looking in there was a no-no. That was Mommy's fridge. Then Chuck looked into the kitchen cupboards, shutting each door soundlessly before he went back into the front room.

I grabbed Maria's arm and pulled her into the corner of our bedroom. "Chuck's in big trouble now!" I gloated. "He knows Mommy's secret." Then, lowering my voice to match the seriousness of his mistake, I added, "And she ain't gonna like that one bit!"

Chuck didn't stay much longer that night, and as soon as he was gone, Maria and I tattled on him. But to our surprise, Mommy got cross. She sent us to bed!

The next morning there was a lot of loud knocking at our front door before even Mommy was awake. As she threw on her bathrobe, we fell in right behind her, still half-asleep but curious.

Chuck was the one making all the noise. "Good morning!" he hollered and marched right in the door as soon as Mommy unlocked it. He had two big sacks, one under each arm, that he carried straight into the kitchen and dropped on the counter. He turned around quickly and looked at the three of us. He laughed. In and out of the house Chuck hurried, carrying more and more sacks. Maria and I sat down out of the way and watched. Mommy was standing awfully still, staring at him with her green eyes very big and her mouth sort of twitchy. Then all at once she began to bawl.

Chuck stopped in his tracks.

"You shouldn't have," she cried. "You shouldn't have!"

Chuck put his arms around my mother.

"You shouldn't have, Chuck." She was sobbing even harder now.

I jumped up and screamed, "Don't touch my mommy!" Frantically I started pushing at Chuck's knees. "Go away!"

Chuck looked down at me. His eyes were hard and very angry. I thought he was going to kick me, but I didn't care. "Go 'way!" I yelled again.

Then Mommy got angry, too. She sent me to my room. Maria followed, and we sat together on the floor. We could still see them in the kitchen, though. Chuck kept his arms around our mother until she stopped crying. Then they unloaded those big brown sacks together. It took a long time, but the fridge and cupboards were all full when they finished.

After that, they fixed a huge breakfast of flapjacks and maple syrup, orange juice and pork links. When it was ready, they called us in. Maria and I could eat on TV trays in our bedroom; Mommy and Chuck were going to eat alone at the table. And eat we did! Maria said maybe she was going to pop, and I knew I was. We were so busy eating we forgot to listen to what was going on in the kitchen.

But even after the breakfast dishes were all washed, Chuck and our mother kept talking for hours. Maria and I played in our room as we were told, but we knew something strange was happening. We'd never heard Mommy talk this much to anyone before.

I didn't like what was going on. Chuck had really done it now. Mama seemed to think he was wonderful, and that made me shudder. Something inside told me he was a bad man, and I wondered why Mommy didn't know it.

Nothing was the same for the next couple of weeks after Chuck and the groceries arrived. He practically lived at our house. But then one morning everything was different. Chuck wasn't there, and Mommy was absolutely buzzing through all the rooms, washing clothes and packing her pretty yellow travel bag. She also put clothes and toothbrushes for us in a paper sack. Then she sat us down and talked to us about our manners. We would be needing them because we were going on a sleep-over at Nanny Julie's. We would be staying two whole days.

Maria looped her chubby arms around Mama's neck. "Where goin'?"

"Nevada," Mommy said with a smile.

"What for?" I asked, convinced that Mommy realized how four-year-olds understand these things better than three-year-olds do.

"Because," she said, getting up.

I hated that answer. It was the one she used every time she wasn't paying attention or was keeping an adult secret. Then Mommy did the strangest thing of all. She walked over to the nightstand and picked up the picture that had always sat there, the one of the handsome man with dark, curly hair and soft brown eyes. Gently she ran her fingers around the edges of the frame and looked at it. Then she went to her closet, stretched way up on her tiptoes, and tapped at the bottom of a big, old-fashioned tin until it tumbled noisily down from the shelf.

When she put the tin on her bed and opened it, Maria and I scrambled up to look over the edges. I wasn't sure what to expect, but somehow I knew these were Mommy's treasures. Mommy lifted them out one at a time, looking each one over tenderly before replacing it again.

There was a pile of letters neatly tied with a faded ribbon, a fancy metal cigarette lighter with initials engraved on it, a baseball team shirt, a few photos of people I didn't know, and a marvelous ring with a clear stone that caught and reflected the light. "Oh!" I breathed when I saw the ring.

"I want that," Maria said, pointing at the shiny lighter.

"Who mailed you those letters?" I asked Mommy, wishing I could touch the ring.

Ignoring us, Mama slid the small picture from its frame. With shaking hands, she stuffed the ring into her blue jeans pocket. Then she sucked in a resolute breath that was sadder than any sigh I'd ever heard. She shut the picture up with the other treasures and ran into the kitchen. Maria and I followed right behind her, watching as she crammed the beautiful tin into the kitchen garbage can and then ran outside to dump it. When she came back in, she washed her hands for a long time, and I couldn't see her face. "Go get your coats on," she said suddenly, as if she'd all at once remembered we were there.

Chuck came soon after that, and Mommy loaded us into his fancy sports car. Before he started the engine, he told us the rules for passengers receiving the privilege of riding in his car. His look said more than his words. If we broke Chuck's rules, I knew his gray eyes would shoot daggers into us. When he was finished, he told us to repeat the rules back to him. We did pretty well, but he went over them once more for good measure: "Feet off the seat, butts planted, arms folded, mouths shut tight."

The ride to Nanny Julie's had never been so long. It was supposed to take only twenty minutes, but we sat on Chuck's backseat forever. As soon as the front wheels pulled into the driveway, Maria and I slid forward and touched our toes to the floor.

"Wait!" Mother commanded. "Do you remember your manners?" She reminded us in case we'd forgotten, but my thoughts had already raced through Nanny Julie's front door.

Nanny Julie and her husband had never had any children, so they liked to baby-sit us sometimes for Mommy. They had the whole house to themselves, with a big lawn, an orchard of pecan trees, a barn, and no other families close by, the way they were in our trailer court. Nanny Julie's husband was nice; he read us stories and played catch with us. But best of all, there were eight new baby kittens. Nanny Julie had promised we could hold them if we were very good, and I couldn't wait.

The instant we were free, I made a beeline for the kitties' basket. Maria and I scrambled over each other, up the back steps, and then froze in the doorway, gazing with delight. The kittens' eyes were still shut, and their weak mewing cries filled the sunny farm kitchen.

Needless to say, our two hot, dusty days with Nanny Julie whizzed by. We fed the chickens, chased the puppies, and played in the barn. Sometime after Nanny Julie bathed us and put us to bed for the second night, Mommy and Chuck came back. The hall light woke me just before I heard Mommy come in and scoop up Maria. That left Chuck for me, so I kept my eyes squeezed shut tight—I didn't want him to think I knew he was carrying me. I didn't want him ever to think I liked him.

When the sun first tickled my cheek the next morning, I threw off my covers and woke up Maria. Maria got mad—she always did. But I just hopped out of bed, and as usual, she followed right behind me into Mommy's room.

"Good morning to you," we sang, just like always. But to my absolute horror, Chuck sat up in her bed!

"Get back in your room, now!" he yelled at us. "And don't come out until you're called."

We ran. Maria and I sat together on my bed and cried. Finally Mama came in. She told us to stop crying and listen. "Chuck and I got married on Sunday," she said. "Chuck is your daddy now."

I'd never had a daddy before that I could remember. But I knew what one was. Daddies went to work, came home, and shared mommies' rooms. All the other kids had one. I wondered if they all thought their daddy was a yucky, scary man.

"Do you understand, Elizabeth?" Mommy was saying. Chuck had a new name now, she repeated. I was supposed to call that man Daddy.
