Michele R. Sorensen, Chainbreakers ( 1993)

2

Gee, Elizabeth," Ben said in his comforting, understated way, "you look unhappy."

"Hmm?" My mind jerked back to the neat, clean lines of the empty church hallway. "Oh. Well, I was just thinking about the mothers. I mean, little children can't understand where their mothers are coming from. They only see someone who won't protect them or save them from a threat."

"Sometimes grown-up children still feel that way." He smiled, friendly creases at the corners of his eyes. "Mothers are dealing with responsibilities and expectations that a child can't understand. But sometimes they are just as confused as their children are. Sometimes they, too, endure abuse."

I wasn't looking at Ben anymore, and after that last sentence, I wasn't hearing him, either. Instead, I was recalling the words of a quotation my mother carried for years in her wallet: "The first couple of years in a marriage can be frustrating and difficult. However, with open communication between two persons . . . the ocean of erratic waves becomes a calm sea, perfect for smooth sailing."

She used to read those words softly to herself—read them often enough that I still remember them twenty-five years later, even though I didn't grasp their meaning at the time. Back then, I couldn't have understood how they burned. But I saw the flames.

/ / / / /

"I've had it with the adjustment period!" Mama groaned one night when Daddy was working late. I was walking to my bedroom when I looked up and saw her pound her fists against the bathroom mirror. She must have thought the door was shut, but it always swung open if the latch didn't catch properly.

I stood there a moment, watching, as she leaned her head against the glass and cried. "I've had it . . . I've had it . . . " Her long auburn hair made little waving motions with each sob. Quietly I walked to her and put my hand up on her arm.

Mommy jerked around. Her face was twisted all funny, and she looked as if she was going to throw up.

"Me, too," I said. "I've had it, too." I wanted to tell her about how I felt confused and tired of all the changes in this new daddy mess. I wanted to tell her how I had been watching the other daddies on our street and how, even though they all got angry, they didn't do it as much as ours. They didn't have as many rules, either.

I wanted to put my arms around Mommy and tell her about the new feeling I had: the feeling of fear. It was a very deep terror that seemed to take over my whole body. There were times when it made me go numb, and then tingle, and then shake right down to my toes. It made my teeth hurt. My stomach and head ached as if I had the flu, but I didn't. And I figured that was how Mommy was feeling right now.

But she didn't want to talk about it.

"Elizabeth," Mama gulped and tried to find her regular voice while she reached for a tissue. "Elizabeth, where's Maria?"

"Watching 'The Bullwinkle Show'. . . . "

"Why aren't you watching it with her? I thought that was your favorite cartoon."

"Oh, it is!" I answered. "But I don't like Boris and Natasha—especially Boris. He scares me."

"Well, run along, now," Mama said, straightening my hair with gentle fingers. "He's not real, you know. He's just a silly cartoon."

I went back in and sat down on the couch, but I didn't really watch Bullwinkle or even Underdog. I was thinking about the first time I saw Daddy yelling at my mother. No wonder she was scared.

That morning, Mama had taken us outside to work in the yard because it was such a nice day. Then our neighbor, Mrs. Swanson, came over to visit. They talked a long time, while Maria and I tried to dam up the little stream of water flowing down the sidewalk from Mrs. Swanson's sprinklers.

Suddenly there was a squealing of tires. Daddy's GTO roared past us and hit the dip of the driveway without slowing down. He slammed on his brakes and left big, black skid marks on the cement. Then he jumped out the door and kicked it shut.

"Where have you been?" he yelled. "I've been trying to call you for the last hour!"

Mama's face went white, and so did Mrs. Swanson's. "Excuse me," Mama said to her friend. Mrs. Swanson almost ran home, and Mama was almost running, too, as Daddy put his hand on her arm and walked her inside. I took Maria away from our dam because the street is a dangerous place. We sat on the wooden steps to our house.

Daddy was yelling so loud I knew all the neighbors in the trailer park could hear him. He made two new rules that day. First, Mommy could not talk to our neighbor anymore. That woman wasn't good enough for his wife. She was poor welfare trash. Daddy said he didn't want Mommy hurting his name by spending time with low-class people like that. And second, she'd better never go anywhere without telling him first.

Then Daddy marched out the door and right past us like thunder and lightning. He drove away like that, too. He had to get back to work.

Mommy locked herself in the bathroom after that. She took a bath. But we could hear her crying, even though the water was running and the radio was singing.

In the years since, I have heard people use the phrase "green with envy." But green isn't the right color. Jealousy is a deep, fiery red that is sometimes purple and sometimes white-hot in the center. And that was about the right color for Daddy.

What happened that day didn't upset me so very much—but he did. His words weren't naughty or bad ones, but they were ugly. His voice was different. He said everything in an evil tone that pierced every part of my body. It was a tone I knew I would never forget.

/ / / / /

"There are variables," Ben was saying. "Violence is one thing that has a significant impact on how lasting the effects of abuse are."

"Violence isn't always physical," I said, remembering to keep up the conversation. "There can be verbal violence, too." I was still hearing echoes of that tone in Daddy's voice. "And the only thing that could be worse than seeing your mother mistreated would be having it happen to you."

/ / / / /

I remembered an evening when twilight had just begun to settle across the neighborhood. The street lights were blinking on, and the dinner was cleared away. Maria had wandered off to play with her doctor kit, but I scooted a stool up to the counter beside Mama. She'd been making a lemon pie, and now it was time to put the meringue on it.

Using her new mixer, Mama beat the egg whites she'd already separated from the yolks. It took a long time, but at last they were tall and fluffy, like clouds way up in the sky. Mommy's fingers looked long and slender and so very graceful as she swirled the meringue across the top of the pie. She could make it do beautiful things. Her pies looked like the ones in bakery windows that people took home in boxes. And when her creation was finished, she held it high in the air to inspect her work.

"Oh!" she exclaimed. "I forgot to heat the oven. Here, Liz," she said, moving the stool I was standing on away from the oven and turning it on. I don't know if she realized it, but she had scooted me right in front of that delicious-looking, fluffy meringue.

Mama scooped up the bowl and beaters and took them over to the sink to wash them. Suddenly I had an urge—an irresistible urge—to find out what that beautiful white stuff tasted like.

My mouth watering in anticipation, I stretched onto my tiptoes and leaned against the counter, my chin in the palms of my hands. My entire concentration was locked on the masterpiece before me until, finally, I reached out one finger, scooped up the tiniest bit, and popped it into my mouth.

"No!" Daddy screeched. "No! No! No!" He'd been watching me from the living room, and he marched into the kitchen.

"Never!"

Angrily, he hunted through the kitchen drawers, shuffling the contents, and then slamming them shut. All the while he yelled at me about pigs and germs.

Mommy froze, her hands motionless in the soapy water. I couldn't help myself—I started to cry. Then he grabbed me and tied my hands behind my back with a piece of string he'd found. With one smooth motion he lifted the pie and dumped it onto the floor. The next instant he was forcing me to my knees over the pie, shoving my face down into the sticky heap that had been Mama's marvelous creation.

"You want to be a pig?" he shouted in my ear. "You're now a pig. Eat!"

I sobbed my guts out. No four-year-old can eat a whole pie, no matter how delicious it is. And after my first stolen snitch, this one tasted like gooey slime. But whenever I choked or gagged or even slowed a little, he screamed at me again. His big hand came down hard and plastered my face into the mess.

Eventually there was nothing left but sweet stickiness smeared across the floor, and I thought my ordeal was over. But I was wrong. He leaned over me and shouted again, "Lick up the rest. Pigs, even dogs, lick their platters clean!"

I began licking. With each new effort, I thought I would lose everything. But my fear kept me from that. What would he do if I threw up all over? I didn't want to find out. He was way too angry; the evil tone completely filled his voice.

/ / / / /

"Why do women stay in situations like that?" I asked out loud. "If it's so horrible, why don't they get out? If they won't do it for themselves, then why not for their children?"

Years before I had come up with a list of insights and speculations to dissipate my own anger. The pain was very real, but I had worked at letting go of the anger. At that moment, I was curious what Ben thought. Without the anger clouding my vision, I could try to understand his response, but there had been a time when anything he said would have made no sense at all.

I began to think that maybe I really was a pig for snitching. When I was four, I began to learn that I had many flaws. I couldn't concentrate all the time, and sometimes I forgot a rule—or, more accurately, I got sidetracked.

That was a sin. I knew it because I spent hours in a corner with my nose firmly against the wall. I spent days in my room. And I received many spankings with a wide variety of tools: wooden spoons that eventually broke, hangers that soon bent out of shape, and big belts that stung bare skin. Once when I was being punished, Daddy's swinging belt shattered the light fixture on the ceiling, and so I got two extra lashings because of it. I also got to clean up the broken glass. It cut my fingers, but bad girls don't get Band-Aids.

Then came the night my mother whispered through her teeth, "Go get your jammies. Quick! And bring Maria's, too."

I ran. Something was up. I knew because she was whispering, but I couldn't guess what it was. When I went back into her room, I saw her travel bag open on her bed. Her nightgown was already in it, and so was a change of clothes for us girls.

Mama didn't take time to fold anything. She threw in a pair of pants and a shirt for herself, along with our three toothbrushes, and then shut and locked the travel bag. Grabbing the leather handles in one hand, she took both our little ones in the other and hurried out the front door.

We walked right past Daddy's truck in the driveway. He'd taken the GTO, but that didn't matter because Mama didn't have keys to either one. She just kept walking determinedly down the sidewalk.

"Where are we going?" I asked in a stage whisper. Little Maria's feet couldn't go fast enough, so Mommy swung her up and carried her for a while.

"Shhh! Just come quick, Elizabeth."

After a couple of blocks she set Maria down, and we two ran right ahead of her. She kept looking back over her shoulder toward our house.

I didn't know where we were running, but I knew why. Earlier that afternoon Daddy had tried teaching Mommy to ride her new horse. The week before, he'd bought a strong quarter horse for himself and a tall palomino for Mommy. And best of all, he'd arranged to stable them at Nanny Julie's. Maria and I loved playing around the barn and pasture and sneaking into Nanny Julie's for a cookie or two. But today hadn't been so much fun.

Mama had not been able to make her horse behave, so Daddy yelled and yelled at her. He was good with horses—or at least he thought he was. "Show 'im who's boss, Maureen. Take control!"

Mama was very pale, and her hands were shaking. She kept brushing one hand across her forehead, even though her hair hadn't slipped out of the neat bun she'd twisted at the back of her neck. Again and again, Mommy bit at her lip and jerked the reins in a determined way, but the horse was much stronger than she was. When her horse bolted against her will and ran into the barn for the third time, she climbed down and cried, "I give up!"

Daddy was even angrier now. He grabbed a whip from one of the tack rooms and mounted Mommy's horse. Then he began kicking and hitting the palomino's fair hide.

Mommy took Maria and me by the hand and pulled us into Daddy's truck. The dust rose in the hot air, as Daddy made the palomino turn and wheel, race and stop short. When he was tired, he unsaddled the sweaty, foaming horse. He threw the saddles and bits and blankets into the back of the truck and then grabbed us girls and tossed us into the back as well.

Through the cab window, we could see Daddy yelling and yelling and yelling at Mommy. Tears were streaming down her face, and she didn't have any tissues. The wind whipped us all the way home.

That was why we were running away. I don't think I usually could have walked so far, but this was different from any normal situation.

Mama checked us into a small motel. Maria and I had never been in a motel before, but we knew right off they were nice. There was a big bed, a TV, a bathroom, and a telephone. What an adventure! Mommy said we were going to watch TV in bed together.

I think she wanted to watch with us, but she was nervous. She kept walking up and down the floor. Maria and I wanted to enjoy the nice color TV, too, but it was hard not to watch Mommy. Finally she plopped down on the edge of the bed and picked up the phone.

She called Daddy! I was outraged. They talked for a while, and then Mommy hung up. The fun was soon going to be over, I knew. Daddy would spoil everything.

When he knocked on the door, Mommy stepped outside. After a while, she came in and picked up her travel bag. We were going back, with him.
