Michele R. Sorensen, Chainbreakers ( 1993)

3

Why do women stay in situations like that?" Ben repeated my question back to me. After a pause, he spoke slowly, thinking his way through the answer as he went. "I'm not sure, Elizabeth. Most often they feel trapped. Sometimes they don't realize the extent of the abuse their children face. Certainly, their own self-esteem is hurt by the abuse. But even then, they may counteract their feelings of worthlessness by playing the role of martyr. They feel it would be wrong to hurt the abuser; they feel he needs them."

"That's noble," I said, meaning it. "But sometimes people need to consider the price and be sure someone else isn't also paying for their merciful feelings. Besides," I added, shifting my Relief Society materials to my other arm, "being a doormat isn't really doing the abuser any favors, either."

Ben grinned. "Nope, you're right. But most of the time I don't think these wives and mothers realize they're perpetuating the problem. They're on the defensive, feeling trapped. Remember, their own self-esteem has been battered. They may not think they can face the world alone. Being a single mother can be an immense, almost superhuman burden. With that staring them in the face, they keep trying to make things work."

/ / / / /

Ben was right about that. After many months passed, my mother seemed to feel things were at least somewhat better. The truth is, we had all learned how to walk on eggshells.

August came after I turned five. That made this year special. Mama was sewing and snipping and ironing for days. She made dresses with ribbons and crinoline, dresses with lacy pinafores. Every one had rows of ruffles.

My job was to keep quiet and play with Maria until Mommy called me to try something on or help her stretch it out. I had to be very careful because the pieces often had pins in them.

My other job was to practice my alphabet, count to ten, and repeat our telephone number and address. I wasn't sure why that was important, but my upcoming adventure depended on it. Anticipation was making me bounce on the inside of every inch of my body.

One day it was all I could do to stay under control. We were going shopping after Daddy came home. The hours passed as slowly as a cactus grows, but he finally drove up and we all jumped into his truck.

"Kinney's is the best place to buy children's shoes," he told Mama, so we went to Kinney's.

When we walked into the store, Mommy reminded us to use our manners, but Daddy went even further by telling us to sit down, fold our arms, and not move. Except for turning our heads to gawk all around, we sat like statues.

Mommy and Daddy picked up shoe after shoe, looking each one over, always putting them down. Daddy picked up one that was made of black patent leather. My heart jumped when he held that shiny shoe up in the light.

Please oh please oh please . . . , my insides were pleading.

Then the salesman began talking to Daddy, and he put that lovely shoe down. The salesman went away and came back with four boxes in his arms.

"My, what nice young ladies," he said to us. "Can you take your own shoes off?"

"You bet!" I answered, as Maria and I began pulling frantically at our laces. "Have you got anything in there for her, too?" I asked hopefully. "Maria's been feeling sad because she doesn't get to go to school next week like I do."

"Hmmm." The chubby salesman pulled a serious expression. He opened the top box and took out a pair of red Keds. "Do you think these might work?"

"Oh yes!" Maria's dark, round eyes were as bright as the sun while he laced them onto her feet. She walked around the floor, gazing in all the low mirrors. Daddy pinched her toe, and then the salesman did it, too.

"Those will do," Daddy said.

The salesman looked at me and grinned, "So you're starting kindergarten next week, huh, carrot-top?"

"Yep," I answered, looking hopefully at the unopened boxes. "Sure am." My heart pounded as he took off the first lid. Oh please oh please . . .

Inside was a pair of Keds like Maria's, but they were plain black. I tried to smile and look happy when they told me to walk around. Daddy and the salesman pinched my toes.

The salesman was nice. "Come see what else your father has chosen," he said. He took off the other lid, uncovering a pair of brown dress shoes with buckles. I walked around again, while everyone said how sturdy they were. Then he opened another box, pulled the brown shoes off my feet, and said, "Push."

"Oh!" I squealed, looking down. He was putting those patent leather beauties on my feet!

"You like these, huh?" he chuckled.

Daddy leaned over and pinched my toes again. "We'll take these and the two pair of Keds," he said importantly.

I wanted to dance all over the floor. Maria and I hugged each other. Daddy thanked the salesman and then let Mommy carry the boxes out. My imagination soared away into visions of ruffles and lace and shiny patent leather. But when we were climbing into his truck, Daddy took both my arms and whirled me around to face him.

"The shiny shoes are school shoes. They will never be worn at any other time," he said in a low, frightening voice. "The tennis shoes are the ones you may play in. You will shine your leather shoes every day and keep them in their box. Do you understand?"

"Oh, yes, sir!" I answered, remembering my manners. "Yes. . . . and thank you."

"And one more thing," he said sternly, almost accusingly. "I've spent a lot of money on material, coats, galoshes, and new shoes. If I ever catch you not taking care of your things, you'll be going to school naked—and that's a promise!" He let go of my arms. "I work too hard for you to waste my money."

Kindergarten morning finally arrived. Mama spent a long time curling my hair before she let me choose my favorite new dress. By the time she was through, I was all done up in a green calico print with a frilly white pinafore, white lacy anklets, and my black patent leather shoes.

Lifting me up onto the bathroom counter, Mommy said, "Well, what do you think?"

I looked into the mirror. Dancing green eyes and a big smile filled up my freckled face. Framing all this were the bobbing, symmetrical, carrot-red ringlets Mommy had worked so hard to perfect.

"Are you happy, angel?" Mommy asked, putting her arms around me.

I squeezed her back excitedly.

"Let's go now, before you're late." Lifting me down, Mommy scooped up my book bag, took Maria's hand, and walked us a long way down the street to the school.

Kindergarten was every bit as wonderful as I'd ever dreamed. The teacher, Mrs. Edwards, was firm, but her eyes and her smile were marvelously kind. We each had our own coat hook, cubbyhole, and desk with our name on it. Playtime and recess and singing time and—oh! It was all fantastically exciting.

School was an entirely new world for me. Right away I understood that it was a much safer place than home. In the classroom I could try new things. Activities and ideas that I would have been afraid to try at home were at my fingertips here. This was a place for discovery.

Actually, that was the first thing Mrs. Edwards explained to us when we were all finally settled into our desks that exciting afternoon. Kindergarten, she said, was a place to learn. At school you were supposed to learn things, try out new stuff, ask questions. And it didn't take me long to realize that through my interactions with her and with the other children, I was going to learn a lot.

Well into the school year, after the rainy season had hit Arizona, I was walking home with my two best friends. The weatherman had said there might be a storm, but instead, the desert sun was blazing like July all over again. About two blocks from the school, we came upon something that made us all stop walking at once. Our chatter broke off as we smiled at each other with eager delight.

All the lawns in that block were kept green by sprinklers, and here was a house where an automatic system had goofed. The front lawn was entirely submerged under three inches of water!

"Let's hold hands and jump together!" Lonnie whispered.

"Wait a minute," I said, dropping to the sidewalk and pulling my galoshes out of my school bag. "I don't dare get my shoes wet."

"Who cares?" Carrie asked. "Come on!"

But I knew better than to let her talk me out of it. I tugged those galoshes over my shoes, and even though anticipation made me clumsy, I finally got them hooked. "On your mark!" I hollered, as we teetered, holding hands on the edge of the sidewalk.

"Get set!" Lonnie yelled. We all bent our knees in eagerness.

Carrie sucked in a deep breath. "Go!"

We jumped. We danced. We sang. And the water went up in a sun-catching rainbow spray all around us. Deliciously cool on that hot sunny afternoon, it splattered down on us like a private rainstorm.

Honk! Honk!

Lonnie and Carrie kept singing, but I froze.

Honk! Honnnnnnk! Daddy's truck was pulled up beside the opposite curb. Lonnie and Carrie quit dancing and were looking at me. I couldn't move. I just kept staring at Daddy and Mommy and Maria, who were staring back at me.

Mommy got out of the truck and led me across the street. She lifted me into the back. Nobody said anything until we were inside the house. Then Daddy gave me a very mean beating with a wooden spoon. The hitting seemed to go on forever. On and on. I lost count of the lickings. I lost track of everything, except my behind, which stung as if it were bleeding. When he finally finished, Daddy told me the beating was for "trespassing." Then, for being late, he added a "groundation period" on top of it. For two weeks I was to sit in the corner of my bedroom in my rocking chair. I could only leave that spot to go to school and to the bathroom, to eat my meals, and to sleep in my bed. During those two weeks, Mommy was never going to come into my room.

I could hardly sit. Curled over on my hip, I sobbed myself to sleep in the chair. Why had Mommy let Daddy hit me so hard? So very, very hard?

The next morning I met Lonnie and Carrie as they were walking to school. I told them what had happened to me and asked them what their punishments were. To my absolute amazement, Lonnie had escaped the event without even a scolding. Carrie had been given a warning always to come straight home after school and not to dilly-dally ever again.

"You mean your daddy didn't give you beatings?" I asked, stupefied. We were walking past the lawn where we'd danced the afternoon before. Just looking at all that damp green grass made me shudder.

"My daddy disciplines the boys, and my mother disciplines the girls," Carrie said in a matter-of-fact way.

"Discipline?" I asked. "What's that?"

"Oh, that just means we have to do some work. However bad we are, that's how hard the work is."

"Do you get disciplined, too?" I asked Lonnie.

"I dunno," Lonnie said, smiling her toothless grin. "My mommy yells a lot, and sometimes my daddy gives us spankings, but I never have to do work."

"What does he use?" I asked. "I mean, what does your daddy spank with?" I was thinking of spoons and hangers and straps and belts and wondering how Lonnie could be smiling about this.

"He uses his hand, silly. That's how you give spankings."

I was shocked.

Lonnie was still smiling. "Wanna hear a secret?"

"Yeah!" Carrie and I chorused.

"Well, when I'm in trouble, I just give my mom the 'silent treatment' . . . ."

"The what?"

"The 'silent treatment' . . . ." We were almost to the school, so we slowed our steps and Lonnie spoke in a whispery voice. "That's when you don't talk to anybody until you get what you want."

"Do they think you're real sad or something?" Carrie asked as the first bell sounded.

"I guess," Lonnie giggled. "You ought to try it, Elizabeth. Maybe you can get out of your groundation period."

I will, I thought, walking up the front steps and into class with my friends. I'll show Mommy.

When I walked through the back door after school, Mama looked up from her ironing with a smile, just like always. "Hello, 'Lizbeth. How was school?"

Ignoring her, I stiffened my back, put my nose in the air, and marched straight into my room.

As usual, Maria followed me, her mouth going like a speedboat. "What'd ya do today, Liz? What'd ya do?"

"Shhh!" I hissed. "I'm not talking tonight. I'm doing the 'silent treatment,' so go away."

Maria was disappointed. She looked at me for a long moment and then went back into the front room where she'd been watching cartoons.

Hours went by. I wondered how long this was going to take. I hummed to myself, carefully, quietly, so that no one could hear me. I imagined all the neat things I ought to be doing outside right then. I would have given up on the "treatment" working, but there was no chance to talk to anyone, anyway. So I just sat there alone, far away in my imagination.

Finally (it was after dark!), Daddy came in and sat down on my bed. His voice was low, but it wasn't kind or penitent. "Mom says she thinks you've been punished enough. She says you've been real quiet, and she thinks you're real sorry." He tipped my face up and looked into it. "Are you real sorry?"

I nodded.

"Okay, I'll let you off this time. But it had better never happen again."

I was getting ready to run away to freedom when he grabbed my arm.

"Do you hear me?"

I nodded again. "Yes, sir."

Daddy got up and stomped out of the room ahead of me.

As soon as he was gone, I raised my fist to the sky and silently gave a deafening cheer: Yes! It worked! ALL RIGHT!
