Michele R. Sorensen, Chainbreakers ( 1993)

5

Things should have been pretty good during that long, dry summer when I turned nine. We lived in a wonderful little house and, once the judge had banged his heavy gavel, we were officially a "real" family.

The school year seemed to have paid attention to the calendar but not to the seasons. Blazing desert sunshine held the days in its grip long after the rainy season had usually begun. My friends all wished they could still be hanging around the swimming pool, but I was grateful that school had come back into my life.

One Thursday afternoon I was busy with my usual after-school chores. As I carried the kitchen garbage out to the trash cans behind the garage, I began thinking about that day's math test and wondering whether or not I'd gotten the eighth question right. I dumped the trash and started back for the bathroom's wastebasket, walking around the toolshed built onto the back of the garage and toward the back door.

"Come in here," Daddy said to me from the doorway of the toolshed.

I followed him to where he sat down on his workbench, beneath the window. He picked up a magazine that was lying open on the jigsaw table.

"I hear you saw a special film at school."

"Yes," I said. Actually, we'd seen two that day, one in science and one in health class. The movie in science had been about volcanoes, showing hot, red lava pouring down mountainsides, knocking over trees, hissing and burning. The other film had been about the changes girls' bodies make as they become young women. We'd all been giggling and teasing about who would be a late bloomer. At nine those things are still a few years off, which is pretty much the same as forever.

"Well, I thought we should discuss it." Daddy's voice had a tone I'd never heard before; there was a look in his eyes I wasn't familiar with.

Something inside me clicked, and I began to feel very uneasy—not just a little uneasy, but awfully, sickeningly uneasy. A voice inside me whispered, "Run!"

What was I to run from? Where was I to go?

"As you go through puberty, Elizabeth, not only will you change on the outside but you will be changing on the inside."

Now I knew which filmstrip he meant. The room seemed to be shrinking in size. Suddenly it felt dark. Fear washed over me in a wave. How could I run? I was trapped.

"You've probably noticed those changes already." He put his hand on my arm and tried to lock my eyes with his. "The changes, Elizabeth? They're called hormones. You've probably noticed them already."

My mind was dull. I couldn't—I didn't want to—understand what he was talking about.

"Hormones." He repeated the word, and I thought it sounded nasty. "Do you know what I mean?" He squeezed my arm tighter.

"No."

"Well, let me help you." He let go of my arm and flipped through the magazine. Stopping, he held it up for me to look.

It was a naked man.

I glanced away. Why was he showing me this? The boys saw pictures like that in their health class, I supposed, but all we saw was a film on girls becoming young women. They wouldn't have divided us if we were supposed to see each other's stuff.

"How does that picture make your body feel?"

My heart was pounding. I was sure I was going to throw up. Why couldn't I just disappear or waste away? What should I say? I was afraid to make him angry. Where was Mom? Where was Maria?

His question never fully registered in my mind. Instead of answering, I heard myself spit out the words, "I DON'T WANT TO TALK ABOUT THESE THINGS WITH YOU!"

"Well, maybe not yet," he chuckled, "but you'd better think about it." When he chuckled, I felt embarrassed and dirty. "Hormones don't go away." He placed the magazine on the bench in front of me and walked out of the shed.

I just stood there, frozen in my shoes. Numb and cold.

/ / / / /

Ben was smiling at me patiently. There was a compassionate light in his eyes.

I looked away with a sinking feeling. What if he knows?

Although it was awful, my past isn't a locked secret. Yet I'd tried to put it behind me long ago. When I think of myself, I don't immediately think victim of abuse. There was a time when that was the biggest part of my identity. Now I see myself first as Elizabeth: wife, mother, friend, Relief Society worker, PTA room parent, and so on.

I didn't want Ben to think of me as someone who needed his pity. I didn't want him to see me as a woman who had been soiled long ago, dirtied with such a deep, dark stain that she might never quite be emotionally ironed out. What I wanted was his continued friendship, understanding, and respect.

Drawing a deep breath, I looked back again at my friend.

There was nothing to worry about. Maybe it came from something in his casual dress and attitude, but it seemed to be deeper than his manner, something more. He was unpretentious. He knew who he was, and he accepted and liked me for who I was, too.

Suddenly I realized that if he guessed, it was okay. I didn't mind if he knew about my struggles. He could be trusted. There are some people worth trusting. Ben was one of them, and so was Darren.

If only I'd known them twenty years ago.

/ / / / /

I was raking grass clippings in our backyard. Lawn cleanup was a standard item on my list of chores, and I was pretty good at it. Not many nine-year-old girls can rake swiftly, aggressively, and pretend to be riding their bike at the same time.

"Elizabeth."

I jumped. Maybe I wasn't as clever as I thought.

"Come in here a minute," Daddy said.

After knocking the clippings from the tines of my rake, I propped it against the little eucalyptus tree Daddy had recently planted and followed him into the toolshed. I hadn't been in there since the last time he'd asked me to come in, and I was deeply relieved as he walked past his workbench toward the other side of the low, slanting room.

The toolshed had been one of our house's big selling points for Daddy. Bigger than most other sheds, it stretched across the entire width of the two-car garage. He led me to where his athletic equipment was organized on some shelves and hooks against the far wall. There, shoved back into a dark corner, was a big metal tool chest.

Pushing down hard on the top, he flipped the latch open with his thumb. He burrowed into the chest, tossing out a pair of jumper cables, some bungee cords, a jack, and a wrench. With a grunt of satisfaction, Daddy pulled out a stack of magazines and dropped them into my arms.

"Hold these," he commanded in a businesslike way.

As he began stuffing things back into the chest, I looked down at the load in my arms. The picture of a near-naked woman leaped up at me from the front cover.

My stomach lurched, and I mentally dropped the stack as if it were on fire. But in reality my arms could not move. Please, not again, I silently pleaded.

Run, the little voice inside me insisted. Run!

Where? Where could I run? How could I get away from Daddy when Mama and Maria were gone?

"Maybe this will give you an idea of what the new you is going to look like," Daddy said, leaning over me. I could feel his breath hot on my cheek and the scent of his cologne made me queasy. But he didn't notice. He seemed to think he had important knowledge that I was secretly dying for him to share. "We also need to finish discussing what we started the other day. You need to get in touch with your feelings so you will understand them. If you don't understand them, you can't learn to handle them."

That new, disgusting tone of voice and the ugly, nasty look had completely taken over his face. He chuckled again as he added, "And hormones can be difficult to handle."

As he talked, Daddy thumbed through the magazine, occasionally stopping to stare at the naked bodies, trying to get me to look at them, too. When he reached the centerfold, he kicked the lid of the tool chest shut and spread the picture out on top. "You see, Frecklie-frog" (he said that nickname as if it would endear him to me), "your hormones control the feelings you get whenever you're around someone of the opposite sex."

Quickly he grabbed another magazine and thumbed through it to a picture of a naked man. He put that picture next to the one of the naked woman.

The same revulsion I'd felt before flooded over me in overwhelming waves. I was trapped again. Daddy kept on asking questions and making me answer. He was standing right behind me now and pressing me against the tool chest, his fingers digging deep into my shoulders.

I couldn't get away. Hot, humiliated tears stung my eyes.

The little voice inside me was still urging me, Run! Run! Run now! it screamed.

As he began to move his hands down from my shoulders, he loosened his grip ever so slightly. That was when I twisted away.

"You're gross!" I shouted as I ran. I ran all the way to my bedroom and slammed the door. I didn't dare to look back; I just slumped down on the edge of my bed.

Don't come in, don't come in! my heart pleaded. How I wished my door locked from the inside.

Then, suddenly, terror engulfed me as I heard the back door slam. My heart stopped—I couldn't breathe as his footsteps came up the stairs and down the hall. My skin crawled. I bit my lip. He opened a door, but it wasn't mine, It was his, across the hall.

I drew a deep breath as another flood of nausea washed over me. Now I was in trouble for sure. He would be mad. I should never have yelled at him.

What could I do? Sitting there, waiting for what might happen, was impossible. I'd better hurry and do my chores again, make sure each one was perfect. He'd be watching for me to make a mistake, so he could punish me good.

Why doesn't Mama come home? I wondered as I tiptoed to my bedroom door. I swallowed hard, pushing aside the fear of what might happen when I left my room.

As I swung my door open, the door across the hall began to open, too. I hurried, but I got only as far as the top of the stairs.

"Elizabeth."

My heart jumped, hammered, stuck in my throat. "Yes, sir?" I said, turning around. He was standing there, right in front of me—naked.

I looked down at the varnished floorboards beneath my feet. That was the first time I'd ever seen my Daddy without his clothes on.

"Where are you going?"

"I . . . I'm going t . . . t' do m-m-my chores," I answered, my eyes locked on the parallel boards.

"All right." He turned and went back into his room, closing the door behind him.

I thought I was going to pass out right there, but my feet went racing away, down the stairs. What was he trying to do? The question whirled through my mind, too big for me to stifle. How can I get this to stop?

Later that evening, Daddy drove out to the stables to care for his horses. As soon as he was gone, I told my mother everything that had happened, in detail.

She showed about as much emotion as a brick wall. "I'm sorry," Mom said at last. "Don't worry about it," she added without any inflection in her voice. "I'll talk to him."

I was amazed. She didn't seem to care at all—and I'd expected her to be furious. Didn't Mom believe me? She'd always trusted me before. Please . . . please, she's GOT to believe me!

/ / / / /

"There you are, Liz!" Darren said, bursting happily through the foyer's glass doors. "Hurry—the Cougars are leading the Rams in triple overtime. We can still catch the—" He stopped short, entirely forgetting his enthusiasm for the basketball game in his surprise at seeing our longtime friend.

"Well, hullo, Doc," he grinned, reaching out his hand.

"How's it goin'?" Ben answered, clasping my husband's hand heartily. "So they're beating the Rams, are they?"

"Yeah, it's a close fight. Colorado State hung onto a two-point lead most of the fourth quarter," Darren explained. "But BYU will pull it off, of course," he razzed, knowing our friend was a long-time CSU fan.

"Close ones make the best games," Ben grinned.

They went on laughing lightheartedly about a rivalry which, at that moment, didn't matter at all to me. There was one answer I wanted, one thing I'd been eager to ask but didn't know how.

As a physician and as a bishop Ben was obviously very familiar with the problems of abuse. Was it common for mothers to react the way mine had? Why? I'd drawn my own conclusions long ago, but I wanted very much to hear what he'd say.
