Michele R. Sorensen, Chainbreakers ( 1993)

6

Finally, I could stand it no longer. Ben was telling Darren that he knew Doug Larsen, the Littleton boy who'd made it big with the Colorado State basketball team. I waited only for enough of a pause to be polite.

"Darren," I jumped in. "Did you know Ben is thinking of writing a book?"

"About Doug Larsen?"

"No," I said, swatting him playfully, but my voice was serious. "No, he wants to write something that will help adult survivors of abuse—particularly sexual abuse."

Darren's teasing stopped instantly. A surprised look crossed his face before he smiled. "What a worthwhile project, Ben," he said. Then he added carefully, "And a very much-needed one."

"Yes," Ben answered. "A lot of secular books have been written, but there's a need for more gospel light to be shed on this problem."

"What would you say to LDS people that's different from what therapists say in general?" Darren asked, the Cougars and Rams entirely forgotten.

"Many things are unique about an LDS situation," Ben began, leaning back against the wall and placing the scriptures and organizer he'd been holding on a table nearby. "But one of the most obvious and significant things is the problem of trying to cope if the perpetrator is a priesthood holder. Just think what that can do to someone's testimony."

You're not kidding! I thought. I've always felt that unworthy, insincere priesthood holders who masquerade as good guys must be the worst possible hypocrites. And the sin Christ abhorred most was hypocrisy.

"Surely everyone knows the Church doesn't condone abuse of any kind," Darren said. I could tell he was being cautious: he didn't know how much I'd told Ben about myself. Yet he was as curious about the book as I was. "In general conference President Hinckley read from a letter he'd received, asking him to 'remind the brethren that the physical and verbal abuse of women is INEXCUSABLE, NEVER ACCEPTABLE, . . . . especially and particularly despicable if the abuser is a priesthood holder.' " [^1]

"Right," Ben said. "But the problem with abuse is that it's almost always a hidden thing. There are times when everyone on the outside thinks the perpetrator is especially nice."

I knew that was true. I remembered when religion first entered my life because with it came the absolutely shocking realization that people who met my dad liked him. People really liked him!

/ / / / /

Right across the street from our house was the library. But there was something far more important about that old adobe building than the books and records inside. What mattered were the lawns.

All the kids in the neighborhood played on those lawns. The grass was thick in the summer, and the sprinklers were wonderfully cool. The palm and date trees posed a climbing challenge, and the orange trees had the sweetest scent and coolest shade. During the rainy season, the library's parking lot was an ocean of puddles, waiting for stick ships and splashing sea monsters and muddy dams. And best of all, the head librarian was a friendly lady, the classic cookie-baking grandma, who didn't mind our happy noise as long as it stayed outside.

One day during the summer I turned ten, Maria's best friend, Angel, called to say that the sprinklers were going. All the kids were putting on their swimsuits and meeting at the library. Would we like to come?

Of course! Mom gave permission, and we excitedly got out our brand-new suits. We had recently been to the store, and I had chosen a great-looking bikini. I'd never had a bikini before, but Maria liked it so much we decided to be "twinners." She'd gotten one exactly like mine.

"Everyone's going to love our new suits," she giggled.

"They'll positively drool," I grinned as I tied back my hair.

Mom met us in the front room. "Here you go, girls," she said, holding out two old towels. "Don't lose them."

"We won't!" I hollered over my shoulder as we ran out the door.

Searing desert sun blazed down on us, and the wet splashy grass beckoned. All the boys and girls from around the neighborhood were running, laughing, happily screaming. We played several variations of tag, making up the rules as we went. Pretty soon I saw Maria and Angel slip over to the warm sidewalk to take a break. They lay down side by side, heads together.

Suddenly I heard Maria crying. Angel was leaving, and a bunch of other girls were trailing behind her. I ran to Maria.

"It's all your fault!" she growled. "Everybody hates me now."

"What'd I do?"

"You picked out this suit," she screamed in my face and pointed at her bikini. "You told me it was the 'in' thing!"

"It is," I answered, shocked. "The lady at the store said so."

Maria wasn't yelling any more. She just flopped back down on the sidewalk and buried her face in her towel. What a dumb thing to make my sister cry about! Angel was so rude. I began to seethe inwardly. Sometimes, Angel appeared to get pleasure from hurting other people's feelings. This time, I decided, she wasn't going to hurt my sister and get away so easily.

I ran as fast as I could down the sidewalk. In my mind, I rehearsed just what I would say. I would be sure to use a cussword or two; that would scare her a little.

"Wait up!" I hollered.

Angel did.

What a dummy! I chortled inwardly.

"Where the heck do you get off hurting my sister's feelings like that?" I yelled as I caught up with her. "Who do you think you are?"

Angel looked up at me with stubborn eyes. Her voice came right back, quick and sharp. "I'm a baptized Mormon, and we don't wear bad things like that." She gestured at my swimsuit. "We're going to heaven, and you're not."

"Am too!" I shouted.

"You can't! You haven't been baptized." Angel's face was smug as she spun away on her heel and went off with her friends.

I turned around slowly, my bare feet slapping loudly against the cement as I walked back to Maria. The anger I'd been feeling had suddenly melted into bewilderment. What on earth was she talking about?

When I put my hand on Maria's shoulder, she stood up. We walked home wordlessly. Why would our friends say such things?

Later that afternoon Maria asked Mom, "What is baptized?"

Mom sat down with us and answered our question the best she could. But I wasn't satisfied. Everything she said led to another question. And I guessed that our questions were too hard for Mom because she stopped right in the middle of one and went into her bedroom. When she came back, she handed me a tiny book. It was covered with white leather, and in small gold letters across the top were the words New Testament.

"You girls read this, and you'll find the answers," she said.

I tried hard to read that book. Long after Maria gave up, I was still trying. In fact, I started over several times during the next few weeks. But the words were so funny and strange that I wasn't sure what I'd read from one paragraph to the next.

The little white book frustrated me until I finally gave it back to my mother. "That's the weirdest thing I've ever seen," I said, slipping it onto the counter beside her. I was at the top of my class in reading, but I'd never seen anything as strange as this. "What crazy fool wrote it, anyway?"

Mom was great. She explained that the people who knew Jesus and talked with Him wrote down the things He said and did. That was a long time ago, so the words were old-fashioned.

"How about if I take you and Maria to the church where I went when I was a little girl? I haven't been to mass or gone to confession in nearly thirty years," she mused, mostly to herself. Then, turning back to me, she added, "But you might find some answers there."

So, bright and early Sunday morning, Maria and I put on our best dresses. Mama did our hair extra pretty, spraying some of her very own perfume on us. Then, like every other time we were about to go anywhere, she sat us down to rehearse our manners.

"When we get to the church, follow closely behind me," she instructed firmly. "Do exactly what I do. Don't ever talk above your softest whisper. It isn't proper to speak in church, and it makes the little old ladies very upset." Mom's eyes told us that it was important to do everything exactly right, so we took her instructions seriously.

This was exciting! I'd never been in a church before. But I was a little nervous, too. What if I goofed up?

Anticipation tickled my insides as we filed out the back door and went across to the far stall in the garage, where the car Mom was allowed to drive was parked. She hadn't been driving very long. Although we'd always had two cars in the driveway, she didn't use them much.

"Now be sure there isn't any dirt on your shoes," Mama said. "Daddy has a buyer who wants to look at the car this afternoon."

Daddy liked to buy cars, and he liked to sell them, too. He babied his cars so much that when he sold them, he always made money. This Ford Bronco had lots of rules, and not only for passengers. Now that Mom had a license, she could never go anywhere without first hearing the rules on driving, too.

Before long, Mom pulled up in front of a small stucco church right in the middle of town. At the front was a pair of giant, wooden doors that were rounded at the top, and there were bells ringing in the tower. We parked and walked quickly into the cool, spicy-smelling dimness. Just inside the heavy doors we found a small entryway with a tiny desk and hooks for hanging coats. Mom signed all our names in a fancy book, and when she straightened up, I took an eager step forward. We were finally going in!

"Wait a second," she whispered, catching at my arm. She pulled three lacy hankies from her purse. "Put these on your heads carefully. You must keep your head covered while you're inside the sanctuary."

Maria and I quickly did as we were told.

"Now," she said, "you're ready for follow-the-leader."

My eyes raced a hundred miles an hour as we stepped through the second doors into the big room. My breath caught at the beauty—this was prettier than I'd ever imagined.

Mom yanked me by the hand. "You've got to do as I do," she whispered in my ear.

Mom moved her hand in a sort of circular motion from her head to her shoulders and then curtsied, so Maria and I bobbed up and down, too. Then Mom began walking up the aisle. I wished she would slow down for just one second. I wanted to look around. But she walked forward steadily and then turned sideways into one of the pews. There was a stool pushed under the bench in front of us, and she pulled it out for herself, so we did the same with the one closest to us. Mom knelt down and tugged at our dresses, signaling for us to follow. She pulled a round string of beads from her purse, and Maria immediately asked, "O-o-oh, Mama! Where'd you get that pretty necklace?"

"Sh-h-h-h!" Mama hushed. "It's my rosary. Now, tell the Heavenly Father 'thank you' for letting you come and whatever else you want to thank Him for. Then sit down on the bench—quietly."

I said my thank yous at record speed before scooting up on my seat to look around. On both sides of the sanctuary were tall, colored windows with sunlight streaming through them. The pretty glass formed bright pictures of men in long robes, and there were words printed below each window, but I was too far away to read them. Ahead of us was a platform with more pews and what Mom called an altar topped by tall, thin candles. On each side of the platform was a pulpit. A lady came in from a door behind one of the pulpits, walked to the organ, and began playing softly. Behind the altar was a giant picture window of Mary holding the baby Jesus, surrounded by tiny blue flowers and streaming rays of gold.

Mom leaned over and whispered, "The windows are beautiful, aren't they, Liz?"

I nodded.

"They're stained glass," she added. "Each little piece was cut by hand." Then she suddenly whispered, "Shhhhh! Get ready—it's time to start follow-the-leader again."

I couldn't believe my eyes. In through the back door came a bunch of boys singing and wearing long white robes that looked like dresses. Behind them was a man in a fancier robe of white and black, with a satin muffler hanging around his neck.

When we sang we stood up, when we prayed we knelt down, and in between we sat and listened. I did my best to stick with the group in standing and kneeling and sitting, but I didn't do such a good job of understanding what the man in the robe was saying. There were too many pretty things to look at.

"It's time for communion," Mama whispered. "You haven't been baptized, so fold your hands this way."

When she saw we were ready, she walked forward to the altar. She ate a piece of cracker and drank some red stuff. The man in the robe drew a cross over my head and Maria's with his thumb. Then he said something—I couldn't understand what—and we were off to Sunday School.

My teacher was real pretty and very nice. She told us a flannelboard story about Jesus feeding a big crowd of people, and she let us color. Maria thought it was fun, too.

After that, Mom came and took us to another room where everyone was eating donuts and drinking coffee. She sat us down with a napkin on our laps and sugary, jelly-filled donuts in our hands. "Wait right here for a minute," she said. "I'm going to go talk to Father Demas." She went over to the man who had been wearing the robe earlier, and then he walked with her toward us.

"Hello, girls. Your mother says you want to be baptized."

I nodded my head and swallowed the bite that was in my mouth. "Yes, sir."

Maria gulped and nodded her head, too.

"Good," the father said, smiling at our mother. "We'll see you Wednesday."

Wow! I thought. That was easy. Now we'll be baptized. Angel can't ever say Maria and I aren't going to heaven again.

Wednesday came quickly, and Mom had made some special arrangements. A couple she knew from her job at the school cafeteria met us in the entryway. They were going to be our godparents. Daddy came, too. He was smiling and shaking hands with everybody. Mom's friend was interested in buying Daddy's car, so they were busy talking from the start.

After we sat down, the father stood behind one of the pulpits. He had a pitcher of water that he said a prayer over. Then he asked me to join him, so I walked up the aisle with the ruffles on my best dress swishing around my legs and my shoes quietly thumping against the red, red carpet.

The father took the pitcher and poured it into a little sink beside the pulpit. Then he dipped his fingers in the holy water and sprinkled some of it on my head. "I baptize you in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost."

After that, he called Maria forward and did exactly the same thing to her. "Elizabeth and Maria," the father said, "you are clean and pure now. All your sins have been washed away through the blood of Christ Jesus."

That was all. Now we were baptized, and we were every bit as good as anyone else. Funny, though, I didn't really feel any different.

NOTE

---
Notas:
[^1] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Our Solemn Responsibilities," Ensign, Nov. 1991, p. 50.
