Michele R. Sorensen, Chainbreakers ( 1993)

7

I wasted no time telling Angel and the others that Maria and I had been baptized. Not only that, but I'd already memorized some prayers and songs. I even knew that Father Demas's colored mufflers had special meanings, such as green for Easter. Surely our friends would be nicer to us now.

"You got sprinkled?" Angel and her friends snickered. "That doesn't mean a thing."

"Huh?"

"Well," she added snidely, "your baptism didn't count. That man did it wrong. It doesn't mean anything."

Maria and I were confused, but we weren't brave enough to ask Mommy any more about it. Daddy had started going to a brick church two blocks down the street (where he'd gone as a boy), and Mommy was taking us to the little stucco church with the bells. They'd been having a lot of arguments about who was right and what was true. There was a lot of yelling going on at our house.

And that was the thing that confused me the most. I was seeing a new side of Daddy since he had started going to church. We'd been living here for two years, but none of these people had ever come to visit. Now the whole neighborhood seemed to like him, and two men had even been coming over every month to see him.

Couldn't any of these people tell how awful he really was? But then again, how could they? He was so nice to them; he smiled and laughed a lot. But I knew, just as when we'd moved into our new house and when he'd adopted us, that nothing about our family had really changed.

Take report card time, for example. No matter how hard Maria and I tried, we were never once able to make that day a good one.

Daddy expected perfection. He told us so lots of times. He said there was absolutely no way he was going to let us make the same mistakes he did. He had quit school when he was a teenager and then he'd gone back to finish years later. Why would I want to do that? I remembered his finishing too well.

It hadn't been long after he and Mama had gone away to Nevada. A couple of nights a week, for a very long time, we drove with Daddy to the community college. He went inside while Mom and Maria and I sat in the car or on the grass for hours, waiting until he came out again. Mama read us stories, and we sang songs with the radio. I still don't know why we had to go with him, but I remember that when he got his high school diploma, he didn't take us along.

So why would he think that because he had to finish school as an adult, we'd want to do it, too? My grades were always A's and B's. Maria had a lot harder time; she didn't seem to be able to remember anything for very long. But her teachers hadn't been holding her back, and she promised she would never drop out.

/ / / / /

One night during parent-teacher conferences, Mommy and Daddy saw the report cards before we did. I wished they would get home. The knot in my stomach was killing me, and Maria had been in the bathroom throwing up. She knew her grades weren't going to be good, and I could tell it, too, just by looking at her. Her face was pale, and her dark eyes frowned with a frightened look.

When the car pulled into the driveway and the door slammed, Maria jumped. Slamming doors were not a good sign. Before Mama and Daddy even came in, we went into the front room and sat down quietly on the sofa.

Report card day was one of the few times we ever got to go in the front room because it was a place for company. The entire room had been remodeled and carefully decorated in a southwestern style. Visitors always commented on the authentic Navajo blankets, earthen pottery, handwoven baskets, sand paintings, and the extra-big God's-eye hanging above our step-down fireplace.

Daddy came in and found us waiting. I'm the oldest, so I got interrogated first. "You have two B's on your report card this time, Elizabeth." His voice was stern and his gray eyes flashed.

I knew better than to say anything besides "Yes, sir."

"Your cousin Holly always gets straight A's!" he yelled.

Just once I'd like proof! I thought, but I bit my tongue.

"And here, under 'teacher's comments,' there's a section to evaluate if you use your time wisely. Mrs. Goebel has written: 'Usually, but not always.' " He paused just long enough to take a breath. "One week in your room! Time is valuable; stop wasting it, Elizabeth Lynn Hughes."

I knew I was slow once in a while with my work. Sometimes I daydreamed, but whenever I was concentrating I could always do a real good job. Didn't daydreams happen to everyone? They were sure a lot better than nightmares—and I had my share of those, too.

Daddy was still reading aloud from the "teacher's comments" section: "She's a wonderful student, a hard worker. If she could learn to keep her mouth shut, she'd be perfect."

Keep her mouth shut? Mrs. Goebel never said anything like that to me. I enjoyed visiting with my friends, but I had never gotten in trouble for talking too much. I'd never been disciplined in class—I'd have died of embarrassment first. But every time there was a parent-teacher conference, Daddy said that I opened my big mouth too much. I wished I could see that report card—I had a feeling he was lying.

"If you don't learn to keep your mouth shut, I'm going to cut out your tongue!" Daddy yelled. "Two weeks in your room for that, and if you make a peep, I'll add another."

Next came the hard part: Maria's review. If only I could leave; I hated watching this. Daddy always started by asking her why she got this C or that D. Maria always answered, "I don't know."

I sat there wishing Maria would come up with some kind of new response besides "I don't know." Those words really ticked Daddy off bad. Years later I learned that Maria answered that way because it was the truth. She had ADD, attention deficit disorder. But no one understood ADD when she was little. Daddy seemed convinced she was stupid and lazy.

The third time she said "I don't know," Daddy punched her squarely in the mouth with his closed fist. "Well," he drawled coolly, "I don't know why I just did that, either."

Before Daddy finished, Maria had been punched several more times. Her face was already swelling around the nose and eyes. I couldn't keep from crying, and the tears rushed down my cheeks. I felt responsible somehow. We'd worked together on her homework—we'd worked hard. I didn't know what had gone wrong.

"Get out of my sight!" Daddy raged. "You two make me sick. I'm tired of you being an embarrassment to this family!"

I grabbed Maria, and we ran to our room. We got undressed and crawled into bed without even turning on a light. I could hear her crying in the silence, choking on the sobs, trying not to make a sound Daddy might hear. After the television had been turned on in the front room, I scooted to her side of the bed and curled my arms around her shoulders.

Neither of us could go to sleep for a long time. Maria was in a lot of pain. Inside, I was, too. Tomorrow began the "groundation period." Standing and staring at a wall for two weeks was going to be very hard for me. But poor Maria! She would have to stand in her corner until midterms, and then she might get to come out only if her progress reports were extra good.

Whether we slept or not, morning always came. Maria's face was purplish and swollen. "Wear this yellow dress," I told her. "It doesn't show your face as much."

Maria just looked at me. How can your dress hide your face?

On the way to school, we made a plan to try out at dinnertime. And that evening, when chores were finished and everyone was at the table, things started off like normal.

Daddy was working on Maria between bites. Mealtimes had become very difficult. How could she eat when she was scared stiff trying to remember her times tables? I knew Maria couldn't multiply when the room was so quiet and when she couldn't use her fingers.

"Nine times seven is sixty-three, you dumb retard!" Daddy yelled.

Maria is never going to remember that one, I thought. I could see she was so frightened her mind had gone blank.

But I just kept eating as fast as I could without breaking any dinnertime rules. If I didn't clean my plate, Daddy would get suspicious. That might ruin our plan, so I kept shoveling the mashed potatoes in as fast as I could. Suddenly I heard a smack followed by a clink.

Daddy had thrown his fork at Maria. "Stop fidgeting!" he shouted.

I quickly shoved the last piece of pork chop into my mouth, wiped my face with my napkin, and put my hands in my lap.

"Four times six," Daddy said.

With my hands down where only Maria could see them, I held up two fingers, then closed my fist, then four fingers.

"Twenty-four," Maria answered, but she didn't lift her head to look at him. I didn't blame her for not wanting to look at Daddy, but I wished she'd look up a little, at least as far as her plate, so he wouldn't figure us out.

When Daddy was through eating, he pushed away from the table and spoke smugly. "Let's see how many you can forget by tomorrow night."

As soon as he was gone, Mom took a load of dishes to the sink.

"We did it!" I whispered, smiling at Maria.

My sister looked back at me with eyes full of hate.

"What's wrong?"

"You." Maria tried to force down the last of her food so she wouldn't get into even more trouble. "You think you're so smart."

I didn't understand, but it was better having Maria cross with me than having Daddy mad every second at the dinner table. So I kept on helping her for several months.

One day I could stand the hypocrisy no longer. Though I didn't know that big word, I had a working knowledge of what being two-faced meant. Some nights Daddy put on a grin and headed out to church. They'd made him a deacon in the church down the road, and it seemed to me that he put one face on when he went out the door, but he took it off and put on his old face again when he came back.

He was gone one evening, doing something with his friends at church, and my mother was quietly sitting by the TV, mending.

"Mom?" I began snuggling up next to her. "Why is Daddy so different when other people are around? Why do people like him? Can't they see what he's really like?"

My mother was very intent on her sewing. She had a puzzled look on her face, but she didn't register much emotion. "Your daddy is a very outgoing person," she answered slowly. "He . . . he always has been." She cut a new piece of thread, licked the end, and squinted as she struggled to push it through the eye of the needle. "He has lots of friends. He's fun to be around. People just . . . like him."

Her answer was so matter-of-fact that I was amazed. Maybe I didn't know this guy at all.

Right then, Daddy came in the front door. I took one look. No, I knew him. I knew him too well.

"Did you pick up the litter in the yard?" he snarled angrily, hanging his jacket in the closet.

"Yes," I replied. "I did."

I felt as if Daddy were shooting daggers at me, millions of them, racing, screaming, piercing the air. "Liar!" he growled. "I just checked, and there's a ketchup squeezie lying right in the middle of our front sidewalk."

"But I did pick them up. It was the first job I did after school. Wasn't it, Mom?" I asked, turning around. Mom had put away her sewing and gone downstairs to the laundry room.

"Liar." The word hissed out of his mouth again.

It wasn't a new word. I was so sick of being called a liar that I thought I might explode. "I . . . picked . . . up . . . the papers . . . three . . . or four . . . hours . . . ago." I bit the words out slowly, making each one clear, even though they were coming through my teeth.

"You picked up the papers?" he asked again, sarcastically.

"Yes." There was a time when I would have immediately said I hadn't done that job yet and then run and done it again. But as of this minute, those days were past. From now on, I vowed, once I'd done a job, I'd done it. I was not going to keep repeating my work just to please this monster.

"There is a ketchup packet in the middle of the sidewalk, right?" he asked.

"I guess so," I answered carefully, not wanting to commit myself to anything but the fact that I'd done that job already.

Then Daddy drew the most irrational conclusion I'd ever heard in my life. "If there is anything on the sidewalk, then the trash in our yard hasn't been picked up yet today."

"But . . . but people walking by—"

"No buts! If you'd picked up the trash, it wouldn't be there," he shouted. "Now go pick it up." He flung the door open for me to walk out. As I stepped past him, Daddy hissed softly, "You're grounded again for lying. Maybe a month will teach you honesty." He slammed the door behind me.

I plodded down the steps and then down our front walk to the sidewalk that paralleled the road. I'd had it. I was so sick of his twisting and arranging everything to make me look bad. I was sick to death of the wall and of chores and of his moodiness. I was sick of name-calling and hatred.

"Fifteen million people, especially kids, walk down this sidewalk every day," I muttered to myself as I bent over and picked up the plastic ketchup container. Didn't Daddy ever stop to think that less than a block away were Joey's Gas and Goodies and Benson's Laundry and around the corner was a Daylight Donut? This ketchup might have been dropped two seconds before he came home. Or a dog might have carried it over from the neighbor's yard. I hated all the inconsiderate slobs who dropped their candy wrappers and donut bags.

Sitting down on the front steps, I squished the red ketchup back and forth inside its plastic package, back and forth, harder and harder. I was full of hate . . . and I hated the hate. There was only one way I could think of to get rid of it, and that was to run away from it. All this hate was too big to fight, too big to overcome.

I stood up and sucked in a very deep breath of hot, dry twilight air. I would run away, but it wouldn't be just yet. He would be watching me now—I couldn't get far enough away—but the right moment would come if I watched carefully.

Putting my hand on the doorknob, I paused and looked back over my shoulder. No, the yard was spotless. There wasn't another piece of trash or a broken stick anywhere. Then I went inside, threw away the crumpled ketchup squeezie, and walked to my wall.
