Michele R. Sorensen, Chainbreakers ( 1993)

8

I stood with my nose in the corner for a very long time. I imagined I was the size of an ant, climbing up the textured wall the way a mountain climber struggles up a sheer cliff. Then I imagined I was a mouse who had been shrunk by a mad scientist. I was right there on the wall, but no one could see me. Intently, I tried creeping around the grooves as if they were a maze. And just whenever I thought I'd found a way to the top, I always hit a dead end.

"Wake up," Daddy said, thumping me on the back of the head. "Did you hear me?"

"No, sir."

"I said we're leaving. Your mother and I are going to feed the horses. Don't move from this spot, or I'll beat you to a bloody pulp. Do you hear me?"

"Yes, sir," I responded, but my mind silently answered, You THINK! You'll never beat me again!

Even before he slammed the back door and stomped down the steps, I'd conjured up a plan. "Maria," I whispered.

The car's engine whined as Daddy backed out of the driveway. "Maria!"

"What?" she answered from her corner, without turning her head.

"I'm going to run away. Do you want to come?"

Maria turned and shrieked in a whisper, "You what?" "You heard me! Are you coming or not?"

She listened a minute to be sure she couldn't hear the car's engine anymore. Then she yelled, "You're nuts!"

"No," I said earnestly. "I'm just tired beyond believing. We've got to try something new. I don't want to spend the rest of my life with my nose in this corner."

"Where are you going?" she asked, and I could see both terror and hope in her eyes.

"I won't tell unless you're with me. I don't want you blabbing to Daddy and Mom."

"Okay . . . I'll come."

I hugged her. Neither of us really wanted to be alone. "Grab your shoes, and we're out of this pit. I'll tell you more as we go."

While we ran down the alley, cut through a dry, abandoned yard, and took another street, I told Maria my plan. "I have this new friend named Andy." Pant, pant, pant. "She's great"—pant— "really tops. . . . And she lives pretty far away." A car turned onto the street, its headlights crashing around the corner. I pulled Maria down, and we crouched next to some cactus and boulder landscaping. Then, as we got back on our feet, I added the real insurance: "Dad doesn't know her, and he doesn't know where she lives."

When we reached the right house, we stopped to catch our breath. Maria's brown eyes were wide in the darkness. "It's okay, Maria," I said. "Her dad sells stuff, so he travels a lot, and her mother's super nice." Maria wasn't convinced. I didn't want her to start crying now. "Andy is great. She has a trampoline in her backyard and a big trunk full of her great-grandmother's dresses that she can play in. You'll love her house." Then, without giving Maria another moment to hesitate, I reached up and rang the bell.

As if she knew how desperately I wanted her to, Andy opened the door. "L-Liz?" she stammered in surprise. "H-H-Hi!"

"Hi, Andy," I said, trying to look as if being out alone after dark was a real natural thing. "This is my sister, Maria."

"Mom," Andy called. "A friend of mine from school and her sister are here. Can they come in?"

"Sure."

"Let's go to your room. We have to talk," I whispered to Andy as we hurried in the door. I had to make sure she understood that we weren't running away from the events of today. We were running away from years of this. Since I was four, every day had been filled with fear, and the really big blowups were coming more and more often. Soon people weren't going to believe our bruises had come from doorknobs and cupboard handles. I spoke so quickly, so desperately, that Andy never even had a chance to say a word. Then, realizing how I'd rambled, I stopped short and looked into her eyes.

They were filled with shock. "How can I ask my parents to help you?" she moaned sadly. "I'm not sure they'll believe me."

A wave of desperation washed over me, and I thought I might drown. Maria was crying. "Please, Andy. Oh, please . . . please try. We'll leave quickly if your mom says no. We'll find help somewhere else. But we can't go back—he said he'd beat us to a pulp if we left the wall, and he really will."

I think Andy could feel our despair, our hopeless fear. She thought about it for a long time and then drew a deep breath. "Here goes nothin'."

As soon as Andy went out of the room, Maria slid across the bed until she was beside me. "What if her mom calls Daddy?" she whispered.

The thought sent an electric surge of fear racing to my fingers and toes. How could I have been such an idiot? I'd never thought of that. I'd handled everything all wrong. "We'll just have to hope she doesn't," I told Maria, trying to sound optimistic. Andy would have let us play with her things, I knew, but Maria and I just sat on the bed, holding hands.

I noticed that Andy had taped up posters and pictures of friends all over the place. I wondered what I would do if I ever had the chance to make my room the way I wanted it. But I didn't wonder long—unless a miracle happened, that question was pointless.

"You're safe for now," Andy said, walking back into the room with an enormous grin. "My dad gets home from a trip to Phoenix later tonight, though, and it all depends on what he says."

Maria and I sat and stared at her. Eventually, I tried to pull up a smile from my stomach.

"Come on," Andy said, grinning again. "There's nothing else we can do. Let's have a little fun until we see what happens. Have I ever shown you the opera fan and tiara my great-grandmother had?"

Like a thirsty man in the desert, we jumped into Andy's mirage of play. We had a marvelous time until the front door clicked shut.

"It's your dad!" Maria breathed.

We listened as Andy's mother greeted him and took him into another room. They closed the door. I strained to hear what they were saying. Maybe we could still run if we had to . . . but we couldn't make out a word they said.

Then Andy's parents came out of the room. They walked right past us into the kitchen without even acknowledging that we were there. "It's okay!" Andy whispered. "Let's go play some more."

I wanted to believe her. I wanted so much to believe her that I followed her back into her room. So did Maria. Soon we were swimming again in the world of imagination.

Suddenly all the walls came crashing down around me. My mouth was full of sawdust. My heart pounded painfully. My face burned. No! my whole soul silently screamed. No! No! No!

Daddy was standing in the doorway.

He looked taller than he ever had before. His calm, second face beamed down at us. In the voice he saved for other people to hear, he said, "Come on, girls. It's time to go home."

I couldn't feel my feet as I stood up to obey. It felt as if someone else guided my body out of Andy's house and into the car. The ride home was a blur. I was totally detached, with no emotion left, without a grip on what was happening. My body went into the house and up the stairs I had hoped so earnestly never to see again.

Slam! A big foot nailed me from behind. I went sailing down the varnished hallway floor, not stopping until I hit the carpet of my own bedroom. Before I was even sure what had happened, Maria landed on top of me. I could distantly hear her sobbing as my body struggled to get back on its feet.

I looked up. When my eyes met Daddy's, his fist hit my cheek. He must have hit me real hard because the next thing I knew, I was flat on my back again. I thought my head was throbbing, but I wasn't sure of anything.

"Look what you did!" Daddy screamed. "Look! Look, you little creep!"

Somehow, my eyes followed his finger, and I saw a big dent in the wall. Then I found myself facedown on my bed. Maria was next to me. Daddy was spanking her with a wooden hanger, and after a while I began distantly counting the strikes. I knew he would give me more than he gave her because I was older—he always made a point of telling me that.

When Daddy started in on me, my mind told me I was in severe pain: my head was hurt, and my bottom was in agony. But I escaped into the fog as much as I could. Sometimes the fog deserted me, and there was nothing but horrible, red pain. Other times I could run away where it almost seemed the nightmare was happening only to my body, not to me.

I refused to cry out loud. I'd become a stone. It would be better to die than to endure this ever again.

"So you're real tough today, huh?" Daddy shouted, hitting me on the head. "Well, take this!" He jerked off my pants and whaled on my bare skin.

There was no more fog. Lost in fiery, burning, throbbing pain, I screamed. Even then, Daddy kept going for a while before he quit.

Still lying face down with my pants pulled off, I heard him shout as he stomped to the door. "Whatever goes on in this house is our business. No one else's. Don't ever open your ugly mouths again—" he glared back at us through the doorway, "ever!"

/ / / / /

"As Elizabeth and I were saying earlier," Ben told Darren, "there are certain variables that make a big difference in how lasting the effects of abuse are. Aside from the severity of the abuse itself, the first variable is whether physical violence was involved."

"I can understand that," Darren responded.

"Another factor is the victim's closeness to the abuser. If a child is abused by a neighbor or a baby-sitter the child sees occasionally, the effects aren't as devastating as if the child's own father is the perpetrator."

"Sure," Darren nodded. "It's a lot easier to conclude your neighbor is awful than to tell yourself that your dad is a wicked, evil man."

"Exactly," Ben said. "And that's especially true if 'Dad' seems to be a great guy in other ways." He paused. "Of course, the third variable is the length of the abuse. How long did it go on? How many incidents were there?"

Darren nodded.

"And the final, most significant factor is how the mother responds."

Oh, good, I thought. Here's the answer to my question about why mothers so often disbelieve.

"Now, there's a catch," Darren said. "Why in the world wouldn't a mother believe her own child? I mean, this is a child she has known longer and more intimately than anyone else has. Surely she can tell whether her own child is telling the truth."

"She probably can," Ben answered. "But she may not allow herself to believe what she senses to be true. Most of the time, there are two main reasons for her response. First, these women have often been victims themselves. Just this week, I treated a patient in my office who, now that she is in her forties, has finally gotten brave enough to ask her mother why she didn't help. There was no doubt her mother had known what was going on all the time."

"And?" I asked.

"And her mother responded with, 'What's the big deal? That happened to me when I was small. No one ever took care of me. How was I supposed to take care of you?' . . . ."

"In other words," I said, "her trust had been so shattered as a child that protecting someone else or keeping someone else's trust was simply beyond her. Is that what she meant?"

"Yes," Ben answered. "Apparently it never occurred to her that she could make a conscious decision to stop the cycle of abuse. She seems to have accepted it as a part of real life. Either that, or thinking about her daughter's abuse meant she would have to think about her own abuse . . . and that was simply too much for her to handle."

The hall was very quiet. "You said there was another reason why some mothers don't nip the problem in the bud," I prodded.

"Right," Ben said, drawing a deep breath. "Especially in cases of sexual abuse, mothers are afraid to disrupt their family. If a woman believes and accepts what her daughter is saying, then the crime is so heinous she has to take drastic action."

Darren and I nodded.

"Turning her husband over to the authorities is a big thing to do. It may ruin his business—not only his livelihood but that of herself and her children. It may ruin his reputation and tarnish everyone else's. It may ruin his standing in the Church and indirectly affect the entire family's. The ramifications of causing so much turmoil are often too big to think about for a woman whose self-esteem is already hurting. Her mind may tell her she can't support the children. She may begin to count the tender testimonies that could be hurt when she uncovers her husband's deceit. She feels as if she should have kept this from happening. Somehow, she begins to think she has failed."

"That's even easier to see within the Church because of our emphasis on family life," I agreed.

"The Church's orientation is good and right," Darren countered. "Encouraging lasting commitment in families doesn't mean we want to perpetuate abuse."

"You and Ben and I know that," I said, somewhat surprised. "But some people have misinterpreted it."

Darren grinned and agreed. "Breaking out of a harmful marriage could feel like a failure, when, in fact, it is the bravest thing some women could ever do."

"But there are times when women read scriptures about forgiveness and love and feel confused," I said. I'd seen that confusion. "It might seem the Christlike thing to give unconditional love and try to patch things up."

"It might seem that way," Ben said emphatically, "but abuse is different from almost any other situation. We're not encouraging wholesale divorce or rampant inquisition. Still, overlooking abuse in the name of forgiveness doesn't help anyone. You have to draw the line somewhere. And no matter what, any kind of sexual abuse is clearly wrong."

Suddenly the hall was silent again. Ben was looking right at me. "I'm not advocating revenge or retribution," he said. "I'm not saying we shouldn't love the perpetrator. The Savior would have us love all God's children." Deep meaning and emotion surged through his words. He'd obviously struggled somewhere, sometime, with forgiveness. "What I am saying is that the best and greatest love would be to get help for that abuser." He took a deep breath. "If only mothers could see."
