Michele R. Sorensen, Chainbreakers ( 1993)

9

There was a time when thinking about my mother's blindness to the situation frustrated me terribly. Actually, I seethed with anger at her lack of response. She always disappeared whenever conflicts arose. Even if she didn't actually get up and leave the room, she somehow melted away: dropped her head, sank into the sofa, never said a word. Not once did she ever tell Daddy to stop.

Later, Mom sometimes came into Maria's and my room and said she loved us. Often, on the day after a really big thrashing, we'd come home from school to find a double batch of cookies cooling on the counter. We got to eat half, and the rest were saved for Daddy. Mom never said we shouldn't tell Daddy what she'd done. We simply knew. Although her apologies were subtle, we accepted and understood them.

Was she unable to see what was going on? No. If she had been, there would have been no extra "I love yous" and cookies. But our situation had strapped great big blinders on her, and she hadn't torn them off.

The violence ate at her, too. You can't live in the middle of hate and anger and perversion without having the tension rub off on you. She was near the breaking point—even behind her blinders—and sometimes it showed.

/ / / / /

One afternoon I was in trouble for not completing my morning chores before school. The infraction really wasn't too great: I simply hadn't vacuumed my bedroom. My plan was to come straight home from school and do it before Daddy got off work.

Maria and I called Mom's vacuum The Squid. Mom loved her canister vacuum because of all its wonderful attachments, but as Maria put it, The Squid was a royal pain to drag around. It was always grabbing something.

Unfortunately, my good intentions to rendezvous with The Squid came too late. Company had dropped by. Even though it was only Nanny Julie, Mom was embarrassed that our house hadn't been one hundred percent presentable.

When I walked in the door, Mom was plugging in The Squid and crying. "It's about time!" she yelled and thrust the nozzle in my direction.

Like a dummy, I ducked. The Squid decked me. The area just above my eye tore open. Blood gushed everywhere.

Mama called Daddy, who had to leave work half an hour early. Off to the emergency room we went, where I got my first five stitches and heard the biggest lie of my young life. That's not at all what happened! I thought. But my situation was bad enough without my piping up about a little issue like the truth.

Daddy yelled all the way home. He said if I had done my work when I was supposed to, nothing would have gone wrong. He went to great effort explaining how I always made life difficult.

Naturally, I was grounded again as soon as we got home. I also received a new chore of vacuuming the entire house every morning before school for two months. Daddy hoped that would teach me to respect how much work goes into paying stupid doctor bills.

The longer Daddy shouted, the more upset he got. He shouted obscenities and shoved me a few times. He even slapped me across my face. I was so tired I didn't care how long the reprimanding went on. I only wanted to go to bed, to be invisible, to stop existing.

Later that evening Mom came into my bedroom, where I was standing in my corner. She asked how my head felt—did I need anything for a headache?

"Yeah," I said, astonished to discover that I still had enough strength to be angry with her. "Why don't you send Daddy in to slap me around a little more? That ought to make it feel real good."

I thought Mom would be shocked and hurt, but she just snapped right back, "Well, Elizabeth Lynn, if you weren't so stupid, that vacuum wouldn't have hit you in the face. You should've taken it from me when I handed it to you."

"You chucked it," I said smugly, turning so that my swollen eye and bloody bandage were aimed right at her.

"Chucked it? I handed it!" She bit her finger and looked down. Then, lowering her voice but unable to control its tone, she went on, "Next time do your work." Walking out the door she muttered, "If you two kids would just do your work, Daddy wouldn't be angry all the time."

Sure, I thought as I watched Mom leave. All I need to do is figure out how to be perfect. If I were like Jesus, I'd be safe. I turned my nose back into the corner, fuming sarcastically to myself. Just name me one person who's accomplished that! For some reason, God made only one perfect person. I wish I'd been that lucky.

/ / / / /

"You know what I think?" I said suddenly. "No one's perfect." Ben and Darren looked at me curiously. "I mean, when we're children, either we think our parents are perfect or we feel they ought to be. But the truth is, we're all like pieces of marble. I had a friend once who was a sculptor. She taught me a lot of things about stone that have helped me better understand people."

I'd never told Darren about the ideas I'd had after visiting Becky's studio. But the truth is, while you are overcoming abuse—at least right at first—it pretty much monopolizes your thoughts. Until I really put it to rest, just about everything that crossed my mind tied into my past one way or another.

I smiled at Darren as I went on. "Marble is a supremely beautiful but flawed stone. Inside most pieces you can find a dark flaw—some bigger than others. Some even contain black pits of sand. Often, those sand pits are hidden in such a way that no one, or almost no one, knows they're there. Sometimes the marble has been carefully polished and the sand pit is buried in the middle where it can't be seen, but the flaw is still there."

Darren's eyes seemed to be trying to see through me. "Are you saying all people are innately evil?"

"No, I just mean we're all human, all imperfect," I clarified. "Family members shape one another constantly. They have such close and interdependent relationships that their influences mold one another all the time. In a sense they sculpt each other."

"But—" Darren began.

"Oh, I know each of us has the most control over his or her own life—or if we don't, we need to take it. The Lord shapes us constantly, too, and you can't underestimate His influence. But after that, our family relationships make the most difference."

Ben had been silently listening. Now he mirrored my words back to me. "So you're saying that since we are like sculptors, we have a much closer and more influential relationship with family members than anyone else. Our close contact also makes us more aware of each other's flaws than anyone else could be."

"Yes! And sometimes we even polish one another to hide them."

/ / / / /

For a long time I resented my family's sand pits. Maria and I had defects, I knew. Daddy had mapped them out well for us. And I was sure my mother's weaknesses had left her spineless. But most of all, I hated the big, hideous, black sand pit that filled the hollow heart of my daddy.

There were times when I had concluded that there was no love in him and that he'd sucked it all out of my mother, too. When he wasn't around, she was warm and loving, but when he was, he demanded all her attention.

The night my face was stitched up was one of those times I concluded there was no love in our home—and probably not in the whole world, either. After Mom left the room muttering, I leaned the side of my head against the wall and closed my eyes against its painful throbbing.

I hated her. Inwardly, I blamed her for marrying Daddy and letting such a monster into our home to chew up our lives. I loathed her inability to do anything about the situation.

And in that moment, I hated God, too. Maybe even more than anyone else. Mama couldn't help herself. She never claimed to be all-knowing and all-powerful. But God did. He'd made me and put me in this awful place with these awful people. Some friend! He must not have thought much of me, and I decided I didn't think much of Him or all that wonderful love Father Demas was always talking about. I hadn't seen any of it.

One father in heaven and one on earth. Didn't people always say, "like father, like son"? If my father was a monster, then God must be infinitely worse—a monster like Daddy but multiplied more times than I could think of. This reasoning told me that God was powerful, controlling, stern, strict, and terrifying. Well, I wasn't going to give my love or trust to anyone who called himself father.

I leaned there, with my head throbbing and my stomach tied in knots. Hot tears slid between my closed eyelids and down my cheeks. Hate. Hate. HATE!

Then, deep inside me something whispered, Elizabeth, you know that's not true. Is that really what you want to believe?

I ignored the feeling—I even tried hating it—but finally I answered that soundless inner voice. My thoughts said, Oh yes it is true. I hate them, and I hate God most of all. Everyone's a jerk!

Mentally saying those words felt good. They made the anger rush through me again, vindicating my hatred and releasing me from feeling that I had to try anymore.

But the whisper was still there, inside me, and I knew it was right. I didn't admit it that night, but eventually, I knew, I would listen to it again. When Idid, it never let me down. In reality, that inner voice was my best friend.

/ / / / /

Darren slid his arm around my waist. When I raised my eyes, I saw Ben was gazing kindly at me.

"I'm speaking from experience," I said, and my voice wavered.

"I know," he answered softly.

"My childhood was like a roller coaster—up and down, up and down. I always kept grasping at hope, looking for it even when it was nowhere to be found." Darren and Ben didn't answer as the force of my emotion surged through the hall. But their silence wasn't awkward. Rather, they recognized the reality of my long-ago pain, and they knew better than to insinuate that a pat on the back or a cheerful comment could erase it as if it had never been.

Darren pulled out his handkerchief, and I dabbed at my eyes. After a moment or two Ben picked up his scriptures and organizer from the table where he'd set them and asked, "Want to sit down?"

He fitted a key into the lock, twisted it, and swung his office door open. "I would," he said, answering his own question and extending his hand as an invitation to enter. "It would do me good to hear your story, especially since this subject is already so heavily on my mind." He paused. "But if you don't want to talk about it, Liz, that's okay."

I looked up at Darren and then answered by walking in and taking a seat. Darren was right behind me.

Ben pulled his chair from behind his desk and pushed it over close to us. He wasn't beaming any big smiles toward me, but the creases were back at the corners of his eyes.

"I can talk." I answered. "Maybe it will help you if you ever do write that book you're thinking about."

"No doubt," Ben smiled. "I'd especially like to know how you dealt with the hurt. I realize, now, that you've dealt with terrible pain and yet . . . well, until tonight I hadn't seen any signs of it."

"I've made my peace," I responded.

I don't feel that agony anymore, in the sense of carrying it around all the time. But when I open up those emotions and allow myself to remember the crushing hurt that filled those years, well . . . it was very real.

I used to say to myself, If only we could be perfect. My ten-year-old eyes couldn't understand that everyone else has sand pits, too. They may not be hideous black ones, but everyone has troubles and weaknesses.

I wished I were perfect, and I wished my family were, too. As I grew older, I often retreated to a mental fairyland where everyone was perfect and things were wonderful. When reality drew me out and shattered my ability to pretend, my outlook became very cynical. Then everyone had those black, abusive pits. The whole world had them and hid them. If it weren't so, someone would surely be doing something about it. Someone would care.

Now I realize that neither the perfect fairy-tale world nor the totally demonic one is realistic. But I couldn't find a niche I could hold onto in between. Years passed as I rode the roller coaster between the two extremes.

During the year I was eleven, the roller coaster climbed upward. Things were unbelievably good—almost frighteningly good—and I actually began to believe my fairy-tale world was coming true.
