Michele R. Sorensen, Chainbreakers ( 1993)

10

Only a couple of days after I'd battled The Squid, Daddy put on his second face and his new Scout uniform and went down the street for a Young Men's Mutual meeting.

"All my friends' big brothers really like Daddy," Maria commented softly, staring at him through the window as he hurried down the steps and walked briskly away.

"Name one."

"Oh, Candi's and Jeannie's brothers. Angel's, too."

I made a repulsive face to show what I thought of their opinion.

"Whitney's brother told me he's real funny. Her mom said you can tell when someone's really meant for their calling—he said that means a church job—because they enjoy every minute of the work."

Whitney's mom had a point there. Daddy loved doing the kinds of projects the Scouts were involved in: hiking, fishing, camping, mechanical repairs. More and more often it seemed that whenever he came home from a church meeting, a great big grin was spread across his face. He whistled lots of tunes we'd never heard, and he began giving a prayer before dinner sometimes. As much as I hated admitting it, this new smiling Daddy was a very likable person.

One day at dinner, Daddy kissed Mama as he sat down and thanked her for making such a nice meal. Then, about halfway into the mashed potatoes, he asked, "Why don't you all come to sacrament meeting with me this Sunday?"

Maria dropped her fork, and her eyes lit up like stars. "Will Angel and Whitney be there?" she chirped.

"Yes, Gilly-monster. You three will all be in the same Primary class."

Primary, Mutual, sacrament meeting—his church sure had a lot of weird words. "Mom, are you going, too?" I asked.

Mom didn't look up from her plate. Her voice was soft and almost hesitant as she answered, "If you girls would like to go, I'll go, too."

Maria was excitedly trying to capture her peas with her fork. She was obviously delighted about getting increased social time.

A few kids from my school went to that church. The boy, Don, hadn't impressed me very much, and the other two were girls. One was Teri, a new kid in our neighborhood. I felt a little sorry for her. Teri's dresses were hand-me-downs, and she had only two. I supposed having eleven brothers and sisters explained some of her troubles. She had a last name the other kids could twist and use to make fun of her, too. But the other girl, Sandy, was really nice and popular as well. Maybe Maria wasn't the only one who could get a little social time out of this.

"We're in the Third Ward," Daddy said proudly. "Our chapel was one of the first ones built in this area."

Mom made a funny face that sort of said, "So what?"

"You mean your church," I corrected. "We got baptized into the Catholic Church, so it can't be our church."

Daddy smiled and flatly ignored my observation. And, like always, he got his way. Sunday afternoon we all got dressed up and went to his church.

As we entered the glass doors, we found ourselves in a foyer packed with chattering people. There were the Bensons who lived right next door and owned the corner laundry. I also saw the Farfans, who lived on the other side of us, the Rawsons, the Guzmans, the Smarts, Don's parents and sister, Teri's big family, and lots of Maria's friends. I had to work hard to stick with Mama, who was following Daddy through some open doors.

The chapel wasn't anything like our sanctuary downtown. It was lit by electric lights rather than candles. And there weren't any fancy glass windows or prayer stools. I decided it was humble and simple but pretty in its own way. The padded benches were great.

And the meeting was about as different from our church as the building itself was. Babies had been brought right into the chapel, and they got away with crying out and making noises. Even some big kids were whispering. I thought the little old ladies would be furious, but they all seemed to be smiling as if they didn't care.

I kept waiting for when we'd have to stand to sing and kneel to pray, but it never happened. Although they called it the sacrament, the communion prayers at Daddy's church seemed pretty much like the ones I knew. No one wore robes, though, and they forgot to sing "O Holy." Some boys passed bread and water around to everyone, too, instead of having people come forward.

Daddy pointed out someone he called the bishop and told me that man was the leader, like Father Demas. I kept waiting for this bishop to preach, but he let the other guys do the talking. The main sermon came from a man Daddy called the "high councilman." He told one story I thought was especially interesting. He said it came from the Book of Mormon, so I decided I'd try to check that one out at the library during the next week. The last Indian story I'd read had been about Squanto, and I was curious to know more about Native Americans.

When the meeting ended, we didn't go to Sunday School class. That had been in the morning, Daddy explained. Maria began to pout, and I couldn't hide my disappointment, either. Sunday School was the biggest reason we'd come.

But just then a lady walked over and shook our hands. She smiled as she asked us our names and invited us to Primary. It would be Wednesday afternoon, after school, if we could wait that long.

Then Daddy took my hand and led us into a really pretty room. There were padded folding chairs and a lacy cloth on the table at the front. A nice painting of a mother and baby gazed at us from one wall, a shiny upright piano was pushed into the corner, and a pretty cross-stitch picture hung by the door. "This is the Relief Society room," Daddy said, squeezing my hand and smiling at Mom. He reached out and gently straightened Maria's curls. "We'll just wait a minute for the bishop and his counselors to get here. I'm going to be ordained a priest today."

I had no idea what he was talking about, but I liked this new side of my daddy. Pretty soon some men came in and stood around him in a circle with their hands on his head. I was so glad it was him and not me! I'd always been claustrophobic, and the packed foyer had made my stomach churn. There was no way I could have sat and listened to a prayer with all those men smothering me, but Daddy seemed to be enjoying every word.

They gave the longest prayer I'd ever heard but, it said exactly the things I thought Daddy needed. When they blessed him to choose the right, I mentally whispered, That means no lies! They blessed him to have a sharp mind, and I added my own request that his logic would improve on trash pickup in our yard. They blessed him that he would read good books, and I almost stood up to shout, Yes! Yes! Let's lose the tool chest! They blessed him to be a good husband, and I knew that meant no yelling at Mom. But when they blessed him to be a good father, all my insides turned over with burning hope. My heart cried, No more beatings, no more beatings!

I couldn't believe how right that blessing was. Silently, I prayed, Please God, make it all come true. Make it be true!

/ / / / /

"You know," I said to Darren and Ben, "hope is a funny thing. Without it people become brittle and cynical; they lose their ability to see the world clearly or to have joy. But watching your hopes get bashed over and over can be excruciatingly painful. Pretty soon you know you don't want to be hopeless, but you become afraid to hope."

The year I was eleven, I still hadn't lost hope. A little part of me desperately wanted to believe my fairy-tale world would come true. Five more years passed before I became entirely too hurt and uncertain to venture any hope. And until then, my roller coaster was zooming upward to a height from which it would eventually take a dizzying fall.

Ben smiled. His voice was soft but very clear. "Being able to keep your hope alive depends on whom you place it in."

/ / / / /

We celebrated Daddy's being made a priest by eating dinner with some of his friends that night. I didn't care much for the Rawsons, though. They had lived next to us in the trailer court, and they'd been too stuck-up to socialize with us then. But now that Daddy was playing their game, they wanted to get together. No thanks.

Daddy didn't seem to mind at all, though. He was happy about everything, laughing and talking in such a friendly voice. Between his good humor and the blessing those men had given him, I was willing to put up with the Rawson family's changeable hospitality.

Mom was bustling around in the kitchen with Sister Rawson (Daddy told us to call her that), and they were piling the table with a glazed ham, baked potatoes, fruit salad, and lots of other fixings. After we all sat down, Brother Rawson said a blessing on the food. Carrying on with Daddy over one of his jokes, our host began dishing up food for everyone.

Then it happened. As Brother Rawson passed my plate, my fingers slipped, and I dropped the whole thing in my lap. I was mortified! "It's o-o-o-o-ka-a-ay," I stuttered. Not looking up, I tried to make my voice light. "It all landed in my napkin."

That was when I felt his hand on my shoulder. Fear jammed through my limbs like an electrical shock. I knew he was going to slug me. I jerked away.

"Hold still, silly," Daddy said with a laugh, as he picked up my napkin. He dumped my dinner back onto the plate. "Eat it," he said under his breath, right next to my ear. Then he stood up tall, smiling again as he returned to his seat.

Maria giggled and chattered with Heidi Rawson all through dinner, but I could hardly force my mouth open to get the food in. I knew I was in big trouble. Please, God, I silently pleaded, please make those men's blessing come true. At least, please let my beating not be too bad.

When we went home at last, I kept expecting the harsh words to begin. The longer Daddy waited, the worse I knew it would be. But it never happened.

My shock was so great that I finally went in on my bed and just sat there. I couldn't believe it. Maybe God really does hear prayers, I thought.

The events of that day gained more and more significance for me as time went on. Because of the direct correlation I'd seen between prayer and change, a small light began to shine at the end of my life's dark tunnel. Like the tiny voice inside me, this experience with prayer became a beacon pointing me away from cynical hopelessness. There would be times when I was afraid to trust or hope, but I never forgot my first answered prayer.

Over the next few weeks, we continued going to Daddy's church, and I got to know Teri pretty well. She had a cute sense of humor and a thoughtful heart. At first I'd felt sorry for her because she had only one dress and she shared her room with three sisters. But the closer I got to Teri, the better I understood how true envy feels.

Every night when Teri's father came home from work, he hugged his children and talked to them about their day. All eleven of her brothers and sisters actually ran to the door when their dad drove up! Not only that but even though he was dirty and greasy from his job, he'd throw his arms around them and kiss their faces. Then he'd hunt through the house until he found their mom.

Another thing that made Teri's dad so neat was that he always left a few tidbits in his lunch pail. When the children came running to greet him, the ones who didn't get the first hugs got to dig through his leftovers and nibble whatever they could find. The family was poor, and I don't ever remember them finding more than a cookie or a scrap of bread, but the kids gobbled it up like candy because it came from their dad. He must have made a point of leaving treasures in between the empty sandwich bags and napkins on purpose, just for them.

Watching this nightly ritual at Teri's house always embarrassed me. But whenever I was at home and my daddy came in the door, that scene kept reappearing before my eyes. I wished I was brave enough to run to him. I wished he'd hug me.

So it isn't hard to see why I liked being at Teri's house—even if it was embarrassing. But then one day my mom said she didn't like me playing there. From her explanation I gathered that Teri's family was the target of the local grapevine. Everyone accused her parents of neglect, and the gossips even whispered about government social workers investigating the situation. Everyone said they were so concerned about those poor children. But that's all they were: poor. There were eleven children under the age of eighteen in Teri's family, and her mom had decided to stay home to care for them. Their house was cluttered but never dirty. The meals were simple, but they ate them together—happily. Teri's dad worked for the sanitation department, and it's true, he didn't bring home much money. But I never saw him hit anyone.

Mom was worried about the gossip. "Don't go over there so much," she said one evening. "There are lots of other nice girls you know."

"But I like Teri," I told her. "I like her parents." Inside, I was angry about everyone's preoccupation with how much money her dad made. Couldn't they see the double standard? Couldn't anyone see that even though our family never wanted for a single possession, we were crying out for love?

I wished I was brave enough to explain the hypocrisy of it all to Mom. I wanted to make her see how shallow our lives were and how rich Teri's family really was. But my dad was sitting in his chair reading the newspaper, and I kept my mouth shut.

"Well, Liz," Mom said, "just don't spend so much time with her. There are lots of nice girls from fine families in your class at school."

"Aw, Maureen," Daddy spoke from behind his paper. "You worry too much. Let Frecklie-frog play with Teri. After all, their family goes to church every Sunday, so they can't be too bad an influence."

I couldn't believe my ears. Daddy was standing up for me! Perhaps his reasoning wasn't quite the same as mine, but I liked having him on my side of an issue.

Mom snatched up a stack of laundry and went to put it away. In spite of my current joy, I couldn't help but see the bitterness in her face. That look had been there a lot lately. Although she hadn't said it in so many words, I knew Mom was going to Daddy's church in an effort to bring our family together.

They weren't yelling at each other about what was true anymore, but Mom still had obvious misgivings. Her attitude spoke even more loudly than her former arguing had. Daddy seemed happier, Maria and I were certainly happier, but Mom hadn't changed. She'd always pumped the rest of the family up, and now she was lagging behind.

I decided to ignore whatever was troubling Mom. This new personality of Daddy's was much better than anything else I'd ever known. Maybe my prayers were being answered. "Excuse me, Daddy," I said. " . . . .'The Waltons' is going to be on TV pretty soon. I've done my homework and my chores. May I watch it?"

"Okay," Daddy said generously, folding his paper and standing up. "Let me check your work."

He found only one thing to complain about, and I did it over quickly, hoping I wouldn't miss the beginning of my show. There was something special about "The Waltons" for me. At the same time Daddy began softening, I had come to love that program. When I watched it, I found myself dreaming of a whole new life-style. In my imagination we all loved each other and would go out of our way to do things for each other. We even prayed together every day.

At bedtime I used to lie very still, squeeze my eyes shut tight, and pretend we were all calling good night to one another. In my mind "Good night, Jim-Bob," "Good night, John-Boy," and "Good night, Mary Ellen," turned into "Good night, Mama. Good night, Daddy. Good night, Maria." But best of all was their imaginary reply: "Good night, Elizabeth."
