Michele R. Sorensen, Chainbreakers ( 1993)

11

How would you girls like to be baptized at Dad's church?" Mom asked one day over dinner.

Maria and I sat and stared. She could just as easily have asked us if we'd packed up for a trip to the moon.

Our shock forced a wry grin onto her face, and she repeated the question. "Baptized . . . you know? Daddy's church?" She pointed over her shoulder with her thumb, in the direction of the chapel.

"We can do that?" Maria asked.

"Yes, you can," Daddy answered. "Then you'd be a Mormon, like me."

The grin was gone from Mom's face, but I couldn't read anything in her voice as she went on. "I believe your daddy's church is a good one. I've agreed to be baptized and become a member of it. You girls could be baptized, too." Perhaps I just imagined it, but I thought a little enthusiasm crept into her voice as she added, "We could all do it together."

My sister was entirely for it. She'd never gotten over that swimsuit affair or Angel's claim that sprinkling didn't count. Maria was still trying to be as good as everyone else.

"Yeah, me too," I said. I liked Daddy's church—particularly its improvements on Daddy. "I sure hope they do it right this time, though."

"I promise I will," Daddy said.

"You will?" I blurted out, noting that he was delighted with my surprise. "How? You're not the bishop."

"No, but I am a priest—remember? Priests can baptize. I'm not an elder yet, so someone else will confirm you, but I can do the baptizing."

The following days were filled with excitement over the white dresses Mom was sewing for us and our curiosity about getting immersed. I noticed Mom wasn't smiling or humming much anymore. She seemed very quiet, and what she did say lacked feeling. Looking back, I'm certain she wasn't doing this because she believed the teachings she'd heard at church. I can't remember her studying any manuals or reading the Book of Mormon. No, Mom was getting baptized as a sacrifice, hoping to pull her family together.

One brilliantly sunny January day we drove to the stake center to be baptized. Our white dresses were spotless and fresh, and the room was packed with all our new friends. After some singing and a talk, Daddy took Mom's hand and helped her down the steps into the font. Then, before I knew it, it was my turn!

Daddy took my hands gently, yet firmly, in his. His touch was kind, and his voice rang out clearly as he spoke the words of the baptismal prayer, beginning with my name: "Elizabeth Lynn Hughes, having been commissioned of Jesus Christ . . ."

There was something so wonderful, so new and different about him, that it would have made the day memorable all by itself. But the greatest moment was yet to come. As soon as Daddy had laid me down in the sparkling clear water, he pulled me gently back toward the surface. As I rose up, the most wonderful feeling I'd ever had in my life descended over me. Something very important had happened. I knew it. A power far greater than me was speaking through that little voice inside my heart. And that voice told me with absolute sureness that—independent of Daddy and Mama and whatever reasons I'd had for being here—this was the most right thing I'd ever done.

/ / / / /

Ben's comment about hope repeated itself in my mind. I replied out loud, "What you said about keeping hope alive is really true. I think a lot of my pain came from basing my hopes on people rather than putting them first in Christ."

"Well, Liz," Darren said with a laugh, "how would a child know that? You didn't seem to understand all that much about the Savior when I met you, let alone during your early years. Children naturally put their hope and faith and trust in their parents."

"You're right," I answered, grateful that he'd taken my side. "But it was a long time before I learned where I could safely realign my hopes when the others had failed me. Even though I didn't understand the principle of hope until years later, I think seeds of faith were being planted in me from the day I was baptized. That was the second time I'd received a spiritual witness I was able to recognize."

"What was the first time?" Darren asked, but I knew he'd already guessed.

"An answered prayer."

Darren's nod confirmed that he'd supposed right. "Ironic," he muttered, shaking his head, "that your greatest blessings came through your dad."

"Daddy filled my life with the worst misery a child can endure," I explained to Ben, "and yet through him came my only hope. Through him I discovered the gospel, and in it were the tools I needed to begin getting help."

"You mean the Church stepped in and played a part in leading your father to clean up his act?"

"Not exactly." I paused. "Unfortunately, almost not at all. I mean, it wasn't so much what the Church did for him but rather what the Church did for me. Daddy didn't let the gospel change his life the way it could have. But he did introduce me to the Church, and there, in the gospel of Jesus Christ, I found strength and hope and faith. That was where I gathered courage to go on."

"Can you give me an example? How did you gather courage?"

"Well, the atonement of Jesus Christ has been the greatest source of strength and hope in my life. I don't know if I can explain exactly how, because it has helped in so many ways, but take forgiveness as an example. There have been times when my whole being swelled up with hate and anger. Eventually I began to make a conscious effort to remember what had been good about my father. It was a real struggle, but I've done it." I took a deep breath, adding, "And as long as I'm being specific, remember that looking at what was good in my dad or forgiving his wrongs isn't the same as condoning them. I do not condone the things he did to Maria and me. But my efforts to forgive him have been greatly helped by the realization that through him God had meaning in my life."

Ben had been listening closely. "Not all abused women can say that, you know."

"No, of course not, but if they can, it will be something they can hold onto when it comes time to forgive. It will give them a place to begin."

Ben drew a deep breath. "And this courage and hope and strength began when you were baptized? How old were you?"

"I was eleven, but the faith didn't really come then. The seeds were just being planted. There had to be time for them to grow, and anyway, I didn't have the tools to harvest anything yet."

/ / / / /

The first of those tools was given to me at the time of my baptism. I'd enjoyed its help off and on before that day, but when I was confirmed, the bishop explained that I could now have this tool with me all the time if I was worthy. That was when Brother Rodriguez, a counselor in the bishopric, gave me the finest gift I have ever known: the gift of the Holy Ghost.

In spite of my claustrophobia, the confirmation was a supremely beautiful event. For the first time in my life, I had a name for my most trusted companion. This was my only true friend, the only one who had never deserted me. When I needed it most, that little voice had whispered for me to run. In quiet moments, it had wordlessly spoken peace to my heart. It had always spoken love. Now I knew why the voice was wiser than I was. I knew where it came from, and I knew how I could ask for its guidance.

If only I'd recognized the voice sooner . . . .would things have been different?

"Come on!" Maria interrupted my thoughts by pulling on my arm. "The Primary president wants to see us."

Sister Cobbler, the Primary president who'd asked us our names the first day we'd gone to Daddy's church—our church, now—smiled as she hugged us. I could feel her love as she held out a white, leather-covered Bible to each of us. Our names were engraved on the bottom corners in gold.

Then Sister Benson of Benson's Laundry came over and hugged us. She had a matching Book of Mormon for Maria and one for me, with our names on the covers in the same lettering as the Bibles. But equally important, she'd written a pretty letter with her testimony on the inside.

/ / / / /

"Name some of the tools," Ben said.

"The gift of the Holy Ghost and the scriptures," I answered without hesitating. "Those were two great blessings that came to me on the day of my baptism. Without my father, I wouldn't have been there. Can you see how the Lord was kind to me through him?"

"The greatest good came right along with the greatest bad," Darren said.

"That's absolutely true," I said, smiling my appreciation at Darren. "An important part of trusting God and healing myself has been recognizing that blessings actually came into my life through my father."

"So birth would be another one?" Ben asked.

"Well, yes, that would be one for many women. But I was adopted." I paused before adding, "I have learned to thank my mother for the gift of life, though. Once I thought there was nothing to honor in either of my parents. Now I understand that isn't true—my mother gave me birth. And I guess, even as awful as mortality sometimes seems, if we shouted for joy over it in heaven, it must be a pretty big blessing."

"Mm-hm," Darren agreed. "I don't think we were entirely naive in the premortal world. I think we knew it wasn't going to be a picnic, yet we eagerly welcomed it and even fought for the privilege."

"I've known so many women who felt life was more of a curse than a gift," Ben commented sadly.

"I felt that way for a long time," I replied. "But the scriptures plainly say otherwise. I made a leap of faith and trusted them."

Ben silently considered what we'd said. "I want to talk more about what you just said about trust and the scriptures, but first, could I share a story with you?" We nodded, and he went on. "A woman I know told me something unusual once. She'd had a temple marriage, but a few years later her husband became abusive. Finally, she swallowed her pride and her fears and went for help. After the divorce, she remarried, this time to a convert. He is an exceptional man who has relied heavily on the Spirit in establishing relationships with her children. There were three girls and two boys—all somewhat confused because of the abuse that had gone on before the divorce. Anyway, she and her second husband were eventually sealed in the temple, and he wanted very much to adopt those children for eternity."

"Couldn't he?"

"No. A special letter from the prophet explained to this faithful woman that her sons and daughters had received some marvelous blessings in their birthright through their blood father. It doesn't take away anything from what a great man their stepfather is, but it shows that we can't see the whole picture from here."

"What could those blessings possibly be?" Darren asked.

"I'm not sure," Ben answered slowly. "I find it hard to imagine that anything good could come from such a man. But as we were just saying, there are things we can't see from this perspective. Perhaps some abusive fathers who haven't lived up to their potential have nevertheless given their children eternal birthright blessings we can't dream of. Perhaps there are blessings we can't see from where we are now."

"If you'd said that to me ten years ago, I might have spit in your face," I laughed, only half-joking.

"Yes," Ben answered, "it doesn't seem like much of a comfort when you haven't got a foundation of hope or trust on which to build faith."

"But look, here I am, listing blessings my father gave me."

Darren smiled broadly at me. Ten years ago, neither of us could have imagined saying these things—much less believing them. "One thing for certain," he said, with a touch of lopsided humor, "because of Liz's dad, our lives have been affected in ways I'd never have imagined."

/ / / / /

Obviously, Darren was right. My dad left an indelible imprint on who I am. Since my baptism, I have struggled to make sure that I determine who I am and who I will become. Baptism was an important part of that for me, as it was for Maria, too.

Maria became a different girl from that day on, too. I'm not sure exactly what happened. I knew I'd never be the same, but when I looked at her I had no idea how different she would become. Even the night of our baptism, she was suddenly vibrantly alive and much more outgoing with her friends.

From that moment forward, Maria was never my shadow again. In fact, she seemed to have pledged herself to be exactly the opposite.
