Michele R. Sorensen, Chainbreakers ( 1993)

12

Mom," I asked several weeks after our baptism, "how come you never had another baby?"

"Why should I?" Mom looked at me as if I were crazy.

"We don't have a brother, you know," Maria piped up from where she was bent over her homework. "All the other families at church have boys and girls in them—all except ours."

"Your father has not wanted another child yet, and I certainly am not ready."

"Ready for what?" I asked. All the ladies at church seemed to love babies. They always fussed and chattered over new ones.

"Ready to be stuck. Pregnancy is a nine-month commitment. You can't do much of anything, can't enjoy free time outdoors, and you're at the mercy of the baby." Mom's voice sounded funny, kind of sour and resentful. "Then, when it finally arrives, you're just beginning twenty years of worry and responsibility."

Maria's brown eyes were wide with hurt as she looked up at Mom. "Are you sorry you had us?"

"No," Mom answered, and her voice grew more normal. "No, I'm not sorry. I love you. But having another child is such a big commitment. I can't rush into something like that."

Can't rush. Who would ever believe it? Within two weeks Mom got really sick. She looked terrible. She was in the bathroom for days, throwing up and taking baths. She seldom came out.

Maria and I were smart enough to begin guessing what was going on. After all, we'd heard the jokes at church about the Primary fountain. All the Primary workers ribbed each other whenever they drank there because any lady who did seemed to get pregnant soon after that.

Mom's new job in the church was in the library, not the Primary, but Maria and I were sure she'd made the mistake of drinking water from that fountain. And our suspicions were verified within the week, when Mom went to the doctor.

"Have you seen the magazines Mom brought home?" Maria asked me with a knowing grin. "Definitely Primary water."

Sure enough, that evening Mom decided to break the big news. She was being so careful of her words and so mushy that Maria and I couldn't keep from giggling all over the place.

And the giggles didn't stop that night because Mom's belly began to grow like a balloon that was being blown up right before our eyes. She was always in the bathroom, and she was always crying over everything. Sometimes her attitude got exasperating, but most of the time it was just plain funny, uproariously funny.

That is, funny for us. Mom was miserable. By the time she went in for her second checkup, she looked six months pregnant. The doctor didn't think it was funny, either. Although X rays are dangerous for pregnant women, he scheduled her for tests.

Even then, Maria and I wondered what all the fuss was about. Pregnant moms always got fat. We didn't stop giggling until we saw Daddy pacing the floor all the next day, waiting for the lab to call with the test results. When the phone finally rang, it was only to explain that a specialist needed to be called in. Another day of waiting would have to pass before we could get the results.

That next day was one of the longest school days I could remember. It was one of the few times I ever ran home because I wanted to be there.

As Maria and I burst through the door, we immediately sensed a peculiar feeling in the front room. Mom was lying on the couch. Her face was red, her eyes were swollen, and her cheeks were glistening with tears. Daddy was standing in the middle of the room grinning from ear to ear. He had a giant manila envelope in his hands. "Well, Maureen, which one of us is going to tell the girls the news?"

Mom's voice was wavery. She twisted her wet hanky as she whispered, "You go ahead, Chuck."

Daddy pulled us over by the window and opened the giant envelope. "This is our copy of the X rays," he began. "Put your books down and get real close so you can see."

Then, pointing with his finger at the film, he showed us a white circle the size of a mayonnaise jar lid, with a five-inch chain of smaller white spots. "See this? It's the baby's spine. And look, here's its head and these are its legs. Can you see that?"

We both nodded. We could see the white places plainly, and they made sense once he'd explained what they were.

"See this?" Daddy asked, moving his finger to a different spot. "This is the other one's spine!"

Maria and I squealed. We jumped up and down. "Two babies!" we yelled in amazement and glee. Mom was having twins!

"Yes sirree," Daddy answered proudly. "This baby was hiding behind the other baby. When the doctor looked at theX rays, he wasn't sure if one baby had moved or if there were two of them. You can imagine why he was worried! He could only see one head and two spines. So then he called in a specialist." Daddy seemed very relieved as he smiled and added, "But the specialist said there are two—definitely two."

Maria and I began jumping up and down and yelling again, until Daddy put his hands on our shoulders. His face grew serious. Mom started crying again, choking on the sobs she was trying to hold back.

"Why are you crying?" I asked, going over to her and putting my hands on her arm. "Don't you want two babies?"

Mom only hiccoughed and cried harder.

"Mom's pregnancy is going to be very dangerous, now. She is in her later thirties and too little to carry two babies. If your mother isn't very, very careful, the babies will come too early. Early babies don't usually survive," Daddy explained, his voice trailing off.

"She'll be okay," Maria said brightly.

"Yes," Daddy answered. "She will. But we all need to help her. She had to quit her job today, and when she is six months along she'll need to go to bed for the rest of the pregnancy."

The full effect of those words didn't really reach Maria and me.

"Mom is going to need your help," Daddy said firmly.

Then I realized what was coming. I wanted to get angry—Maria and I already did more chores than any of our friends—but Mom looked so uncomfortable and Daddy looked sincerely worried. Besides, I was excited. Twins! Maria and I could get the work done.

Waiting for the babies to arrive wasn't the only exciting change in our family during the months that followed our baptism. Even more wonderful and bewildering than the twins were the changes in Daddy.

"You give it to him, Maria," I said emphatically one evening.

"Nope," my sister answered. "You're gonna have to." Then she suddenly paused. "What if he doesn't wanna go to our Daddy-Daughter Wild West Party?"

"Oh, he'll go," I answered with real assurance. "It's at the church." I was just hoping he'd keep his second face on. Neither Maria nor I wanted to be embarrassed among our new friends. He'd been wearing his church face all the time, though, and I felt more confident than ever before.

"Let's give it to him together," Maria said, clenching her fingers over my hand. But as we rounded the corner into the front room, we both stopped. Daddy was reading the newspaper. A sure way to goof things up would be to interrupt him, so we froze in our footsteps and tried to back out of the room.

The newspaper rattled. "What do you want?"

I gave Maria a shove; she was holding the invitation.

"Here," she said, pushing it into his lap. Then she turned around and ran, with me hot on her heels.

Later that evening Daddy came to our bedroom and leaned against our doorjamb, his thumbs hooked into his belt. A big grin was plastered across his face, and a black Stetson hung low over his brow. A light brown mustache had been drawn across his upper lip, and a bandanna circled his neck. Beneath his Levi's were snakeskin cowboy boots, complete with clinking spurs. Two gun belts circled his waist, a pistol at either hip, and on his chest shone a badge.

"Wal," he drawled, as if he were from Texas, "you two fillies reckon mah duds is fine enough fer y'all's hoedown?"

Maria and I gasped. "Sure," I said, struggling to keep from laughing. Neither of us had ever seen our dad look so ridiculous.

"Wal, then, it's all settled!" Daddy drawled through his grin. He pulled a pistol from its holster and spun it nonchalantly around his index finger. "You two half-pints'd better get yer ma to sew y'all up some fancy foofaraws so's yer costumes'll be as good as mine. I'll be here t' round y' up on time, an' I don' want no trouble. Y'hear?"

We heard! And our preparations kept us busy during the following week, but at last the night of the party came. Mom had sewn square-dancing skirts of gingham with three crinoline petticoats each for Maria and me. She combed our hair up fancy, tied in big gingham bows, and laced bright scarves around our necks. We were almost to the door when she came waddling out of the bathroom with a tube of fire-engine-red lipstick.

"Now you're ready," she said breathlessly.

"Darn tootin'!" Daddy beamed, taking each of us by the hand. His costume was the same as before, except for the addition of a vest and some fringed leather gloves. He even walked like a wild-west gunslinger.

Maria could contain herself no longer. "You look ridiculous, Dad!" she blurted, laughing. "You'd better take first prize with your costume! I don't think any of the other dads will get this fancy."

Daddy wasn't even annoyed. "No other hombre's gonna be this han'some, even if'n they tries," he nodded, tipping his Stetson a little lower. "I'm too good lookin'."

"Just don't bring 'em home too late, Sheriff Earp!" Mama said, collapsing on the couch.

With that, Daddy swung the door open for us to go out. This new side of him was taking some getting used to. I found it hard to think of him as the same monster who usually lived at our house. Maybe the old Daddy was gone for good.

That daddy-daughter party was a blast! We ran some gunnysack and three-legged relay races, learned to do a square dance, and then shaved balloons covered with shaving cream. Daddy had to hold our balloon, and it was kind of scary when it popped. Little bits of shaving cream flew out and splattered all over him. He drew a very deep breath that made my heart thud with fear into the pit of my stomach. But then he only laughed—laughed and laughed. Maria and I laughed, too, giddy with relief. Maria was right about the other dads. They dressed up, but they just didn't compare to Daddy. He won the prize, and all evening the other dads kept making a game of trying to steal his fancy black hat.

Maria was proud of him. She and her friends were too wound up to eat, so they followed us outside and ran around playing tag while the rest of us ate watermelon. Daddy and I sat together, cross-legged in the grass, munching watermelon and seeing how far we could spit the seeds. After a while he nodded in Maria's direction. We both smiled. She was really enjoying her new status.

Maria and I had never had much free time, but after the party it grew even less. Mom couldn't do anything except go to the bathroom. If she pushed The Squid, she went into labor. If she fixed dinner, she went into labor. Whenever she went into labor, she cried. Whenever she got dressed, she cried. Her maternity clothes were almost too small, but she was too short to go up still another size. So she cried.

Maria and I were getting sick of all the extra work. Mom hovered over us because she had nothing else to do, and that made it worse. We couldn't satisfy her no matter how hard we tried. Yet we couldn't get mad at her because she always cried.

When the last day of school came, our friends were all set loose for a summer of fun. But we went home to work. The doctor had put Mom to bed earlier than he had originally expected. She wasn't allowed to do anything at all. Daddy fixed the meals, and Maria and I did the housework and yardwork. Mom could never be alone, so Maria and I had to rotate our free time whenever Daddy was at work.

Mom was getting so big she couldn't get out of her chair or bed by herself. So every time she had to get up, she cried. The doctor laughed and said she was as big around as she was tall. Mom cried again. He said he'd make house calls for the rest of her pregnancy because it would be too stressful for her to come to his office. Of course, she cried some more.

To make matters worse, something the doctor called toxemia had set in. Mom began to swell like a balloon, so Daddy bought a massager. We spent a lot of time watching TV and massaging her feet for her because she could see them only when they were elevated. There were special pillows in every room for propping her feet up, and none of her food could have any salt in it.

Maria and I got a real kick out of watching her tummy. The babies were so wiggly you could see them move from across the room. "They're fighting for position," Mom said. "Usually you can't see babies move from so far away."

The summer dragged for everyone. There was so much work to do. Maria and I had to weed the garden every morning by nine o'clock. We had to edge the lawn and do the laundry. But Daddy's cooking was the worst of all. He became so frustrated that he soon wound down to a routine of hamburgers on the barbecue or scrambled eggs and toast.

"If I have to look at one more unsalted scrambled egg, I think I'll die," Mom groaned.

Maria whimpered, "Can't we have something else tonight?"

But Mom was resigned. "Daddy's doing the best he can."

"Couldn't you sit in the kitchen and tell him what to do?" I begged.

Mom's green eyes brightened. "That's a great idea! When he walks in the door, you two let me do the talking."

"No problem," Maria giggled. "If it means a decent dinner, I'll quit talking for a week."

The instant Daddy came home, Mom raised herself up on her elbow. "Chuck, how would you like enchiladas for dinner tonight?" She sounded so pitiful. "I've been craving them all day. I could walk you through it—it's real easy."

Maria and I looked at each other with raised eyebrows. Boy, was she smooth!

Daddy's voice was even more pitiful than Mom's had been. "Are you sure I wouldn't ruin them?" Even he knew he wasn't a good cook.

"You'll be fine," she beamed. But the next hour was far from smooth sailing. Daddy had a hard time keeping all the filling inside the tortillas. When the bottom end of one squirted meat and cheese all over the floor, Mom laughed. Then Daddy got mad. Real mad.

Mom had to do a lot of apologizing and showing how much she appreciated him. But when the enchiladas finally hit the table, complete with an unsalted serving for Mom, they tasted great. Still, Mom didn't think she could handle walking Daddy through it again. She said Daddy was worse than a blind armadillo in the kitchen. He'd made such a mess that just thinking about it made her cringe. Besides, she couldn't sit up like that again. So we ate burgers and scrambled eggs the rest of the summer.

Mom really was pretty bad off. Some women from the Relief Society threw a shower for her, and she couldn't even go to that. She refused to be seen in her pajamas, even though they were the only thing she could fit into by then. So her visiting teachers brought all the gifts to our house afterward.

We were delighted when school started again, but Daddy was almost frantic about leaving Mom home alone. He bought a fancy pager and a new phone for her nightstand. We fixed her a sack lunch every morning before we left and came straight home from school every afternoon. I began realizing that Mom had been right: nine months is a long time.
