Michele R. Sorensen, Chainbreakers ( 1993)

13

Even a long, miserable pregnancy isn't a permanent condition. Despite all our efforts, the babies were finally on their way. Maria and I knew "premature" was something very dangerous, and we begged to go along to the hospital, but Daddy was adamant. So we went to school, where neither of us learned a thing. As soon as the bell rang, we ran for home. No one was there.

At last, at about four o'clock, Daddy burst through the door. "A boy and a girl!" he bellowed proudly. They were tiny and weak, so they'd need help breathing. Right now they were in intensive care, but the doctor said they were going to be just fine. And so would Mama, he added, sweeping us both off our feet for a hug. Charlene L. Hughes (he'd vowed the first would be named after him) had weighed in at barely four pounds. Vaughn B. Hughes had weighed two ounces more. We were lucky, he said, very lucky.

Then, somehow, we were supposed to go to sleep. Daddy explained that Grandma and Grandpa Hughes were going to pick us up the next day, feed us dinner, and take us to the hospital to see our new brother and sister.

I lay in bed dreaming about the babies. Mom's pregnancy had been a lot of work for everybody—and no eleven-year-old likes to lose free time—but I was beginning to think it had been a really great year. Even though we'd worked hard and done without some comforts (like good meals), we'd all been working together, and it had been fun.

I could hardly wait to see our twins. They were going to be rosy cheeked, curly haired, and stunningly beautiful. I knew it. And I was going to be a wonderful big sister.

A few weeks went by, and finally the babies reached a safe weight and gained strength. Maria and I could hardly contain ourselves the morning Mama announced they were coming home! They each had an I.D. picture, and a tag on one arm and one foot.

Mom left their arm tags on for a while, and I didn't blame her. With their diapers on, those two were identical. They didn't even have a distinguishing birthmark. Both had light brown peach fuzz on top of their heads and black, black eyes.

"Why are their eyes so dark?" I asked Mom, who was leaning back with her own eyes closed, attempting to sleep.

"The doctors put drops in their eyes so they wouldn't get infected. They'll turn back to their own color in a few weeks."

Daddy came into the room with his third or fourth load of things from the hospital. This time he had an armful of papers and two packs of diapers. "Where do you want these?"

Mom pointed across the room to the dresser. "That should be fine for now. I don't think the babies will be climbing for a little while yet."

Daddy stuck his tongue out at Mom teasingly. He'd been such a "nervous nellie" that he had actually baby-proofed the whole house before Mom even came home, weeks before the twins ever left the hospital. Funny things were stuck in all the outlets, hooks had been attached to the cupboards, and he had spent one morning crawling around the whole house on his knees picking up no-nos for babies. He couldn't seem to find enough ways to work off his excitement.

But while his energy had grown with his excitement, Mom seemed to have lost all of hers. She could hardly move. For the next couple of months we were constantly fetching diapers and bottles. Every three hours was feeding and changing time. The babies and Mom did nothing but eat and sleep. Nighttime was different, though. Sleep was out of the question because the babies, and therefore poor Mom, were up and down, up and down.

The fast Sunday after the twins came home was a great day for Daddy. He got to show off his babies and bless them in church. Grandpa and Grandma Hughes came, which was nice, everyone said, because they hadn't been to church for years. Grandpa said nothing had changed much, and he didn't seem very thrilled, but Daddy couldn't quit smiling. He even cried as he blessed his pretty little twins, all dressed up in white.

Looking back, I think fatherhood took on a new meaning for him that day. He was more sensitive after that. He even handed out compliments and was sometimes a little mushy. I'll never forget the night he came into our room at bedtime and told us he loved us. Just like that—out of the blue!

The next afternoon, Daddy was putting a load of diapers in the washer. I was in the upstairs bedroom.

"Liz!" Daddy hollered.

I thought he was going to tell me to hang a load of clean diapers out on the line, but I answered anyway, "What?"

"Could I speak to you for a minute?"

I ran down the stairs to the laundry room. "Yes, sir?"

"I have something important I want to ask you," Daddy said. "You seemed surprised when I told you I love you."

I was stunned. If I'd been caught off guard then, I nearly lost my teeth now. I never dreamed he'd draw attention to the moment when he'd gone soft.

"Don't you believe me? I love you and Maria just as much as I love these new babies. You're not afraid I'll love them more than I love you girls, are you?"

Daddy's questions were baffling. I'd never considered that he might love the twins more than us. To be honest, I'd never been quite sure he loved us at all. The only times he'd said so were when he wanted us to be adopted and when he wanted us to be baptized. I'd heard him say it a few times to other people, but I figured that's what grown-ups are supposed to say. And if it were true, well, he had a real weird way of showing it.

But this "I love you" had come when there was no one to impress and no ulterior motive. Maybe . . . . , a little part of me thought inside, maybe he is finally figuring out what it really means to love someone.

"Um," I answered, "it's just that you just don't say that very often. And about the babies, uh, well, all dads want their own kids, don't they? I mean, after all, we are adopted."

"No," he said gently. "You don't understand, Liz. Dads and moms love all their kids the same. I'm excited to have new babies of my own, but I would never give up you and Maria for anything in the world."

Now I was really confused. I knew this conversation had to be a result of our new religion, because it was so dedicated to families. Even in my Primary class they told us that family members should love each other the way Jesus loves us. I'd been amazed not only by how sure the people at church were about that but also by how easy it had been for me to believe it. The little voice inside me had whispered, Yes, Elizabeth, this is true.

The voice told me other things were true, too. I had felt so warm inside when I had learned that I am a child of God and that He loves me. Perhaps Daddy wasn't really going soft; maybe he was just realizing that little Elizabeth was also very important to Heavenly Father. Maybe the voice was talking to him, too!

Daddy reached his arms out toward me. I hesitated and then took a step forward. He gave me a great big hug—I think it was our first. "I guess I'll have to remember more often to tell you girls I love you," Daddy said. "It's important that you believe me."

/ / / / /

"Daddy wasn't always awful," I said out loud. "There was a time when he really tried hard to be good to us. I think he did everything he knew of to be a model father, then."

Darren's eyebrows were raised. "It wasn't a very long time," he said.

"No, but I think he was sincere."

"Was that when you were baptized?" Ben asked.

"Well, yes, but I think the high point was when we went to the temple."

/ / / / /

"Hello," Bishop Kendall said. "Come in and have a seat."

Maria and I filed through the door first, followed by our parents, each carrying a three-month-old baby and its paraphernalia.

"I'd like to sit closer to you tonight," the bishop said as he pulled his chair around in front of his desk and smiled at Maria and me. "Do you know why we are here?"

"Don't you?" Maria asked. Her question wasn't disrespectful; she truly didn't know.

Daddy gasped. "We haven't told them! We wanted someone to help answer questions," he explained. "I knew I probably wouldn't have the right answers."

Bishop Kendall's smile grew even bigger. "Your daddy is very smart. And I can't tell you how happy I am to share this moment with your family."

The babies weren't so happy. Mama was getting embarrassed, but the bishop didn't seem to care. "Go ahead and lay them down on the floor to stretch," he said. "We've had a lot of babies in this office, and not one has ever wanted to sit and talk."

Mom and the babies were grateful, but the bishop's mind had already gone back to the matter at hand. "Your mother and father have decided to become an eternal family," he told Maria and me. He sounded very proud of them.

"What's that?" Maria's voice sang out, high and cheerful.

Bishop Kendall spent several minutes talking just with Maria and me, patiently explaining, answering questions.

I was shocked. The idea that we might not see each other in heaven was entirely new to me. I'd always assumed that if we all came from heaven, we'd all return there, too.

Maria and I didn't leave the bishop wondering how we felt about this decision. I mean, who would say no? No one in their right mind! Heaven, I reasoned, is better than earth, and things had been pretty great the last few months. The bishop was promising even better things. This was even more exciting than my baptism! We were finally becoming the wonderful family I'd been dreaming about for so long—just like the Waltons on TV.

"I know I'm forgetting something," Daddy muttered several days later, walking back and forth in the front room.

Mom handed him a fussy baby. "Here, hold Charlie while I finish combing Liz's hair."

Now Daddy and Charlene were walking back and forth. Maria was all ready to go, so she was playing with Vaughn on the floor. She looked extra pretty in her baptism dress. Daddy had his white pants and shirt in a bag to change into later, along with bags containing Mom's white dress and the babies' outfits they'd been blessed in.

"Behave!" Mom commanded my orange-red hair as if it were alive. People only rave about naturally curly hair if they've never tried to tame it.

"Come on, Maureen," Daddy called in the voice he used when he was trying to be patient.

Mom began caking on the hairspray. "He's forgetting to relax and enjoy his day," she whispered to me.

"Aren't you ready? I don't want to be late for this," Daddy said, coming to the bathroom door.

Charlie spit up. Mom produced a rag for mopping up father and daughter. "Yes, this is as good as it gets. I'll bring Vaughn." As she made her way into the front room, she said over her shoulder, "When have you ever been late for anything, anyway, Chuck?"

Maria and I each grabbed a diaper bag and then followed our parents out to the station wagon. Getting everyone buckled in was almost a ritual. "White clothes—check; babies' whites—check; bottles—check; diapers and wipes—check; recommend—Recommend! I knew I forgot something!"

Daddy hopped out of our station wagon and ran back into the house. Mom chuckled, but she sounded irritated. "I can't believe he forgot the recommend," she said.

Daddy ran back to the car, breathless. "Maureen! Do you have your keys?" It was all Maria and I could do to keep from bursting out laughing. Mom reached into her purse and handed him her keys. She didn't say a word as he ran back to the front door. Pretty soon Daddy came bounding back. He leaped over the ornamental cactus patch in our front yard and into the car. I believe we exceeded the speed limit all the way, but we arrived at the temple on time.

As soon as we had pulled into a parking spot, Daddy began unloading everyone. Mom and Dad were getting things organized and Charlene and Vaughn were making noises, but the moment I looked at the temple, I was caught up into my own world.

Although we'd driven by the Arizona Temple many times before, it had never seemed quite this beautiful to me. Sunlight was teasing the leaves of the palm trees, glancing off the bright temple walls and dancing across the bas-relief sculptures that decorated them. It was such a lovely, sweet place that I even forgot to breathe.

"Come on," Maria said, tugging on my sleeve. "Don't stand there with your mouth open."

People in white welcomed us as soon as we stepped inside the big doors. Two grandmas were waiting to take the twins, and two more came forward to take Maria's and my hands. Mommy and Daddy would be busy with some very special things for some time, they explained. Meanwhile, we could stay in the children's waiting room.

What a wonderful place! There were cribs for babies to sleep in, play pens, toys, coloring books, and crayons—more than we could possibly do if we'd had all day.

It seemed like no time at all until another grandma in white asked us to get ready. Maria and I dressed the twins, while the grandmas smiled and exclaimed softly over how quick we were and what a good job we'd done.

Then we took an elevator that opened onto a very long hall. We passed many doors and lots of people dressed in white. The carpets were beautiful, the walls were beautiful, the furniture, the lights, the flowers—everything! But I was marveling at more than the beauty I could see. I knew this place was holy. Everyone we passed looked happy. No one had to tell us to whisper—we felt the reverence inside ourselves. We felt the peace.

The grandma holding my hand stopped in front of a big door. Gently she swung it open, and I saw a room filled with familiar faces. The whole ward must have been packed in there! Mommy and Daddy were in the center of the room, holding hands and waiting for us.

I had never, never, ever seen such a beautiful place. The chandelier was made of tiny dangling pieces of glass, and its brightness glittered everywhere. I couldn't express the awe I felt, but I knew this was a place where truth and love flowed freely, like pure water. Like the light from that chandelier.

I just stood there, the wonder of it all washing over me.

The grandma holding my hand led me forward and showed me where to kneel at the altar. Maria followed, and two ladies in white assisted the twins. We all held hands.

My deepest wish was coming true! All my secret dreams, so precious I'd hardly dared think them, were becoming reality. This was the most happily-ever-after fairy tale I could imagine, yet it was immeasurably more significant, more real, more lasting.

A very kind man in white began talking to us. I wasn't sure whether I was supposed to close my eyes, but I didn't. I couldn't take them off what was around me. I couldn't take them off my daddy. Tears were streaming down his face. Mom had bowed her head low and was very still. The twins were awake but quiet. Maria and I threw smiles at each other.

Everyone in the room suddenly whispered amen, and I realized I hadn't heard a word the man had been saying. "Amen," Maria and I echoed.

Then the man asked us to stand together and look into one of the mirrors that hung on all the walls. There was our family going on and on in the reflections: Mama and Daddy each holding a twin, Maria and I on either side.

We are an eternal family, my heart sang. I was so happy I felt as if I were floating.

The man explained to us that if we lived the best we could and repented when we made mistakes, our family couldgo on forever, just like the reflections. On and on and on and on . . .

Daddy squeezed Mama and kissed the top of her head. He bent down and lifted Maria off her feet in a hug. Then, turning toward me, Daddy knelt and gave me a tremendous, yet gentle hug. "I LOVE YOU," he said.
