Michele R. Sorensen, Chainbreakers ( 1993)

14

Our future looked so perfect when we went to the temple. God had answered my prayers—we really seemed to have become the wonderful family of my dreams."

"What went wrong?" Ben asked.

Darren's arm around my waist squeezed a little tighter. "I've wondered the same thing for years," I answered with a sigh. "I was so young. It was all so confusing."

"Have you ever talked with your parents about it?"

"Oh yes, I've talked with Mom many times."

"And did she give you answers?"

"Yes, but they have never made any sense to me." Ben was waiting for me to go on, so I took a deep breath. "I think the answers to my questions—questions that I asked of my mother, of Darren, of God—never made sense because I was asking the wrong questions."

"What kind of questions?"

"For years I asked, What did I do wrong? Why was Heavenly Father mad at me? Why did I deserve this? Was I an awful person?"

"Oh, I see," Ben breathed.

"Only recently have I understood that what happened was a result of people making choices and acting on their own decisions. God was not punishing me. What happened was not a reflection of my value in His eyes." "You're right, Elizabeth." Ben spoke gently but with conviction. "The Lord has told us over and over that He wouldn't put us in any situation without also giving us what we need to overcome our challenges. He must have a lot of faith in you to believe that you could be in this family and still return to Him. It takes a lot of strength to break the chains of an abusive cycle."

/ / / / /

"I'm never going back!" my mother yelled as she went running into the house. "If all you Mormons want to live like hypocrites, you can. If those other women are stupid idiots, so be it!" She threw a diaper bag down onto the couch, pulled off her high heels, and stomped toward her bedroom. At the entry to the hall she stopped and turned around. "I am not going to be sucked so far into this that I can't get out! I'm a whole person. I think for myself and refuse to be at your mercy. I don't need a man to tell me when I may breathe!"

"What?" Daddy stood in the front doorway. His face was blank and pale with shock. "What are you talking about, Maureen?" He took a few steps forward and held out his hands.

"Don't play ignorant with me!" Mom growled defiantly from across the room. "I found out what you men do during priesthood meeting." Her voice was almost hysterical. "I can't believe I almost fell for it!" Then she turned, and her green eyes sparked. "If you think you're going to keep me barefoot and pregnant, waiting to ask how high you want me to jump, then get used to disappointment, Charles Hughes!"

"Maureen, you don't understand something. I'm sure that's not what it means." Standing on the porch, looking in through the screen door, I was astonished by the sound of Daddy's voice. He seemed confused but genuinely concerned. He wasn't answering Mom's anger with anger but with love. "Give me a chance to explain, Maureen."

Mom shook her head violently.

"Whoever you've been talking with is misinformed."

" . . . .'Whoever' is right here in these books," Mom said, stalking over to the locked cupboard in the china cabinet and pulling out five or six paperbacks. "Not just one book, Chuck, but many, written by women just like me. These are women who tried desperately to make their failing marriages work. They tried to keep their husbands happy, while those selfish men went right on manipulating them!"

Mom's voice was high, pinched with emotion. She shouted at Daddy for hours, but not a word of it made sense to Maria or me. She kept repeating the letters ERA and words like self-fulfillment, but we couldn't figure out what it all meant. Finally, we went around to the back door and slipped upstairs into our bedroom. Below us, we heard the babies cry and get fed, we heard doors slam and bang, and we heard Mom yell. I'm still amazed by Daddy's patience that night. He'd never allowed anyone to speak to him in that tone of voice. In the past, if Mom had ever gotten even remotely angry, he'd verbally put her in her place at once. She'd always kept her mouth shut at his command.

Over the next few months, things got more and more foggy. Eventually, I began putting two and two together, but I didn't like what they added up to, and I hoped I was wrong. I prayed I was wrong.

My dream was crumbling right before my eyes. I felt betrayed. God, where are you? my heart screamed.

Maria and I kept going to church with Daddy. One Sunday Sister Dobson taught us that if you pray with only righteous desires, your prayers will be answered. She told us faith could move mountains. Well, my desires were righteous, and I had a lot of faith. I wasn't asking for any mountains to be moved, only for a happy family. I wasn't asking for anything God hadn't given other people.

I tried to hold onto the dream, but it slipped through my fingers. I even asked Mom some point-blank questions. She gave me answers I couldn't understand, but I knew she'd interpreted things from the temple session to mean she was less valuable than Daddy. "Why should he be my boss?" she demanded. "I am just as good a person—even better! And I've never done some of the awful things he has."

After her first big blowup, the fits of pettiness grew in violence and frequency. She quit going to church, and she made a lot of changes that suggested she was becoming more and more convinced she'd made the wrong choice in going to Daddy's church.

For example, she'd always disliked the modest dress code Latter-day Saints voluntarily practice, but now she violated it flagrantly. "Whoever made that up," she announced, "did NOT live in Arizona!" And under her breath she muttered about some conspiracy to make women feel unattractive. She read a put-down for women into every little thing anyone said or did. She told us the scriptures have two meanings: the right one, and the one husbands want their wives to believe. Pretty soon she had an impressive list of things that Daddy and his priesthood buddies were going to do to their wives—and she was quick to recite it.

I began to disbelieve my mom. It was that little voice again, whispering, Be patient. Your mom loves you. But she doesn't understand.

/ / / / /

Ben said it took strength to break the chains of the cycle of abuse. I wished God hadn't thought I was up to it! There were so many chains . . .

"Chains," I echoed my thoughts out loud. "Our house was full of them. Chains of physical abuse and sexual perversion were inflicted on me by my father." Compared with the memories, my voice seemed distant. "But Mom did her part as well. She was bound with chains of mistrust and fear and cynicism. She left the Church without knowing whether it was true. She joined as a sacrifice for her family, but she turned away and chose to believe what deceitful people said about the doctrine."

"She never had a testimony of her own?"

"No." I looked down. "That's how everything beautiful began to fall apart."

It still hurt to think about it, and by their silence, I knew Darren and Ben could tell. If you've tasted both the good life and the bad life, why would you choose to go back to the bad? Why? I had always figured there were things Mom didn't tell me, but only in the past year or two have I come to understand what some of those things were. After she married Daddy, Mom discovered that Grandpa Hughes had been abusive—perniciously abusive. He'd even attacked Mom sexually once while he was staying in our home. She wanted to trust Daddy and believe he'd moved beyond the problems his father and grandfather had, but she was paralyzed by confusion and fear.

Worst of all, Mom had quit believing in God years before. She had nowhere to turn, no one she could ultimately trust. When she was only five years old, both of her parents had died in a car crash. My mom had been taught that God answers all prayers, and she'd taken that promise literally. So she'd knelt down and prayed for hours in her closet, but her mom and dad never came back. After that, she quit believing in God and His love. Every time something awful happened to her—and plenty of awful things did—she saw each new incident as proof that God wasn't real. She kept telling herself that a loving Father in Heaven would never let such things happen.

"Time has revealed things about my Mom that have given me insight into the way she acted," I told Ben. "But that information didn't come when I was desperate to get it. If I'd understood her long ago, everything would have been so much easier."

"Did you have to work your way through love and forgiveness first?" Ben asked, then smiled understandingly when I nodded. "I'm glad you got the insights, even though they seem late. It isn't easy to accept that there are things we may never know about certain people in this life. But we can determine the way we will act and feel toward them rather than being slaves to what they do."

"You're saying act, not react—right?" Darren broke in.

"Exactly," Ben said.

I understood the principle they were talking about. In fact, it has been an important factor in discovering how to move on with my life. But that doesn't deny how hard it was to take control and act independently upon my own future. It doesn't deny how horribly I suffered before I found the way to change things.

To my twelve-year-old eyes, it seemed as if Mom had pulled her finger from the dike and thumbed her nose at the rest of us. No matter how hard we tried to stop all the little insidious trickles, the entire dam was sure to fall. And when it did, the filthy flood crashed over us all.

/ / / / /

Shortly after the babies were born and not long before we went to the temple, our home became a three-ring circus: Daddy decided he would go to college and improve himself.

He was miserable at his job. Other people got promotions before he did just because they had some little slip of paper called a diploma, not because of their work. So Daddy left the post office and began going to school full time. Meanwhile, until graduation, the bishop said that he and Mom could work for the Church as regular staff at the Bishops' Storehouse. And Mom, to our surprise, agreed to go back to church in the name of a brighter future.

I, too, was having my own new educational experiences. That was the year I started junior high. My new school was much larger than the old elementary, and there were students attending from four other elementaries, so I made many new friends.

Teri and I didn't have classes together anymore. We saw each other at church, but with all the changes, my best friend soon became Rosa. She was the zany, bubbly, Latin beauty who first talked me into trying out for swing choir.

In junior high, we were still pretty much little kids, afraid to touch hands with our partners and uncertain about doing even the most simple dance steps. But there were a few girls who had taken tap and ballet lessons, and that gave them an edge. Never having had any training, I could only rely on the quality of my voice and my eagerness to get involved. Not until I'd committed myself for tryouts did I realize how stiff my competition would be. That was when Daddy came to my rescue by teaching me some dance steps.

He got out his old records and showed me the basics to all the routines. He coached me on how to smile and when to breathe and taught me other fundamentals of stage presence. Daddy even got acquainted with the choir director and volunteered to chaperon our first road trip.

Daddy seemed even more excited about my being selected than I was. In my opinion, the entire experience was a kick, and I was pleasantly surprised by the way things worked out. But what really meant a lot to me was the way Daddy cared. Throughout the rest of that first season, He would ask me to do a shuffle-step-kick or sing a difficult harmony as if it were our own private joke. Maybe I remember that period of my life in a rosy light because that was one of the last times he relaxed with me, cared specifically about me, and had a good time.

He carried such a heavy credit load at the university that his teachers came right out and told him he was nuts. They accused him of trying suicide by college burnout. But Daddy was under too much pressure to take things slowly.

Mom wanted more money. She took another job working nights. That way she could work at the Bishops' Storehouse all morning while the twins played beside her in a playpen. Daddy unloaded trucks and did paperwork during the morning. Then, when Maria and I came home from school, Dad took off for night classes and Mom left the babies with us while she went to her other job.

Daddy was becoming a very irritable person again. We tip-toed around whenever he wasn't in class because the littlest noises made him angry when he was trying to study. Daddy had a phobia about tests, so he had to work extra hard to remember things. He memorized information forward and backward. Even years later, not only could he answer the questions from his freshman classes but he also could tell you exactly which book and page to find those answers on. That's how he maintained his 3.8 grade-point average.

During the first quarter Daddy took a self-awareness class that led him to tape up recipe cards all over the house. They said little things he wanted to remember, such as, "Stand tall and confident," "Stay one step ahead of the others," and "Winners sit at the front." He worked at applying those principles in his own life and vigorously encouraged us to implement them as well.

So, off our family marched to the front of the chapel every Sunday (at first with Mom, later without her and the twins). And maybe Daddy was right when he said you learn more at the front. At least, I was learning things that were going to be very important for the rest of my life.

One time my Sunday School teacher taught about the Creation. At the end of the lesson, she gave each of us a picture of a slightly clumsy ballerina standing at the exercise barre and looking into the mirror, where her reflection shone in a perfect image of grace and poise. Across the bottom of the picture were the words "God don't make no junk."

I figured this quotation was just as valuable as one of Daddy's cards—but this one was mine. Something told me it was absolutely true and tremendously important. When I got home, I colored the picture and taped it up on my bedroom mirror. It hung there for years.

The day I brought home that picture, its meaning burned deep within me. But in the successive waves of confusion that washed over our family, I discovered that I had to sit very still on my bed to remember the warm feeling it had given me when I'd first seen it. Why weren't we trying to be a celestial family anymore? What had I done wrong to lose my dream-come-true?

Everyday living was much harder now. The heartaches hurt even more than the first ones I'd experienced as a little child. I knew things didn't have to be this way.

"Mom, can I ask you something?" I scooted up beside where she was folding laundry and started in on some diapers.

Mom didn't even look up, but I was getting used to that by now. It seemed she and Daddy had forgotten how to smile or even how to say hi. We kids just seemed to be in their way.

"Mom, do you and Daddy hate me?"

That got her attention, but she went on folding as she answered in a scolding voice. "No, Liz! Of course not."

"Well, then, why are you always yelling at me? Why isn't anything I do good enough for you and Daddy?"

I wanted her to hug me, but instead I got an even angrier response. "You know we love you, Liz. We just don't like the things you do."

"Why does everyone have to yell about everything?" I was crying now.

"We have a lot of stress, and that's what makes us yell," Mom said matter-of-factly. "We don't like our life the way it is right now, and we're working very hard to make it better."

That seemed like a dumb answer to me, so I left and went to my room. I thought things had been better than they'd ever been before, until Daddy quit his job and Mom quit the Church. I didn't see any need for all this change to come ripping through our world. I tried to talk about my feelings only a few more times. More and more questions gathered in my heart, but the answers Mom gave seemed to get dumber and dumber.
