Michele R. Sorensen, Chainbreakers ( 1993)

15

School once again became my escape from reality. As the mood around our house steadily declined, I began participating in as many extracurricular activities as I could. I tried out for the swim team and made it. I practiced day and night to make it into the high school swing choir (they took lots of road trips!) and signed up as a volunteer aide in the office so I could go to school early once a week.

On Friday nights and Saturdays I worked to pay for my choir trips, choir clothing, and swim gear by tending children. On weeknights Maria and I were baby-sitters, housekeepers, and full-time students. When we weren't grounded, we went to MIA. When we were grounded, we lost all our telephone privileges, had to stay home from church, and couldn't take baby-sitting jobs. That made it hard for me to earn enough money to pay for my school activities.

School offered less of an escape for Maria. She wasn't doing very well, and she began changing her circle of friends. "Losers" and "undesirables," Mom called them, but Maria didn't pay any attention. These were kids who didn't care if she got a 3.0 or if she couldn't get out of the house. They couldn't, either.

Vacation days were soon upon us. "This summer isn't going to be easy," Mom said, referring to the third job she'd taken when school got out. "But once I land a permanent spot with the hospital instead of this part-time one" (she was a front-desk receptionist and after-hours answering service), "I'll quit the others."

I soon went back to worrying about when the next beating would be. Daddy had begun hitting us again, but not with the kind of blows that left really bad bruises—at least on the outside.

/ / / / /

"Daddy! Daddy! Come home!"

"What's the matter, Maria?" I could hear his voice through the telephone receiver. "Just tell me."

"You know the swamp cooler on the roof?" Maria paused to hear his answer. "Well, something's wrong, and water's leaking all over our bedroom! The carpet's all squishy and wet on one side."

Daddy came home and looked things over. He turned the swamp cooler off and told us to gather everything up and stack it all on the dry side of the room. Then he went back to the Bishops' Storehouse, where he and Mom were trying to finish inventorying a truckload of items that had come in that day.

Maria and I worked for hours, taking apart our beds and pushing our heavy dresser against the other wall. All the little things got stacked on top in total chaos.

When Daddy finally came home that night, he was too tired to look at the problem even though everyone was hot. Maria and I slept on the Hide-a-bed in the TV room and got up early to search for our Sunday clothes.

"I'm not going to church today, girls. I'd better stay home and try to fix the cooler," Daddy said, coming upstairs a few minutes before Sunday School. He exploded as he came through the door. "What the heck is this mess?" he yelled. He began chucking things at us. "You're a couple of real slobs!"

Maria and I started to cry. "We did the best we could, Daddy," I said, furious even in my fear. "The furniture was heavy. We didn't think it had to be done neatly, just quickly, before it got wet."

Daddy made a simpery face and used a whiny voice. "We did the best we could," he mimicked with disgust. "You should've been raised in a barn. You're a pair of pigs!" He threw my jewelry box, and it broke against the other wall. Then he did the same with my porcelain vase. "Yeah, that's a real good idea. In a barn . . . " he growled, grabbing us.

Clenching our hair in each of his hands, he dragged us downstairs and through the kitchen to the back door. As he pushed us out the door, he kicked us both in the rear, sending us tumbling to the pavement. Maria's dress tore; her arm was bleeding.

"Get your faces out of my sight! And don't ever come back!" he yelled. "I told you I wouldn't let pigs in my house. Go find some dump to live in!" Daddy slammed the door and locked us out.

Maria and I ran. We didn't even know where we were going. We just ran and ran, tears streaming down our faces.

"Liz," Maria coughed at last, choking for air between sobbing and running. She was holding her side. "Where are we going to go?"

Her words stopped me in the middle of the sidewalk. I stood there for a long time, looking at her, my own shoulders heaving with each breath. I began a desperate inventory of all my friends. Finally, I thought of something worth saying. "Let's go to Lonnie's. I've known her since kindergarten, and her mom hates Daddy. Lonnie told me just last week that she couldn't believe he—"

I broke off midsentence because Maria had quit sobbing long enough to look at me. Her eyes were big and round and void of hope. I wasn't very convinced, either—we both remembered too well our experience after going to Andy's house—but Maria didn't have anything better to offer. Most of her new friends had parents like Daddy.

"I wish I could keep you girls," Lonnie's mom said when we finished telling her what had happened to us that day and in the past. "Let's call the police and say you are runaways. When you tell them you want assistance, they'll investigate your father and nail him to the wall. What he's done to you two is illegal."

So we phoned, and the next thing we knew, we were placed in a foster home to wait for a hearing. That home was the filthiest place I'd ever seen. Neither of the parents had jobs; they just lived off the money they received for doing foster care. Although they weren't mean, they weren't friendly, either. Until Lonnie gave us each a change of clothes, we hadn't had anything except the Sunday dresses on our backs, and they were getting dirty quick in that house.

We had to wait three days for our hearing. On the appointed morning we got up early, put on our dresses, and stood by the window until the attorney came to get us. She arrived three hours late, with bad news.

"Hi there," the attorney said, smiling. She was a young woman with mousy brown hair and tiny eyes that hid behind a pair of round glasses. "There's been a change of plan. Your dad has plea-bargained. That means he pleaded guilty to the charges against him, and since it's his first offense—"

"It is not!" I shrieked in terror. "He's been doing it for years! We told you that!"

The attorney was very calm. She cleared her throat and clarified, "This is the first time your father has been brought to court for his actions. The judge was lenient because he had never been in court before and because he pleaded guilty. A social worker will be coming into your home for the next few months. If there are any more problems, she will help you take care of them."

"Is she gonna live with us?" Maria asked.

"No."

"Then what good's she gonna be? He'll just hide it like he always has. He'll wait until she's gone. She'll never know."

"You have to tell her. She is there to protect you."

"What if we refuse to go home?" I asked, folding my arms defensively.

"You don't have that choice," the attorney said, squelching my brave stand. "The judge says you must."

We walked through the front door of a house that felt colder and darker than ever before. Mom stayed in her room. Daddy looked at us with contempt and told us to get cleaned up.

Our bedroom was exactly as we'd left it. The carpet was dry and matted; the ceiling and one wall had water damage all over them. Broken things were still lying on the floor where Daddy had thrown them. We cleaned up what was ruined and put everything else away. Mom didn't speak a single word to us for days, but Daddy had plenty to say during dinner.

"When I showed the judge my picture of your filthy pigpen, I told him, 'This is what I have to put up with all the time.' And you know what? He felt sorry for me, not you! You think you're so picked on, but he didn't even care."

Daddy was apparently enjoying his food. He chewed with gusto and took a second serving while everyone else was still struggling to force down the first bite. "Well, now you're back, but that's only because I said I would take you back. So listen up. If you want to be out on the streets like bag ladies—or dead—just squeal one time to our social worker. Tell her how mean I am and how I hate you. I guarantee you won't ever open your mouths to anyone again!"

Maria and I got the message loud and clear.

We lied to our social worker during the months that followed. Maria admitted to being lazy at school and said she would start trying. I confessed to being a mouthy, hot-tempered brat who tried to make trouble. I voluntarily promised to obey and honor my parents as the scriptures tell us we should. Daddy said he would be more patient with our many imperfections, and Mom stated over and over that she didn't have any problems.

One day the social worker quit coming. She had officially labeled our family rehabilitated and functioning.

/ / / / /

"You do have to take control of your own life," I told Ben. "But that isn't an easy thing to do, especially while you're living at home."

"I didn't say it was." He put up both hands in innocence. "There are ways and means available to help, though."

"That's true." I was ready to let his comment alone, but Darren spoke up.

"The first time Liz ran away, the adults she turned to for help immediately phoned her dad to come get her. Going home was a terrible, painful experience."

Remembering the beating I'd had, I wondered how those strong words terrible and painful could sound like such a measly understatement.

"Did you ever try to get help from someone who was qualified?" Ben asked me.

"Like turning myself over to the police?"

"That would be one way," he said, looking at me closely. "I see you did. And things didn't get better?"

"Is living in fear of your life an improvement?"

Ben nodded again and sighed. "Just this week I was reading about this problem in a Denver newspaper. The title of the article was 'Aurora Gets Tough on Batterers,' but from what I've read and from what women like you have told me, I'm not sure tough is the right word."

"How's that?" Darren asked.

"Well, in all fairness, most of the cases that don't end in a guilty plea do wind up with a conviction. But what concerns me is that roughly one-third of the offenders plead guilty within the first twenty-four hours." [^1]

"Like my dad," I said softly. "Then they're free to run straight home and do it again."

"I guess that's exactly what worried me. Abusers realize that plea-bargaining is an easy way out. All too often, it becomes a loophole for slipping through the fingers of justice."

Ben's words described Daddy's situation perfectly. And once you've gotten away with something, it becomes easier to do it again.

Daddy had turned back into the angry, foul-mouthed, destructive man of a few years before. But this time he was even uglier. Now he was wearing a suit on Sundays and exuding a wonderful-person, great-father image. He was becoming comfortable living a monstrous lie.

Horrified, I watched as Satan slowly, subtly clamped my family in his "awful" and "everlasting chains." I am an eyewitness to how he cheats men's souls and stirs them up to anger. I know that's how he leads them, one step at a time, "carefully down to hell." [^2]

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] Richard G. Scott, "Healing the Tragic Scars of Abuse," Ensign, May 1992, p. 32.
[^2] 2. 2 Nephi 28:19-23.
