Michele R. Sorensen, Chainbreakers ( 1993)

16

Nephi describes Satan's chains. He explains how at first that great deceiver uses nothing more than a "flaxen cord." Because his victim isn't struggling to get away, one little flaxen cord is plenty. But by the time the poor slave discovers his bondage, strong chains have been locked into place.

That's what I saw with Daddy. I didn't understand it then, but the passing years and studying the scriptures and many, many prayers have made things clearer. With time, I've begun to sort out what was once a holocaust of confusion.

Making sense of what happened next in my life began when I realized this simple fact: an abuser is seeking control.

Daddy had been seeking control until the judge handed it to him on a lovely silver platter. He interpreted the court's dismissal as an encouraging pat on the back. "No problem, Chuck. You're doing fine," the situation seemed to say. And in the new light of what had just happened, Daddy saw control as nothing more than a toy. Power was what real men wanted. When Daddy decided he wanted it too, he voluntarily upgraded those flaxen cords to iron bands.

/ / / / /

There had been some rapid changes in our house once Daddy quit his job. But after Maria and I turned ourselves in to the police, things really sped up. Mom became different, too.

For one thing, her hair color kept changing. Now she was a pencil-woven blonde—and every bit as beautiful as she had been when her hair was long and auburn, or layered and jet black, or shoulder length and frosted. I'd become used to frequent changes in Mom's hair color and makeup over the last few years, but there was something else I couldn't put my finger on. She didn't seem like my mother anymore.

One conspicuous difference was that she seemed so full of energy in spite of the many hours she was working. Hers was a strange kind of energy. It was tainted by an angry, belligerent attitude one moment and a boisterous, loud-joking, and crude personality the next. About a year later, I caught her popping pills and began to understand her moodiness. She'd been using drugs to stay awake.

I have never understood what happened to Daddy, though. Things had been miserable when he'd had two faces, but I never dreamed he would add a third face to his wardrobe.

There was the good-father look he wore on Sundays, though he'd mothballed that one around the house. Then there was the mean, angry, physically and verbally abusive face that I was seeing more and more often. But along came a third face that I'd seen only twice before—both times in the toolshed. Manipulative, peculiar . . . The lips on this face said 'I love you,' but the eyes terrified me beyond words.

/ / / / /

Coming home from swim practice one evening, I found Maria crying. She was sitting alone in the dark, in our bedroom with most of her clothes off.

"What's wrong?" I asked, flopping down beside her and handing her a blanket off the end of the bed.

"I . . . I'm . . . not sure." She was still in the hiccoughing stage of grief, trying to bring her silent sobs under control.

"Then why are you crying?" I worked on getting her to look at me. "Why?"

She turned away. When I put my hand on her shoulder, Maria shrugged it off. "Don't touch me!" Her words were terse, anxious. "I'm just scared. That's all. Scared to death. I don't want to be alone in this house anymore."

"Maria, what happened?"

"I'm not sure!" Her confusion and anxiety exploded. "That's just the problem. I wish I knew!" Then, drawing a deep breath, she added cryptically, "Whatever it was, it wasn't good."

"Come off it!" I was irritated by her babbling; this seemed to be just another of her vague explanations. "Spit it out, for once. Make a little sense!"

Maria was staring at me, her round brown eyes brimming with fresh tears.

I softened my voice. "Start at the beginning, and speak clearly."

After a minute, Maria wiped her nose and swallowed hard. "I was here, at my desk, doing my homework, when Daddy came in our room. He started asking me questions about what we'd done at the Beehive party. I didn't know why he was here, Liz! He was staring at me in a strange way. It was so scary!"

Maria lunged to her feet and walked across the room, twisting her hands together. "The next thing I know, I'm here, lying on the floor, Liz. And where," she wailed, "WHERE are the rest of my clothes?"

"Well, now, my dear," I began trying to laugh away this absurdity, "if YOU don't know how your clothes came off, who does?"

"Exactly!" she whispered, her words bouncing around the walls of our room like cannon fire. She stopped walking and leaned, sort of huddled up, in her corner, staring off into space. I wanted to get up and run somewhere far away, to shout, to scream, to break something, to laugh and laugh and laugh—to do anything! But I couldn't move.

All at once Maria turned on me, angry. "I don't want to be home alone with Daddy anymore, Liz. Ever since I was little, I haven't been able to remember my times tables around him. I've never been able to do my chores well enough to please him. And now . . . now . . . " Her bottom lip began to quiver, and her voice cracked. "Now I can't even remember what I've been doing for the past two hours!" Her voice was so low I could hardly make out the words. "Something's very wrong, Liz. Something . . . I don't understand," her voice dropped away entirely.

This all seemed far-fetched to me. "What are you trying to say, Maria? Can't remember? That's ridiculous!"

At the impatience in my voice, Maria broke down completely. She slumped onto the floor and started sobbing. "I don't know how it could have happened, or . . . if . . . or . . . I just don't know, Liz . . . "

"Know what, Maria? What?"

"It's spooky, Liz. I think he's driving me insane!"

I turned away and noticed her clothes, heaped on the floor behind the door. My stomach lurched, and I came abruptly to my feet. "Maybe you passed out."

"I don't know," Maria moaned. "I just don't know."

"Well, I don't either!" My frustration blared through the crossness of my voice. "Don't go anywhere near him, okay? Do your homework in the twins' room or something."

"How's that going to help, Liz?" she whined, looking at me as if I were off my rocker. "How—?"

I didn't know what to think; the whole thing was weird. Exasperated and confused, I jumped up and stormed out of the room.

Now I was the one wearing blinders. I knew what might have happened, but somehow I denied my suspicions—and yet I didn't, not completely. Instead, I focused on what seemed like the distant future. Someday I'd be able to go away on my own. When I turned eighteen, I'd be legally free to get out of there. That was only four years away . . . four years.

/ / / / /

"Hi, Liz," Daddy said one early evening in October. "What are you up to?"

As I looked into that eerie I-love-you face, I answered, "Watching TV." Inside, I was thinking he'd just asked a really dumb question. Quickly turning back to the screen, I tried to lose myself in an episode of "M*A*S*H."

"Oh," Daddy said, sitting down on the floor beside me, a "Fashion Duds" bag in his hand. "You sure look good in those shorts. Your legs have such a nice tan, Liz, especially for a red-head. You must have spent a lot of time outside last summer."

"Yep," I replied, without following his gaze to my white shorts. Of course I had. Maria and I did all the yard work around our house. When I turn eighteen, the dumb questions and the yardwork will all be behind me, I thought eagerly, burying myself in Hawkeye's troubles at the mess hall.

"I'll bet you look real good in a swimsuit," he murmured.

I pretended to be totally engrossed in my show.

"You sure do have some strong-looking legs, Liz."

"Swim team helps," I said politely, realizing he wasn't going to be ignored. "We work out a lot."

Casually, he pulled a black, french-cut suit with a zipper front from the bag he'd been carrying. "Why don't we try this new one on you? I'd like to see you in it."

Maria's tearful words flared across my mind. Several weeks had passed since then; I'd almost forgotten it. Inside me, the familiar voice was screaming, Be careful, Liz. Don't trust him, Liz.

"Nah," I answered warily, "It's not my style."

Daddy's laugh sounded like a snort. "Hah! Girls like you don't need to be modest, Liz. Black's going to look striking against that nice tan and foxy red hair of yours. Show me, okay?"

"No," I said flatly, turning back to "M*A*S*H" again. But I couldn't get a handle on what was happening. That was the first time I'd ever turned down a new swimsuit. I could really use one, and my funds were low right then. But something inside me was firmly insisting that I shouldn't touch this suit, not even for a million dollars!

Mentally, I fumbled for an excuse to leave. A commercial . . . . I started hoping for a commercial. Maybe I could say I had to go finish my homework. The next few moments crawled by slowly. I began praying the phone would ring or Maria would come home—anything!

I felt Daddy's hand slide up and down my leg. "I sure am proud of you, Liz. You're a real sharp girl." His fingertips went up under the hem of my shorts. "I'm glad you're doing so well at—Gee, Liz! You sure are soft."

I glared up at him. Heat and anger filled my face. I wanted to scream at him to get his hands off me, but my mouth wouldn't work.

Daddy quickly moved his hand to my back and patted me as if I were one of the guys. "Now where was I before you side-tracked me?"

I wanted to yell at him, "I sidetracked you?" but my mouth was still stuck.

"Oh yes . . . swimming. I'll have to squeeze one of your meets into my schedule some time."

Daddy didn't speak for several minutes. He seemed absorbed in the television program, but his hands weren't so interested in the comedy.

Awful memories flooded over me. Maria's voice kept saying, "I don't know, I don't know . . . " I remembered the toolshed . . . sitting on my bed . . . shivering with fright.

"You sick pervert!" I heard myself yell. I was standing on my feet, screaming. "Keep your hands off me! I hate you! Just stay away from me!" Then I was running to the bathroom. I locked the door behind me. Maria and I had been told never to do that, but I didn't even hesitate.

Daddy banged on the door. "Let me in, Liz. I'm sorry. It's not what you think. Please, Liz, let me explain." He coaxed and begged, sounding deceitful and desperate.

Don't open that door, Liz, the voice inside me said. No matter what, don't open that door.

Then I remembered the extra key on top of the door frame. He only had to look up . . .

Please, please don't let him find it, I prayed. I climbed into the linen closet and shut the door. The closet was very large, stretching all along one wall beneath the eaves of the roof, so I wiggled between towels and bedding all the way into the back corner.

I'm not sure how long I was there or how long it was before Daddy went away. My mind was frozen to the point where I couldn't even think . . .

"Open the stupid door, Liz." I suddenly realized Maria was yelling. "You're not funny."

Crawling out through all the towels, I wondered when she'd come home. "Sorry," I said as I turned the knob. "My stomach's upset."

I'm not sure why I lied. I never told Maria what had happened to me that day. I didn't tell anyone for years. I was too ashamed. I felt filthy. And the words Daddy had used continued to haunt me in nightmares: "YOU side-tracked me . . . YOU side-tracked me . . . It's not what you think. . . ." Sometimes I began to wonder if I was crazy. Was that day my fault?

/ / / / /

"The abuse itself isn't really the biggest problem," I told Ben. "Confusion is."

"Explain."

"Well, when a perpetrator thinks he's getting away with something he knows is wrong, he begins to rationalize. He begins to confuse right and wrong—or at least he tries to."

Ben nodded but didn't speak.

"But what's worse is how his confusion can spill over into the mind of the victim."

"Yes," he said. "I know that's true. The first step toward healing is for victims to understand and really believe that they are not guilty for what another person has done." He paused and repeated, "Confusion . . . " Then, realizing Darren and I were looking at him, Ben clarified, "Sometimes—with good intentions—a girl will put herself between an abuser and her siblings to protect them, or throw herself at her abuser because she thinks she is keeping the family together, or respond favorably in a desperate search for love and acceptance."

Darren spoke up. "It's important to remember that all those situations can be worked out with a priesthood leader. No abuse victim has to stay buried under feelings of guilt, whether they're self-imposed or real." Ben nodded as Darren went on. "Elder Scott's conference address made a point of explaining that 'no matter what degree of responsibility [is involved], from absolutely none to increasing consent, the healing power of the atonement of Jesus Christ can provide a complete cure.' . . . ." [^1]

Darren's words were particularly meaningful to me because I knew of the time when he'd worked through his own repentance with a priesthood leader's help. He knew the pain as well as the joy that follows. Still, I didn't want to be misunderstood.

"That sounds so simple," I broke in. "And it is. But when you're caught in a cesspool, nothing seems simple. The abuser has power over you, and you're stunned."

"Elder Scott mentioned that, too," Darren said. "He said most victims are 'innocent because of being disabled by fear or the power or authority of the offender.' . . . ."

"I'm grateful to know that now. But at the time I felt so dirty and polluted. I really wondered if it was all my fault."

"You said earlier that the Holy Ghost helped you whenever you would listen," Ben prodded. "Did the Spirit help you with those feelings?"

"Well," I paused. "Yes. Yes, but not the way you're thinking. You see, my feelings of dirtiness, although they seemed like a torment, were actually a blessing. They kept my resolve strong. At least, no matter how confused I was, they still told me right from wrong. I always knew when Daddy had done something bad. And I was very blessed in my situation, because I was old enough to fight off his advances."

"But you still felt confused and at fault," Darren said.

"Oh, yes! My fear of the sexual advances was so great that I couldn't really even think about it. But violence was something I'd been living with for years, and I could handle that. So I concentrated on my fear that he would physically hurt me."

"Not on the sexual abuse," Ben echoed.

"No. It was only years later, when Darren and I were married, that I began to understand. Then, when Darren used some of the touch-words Daddy had used, they triggered something awful inside me. The confusion drowned me again, and I began to realize how deeply Daddy's abuse had affected me."

"So getting help to clarify the confusion is a very important part of getting away from the abuse and moving on," Ben said.

"Yes," I said emphatically. "Very important."

NOTE

---
Notas:
[^1] Thomas S. Monson, "Precious Children—A Gift from God," Ensign, Nov. 1991, p. 69.
