Michele R. Sorensen, Chainbreakers ( 1993)

17

No one can clear up that much confusion by themselves," I told Ben.

"No," he answered. "That's why people who have been abused are always counseled to get help—to keep asking, yelling, screaming for help until they get it."

"We're back to that?" Darren said. "I know of four instances where Liz went to someone in authority over her. Things only got worse."

"Yes, they did," I agreed. "But I could have kept on asking for help, instead of giving up each time."

"Right, Liz," my husband said with gentle sarcasm. "When we met, you were paralyzed by your fear of that man."

"Absolutely!" I admitted. "But things are different from how they used to be. People are more aware that abuse exists. They aren't as disbelieving, and they know more about what to do."

Ben was looking at me intently, as if he agreed with what I'd said but was wondering whether I really meant it.

If only he knew how hard it had been for me to understand that fact. I knew the hurt of asking for help and receiving nothing. But I've also had to live with the realization that I could have kept screaming until the fire got put out. Maybe, if I'd done that, things would have ended differently.

/ / / / /

"Who was in the TV room last night?" Daddy demanded from the door of our bedroom where we were getting ready for school.

"I was," I said, wondering frantically what I'd done wrong. My beatings seemed to have been getting closer and closer together these days; they seemed to come for no reason at all.

"You left a filthy bowl of half-eaten potato chips by the couch! How many times do you have to be told to put things away, you stupid pig!" Daddy turned on his heel and marched downstairs, growling obscenities.

"I'm sure I put that away. Besides, I wouldn't leave my bowl out and not my glass," I muttered, looking at Maria. "He's full of it!"

"So what's new?" She shrugged in apathetic disgust.

Maria seemed as if nothing could touch her. That must have been because of the crowd she was hanging around with at school, I reasoned. She'd entirely quit caring about her grades anymore.

After her fiasco with the special education reading program, Daddy had given up on her. He ignored her feelings as if she were a worthless loser. Though her report card beatings had stopped, I could tell his obvious disgust struck Maria worse than any blow. Perhaps that was why at the last minute before grades came out, Maria would turn on the tears and tell her teachers she was trying so hard, that it just wasn't fair. When they wouldn't change an F, she used a typewriter and changed it into a B herself and then did the same with her grade-point average.

My thoughts suddenly jerked back to the present as Daddy came stomping up the stairs again. "Do you think I'm going to put it away for you?" Suddenly he reached down, jerked off his shoe, and began swinging it. That hurt as much as the Ping-Pong paddle he'd used the last time, or the hairbrush the time before, only now he kept hitting me across my back instead of my behind, sometimes missing and striking my arm. Then he threw away the shoe, doubled up his fist, and hit me with all his strength, several times, tossing me around like a rag doll. Suddenly the room began spinning and grew dark. I'm not sure if I actually fainted, but I know I collapsed on the floor.

As soon as he was gone, Maria pulled me to my feet. "Hurry," she whispered, very close to my ear. "Go put it away."

The stairway seemed like a descent into the pit of doom. I paused at the bottom, taking a deep breath before starting down the hall. I kept ducking, certain that Daddy would be lurking around one of the corners. But he wasn't. Snatching up the bowl, I hurried into the kitchen, poured the leftover chips into a plastic bag, and put the bowl in the dishwasher. Then I met Maria by the front door, where she had brought my school bag.

I cried all the way to school. My back and bottom burned wherever my clothes rubbed against the welts. My chair stung. We had to shower after P. E., but I managed to get one of the private stalls. The warm water felt so good on my welts that I let down and cried again.

After a while I realized someone might hear me, so I quickly washed off my makeup and hurried to my locker to dress. The rest of the class was waiting by the doors to be dismissed.

When the bell rang I knew I was going to be late, so I tried to hurry. But as I pulled the door open to leave, my gym teacher grabbed me by the shoulder. Her touch almost sent me flying through the ceiling with pain.

"Liz," she said, "you're wanted in the office."

"Me?" My stomach lurched. "What . . . what for? I've never been called into the office."

"I'm not sure," she said, with a face that gave away nothing. "Here's a pink slip."

I worried all the way down the hall, my stomach twisted in knots.

Mr. Fiero, the school police officer, greeted me as I stepped through the door. Both he and his partner were very friendly; they asked me to come into their office.

The next thing I knew, I was being searched and asked endless questions. Would I please pull up the back of my shirt?

I was humiliated.

"We won't hurt you," the officers kept reassuring me. They promised I would be okay.

Beyond my humiliation lay confusion. Whenever Daddy hadn't been angry with me during the last few months, he'd made sexual advances. I didn't know how much I'd been doing wrong, or what was my fault. I only knew I felt dirty, dirty, dirty.

One night I'd awakened out of deep sleep to find Daddy standing at the foot of our bed. Since then, it had happened often, and sometimes the blankets had been pulled down. Fear began ruling my life in a new way: I stopped wearing shortie nighties and sleeping soundly. I told Maria that even though it was hot, we couldn't sleep in just our underwear anymore.

I was lost in shame and confusion as the school police pulled up my shirt and examined my back.

Tears streamed down my face once more. "Please," I choked on my sobs. "Please don't make me talk anymore, Officer Fiero. I'll only get in trouble. I already told the police the truth, but the judge sent me back home anyway. I can't go through that another time."

"Your dad won't ever do this again," Officer Fiero said. "Your dad will never know you told us anything."

I finally gave in and answered all their questions. Then they stepped out of the room and allowed me a few minutes to pull myself together. I was supposed to return immediately to class, but on the way I stopped in the bathroom and threw up. I was so sick—sick with terror and humiliation.

Hunched over the toilet in that dimly lit, graffiti-scrawled bathroom, I finally gave up. I simply didn't care whether I lived or died. Leaning my head against the cold tiles on the wall, I wished with all my soul that I could just fade away.

/ / / / /

"You went for help four times?" Ben asked.

I nodded.

"Once to a friend's house, once to the police, and then where?"

"One of my teachers turned me over to the school police because of some welts on my back," I said.

"And you were examined?"

"Yes, but nothing happened. I waited for the beating that I knew would end my life, but nothing happened at all. I guess they never did anything about it."

"Can I read you something?" Ben asked, leafing through his planner. "Speaking of physical, psychological, and sexual abuse, President Monson said: 'When you and I know of such conduct and fail to take action to eradicate it, we become part of the problem. We share part of the guilt. We experience part of the punishment.' . . . ." [^1]

The room was silent for a moment, each of us pondering the forceful words Ben had just read. "You know what?" I broke the silence at last. "President Monson's statement supports what I was saying earlier. That a member of the First Presidency is speaking boldly about abuse can give hope to victims. Nobody ever talked about these things when I was little. I was married before I ever heard the words child molestation. The very fact it had a name made me feel vindicated and relieved some of the confusion in my mind."

"Yes," Ben agreed. "Abuse is an ugly subject, but hiding the realities that do exist won't make anything better." After a moment's pause he said, "So you actually talked to the police twice. What was the fourth place you turned to?"

This was going to be awkward. I didn't want to give him the wrong idea, so I didn't answer right away.

"Her bishop," Darren said. "Liz's bishop called her into his office one night before Mutual. He explained that he'd heard there were some serious problems in her home, and he told her he wanted to help."

/ / / / /

When I heard the bishop's words, instant fear swept over my body. Daddy's sexual advances were increasing, but there had been fewer beatings lately. Time had only been intensifying the chaos in my mind.

There was no way I could tell this man the truth. He worked with my dad every Sunday, because Daddy was the executive secretary. I knew I'd be making a big mistake if Daddy ever found out I'd said anything to the bishop.

"I . . . I'm sure . . . sure things are going to get b-b-better real soon, Bishop," I stammered. I didn't want to confess to anything. I didn't know what I should confess to. "Daddy is going to be graduating, and he'll be getting a good job soon."

"Liz, I wish I could believe that. But the problems I'm concerned about won't be solved by a job."

I was sweating all over and cold. Did he know what went on at our house? How? If I lied to the bishop, I knew God would punish me. Although I wasn't so sure anymore that there was a God, I didn't want to find out the hard way.

In spite of my confusion, I'd always continued attending church. Perhaps the inner voice was urging me to go. Somehow I knew my only safety was in that place. And now my fear was erasing the security I'd felt.

The bishop moved over next to me and sat in the chair at my side. "It's okay, Liz. My responsibility is to help the members of the ward, the way a father does. Let me help you, too."

A father? Like I wanted another father! I didn't know what to do. Why couldn't I run away?

Hesitantly, I started talking. I knew bishops were supposed to keep confidences. With tears washing my face, I began to tell about some of the beatings—but I didn't tell all of it. I never even hinted at that third face, that really scary side of my daddy.

I couldn't tell what the little voice inside wanted me to do. It seemed as if I should talk, but I was afraid to really open up. "Please don't tell Daddy I said anything," I pleaded. "Please. I'm afraid he'll kill me."

I was remembering Officer Fiero. It was painful to think he hadn't acted on what I'd told him and what he'd seen that day. So I concluded that he understood how, if he interfered, my situation would get worse. I even told the bishop about that humiliating experience. I hoped he would see my situation the same way.

The bishop smiled and told me not to worry. Because those had been Officer Fiero's same words, I assumed nothing would come of all this. I went home to bed thinking that I had only two years left before I turned eighteen. Maybe I really could survive two more years. . . .

The back door slammed, waking me from my sleep. Daddy's feet pounded up the stairs. Suddenly I was flying through the air. Daddy had pulled me right out of my bed by the front of my flannel nightgown.

"Well, I understand you have been running off with that big mouth of yours again, Liz. I've warned you for years that it was going to get you in trouble. You didn't listen. So tonight I'll just have to prove it to you."

The next thing I knew Daddy's fist was hitting my face. He was screaming, but I couldn't hear the words. He kicked me and punched me and picked me up and threw me across the room several times.

After the first few moments, I couldn't feel a thing. I was only an emotionless witness to the events. Later, I discovered a burning sensation. Hot tears were running down my cheeks, but the only feeling I had was an intense determination never to tell anyone anything again.

I stayed in my room, pretty much in my bed, for three days. I was so banged up, I could hardly move. Although I somehow managed to do my chores, I didn't go out until I could disguise my face with makeup. I didn't see or talk to anybody. No one was going to know or guess about my life. I wasn't trusting anyone ever again.

NOTE

---
Notas:
[^1] Thomas S. Monson, "Precious Children—A Gift from God," Ensign, Nov. 1991, p. 69.
