Michele R. Sorensen, Chainbreakers ( 1993)

18

So your bishop called you in, and what happened?" Ben asked.

"I guess he had a talk with my dad after that. Then, when Daddy got home, he beat me severely." The room was very quiet again as Ben considered my story. "I should have taken those bruises down the street and shown the bishop or the stake president," I continued. "I never should have quit showing them until I got help."

"Come on, Liz," Darren said impatiently. "You were so confused and scared. Get help—ha! You were focused on survival. Don't blame yourself for how you reacted."

"You're right. I can't change things now, and I don't carry guilt around over it. But if I were in that situation today, that's what I would do. I'd yell and scream and tell the whole world my story until someone paid attention. I'd get help, and I'd get out of the confusion."

Darren was halfway incredulous. "How could you have gone back to the bishop? You've told me how you didn't think you could ever trust anybody again."

"But, Darren," I said, "I could have gone back to the bishop. You see, I didn't tell him everything. He chastised Daddy according to what he knew. If I'd told him the whole truth, he might never have sent me back into that situation."

"I see," Darren said. "If you'd asked for the help when you were still bruised and extremely frightened, it would have provided a lot more support for what you were saying."

"No doubt that's true," Ben put in, "but let's don't forget there have also been great changes in the last ten years. There's a growing awareness of abuse. Church leaders are speaking out against this crime, and that's not all. Leadership training meetings are being held, with the support of LDS Social Services, to help bishops and auxiliary leaders. Bishops' handbooks specify the Church's standing on abuse and contain guidelines for both the perpetrator and the victim. Our own stake president has spoken out against all forms of abuse. He's promised that if injured persons will only ask, he'll give them aid."

"The problem is the asking," Darren said.

"I know!" Ben answered. "But requesting help allows civil authorities and church leaders to step in. If they're not asked, they can't do as much, often nothing at all."

Ben was right, and I knew it. "If I'd told at the top of my lungs—no matter how afraid I was—I might have begun breaking the chain right then. Instead, I unwittingly perpetuated it."

Darren was watching me closely again. He's always careful to warn me about not carrying guilt for things I have no control over. But I was sure of myself and what I was trying to explain. So I went on: "Not only did the chains still shackle my dad, but they slipped even tighter around me. When I vowed I would not trust, I set myself up for Satan. It was a natural reaction, and it was the one he wanted. Soon, in my desire to escape my misery, I voluntarily took Old Slick's flaxen cord and looped it around my own neck. I got hooked on the bottle."

/ / / / /

Daddy's graduation finally came, but to my dismay, it didn't change a thing. In fact, the troubles in our home grew as the big day approached. My parents were always fighting. At the time, I couldn't figure out why, but now I think I understand—at least in part—what was going on.

Mom had been working all those jobs while Daddy was in school because she was hoping for better days to come. When Daddy graduated with his pre-law degree, he applied to several law schools but received one rejection after another. No one could explain why; he was at the very top of his class. When Mom suggested it was his age, he was not only disappointed but annoyed, too.

Almost immediately, he took a job with a trucking company that paid less than his Post Office job had before college. He wanted our family to move to Texas, where the trucking service was based.

But Mom had worked hard to get her position as a full-time receptionist at the hospital. After taxes, her paychecks were now fatter than Daddy's. Besides, she repeated, this was the first real independence she'd ever had in her life. And just when she was discovering that she could choose for herself, she had discovered something else. From what I've been able to put together, and from an old letter Maria found, it seems that this was the time Mom discovered that Daddy had been having an affair. No wonder they fought!

Night after night, Maria and I lay in our bed, listening to their violent arguments. Several times, we ran next door to the Bensons' house to phone the police. Whenever the Bensons weren't home, we ran two blocks to a busy street and flagged down the first police car that passed.

One night, Mom and Daddy were in the pantry, shouting at each other. Mom kept yelling that she didn't have to put up with him anymore, and Daddy went on trying to put her in her place. Now, our pantry was so small that when two people were in there, one of them had to have been crammed halfway onto one of the shelves. So when I heard a tremendous crash, I thought Daddy must either have begun throwing all the cans and other things off the shelves or shoved Mom into them, causing a collapse. Once again, I ran to the Bensons'.

The police came and threw Daddy out. Mom had a nasty cut above her eyebrow and a badly bruised shoulder. She was really shaken up, but she absolutely refused to sign the officers' papers. She had never signed when they wanted her to, and of course, without formal charges, the police could do almost nothing. Mom was confused, too.

Just like always, ten minutes after they were gone, Daddy was banging on the back door and crying and shouting. "Maureen, please let me in . . . I'm sorry . . . I promise I won't hurt you anymore . . . I love you, Maureen. I can't live without you . . . I know I need help, and I promise I'll do better. I just don't know what's wrong with me."

About this time, Mom couldn't stand for the neighbors to hear all the stuff Daddy was howling about. She always let him back in, and he slept on the sofa. But no matter how hard Mom tried to keep things quiet, the poison sloshed onto our other relationships, too.

"I'm sick of everything," I told my friend Rosa one day as we were walking home from school. Though I'd never alluded to what happened to me when Daddy was wearing his third face, she knew about my beatings.

"I don't know what I can do to help you," Rosa answered.

"No one can help," I said. "But somehow—even if it's just for a minute or two—it feels good to talk about it. If you weren't around . . . well, I'm afraid I'd explode."

"Speaking of your home life, Liz, we really need to talk."

I gave her my full attention. "Sure."

"Well, Liz . . . Ah . . . I don't really want to dump on you, . . . but my parents say I have to."

I knew what Rosa's next words were going to be. Every friend I'd ever had—girls and boys—had sooner or later given me the same line.

"Liz, your dad scares me. I'm sorry, but I told my folks. I just couldn't keep your secret anymore." Rosa kept running on and on in my silence. "They don't want me to get involved. So, . . . well, we can't be best buddies anymore, Liz. I just can't deal with it."

Fighting back my tears, I spoke like a woman of steel. "That's okay, Rosa. I know where you're coming from."

Rosa sniffled, and I knew she was crying even though she was looking at her feet.

"It's okay. Really. We'll just be acquaintances, and that way you won't get in trouble with your mom and dad."

"I'm really sorry, Liz."

"See you around," I said, afraid to stay a moment longer. She reached out to touch my arm, but I couldn't stand it. "I've gotta go now, Rosa. I'd hate to get grounded again."

One by one, my friends fell away. Only Teri was left. She was too poor to go anywhere, and I was always grounded, so we had a comfortable, casual relationship. But in reality, I was very lonely.

One day I was running an errand for my algebra teacher during class, when I passed Maria and her friends in the hall. They weren't in high school yet, so I was doubly surprised. "Maria, what are you doing here?"

"Just skipping a stupid class."

"Why would you do that?" I asked. "What if you get caught?"

Maria's laugh was boisterous and invincible. "Get caught by who? You won't nark, and the school will never catch on unless I miss class more than once a week or have ten unexcused absences. And that won't happen."

Her friends were all laughing with her—not happy laughter but the snide, smirking kind. Anita, the leader of Maria's bunch (we didn't call them gangs, but this was as close as any group came back then) stepped right in front of me.

"Listen," she said in a cool, superior voice. "Let's shake the straight chick. If I were you, Maria, I'd never let anyone know she was related to me. It can bruise a girl's image, if you know what I mean."

I had no other methods for dealing with this situation than the ones I'd seen used in my home. So I used them.

"Who are you calling a straight chick?" I said, determined not to let anyone appear to have anything over on me. "I'll give you a run for your money any day."

For all my tough words, I was scared to death inside. I knew Anita enjoyed overpowering people, and I was afraid of being pushed around. I lived in a situation I couldn't fight, but I figured I could knock Anita around pretty good.

What I didn't realize was that Anita didn't want to fight. She had another, more clever idea. "Okay, Goody Two-Shoes. You're on. There's a party tonight at the park. Be there."

Maria didn't want to be embarrassed by me. "That's perfect," she said quickly. "She'll be there, and I will, too." I don't think Maria really liked her rude friend; perhaps she was simply afraid not to align herself with someone who seemed so powerful. In any case, she tauntingly added, "I do believe you're in for a big surprise, 'Nita. Huh, Liz?"

"Yeah," I said, stiffening up. "She sure is."

Maria talked Mom into letting us ride our bikes to the park that night. Mom was always so tired after work that the twins were about all she could handle. She was a real pushover now that Daddy was home from his trucking job only on weekends.

The kids at the party surprised me. No one ever picked the fight I was looking for. They just talked tough and drank a lot. I didn't want to appear wimpy, so I joined in. I even joined in a beer-guzzling contest and did very well.

Several guys at the party seemed impressed by my looks and my bravado. They laughed and joked with me, and I drank some more with them. I felt a lot less shy in their company than with the nice young men I'd known before. These guys couldn't discover anything about me that would shame me—I knew they were no better.

Although I left Anita's party very drunk, I managed to look stable on my feet and to keep from throwing up. My mother never had a clue about what I'd done.

And the next morning at school, I discovered I had a whole new set of friends. The day before, I wouldn't have wanted to be seen with them, but now it didn't matter. They'd accepted me, and I'd had fun showing off. I couldn't wait to party again.

After that, alcohol provided a wonderful escape from my frustrations, but I knew I had to keep my drinking a secret. I became very good at covering up. I even managed to drink before I went to school in the mornings and to sneak spiked Cokes into class.

Because I never skipped class or openly challenged authority, because I kept my grades up and my mouth shut, I never got into trouble. And I spent so much time concentrating on my secret that there wasn't much energy left to worry about Daddy.
