Michele R. Sorensen, Chainbreakers ( 1993)

19

So your rebellion was drinking?" Ben asked.

"Rebellion?" I asked. "Well, yes, I suppose. But alcohol was much more than that. It was an escape, a relief, almost a consolation. Booze gave me a way to feel tricky—to hold something over on people who were holding so much over on me."

"How do you mean?"

"Well, they never knew. It was my secret, my private power. For once, I was in control."

"Chains of control," Darren said under his breath, and I knew he was thinking how Daddy's grabbing for control had left us all trying to grasp hold of some, too.

Ben didn't respond to Darren. "A book I read years ago contained one sentence that hit me like lightning. Since then, I have seen it verified time and time again in my medical practice. The concept was how rarely we find drug addicts and alcoholics among those who had previously always been normal, well-adjusted people."

Darren was looking quizzically at Ben, and I suppose my face didn't look much calmer. I was thinking how often people use addictions as a crutch and how I didn't ever want to fuel that fire.

"Don't misunderstand me," Ben said, chuckling. "What I mean is that certain behaviors such as drinking, doing drugs, or promiscuity are not the actual problem. They're symptoms of a deeper need for healing. They show us that something else is out of balance. If I understand correctly, in Liz's case, her drinking was an attempt to be free—even if only briefly—from confusion."

"That's right," I said, thinking about how useless it had been for me to struggle to gain control over my life and then turn around and throw it into a bottle.

"And," Ben went on, "there were probably other symptoms that grew out of the abusive cycle in your family."

I looked closely into Ben's face again and said, "Yes! Those chains really galled us! We struggled with alcoholism, loss of chastity, even—even suicide. But I want you to know something, Ben. I want you to know that the Lord never deserted me. In the deepest pit of my life, down in the depths of the worst blackness I can remember, God did not forget me. I thought He had. In fact, I was sure of it. But that was when, through His mercy, someone new walked into my life." I squeezed Darren's hand, struggling vainly to fight back tears and keep my voice steady.

I could see I was making Darren uncomfortable, so I joked a little. "Oh, he was human, all right. But he was like a savior to me. He exhibited one characteristic I hadn't known before, and that was love. Selfless, honest, Christlike love."

/ / / / /

Even before school got out the year I was sixteen, I knew this summer would be different from any other summer. Maria got a job with Youth Alternatives, working to clean up some inner-city neighborhoods in Las Vegas. By an all-out miracle, I was able to land a job that also met my imposed obligation to care for the twins: I worked for a day-care center tending children while their parents took desert tours. But most important, Daddy was on the road five days a week.

"Where are you going tonight, Mom?" I asked, sliding around the corner into her bedroom.

She didn't even stop singing, as her voice swept along in a beautiful soprano above the country-western beat. "Out," she sang with a big smile, fastening on a turquoise necklace.

Daddy wasn't home, but this was obviously something more than a trip to the grocery store. "Where?" I sang back, intentionally off-key.

"Just out," she grinned and turned away, but I wasn't giving up.

"With who?"

"Some ladies from work."

"Who? I didn't know you had lady friends at work. You're always telling me how you have to be so careful to stay above the office politics and produce enough paperwork to cover your own backside."

"That's right. I don't trust anyone; I don't help anyone. But that's during office hours. After work, the rules change." She smiled at me again. "Liz, I've really been looking forward to going out—I haven't been out in years. You will baby-sit for me, won't you?"

"Oh, sure," I answered. "But where are you going?"

"I think we'll grab a bite to eat, and then we might go out for a drink."

Mom's candor shocked me so much that I turned away.

"Liz, will you do me a real big favor? If Daddy happens to call, just tell him I went shopping." I must have had a funny look on my face because Mom sighed and offered a second option. "Okay, if you don't want to do that, just tell him you don't know. All right? I'm tired of your dad smothering me."

Fortunately for me, Daddy didn't call that night. And when Mom came in, her eyes were all lit up like candles on a birthday cake. "Have a good time, Mom?"

"You bet!" she said, with enthusiasm I hadn't heard before. "We had fun and went out for drinks. I got asked to dance several times. It was great!" I must have been staring again because she glared at me. "Your dad's an awful dancer, you know."

My mind dashed back over the lessons Daddy had given me, the routines he'd helped me decipher, the stage presence he'd helped me create. But an even greater jolt had stunned my senses. Flabbergasted, I blurted out, "You're not supposed to dance with other guys, Mom. You're married."

"Well, maybe not for long," she answered back smugly, her green eyes glinting. "If your dad won't give me a divorce, I may just have to force him."

I sneaked a drink just before crawling into bed that night. Shock from what my mother had said was still ringing in my ears. But soon I realized that her new attitude was reality. She continued going out a couple of times each week. And I wasn't as lucky as the first time, because sometimes Daddy called.

"Where is she?" he always demanded. "It's too late to be shopping. She should be home. Where'd she go, Liz?" When the answers I'd been instructed to give didn't satisfy him, he'd curse at me and slam down the receiver.

Then once Mom breezed in the door, there were always plots and questions: "Liz, do you think I'm making the right decision?" "Liz, it might put us in a slight financial strain if I divorce your dad." "You won't be angry, will you, Liz?"

I didn't want to be my mom's marriage counselor. I didn't want to be scared to death anymore, either. Why couldn't we ever have just one weekend without screaming and hitting? Why couldn't we have that happy family of my dreams?

Deep down I knew my wish would never come true. When the twins were asleep and Mom was still out on the town, I'd sometimes slip upstairs into my bedroom and stare at that ballerina picture with the caption, "God don't make no junk." Maybe God doesn't love me after all, I thought. He doesn't answer my prayers anymore. It seemed obvious that the biggest, longest, deepest desire of my life was never going to happen.

I continued sipping my secret elixir whenever I could get away with it. My other pastime was dreaming about the only wonderful thing in my life. During the days, the twins and I went to work at the day-care center, and from my first morning on the job, my eye had been fixed on a remarkable guy. Sometimes he drove one of the tour buses, and sometimes he worked as a wrangler for the more rough-and-ready desert tours.

It was completely out of character for me even to allow myself to get interested in him. This guy was nice. He came from a good LDS family, and his values showed in everything he did, from his walk and his mannerisms to the way he paid attention to the little children we were taking care of. He was easily six feet tall, with muscular shoulders and legs, sun-bleached hair, and a dark tan. Most of the athletes I knew liked the rugged, wild, dangerous look, but this man was the clean-cut missionary type.

Stop! I told myself firmly. That kind of hunk would never give you the time of day. Besides, the humiliation of Daddy's alienating all my dates had caused me to swear off the opposite sex.

Daddy really had me on edge about guys. Whenever he was home for the weekend, he sought opportunities to question my knowledge of the facts of life. He asked explicit, filthy questions and wouldn't accept anything but a direct answer. For him, this was a game, a challenge to see if he could get me to respond without delicacy or discretion. I was always totally humiliated—which delighted him.

No wonder I was intimidated by the opposite sex! Still, something inside me persisted in thinking about the handsome guy at work. I found myself trying to think up ways to coax such a bashful, strong-and-silent-type to ask me out. Although Darren often gave us a ride home from the day-care program, I eventually began to realize that a full-fledged date might never happen.

One afternoon, as we pulled up in front of the house, I saw Daddy's Trans Am in the driveway. Oh no! I thought. Daddy wasn't supposed to come home in the middle of the week. I quickly said good-bye to Darren and hurried the twins in the door.

Mom was sitting alone in the front room, crying. When she saw me, she grabbed her purse and hollered upstairs, "Chuck!" Then she turned to me. "Liz, your dad and I are going to Vegas to get Maria. There's a leftover casserole in the icebox, or hot dogs, if you'd rather." Daddy stomped down the stairs and past me out the front door. "Call Grandma Hughes if you have an emergency!" Mom added, following him.

I ran out onto the porch. "What's going on?"

No answers.

"Is Maria all right?"

Mom slammed the door shut and then rolled down her window. "I can't go into it right now, Liz. You'll find out soon enough."

Mom's words were an understatement. I woke about six-thirty in the morning to hear Daddy yelling and Maria crying. It was the most disgusting conversation I'd ever heard in my life.

"Let's hear all about it, Maria," he said, his voice dripping with sarcastic sympathy. "I want all the details. I'm not sure I understand."

Maria was sobbing. "I don't want to tell you again."

"Well, that's too bad, Gilly-monster, because I intend to find out just what kind of daughter I've raised."

Daddy taunted her about sleeping with a married man, the supervisor where she was working. One minute he was yelling at her, condemning her in the harshest tones; the next minute he was pumping her in a vile way for emotional and mechanical details.

"I didn't seduce him! He came on to me first!" Fifteen-year-old Maria finally stood up in her own defense.

Daddy knew he was getting to her then, and he didn't hesitate to say things that would hurt even worse.

"No, no. That's not true," Maria sobbed. "You're full of lies. Jason loves me. I know he does."

Mom spoke up suddenly. It was the first time she had ever interfered on our behalf. "That's enough, Chuck. We've listened to you for hours. We'd all like to get some sleep."

"I'll decide when this is over," Daddy said.

"No!" Mom screamed. "I said it's over, and it is over. Maria, get to bed. Chuck, you can keep your mouth shut or go back to Texas. I've had enough. I don't want to hear you say anything about this subject ever again."

Daddy was furious. "I warned you about guys and hormones, Maria. But you wouldn't believe me, would you? Well, how does it feel to be used goods?"

"Chuck!" Mom shrieked.

Daddy stormed out the back door, muttering loudly, "Like mother, like daughter—apparently it runs in the family."
