Michele R. Sorensen, Chainbreakers ( 1993)

20

I was standing outside one searing July afternoon, watching the twins ride their new bicycles around the backyard. Practice was making them so good that the neighborhood would never be the same again. Then the phone rang, and I ran inside to answer it.

"Hello. Hughes residence."

"Hi, Liz. This is Darren."

"Hi, Darren!" My stomach did an elated flip-flop, but I managed to keep my voice cool as I asked, "What's up?"

"Not much. I have tickets to the Gila Ranch Hayride tomorrow night. Wanna' go?"

"Sure, I'd love to go with you. I haven't been on a hayride since I was a little kid."

"Really? My whole family goes every year."

My mind was clicking. Whole family? I thought.

"My sisters and their kids will be coming with us, too. It's a big group, and we always have a blast."

What could I wear that would impress his whole family? What would happen if he wanted to meet my family? "Yes, Darren. I . . . I'd love to meet your family. That'll be great."

"Okay," he said, sounding glad I'd accepted. "I'll pick you up about six-thirty. Oh, and come hungry," he added. "They have great barbecued ribs."

As soon as we'd said good-bye, I raised my fist to the sky, screeching with delight. "Yes. Yes! Yes!" I spun around and jogged down the hallway. Then I ran back to the phone and called Teri to share the news as fast as my mouth could move.

Our first date was wonderful. Darren's family was happy and friendly—very much, I supposed, like the television family of my dreams. His father was a calm, reverent man. His mother was gracious and welcoming. His brother and two sisters were there to have fun—and did we ever!

But I probably enjoyed myself more than anyone else. Somehow, I'd managed to land in the situation of my dreams. Now that this guy had bitten my hook, I wanted desperately to reel him in. The surprising thing was that over the weeks that followed, the fish reeled me in.

No matter how hard I tried to hide my family's troubles from Darren, they always seemed to seep out at the edges. Unlike my other friends, male or female, he didn't walk away. He witnessed the tension, the anger, and the misery, and he kept coming back to me.

Maria and I were alone with the twins one weeknight, when Daddy arrived home unexpectedly. "Where's your mother?" he demanded.

"I dunno," Maria answered.

Daddy's face was turning red, so I added, "She said she had to run some errands."

The red got darker. "The same kind of errands she's been busy with for the last couple of months?" he asked, as if it were our fault. "Well, let's just see who she's with this week."

Maria and I spent the next hour worrying ourselves sick. We had no idea which bar Mom had gone to, so we couldn't warn her. What if Daddy went looking for her and she was dancing with another man? "He'd kill the guy," Maria whispered, "and then Mom, for sure." Finally, we put the twins to bed and began preparing to weather a very large storm by going to bed early, too.

We didn't have to wait long. "You're a disgrace to this family!" Daddy yelled as the front door banged open.

Mom was apparently ignoring all the obscenities he was shouting. We heard her climb the stairs, go into the bedroom, hang up her clothes, and climb into bed. Her attitude was making Daddy furious.

"Don't you have anything to say for yourself?" he growled.

"No, I don't, Chuck." Mom's voice was emotionless. "To be honest, I don't care how you feel or what you think. I'm through centering my life on the most selfish and inconsiderate man I've ever met. I'm through kissing your feet."

Maria and I crawled out of bed and over to our door, knowing that Daddy was really going to lose control. Crouching in the darkness, we waited anxiously.

Sure enough. He was lost in red anger. "That's just fine, Maureen, because I don't plan on spending another day married to a slut!" We heard Daddy scoop Mom up, and we followed at a distance as he stomped down the stairs and through the kitchen to the back door. He threw her out, and she hit hard. But Mom knew Daddy wasn't through. She jumped up and took off running in her pajamas.

"You keep your hands off my mother, you big fat jerk!" I screamed, sprinting across the kitchen.

Daddy swirled around and punched me squarely in the face. I went flying into a plate-glass window. "Mind your own business if you want to see tomorrow," he growled as he bolted out the back door.

When I heard the glass shatter around me, suddenly I realized that what had just occurred was identical to the dream that had been awakening me for so many nights—but this time it was real. I was living it.

Maria hurried to see if I was okay. I had a few nasty cuts, but miraculously, most of the broken glass had fallen onto the patio outside, and I had landed inside on the kitchen floor. "Listen," I told her, struggling to clear my head, "we've got to get help!"

Slipping jeans under our nightgowns, we ran to the intersection and flagged down a policeman. Within moments, one officer was on the front porch while another canvassed the neighborhood. Sister Benson heard all the commotion and took us into her home.

We'd been sitting there a while when I suddenly had a terrifying thought. Charlie and Vaughn were alone! Grabbing Maria, I ran out the door, only to discover the policeman talking with Daddy on the porch. Daddy had one of the twins under each arm. He saw Maria and me coming as he walked across the front lawn. "If you want your mother, you can have her," he shouted, "but I'm taking my kids away. Look close. You'll never see them again!"

/ / / / /

"Things were really bad at Liz's house by the time I came into the picture," Darren said quietly, somewhat changing the subject.

"You called it the blackest hole, the deepest pit of your life," Ben said to me. "How was the Holy Ghost still with you?"

Now I had to think. That part of my life had been so dark and full of screaming tension. "The inner voice was there," I began slowly. "The voice was there, but fear and anxiety and alcohol made it downright impossible for me to hear the whispers. I forgot to listen. Then a funny thing happened. I don't know for a fact that it was the Holy Ghost, but I feel very sure it was."

"The dreams?" Darren broke in.

"Yes, I began having dreams—nightmares, really. In them, I lived out horrible situations, like the night Daddy threw Mom out the door and then punched me. That was when I realized I was living the nightmares I'd been having. I didn't know what to do about my premonitions being fulfilled, but it happened many, many times."

"So you're saying that those premonitory dreams were messages from the Holy Ghost?" Ben looked surprised.

"No," I answered, but then I reconsidered. "Well, yes, maybe. The idea never occurred to me then. But I can see now that I never calmed down enough to listen to the Spirit. It's only been in the last few years that Darren and I have talked about those dreams and wondered if they weren't a sort of confirmation. They're proof to me that even though I felt abandoned, I was never entirely alone."

Darren added, "The Holy Ghost can speak in a lot of ways. He teaches and prompts and comforts. And He can chastise and confirm things, too. When we thought about it prayerfully, Liz and I were able to identify most of those influences in her life. I think everyone can."

/ / / / /

Perhaps watching my nightmare become reality was the reason I felt something impending the night the twins were stolen. When Daddy said we'd never see them again, fear slammed at my stomach. "How could we have been so stupid?" I moaned, sinking to the ground and crying.

As soon as Daddy drove away, Mom crawled out of the bushes around the library down the street. Maria and I sat on the grass crying while she answered the officers' questions.

"It'll be okay," Mom announced, pulling us to our feet and walking into the house. "No judge in this state will let that man keep your brother and sister. He has a pretty impressive police record."

"You never signed the papers," I said between tears.

"Yes, but the record for reports of domestic violence is there because of all the times you girls have called the cops."

Mom was right—the twins were returned. But that was when Daddy gave new meaning to violence. He broke into our home on several occasions, called continually at late hours, followed Mom when she went places, and tried to kidnap Charlie and Vaughn from their day-care center. He even cut the brake line on Mom's car.

Fortunately, she wasn't hurt. But one day, not long after that, she told Maria and me that we needed to talk. "Daddy has started seeing a marriage counselor," Mom explained.

Maria made a scoffing sound.

"He says he wants to show good faith and prove that he truly does want to change. But the counselor called me today and warned us that your dad is a very dangerous person. We're not to believe a thing he says. Not one thing! The counselor warned that he will do anything to fool us into taking him back."

"He's sick," I commented, in what was likely the biggest understatement of the year.

"Do not trust him—ever. Do you understand?"

Maria and I told her we did. But during the months that followed, we were surprised by the new lengths Daddy went to for attention. He began threatening suicide at least twice a week. Again, the counselor phoned and told us not to believe a word Dad said. I had no trouble following the counselor's advice—the voice inside me agreed one hundred percent.

But there was one message the Spirit was whispering that I absolutely refused to hear. It said that Darren and I were spending too much time alone together. He came to my school functions, we went to church dances and firesides, and even when I had to baby-sit, Darren hung around.

One night, as we arrived back at my house after the homecoming dance, Darren's headlights illuminated someone breaking into our back door. Daddy! Mom had put double locks on all of the doors, so it took a key to get through them no matter which way a person was going. But there Daddy was, trying to jimmy the lock.

Without a second thought, I ran to the Bensons' to phone the police. We had a protective order, and it was illegal for Daddy to come within five miles of our house.

Using his Chevy Luv pickup, Darren tried to block the driveway and box Daddy in while I made the call. But Daddy ran wildly for his Trans Am and revved the engine. You'd have thought he was a movie stuntman, the way he drove across the lawn, flew out over the gutter, and sped off down the road.

If any guy was going to be deterred from a girl, that ought to have done it. I expected Darren to back off. But he didn't. He seemed surprised by my loony father and strained family relations, but apparently he didn't think they reflected poorly on me. And when it came down to faults of my own, I could see that he cared deeply. Instead of using name-calling or hitting or temper tantrums, he spoke calmly with me. I was amazed to discover that people could talk about their disappointments, condemn something wrong, and still be filled with love.

My drinking, for example. On the day of Darren's first football game, I desperately wanted to relax, to forget, to have a good time. So I guzzled until I was sloshed. When Darren found out, it was obvious that he didn't approve. I fully expected him to go away. Instead, he put his hand on my cheek, causing me to look him squarely in the eye.

"Liz," he said, "this behavior is disgusting." Disappointment and hurt filled his eyes, but so did love. That was when I knew he really cared about me.

After that, with Darren's help, I learned to stay sober. We continued growing closer and closer. And yes, I realized we were getting pretty intimate with one another, but I didn't pay any attention to thoughts that it might have been wrong. When I was with Darren, I felt appreciated. He knew my weaknesses and my family's troubles, but he loved me anyway. Giving him all my love in return seemed a natural, beautiful thing to do.
