Michele R. Sorensen, Chainbreakers ( 1993)

21

Late one rainy evening, the night before Easter, Darren and I arrived home from a swing-choir performance. Because of the way Mom had set up the new locks on our house, we had to wait on the porch for someone to let us in.

When she swung the door open, Maria screamed. "There's a light on in the garage!"

Darren and I turned to look. Through the window on the side of the garage, we could see the dome light of Daddy's Trans Am. I couldn't see Daddy anywhere, "How'd he get in there?"

"Go turn the patio light on, Liz," Darren shouted.

I flipped the switch and ran back down the steps. Meanwhile, Darren was dragging Daddy through the garage door and onto the driveway. "Tell your mom to phone an ambulance," he commanded.

The house was in an uproar. "Mom, call 911! We need an ambulance! It's Daddy—he's—"

The next thing I knew, I was kneeling at Daddy's side. Darren was administering mouth-to-mouth resuscitation.

"Darren," I said, pressing Daddy's wrist in my hand, "I can't find a pulse."

Darren just kept breathing into Daddy's mouth and pushing on his chest.

"I can't find a pulse!"

Darren's rhythm didn't break.

Within seconds, we were surrounded by flashing red lights. Neighbors were gathering along the perimeter of our rain-soaked yard. Distantly, as if it were a hundred miles away, I saw Sister Benson take Maria and the twins. The men in the ambulance relieved Darren, and Mom ran to get her purse for the trip to the hospital.

"It's a DOA," the paramedic said, just after she'd gone.

I knew I'd heard that abbreviation before, but I couldn't bring the meaning of it to the surface of my mind. Then, as I stood watching, the paramedics heaved Daddy's body onto a gurney. They covered his face with a sheet.

"He's dead?" I gasped, looking up at Darren.

Darren nodded. Like pillars of stone, we stood watching them load Daddy's body into the ambulance.

Mom ran up, breathless. "Liz," she grabbed my arm. "You take care of things—Aunt Irene's on her way over—and I'll call as soon as I have any word on his condition."

"Ma'am?" A police officer interrupted. "Do you have a suicide note?"

"What?" Mom was pale and shocked.

"Did he leave a note?"

"A note? I don't know. Why?"

"If he didn't leave a note, we'll be needing a signature right here," the officer said, holding up a clipboard and a pen, "to perform an autopsy. Then we'll be able to determine the cause of death."

"Death?" Mom said, one hand flying up to her forehead. "He's dead?"

Chagrined, the officer realized she hadn't known. "Yes, ma'am," he said more tenderly. "I'm terribly sorry."

"Dear God!" my mother screamed, collapsing in a heap. "He's dead and still hurting me. Dead . . . dead . . . " she began crying, her small body racked with heaving sobs. "Please, God. Please, someone—anyone! Please make him stop!"

The paramedics quickly surrounded Mom. Her sister, Irene, drove up only moments later, and they half-lifted her into Irene's car. Soon everyone had driven away into the night. Darren and I were left alone in the dark, wet driveway.

When Darren put his arms around me, I melted into hot tears. "That jerk!" I cried. "That horrible, awful jerk! How could he do this to Mom? What about the twins, now? That selfish, selfish jerk!"

Darren led me into the house and sat me on the sofa. Then he ran for the bathroom. Over my own sobbing, I could hear him throwing up again and again. He'd breathed in a lot of carbon monoxide while doing mouth-to-mouth.

When he came out a few minutes later, he was trying not to show how affected he was by the whole ordeal. "Liz," he said, kneeling on the floor by my feet.

I coughed against the hiccoughing sobs I couldn't seem to control, and looked into his face.

"I swear to you, Liz," he spoke with earnest intensity. "No one will ever hurt you again, Liz. I will not let it happen." Then Darren put his arms around me. "I love you," he said, kissing me gently.

/ / / / /

My cheeks were wet again, but I was seated in a bishop's office, not standing in the dark, empty driveway. Just remembering that night ripped open my heart.

"Love came into my life the night Daddy left. Someone really, truly loved me in a selfless way, and I loved him, too."

Darren cleared his throat a little uncomfortably, but I wanted very much for Ben to understand the healing power of love.

"There were times when I treated him spitefully, when I didn't know how to trust, when I was afraid. And sometimes he got fed up, too. But he never quit loving me. He just went on. I think it was the unconditional nature of his love that finally won through. That, and my own desire to become a whole enough person that I could return his love the same way. For a long time I enjoyed receiving it, but I didn't really know how to feel those positive emotions anymore. Anger and sadness were the only things I knew how to feel."

When I stopped talking, the room was still once more, but at last Ben asked, "Your father is dead?"

I nodded.

"And was it all over when he left your life?"

Was it over? I laughed a little. There were times when I felt that it would never be over.

/ / / / /

Bishop Randolph and his counselors came to our home the day before the funeral to assist Mom with the last few details. The house was very quiet except for their low voices. Suddenly, Mom's voice shot out, sharp and loud. "He will, and that's final!"

The men gave soft-spoken explanations, followed by Mom's angry answer, "You're not the judge. If he'd had a choice, Chuck would have wanted to be buried in his temple clothes. If God decides he's not worthy, then He can remove the clothing!"

Fuming, Mom showed the three men out. "It's a good thing he's a brand-new bishop. I'll overlook his arrogance," she muttered. Then, seeing me watching from the next room, she asked, "What are you staring at?"

I was looking at my mother. I was trying to understand what had become of her. Silently, I opened my American history book and started reading again.

The funeral was held during the week of Easter break—Easter! A time of new beginnings, a time when people celebrate Christ's sacrifice and resurrection. I thought back over all the changes in my life since Easter a year before: I'd turned sixteen, Daddy had finally graduated, our family had blown apart entirely, I'd met Darren . . . and now I was free!

Lots of people came to Daddy's funeral, and the service was a well-done memorial. It was an emotional group. People cried openly through it, but I showed nothing.

My emotions were very different from those of most of the mourners. I was angry on behalf of my mom—angry for what she'd become because of that man. I also felt an overwhelming sense of relief. No one would be hitting me for trumped-up reasons, ruling my life like a tyrant, standing at the foot of my bed in the middle of the night, or trying to put his hands where I didn't want them. Darren was right: no one would ever hurt me again. Daddy could control me no longer.

Grandpa Hughes took me aside between the funeral and the graveside services. "You were real cold in there, Liz. Someday you are going to hate what you've done."

I looked at Grandpa Hughes in silent surprise. Hate what I'd done? I didn't beat, abuse, or attack. I certainly didn't kill that horrible man.

"Your dad really loved you girls. He took care of you when no one else would. Someday you're going to wake up and realize how very much you hurt him. I hope you can live with the guilt," my grandfather said pointedly, turning and walking away into the continuing wet drizzle.

I was speechless. How many other people thought it was my fault—Mom's and Maria's and mine? Apparently Daddy's family did. Who else?

Darren slipped his arm around my shoulder. "Is everything okay?"

"Just hold me tight," I pleaded, curling into his embrace.

From the safety of that spot, I reviewed the situation. Darren had become a deliverer for me. During the past several months, he'd rescued my mother and sister and me from potentially dangerous situations. He'd helped me give up the bottle and was even after me now to quit drinking caffeinated sodas. He thought far more of me than I did of myself. For example, he always said I had strength and faith he admired—even when I didn't think I had any faith left.

Because of these things, and many others, I knew he genuinely cared. His love was like gentle sunshine that kept a tiny part of my heart warm and alive. I responded to his goodness.

Watching my mom had plainly shown me what living in fear and anger could do to a person. As she became more and more distant, Mom also grew into a person whose misery spread around her like a cloud. Constantly expressing guilt, she would say she ought to have done this or that. Then she'd place blame: you kids should have tried harder; you were the center of most of our arguments.

I wanted to escape again. Why couldn't the nightmare end? It just kept dragging on and on. . . .

/ / / / /

"No, Ben," I said, noticing the gleam in his eye. "You know very well it wasn't over. That's when my life really began."

Ben crossed his legs, one ankle resting on the other knee, spread his notebook open across his lap, and leaned back in a go-ahead gesture.

"Up to this point, the abuse had happened to me. But once I escaped my father, I chose to make things happen."

"I've known you long enough to know you're something of a spitfire," Ben chuckled. "I can't imagine you not stirring things up!"

"You've got me there," I grinned. "But the girl I was at seventeen is not the same person sitting here now."

Darren whistled teasingly, but I ignored him.

"One day, in a cold, high-school bathroom, vomiting my guts out, I gave up on life. After that, it seemed my emotions were dead—or at least, certain ones seemed to have been lost to me."

"Go on," Ben prodded when I paused.

"Anger, fear, pain, sadness, shame—these were feelings that had become my companions. I was more comfortable with them than I was with joy or love, because I wasn't used to positive emotions anymore. I didn't trust them."

"What attracted you to this cynical teenager?" Ben asked Darren, only half-teasingly.

I didn't give my husband a chance to answer. "People liked my dad when they didn't know his other side. I learned hypocrisy from a master," I explained. "I knew how to make others laugh and relax, have a good time, break all the rules and think it was fun. Besides, I quit letting myself get very close to anyone—except Darren."

"But you trusted him?"

"Yes and no," I answered, taking a deep breath. "He never gave me any reason not to trust him. He just loved me in spite of everything I was ashamed of. At first, I suppose I didn't love him in a healthy way. But I was drawn to him, and I gave him the kind of love I knew. Granted, my love was full of shallow counterfeits and mistakes, but I recognized that his love was what I needed. I was approaching it from the only angle I'd ever known."
