Michele R. Sorensen, Chainbreakers ( 1993)

22

Mom," I said, walking into her bedroom while she was getting ready to take off on another weekend of partying with her new boyfriend, "I need to talk to you."

"Make it quick, Liz," she answered, putting on a pair of turquoise earrings. "I don't want to be late."

"Okay, you asked for it! Darren and I are engaged, Mom. We're expecting a baby in about seven months." Putting my news so bluntly would be sure to knock her socks off.

Mom didn't even flinch. "I know," she remarked casually, painting on her lipstick. When she finished, she blotted the excess on a tissue and added, "We'll talk . . . .. Okay?"

I stared at her. "What do you mean, 'I know'?"

"You've been looking very pale lately, Liz," she said, fluffing the pillows on her bed and making sure everything in her room was straight. "All your life you've had a phenomenal amount of energy—until the past few weeks. Now you've got dark circles that are almost as green as your eyes are! And that red hair of yours has lost its color and shine. You look like something the cat dragged in. Besides, seeing how you're always with Darren . . . well, it doesn't take a rocket scientist to figure out two plus two." Snatching up her purse, she said, "Gotta go, or I'll be late. Oh," she stuck her head back in the bedroom door. "I still love ya."

Mom stayed away all weekend and went off again the next weekend, too, as was becoming her routine. Darren, according to our habit, came over while I ran the fort.

It was a beautiful evening in early summer. A cool breeze whispered through the orange trees surrounding our patio and sent a spray of spent blossoms swirling gently onto the tiles. The leaves of the eucalyptus tree Daddy had planted behind his toolshed made a soft rustling sound. And the brilliant pinks and purples of the Arizona sunset painted the sky and then faded gently into twilight. Maria went to a movie, and Darren put the twins to bed because I wasn't feeling at all well.

"This is normal," Darren said comfortingly. "Women always throw up when they're pregnant."

"But they don't have cramps," I moaned, holding my stomach.

As the beautiful twilight gave way to darkness and the hours of night crawled by, I became very ill. Finally, about three or four in the morning, I slept.

Darren's dad was waiting for him when he returned home. "I don't believe you two are married yet," he observed when Darren staggered in at dawn.

"You're right," Darren answered, blurting it all out. "Liz was really sick tonight. We think she had the flu, and we were concerned—she's pregnant, you see, and we're engaged." He'd been wondering how to break the news. Now it was done.

Darren's father stood silent for several moments, realizing that the time for teaching gospel principles in theory was past. His son had already enrolled in the school of hard knocks. "When the tune is done," Darren's dad said softly, patting his son on the back, "someone has to pay the fiddler."

The wedding hall looked like a bowery of flowers. Brother Benson walked me down the aisle and gave me away, placing my hand on Darren's arm.

But in the midst of all the flowers and smiles and traditions, Bishop Randolph's preliminary remarks were simply to the point. Without apology, he extended a goal for Darren and me to get our lives in order and go to the temple. He admonished us to be sealed to each other for eternity, and then he performed a brief ceremony that made us husband and wife for time.

Rude, I thought. On my special day, he tries to hold something over my head! Going to the temple was of no interest to me. I had no intention of going through what my mother had endured. From that moment on, the bishop's words fell on deaf ears and a heart of stone.

/ / / / /

Ben shut his notebook and placed his scriptures on top, spreading them open where his notes had been. "Are you familiar with Jacob 2:31-35?" he asked.

"Is that the scripture about women and children whose hearts have died?" Darren asked. Ben nodded as he searched for the page.

"A friend of mine calls that being soul-murdered," I said. "It's when you can't feel positive emotions like love and joy anymore. Those are the things that feed your spirit, so without them you become a hardened, burnt-out shell."

"Exactly," Ben smiled. "Jacob put it this way: 'I, the Lord, have seen the sorrow, and heard the mourning of the daughters of my people. . . . Ye have broken the hearts of your tender wives, . . . and the sobbings of their hearts ascend up to God against you.' Then," he nodded at Darren, "the part you're referring to, 'many hearts died, pierced with deep wounds.' . . . ."

"Doesn't it say right in there that God will not suffer the cries of those fair daughters to come up to Him against the men?" Darren asked. "I'm pretty sure it goes so far as to say they cannot lead those daughters away into captivity because of their tenderness, without the Lord cursing them—even unto destruction."

"That's it, in a nutshell!" Ben grinned. "So I suppose you've already noticed what led me to this scripture. In this chapter, Jacob is calling the Nephite men of his day to repentance for unchastity. But I have long thought that it seems to apply very specifically to the problems we've been talking about, too."

"Like the hearts that died, pierced with deep wounds?" I asked, thinking of my mother and Maria and myself.

"Exactly," Ben answered, closing his Book of Mormon and zipping it shut. "Elizabeth, what can you tell me about healing a broken heart—a heart that's been, as you say, 'soul-murdered'?"

I thought about this question for some time, while the men waited quietly. I thought of many things: of the healing power in love, of the importance of the wounded person wanting to let go of the pain and to be willing to be healed, and of how doing that requires humility and faith.

"I can't imagine there's a single easy sentence that answers your question," I began hesitantly. "But I'm sure of one thing. Nothing short of the atonement of Jesus Christ can heal such a wound. It is important for priesthood leaders to help in cleansing it, for loving friends and even therapists to bind it. But then, only the healing power of the Master Physician can actually resurrect tissues that have died. Christ is the only one who can cause them to knit together again and function once more."

This was the deepest core of my testimony. There were no words to express the depth of my feelings about the Savior's love or the power He wants to exercise on our behalf.

"Perhaps the greatest realization of my life—the key to healing for me—came when I suddenly understood that Christ saves us not only from our sins but also from our afflictions, our sorrows, and our inabilities. The Atonement doesn't apply just to the mistakes Darren and I made before we were married, or to the hatred I felt as a child, or to any other chain that has ever bound us. The Lord knelt in Gethsemane so that He might provide a way whereby I could break the chains that have bound my family for generations."

I was crying again, but this time the tears grew from the depth of my gratitude. "Do you see?" I asked. "Do you understand? The Atonement was made to save me from my pain. That's what eternal life is all about. My Savior wants me to have eternal joy."

Silence again bound us together. When I reached toward Ben's scriptures, he handed them to me. Opening the Bible to Isaiah 61, I read the words of the Messiah. "I have come, he said, 'to preach good tidings unto the meek; . . . to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound: . . . to comfort all that mourn; . . . to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness.' . . . ."

"Christ is the Ultimate Physician," I said. "He's the one who can resurrect a murdered soul and give that soul what it takes to be a chainbreaker. He's the only one."

Quiet lay between us once more. At last Ben spoke softly. "I see. But how does it happen? From your experience, what brought the Lord's hand into your life?"

Ben's questions were so hard. I thought of myself at the time of my wedding. By my own actions, I'd pretty much closed my ears to the whispering of that inner voice. I trusted almost no one, and my emotions had—in many ways—become hard.

"Time has been a good friend," I answered. "Over time I have been able to draw upon the grace of Christ by using the tools available to me. And to do that . . . well, I already pointed out how making the Atonement meaningful in our lives requires humility and faith."

"That's a big demand for someone who's lost in feelings of shame and distrust," Ben observed.

"Believe me, I know!" I answered. "But I didn't say how much of those qualities we need. All I said was that we have to do our best—whatever it may be—to exercise faith and humility. Everyone falls short of the mark—that's why a Savior was provided. He said, 'My grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me.' [^1] That means, once we do everything we can, Christ's grace takes over through the Atonement."

Wisely, Darren added, "With time."

/ / / / /

After our reception, Darren and I spent our honeymoon at a little cabin overlooking the Grand Canyon. From our doorstep we watched the varied colors of the desert, the myriad changing hues within the depths of that vast gorge.

On the second night I woke up screaming from one of my usual nightmares.

"Liz?" Darren had his arms tight around me. "Liz! Are you all right?"

"Uh, yeah, sure," I answered shakily. "Just a dream."

Darren began stroking my hair. "A dream? What could be that bad?"

"I . . . I don't remember," I lied. Crawling out of bed, I started toward the bathroom for a drink of water. "It must have been a pretty intense one, though. I'm still shaking!" I said, laughing.

Once in the bathroom, I glared into the dark mirror and bit back tears. Even after I'd finally gotten away from my father, away from my home and into the arms of someone kind and good, my past was still haunting me. The dream was still clear in my mind—every stark, vivid detail. The groping hands and peering eyes that I forced out of my thoughts each day had come, as always, to clutch at me in the night.

I couldn't tell Darren the darkest secret of all. I was sure that if I did—if Darren really knew me—it would mean the loss of the best thing I'd ever had.

NOTE

---
Notas:
[^1] The remaining verses of this chapter are also helpful.
