Michele R. Sorensen, Chainbreakers ( 1993)

23

One month after we were married, Darren and I loaded up his battered Chevy Luv pickup and hitched a small U-haul trailer to the back. We were heading out into the big, vast world, where Darren had been accepted for admission to a university in Saint Paul, Minnesota.

As we were giving our last hugs through the windows and pulling away from the curb, Darren's dad handed him a roll of quarters. "I want a phone call every night until you're settled," he told Darren. Then, with gruffness that revealed the depth of his emotion, he added, "I don't want your mother worrying herself sick."

Darren promised he'd call, waving one last time to his mom, and we were off.

The future seemed a blossom of promise, like a delicate desert flower growing out of a dry, brittle bush. My heart raced whenever I thought about how soon I would be a mother. And at the same time, I assured myself that I would finish my senior year of high school right on schedule.

But if our future together was a lovely, unfolding flower, it soon became apparent that the stem had sprouted a sharp, persistent thorn. I was keeping a secret hidden—a dark memory that waited each night to prick me.

/ / / / /

"Liz! Wake up!" Darren's voice was caring, but a hint of exasperation hung about the edges as he turned on the lamp and pulled me into his arms. "It's another nightmare, Liz. That's all. Just another of your nightmares."

I'd married a good man and traveled far away from my childhood, yet Daddy's abuse still had me shackled in chains of steel. Each link had a character of its own, and two of the heaviest were anger and fear. Fear was clenching tight around me that night, overflowing even into my feelings toward my husband. Yet, though I was trembling, I clung to him.

"Look, Liz," he said with firm gentleness, "I know your relationship with your dad is behind these bad dreams. I know he hurt you terribly, but he's gone now. Chuck can't hurt you anymore."

Although Darren rubbed my shoulders soothingly, I wasn't able to calm down. I kept thinking Daddy was at the foot of my bed. Night after night, I'd been dreaming that when I woke up he'd be standing there. I was tired of being constantly shadowed by fear. While I slept, it lurked in the darkness just beyond my feet; while I was awake, it shadowed my thoughts. And during intimate moments it drove me to irrational misery.

Completely innocent, Darren would unwittingly say some of the same things my father had said to me, and those trigger words sent me vaulting into the past. I became a child again, alone, a victim.

At last, when he could see that I was beyond comfort, Darren's patience wore thin. Frustrated and confused by the invisible chains that bound me, he repeated, "Chuck can't hurt you anymore, Liz. He's in God's hands now." Then he reached over to the nightstand and turned through the pages of his seminary Bible. "Remember that scripture we read the other day? Here it is—Matthew 18, verse 6: 'But whoso shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me, it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea.' . . . ."

Darren said, "You are one of those 'little ones,' Liz." Then he put his arms around me again. "Believe in Him, and let it go."

"Oh, Darren!" I shouted, crying and pushing him away. "You don't understand. I share some of the guilt! God would never have allowed such terrible things to happen unless He was angry with me. God won't let me forget those things." I felt my chest heave as I drew a deep, furious breath. Spitefully I muttered, "And if Daddy is in what you call 'spirit prison,' he and Satan certainly aren't letting me forget, either!"

Darren stared at me, exhausted and utterly confused.

I glared back at him for one long, painful moment, wishing there was something one of us could do. Then I dropped my face into my hands and sobbed with anger and fear.

"Liz," he said at last, working to remain tender and calm. "What on earth are you talking about? God doesn't punish people that way."

I could do nothing but weep.

"God disapproves of physical violence," he said.

"Oh, Darren," I moaned, rocking back and forth with grief that I thought would somehow tear me wide open. "Oh, if only it had just been physical!"

"Well, I know there was emotional abuse, too . . . " he faltered.

I looked up at him through my fingers. His mouth had shut hard, and his eyes had grown very serious.

Something inside my heart said to tell him, that now was the time. But my mind screamed at me to stop! Divulging my secret would destroy my marriage, I reasoned. He wouldn't want me when he knew the truth. Tell him, my heart urged. He'll try to understand. It isn't fair this way.

I bit my lip and worked at getting myself under control. Cautiously, I considered what things I could tell. Tell all, my heart prodded. And so, slowly, I began to divulge even the ugliest details.

Darren sat like a silent pillar in the bed, horrified by what I was trying to say. The longer he sat motionless, the more desperately I struggled to make him understand.

"Enough!" he suddenly shouted. Fuming, he leaped up from the bed and began pacing the floor. Fear jerked through my insides as I wondered if he was going to vent his anger on me. I was always looking for a second face—always suspecting that he had one, always waiting to see it come forward.

But the fury was never cast in my direction, not even now. At last he strode to his nightstand and grabbed his scriptures again, this time the Doctrine and Covenants. I watched, curious, as he stormed through the pages. He stood motionless by the lamp, reading in the same spot for a very long time.

Days later, he told me that a fire had been burning inside him, demanding revenge. When he prayed mentally for help against the consuming anger, the passage in Doctrine and Covenants 98:23-24 had come into his mind, and he'd read it over again and again until the flames finally came under his control: "Now, I speak unto you concerning your families," the scripture began, "if men will smite you, or your families, once, and ye bear it patiently and revile not against them, neither seek revenge, ye shall be rewarded; but if ye bear it not patiently, it shall be accounted unto you as being meted out as a just measure unto you." [^1]

All at once, as if he had suddenly remembered I was there, Darren looked toward where I sat huddled beneath the bedding. "I love you, Liz," he whispered, sitting down beside me and curling his arms around me.

We stayed that way for a long, long time, and at last I slipped again into sleep. Afterward I learned that Darren had remained awake through the night, alone with his agonizing thoughts.

/ / / / /

"Time is also an important tool the Savior uses in healing," Darren said. "Surely, as a physician, you see proof of that every day."

"Absolutely." Ben nodded in agreement. "I see it in the healing of both physical and spiritual wounds." He drew a deep breath as if to ask something, but then, apparently thinking better of it, he paused.

"Go on," Darren urged. "Ask."

"Well," Ben began, "it has been my experience that spouses are also victimized by the perpetrator's sexual abuse. What I was wondering about was the significance of your comment on time. I assume you based it on your own, personal ordeal."

"That's perceptive of you," Darren said with a hint of surprise in his voice. Then, after some thought, he added, "You know, at first I was shocked by the vehemence of my own anger and internal demand for revenge. I endured many strong, consuming feelings, and I wasn't sure if I was justified in having them."

Ben nodded.

"But Liz and I have discussed my feelings at length, as well as hers. With time, we've come to understand that these reactions are natural."

Darren gently reached out and took my hand into his. I knew that reassuring love grip well; he wanted me to listen carefully to what he was saying and understand what he really meant beyond the words.

"When a man discovers that the woman he married has been abused, he feels as though their relationship has been violated—he has been violated. He may feel that this marvelous, choice woman whom he chose above all others suddenly seems tarnished, much as if you turned over a beautiful piece of silver and found the back had oxidized and discolored. The value of that silver is no less. But a husband's first instinct is to rub off the stain. Then he realizes it's not a stain but a scar."

Ben smiled. "Scars aren't easily removed."

"Exactly!" Darren returned the smile of understanding. "I was powerless to reach out and instantly make Liz better. I felt hurt—even cheated. The most sacred, intimate, private part of our relationship was haunted by a ghost from her past. My own ego began to suffer as well."

"And so what did you do?" Ben prodded.

"That's the point—there seemed to be nothing I could do. I was the protector of my family, yet my hands were tied. Only Liz could determine whether she was going to be made well. No matter how I agonized, I could not erase my wife's pain."

Darren let my hand go and shifted in his chair. "I didn't stop trying to help her, though," he said. He stood up and took a few steps back and forth across the room. "Ben, I felt like a blind surgeon performing an excruciating, delicate surgery on the person I loved most in this world. The operation went on for days and then dragged into months, even years. I felt untrained and unprepared, but I discovered the tools were there before me. In time I learned how to let the Spirit be my guide."

"Tools again," Ben said. "Name them."

"They're the same ones Liz has been talking about," Darren answered, sitting back down. "Accepting the Atonement was vital for both of us. That's a tool, and so are the scriptures. They provide a powerful way for an abused person to begin to replant trust in his or her heart. Prayer is another tool. It's the source through which you can invite divine intervention to enter the healing process. Turning away from revenge and focusing on what we could control was an important part of changing our attitude, too."

"That's right," I broke in. "Attitude is a tool we discovered was within our control. For example, the attitude we took toward gratitude made a difference. Expressing gratitude for every little thing that was right in our lives was like planting little seeds of hope and faith."

Ben began counting on his fingers. "The Atonement, the guidance of the Holy Ghost, scriptures, prayer, and attitude. You also mentioned love and trust before."

"And the priesthood," Darren added. "That's a very important tool God has provided."

I'd never fully realized just how significant the priesthood was until I heard Elder Scott's conference address. When he said, "Relief comes by applying eternal truths with priesthood assistance," [^2] I realized that was true. I'd seen it in my own life. Honoring and exercising his priesthood was one of Darren's most important gifts to me.

"The priesthood," Ben added. "That's six."

"And don't forget time," Darren reminded. "Liz and I begged the Lord for a quick fix, a nice, easy solution with immediate results. But healing something like this takes time."

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] 2 Nephi 32:5. Note also the emphasis on the scriptures in verse 3 and on prayer in verse 9. These tools work together.
[^2] Thomas S. Monson has explained: "Those who see the world only from a mortal perspective rely on human reasoning and do not claim to know that which cannot be observed, evaluated, or proven by tangible evidence. Their conclusions are only as reliable as the information available to them and their ability to evaluate it. . . . Because mankind has made such marvelous advances using only the methods of mortal perspective (logical reasoning and experimentation), some have come to rely on them exclusively. These people reject the eternal perspective because spiritual things (revelation, resurrection, atonement, etc.) cannot be evaluated from a mortal perspective." (The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, "Mortal Perspective Is Limited," Living Prophets for a Living Church, p. 40; emphasis added.)
