Michele R. Sorensen, Chainbreakers ( 1993)

24

Darren!" I screamed. "Quick! Get the nurse!"

Darren hesitated blankly for a moment. We'd been in the hospital for three days, watching women come, deliver babies, and go home. We were still trying. After thirty-six hours of hard labor, both of us were physically exhausted.

The doctors had gone into the hall to discuss a C-section, leaving Darren alone beside my bed. He looked haggard, blond stubble covering his chin and worried circles shadowing his eyes. "Liz," he said with his imperturbably careful calm, "the nurse barely left. What did you forget to ask?"

"I didn't forget anything," I bit the words out against contractions. "The baby is coming."

"She said it was still going to be a while," Darren countered, squeezing my hand. By his face I knew he was wondering if anyone understood what was going on.

"I don't care what she said!" I yelled. "She must have done something, or this baby has a mind of its own. It's coming now!"

Darren jumped. "We need a nurse fast!" he called, running into the hall.

The nurse walked disapprovingly into the room. "Everything's okay," she said condescendingly. "I just checked, and it's going to be a while."

Another contraction gripped me, and I shouted, "Well, I think you'd better look again!" "Oh, my," the nurse muttered. Then she put a hand on my knee. "Whatever you do, don't push. The baby is crowning."

Within seconds the room filled with people who pushed my gurney down the hall to the delivery room. "We're not taking any chances," the doctor told me. "I'm going to use forceps. The baby's heart rate is dropping, Liz. When I say three, push with all you've got. One, two, three . . . "

Everyone cheered.

"It's a beautiful boy, Mom," the doctor said, bundling the infant up. He handed him to Darren and sent them directly down the hall to the newborn Intensive Care Unit.

By the time my husband came back, I was unconscious. Like my baby, I, too, was wheeled into intensive care. The doctor explained to Darren that I had hemorrhaged.

The first thing I remember after delivery was the pressure of blood being pumped into my arm. I looked up to see Darren kneeling beside my bed, his head bowed.

"Hi. What's going on? My arm hurts."

"Everything's fine." Darren looked up and smiled at me. "The baby is healthy, and you're going to be great."

After that I dozed back off. A nurse woke me several hours later. "Hey, Mom," she said, gently rubbing my shoulder. "It's feeding time."

My heart leaped. I was finally going to see the beautiful little boy everyone had been cooing over. As I cradled him in my arms, my heart surged with peace and warmth and love. He was precious. Blond fuzz topped his rosy complexion, and big, round eyes looked up at me. His hair was exactly the color of Darren's; I wondered if his eyes would be green like mine, when the doctor's drops wore off. It was good—so satisfying—to find both of us in him. He had all his fingers. Tears slid from my eyes as I fumbled with the blankets and accounted for all his toes as well.

"Darren," I breathed, looking up. "He's really ours! He's so tiny and . . . and perfect." Then, with a wink, I added, "When are we going to have another one?"

Darren gasped and nearly fell off his chair. He'd been beside me every minute: four long days without a rest. All he could think of now was a little sleep!

/ / / / /

"Darren, you compared yourself to a surgeon, trying to bring relief to the person you love most of all," Ben said.

Darren answered, "That's right."

"And you listed the tools that were available to you."

"Yes."

"What I want to know is how you applied those tools. How did you use them?" Realizing that Darren didn't know exactly what he meant, Ben added, "Okay, say I scrubbed you up and sent you into an operating room. Perhaps you knew some of the different surgical instruments and what they were used for. But how did you go about actually performing an operation with them?"

Darren gathered his thoughts. "I suppose when you go into surgery, you don't look at the entire process as a whole. Unless I'm mistaken, you probably break it down into parts and perform them step by step. Is that right?"

"Yes."

"Remember what I said about the Holy Ghost being my guide? Well, the Holy Ghost led us just as the scriptures promise, showing 'all things what ye should do.' . . . ." [^1]

"How?" Ben prodded.

Neither Darren nor I had ever tried to explain the process to someone else before, but we had talked about it together. "Okay," he said, drawing a deep breath and leaning forward in his chair. "The Atonement isn't something you can measure quantitatively. Human reasoning can't comprehend it." [^2]

"Right," Ben responded.

"So experiencing it has to be a matter of the Spirit; it has to be shown to you by the Spirit so you can begin to comprehend it."

"I'm with you so far," Ben said.

"Well, over time, Liz and I began to discover some steps involved in healing, and I can try to outline them for you in a minute. But first, you have to understand that the element of the Spirit was vital. The Spirit taught us, cleansed us, healed us. That's why the tools of prayer and the Holy Ghost are so important. A person can follow the steps just as a physician can perform the surgery, but their success still hinges on a miracle. Just as severed tissues heal because of God's gift of life to us, so our spirits are healed only by a gift of love that we don't quite understand. We call it the Atonement."

/ / / / /

Scottie was never a very big baby. But what he didn't inherit from Darren in stature, he sure made up for in smarts. From the word go that child kept me busy. He began talking early and was always into something. "Grandma's revenge," Darren called it as he trundled off each Monday morning for his full load of college courses and forty-five-hour work week.

My baby was an adorable, happy companion. He almost never fussed—he kept too busy! We occupied ourselves with books and a radio, since Darren and I couldn't afford a TV.

But one morning Scottie began crying. There was apparently nothing wrong with him, but he kept fussing all day and on and on into the night. I'd tried everything: diaper changing, fresh feedings, burpings, even Numzit on the gums in case he was teething. Nothing helped.

Crying gave way to screaming. That sweet little guy just howled and howled until he was breathless. Then, as soon as he'd gasped in enough air, he'd start up again.

"Shut up!" I yelled at last, after hours without a break. "Shut up, do you hear? I can't take it anymore!"

Scottie paused for an instant at the sound of my voice and then started screaming again before I'd even finished my sentence.

"I don't know what to do for you!" I yelled. "I've tried everything."

The more I shouted at him, the louder he cried (if that was possible). As I became more upset, so did he. And the worse he got, the less control I felt. I wanted to beat that noise right out of Scottie. I raised my fist to do it—

"STOP!" I heard a loud shout, as if someone else was in the room. My hand still poised in the air, I whirled around. We were alone.

When I turned back and looked again at my son, I wondered how I could have even imagined something so hideous. Scottie was my precious, wonderful gift from God! I scooped up the screaming bundle in my arms and put him safely in his crib. Quietly, I left the room and gently closed the door.

Then I ran to the bathroom and locked myself in. I leaned against the corner and slid down the wall into a heap on the floor. It took all my willpower to pray right then. I was physically and emotionally exhausted from the hours of frustration.

"Please make him stop crying," I begged. "I can't handle this. Oh, please, Father. Tell me what to do." I pleaded with the Lord for an hour, a limp ball on the cold bathroom floor.

At last Scottie's cries began to die down, and he fell asleep. But I was terribly upset with myself. That night I realized just how effectively the chains of abuse still bound me. I felt powerless to cut myself free from a life-style of which I wanted no part. I did not want to treat my children as I'd been treated; I did not want to cope with trouble in those same violent ways. Suddenly, I no longer trusted myself. I saw myself as a time bomb, loaded years before and capable of going off at any instant.

I couldn't escape those chains; I didn't know how to make myself into the person I wanted to be. Daddy was still controlling my life! Right down to the smallest decisions—even how I would react to my own son—I was under the influence of the past.

Powerless. I felt utterly powerless against the chains. I lay there, bewildered by my own unmeasurable disappointment at not being able to trust myself.

"Liz!" Darren exclaimed, coming home and finding me alone in the bathroom, still huddled in the corner. "Are you okay?"

When he heard my story, he laughed with relief. Taking my hand, he led me into the bedroom. "I still don't know why you're upset," he grinned. "Don't you see? You conquered your dad tonight. You took control of your emotions instead of giving in to your fury. That's victory!"

I blew my nose and didn't say a word. Apparently he didn't understand at all.

"Look, Liz," Darren said, pulling out his scriptures. "The Savior said right here in 3 Nephi 11:29, 'He that hath the spirit of contention is not of me, but is of the devil.' Just keep things in perspective. If you recognize who's trying to stir you up to anger, you're going to be fine."

I watched Darren close his scriptures. As he turned back, beaming at me, I snarled, "What planet are you from?"

Darren's smile disappeared.

"I'm disappointed in myself, and you act like everything's hunky-dory!" I stood up and shouted at him. "Your sweetness is nauseating, mister. I wanted to beat a baby tonight . . . my baby!"

Darren interrupted, "But you didn't, Liz. You should be proud of yourself."

"I'm not sure I'll be that fortunate next time," I hissed.

"Well, don't forget, you can always lock yourself in the bathroom again." Darren grinned again. "Let's take out a little insurance policy, then." He slid off the edge of the bed onto his knees, took me by the hand, and pulled me down beside him. "Let's say a prayer."

The last thing I wanted to do was pray, but I folded my arms anyway.

Darren's words were sincere and sweet. He thanked the Lord for the voice that had halted me in midswing. He begged Heavenly Father to guide and direct me. He asked that I be blessed with knowledge and patience and that my testimony might be strengthened. He implored the Lord to teach me that I was more trustworthy than I knew. And then he pleaded for my peace of mind.

I didn't understand all the things he said in the same way he did, but I appreciated his caring. Peace of mind was what I wanted more than anything else in the world. Silently I added with all the fervor of my heart, I just want to be free of these chains, Lord. I'll do anything it takes!

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] 2 Nephi 32:5. Note also the emphasis on the scriptures in verse 3 and on prayer in verse 9. These tools work together.
[^2] Thomas S. Monson has explained: "Those who see the world only from a mortal perspective rely on human reasoning and do not claim to know that which cannot be observed, evaluated, or proven by tangible evidence. Their conclusions are only as reliable as the information available to them and their ability to evaluate it. . . . Because mankind has made such marvelous advances using only the methods of mortal perspective (logical reasoning and experimentation), some have come to rely on them exclusively. These people reject the eternal perspective because spiritual things (revelation, resurrection, atonement, etc.) cannot be evaluated from a mortal perspective." (The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, "Mortal Perspective Is Limited," Living Prophets for a Living Church, p. 40; emphasis added.)
