Michele R. Sorensen, Chainbreakers ( 1993)

25

The problem was, I didn't know what it would take to break free of my chains. I was willing to do anything, but what should I do?

With the benefit of hindsight, Darren and I have come to understand that having a sin imposed on you requires a process of healing similar to that of being forgiven of a sin. It requires the repentance process.

"You want me to list the steps for applying the tools," Darren told Ben, "and I will. But remember, although the steps are similar to those of regular repentance, I'm not suggesting that what happened to Liz was her fault. I have come to think of these steps as measures we must take to draw on the power of the Atonement."

"I'll bear that in mind," Ben said, rubbing his fingers against his beard.

"Remember being a little child in Sunday School and learning the four steps to repentance—recognizing the error, feeling remorse over it, revealing it, and making restitution for it?"

"Yes."

"Well, in the situation that was forced upon Liz, those same steps applied to her healing."

"Even though I wasn't responsible," I explained, "bad things had happened, and the smirch from someone else's decisions fell on me, too. I needed the Atonement to cleanse and heal me from what Daddy had done." "So," Darren said, getting back to the steps, "first she had to recognize that what had happened was wrong. She had to clarify which things she was responsible for and which ones were not her fault. In her case, Liz was not to blame."

I broke in. "That was something Darren helped me clear up. When we got married, I was lost in confusion and honestly feared the abuse had somehow been my fault."

"Okay," Ben said, jotting something down in his black notebook. "You recognized it and clarified it."

"The next step in repentance is feeling remorse."

"That shouldn't have been hard."

"No—that had been going on for years," I answered.

Ben's pen was poised above the page, "Third?"

"Confess, or reveal," Darren answered.

"I prefer to call this step 'stopping the lie,' . . . ." I said. "Whether the perpetrator still sees you every day or whether he's dead and gone, you have to tell the problem to those who can help you. I don't mean you have to wear a scarlet letter on your chest for the whole world to see, but these troubles can't get better if they never come out into the light."

"Who did you tell?" Ben asked.

"Well, first I told Darren. That was just about the hardest thing I've ever done."

"Anyone else?"

"Mom and Maria, and eventually, my stake president. Having to tell anyone at all didn't seem fair at first, because it wasn't my fault. But I discovered that there is healing power in speaking the truth. My secret didn't seem so dark when the right people knew it. They loved me anyway and actually understood me better."

After a brief pause, Darren went on, "Then there's restitution."

"Restitution?" Ben asked. "How would you handle that?"

"By allowing the perpetrator to answer for what he's done," Darren said.

"Oh, I see," Ben made another note in his book. "By not protecting him."

Restitution hadn't applied so much for me because Daddy was dead before I began healing. But there was another factor that had been especially significant.

"One more thing," I told Ben. "When a person repents of a sin he has committed, he usually forsakes it as an early part of recognizing and feeling remorse."

"True," Ben answered.

"But forsaking was perhaps the most difficult aspect of healing for me."

Ben looked at me quizzically.

"Don't get me wrong! I was trying with everything I had to keep from perpetuating the crimes I'd endured. But the real test, the hard thing, was becoming willing to forsake the pain. For a long time I didn't want to let it go."

"You didn't want to stop hurting?" Ben asked.

"Of course I did! But the injustices of my childhood were all etched in vivid detail across my mind. They were so unfair—I couldn't just snap my fingers and forget them."

"As long as they stayed, so did the pain," Ben murmured, almost to himself.

"Right," I said. "They shaped my view of the world, and it was a dismal one. But Darren was working on me all the time, extending another vantage point I hardly dared believe in."

/ / / / /

"Darren, I've kept my mouth shut for almost a year, now. Every month out of respect for your religious upbringing, I stifle my feelings. But I can't do it any longer." Pointing an accusing finger at the tithing receipt he was holding, I added with determination, "I forbid you to fill out that slip!"

"You what?" He stared at me in shock.

"I just can't let you keep doing this," I answered. "Every month you throw away a desperately needed part of our income. And now, this month the ward is asking for even more as a temple donation." I could feel the rising indignation that had been building up within me for nearly a year. "It isn't right! We need every penny we can get our hands on." Then, indignation turning to rage, I added, "In case you haven't noticed, dear, we're poor!"

Darren looked at me for a moment. Then, with his usual calm, he stood and walked out of the room.

I was furious. "Don't you try to ignore me, Darren Kearney! That money's mine, too!" I yelled after him. "I have a say in what gets done with it, and you're not going to spend it without my consent."

I'd hardly had time to catch my breath before he walked back into the room, carrying his scriptures and his seminary binder.

"Oh, no, you don't!" I raged. "You're not preaching to me again. I won't hear it. The scriptures are just plain wrong. I don't believe for a second that the Lord wants us to go hungry!"

"You will listen, Liz," Darren answered with infuriating composure. "Because half the money is mine and because I, too, have a say in where it goes." Pulling a small photocopied page from his binder, Darren handed me the sheet to follow along as he recited:

Not mine to keep—not mine to spend, Not mine to give, not mine to lend, 'Tis the Lord's part—'tis the Lord's part, A tenth of all I gain. 'Tis His to have, 'Tis His to use, As He, not I, may please to choose, . . . . . . . . . . He gives me all and asks this part, To test the bigness of my heart, . . . . . . . . . . His part shall be the first and best, Of all the ten with which I am blessed. 'Tis the Lord's part—'tis the Lord's part, A tenth of all I gain. [^1]

I stared at Darren with cold, fuming eyes. If he thought for one instant that some silly poem was going to keep me from being sensible—

"You see, Liz," he said in his steady, decided voice, "the money isn't ours to keep. It's God's."

I didn't see, and he could tell just by looking at me.

"Besides," Darren added firmly, "Right here in Doctrine and Covenants 64:23, it says, 'for he that is tithed shall not be burned at his coming.' Think of tithing as fire insurance for the Second Coming, Liz."

My cold stare didn't melt.

"Well, I for one, do not wish to be burned. Are you willing to take that risk?" Darren glanced over at Scottie's infant seat and directly back at me.

I could see by his eyes that he wasn't going to change his mind. I was amazed at his forceful stubbornness, because he didn't often hang onto things with such tenacity. Obviously, he was not going to be budged. So there we stood, at an impasse. While I was busy glaring at him, and he was still looking gently but resolutely back at me, the phone rang.

"Kearneys'," I said, picking up the receiver. "Well, hello, Sister Johansen! Yes, we'll be in town this weekend."

I listened as our friend explained that her husband was hosting a party for representatives of various political groups that weekend. Would I be willing to help her take care of the preparations? She needed someone to launder and press her linens, help with the housecleaning, and assist her in the kitchen during dinner.

Excitedly, I told her I would do it. If Darren was going to continue giving our money away, I figured I'd definitely need to increase our income. But even at that, I never dreamed what a blessing this job would be. Sister Johansen paid me two hundred dollars and asked if I would help again with her daughter's wedding the following month.

Shortly before payday, Darren was sitting at the table planning for the next month and balancing the last month's receipts. "Liz!" he said, turning toward me with the grin of a cat who'd swallowed a canary. "Look at this!"

Before him on the table was a simple spread sheet that looked something like this:

paycheck $400.00

Johansen party 200.00

Total income 600.00

tithing -60.00

fast offering -20.00

temple fund -50.00

New balance 470.00

rent -250.00

utilities -90.00

groceries, etc. -150.00

Final balance: -$20.00

"So what are you gloating about?" I demanded, exasperated by his delight. "Obviously, I'm not getting grocery money. It's going to be another month of peanut butter and jelly or macaroni and cheese."

"You don't understand!" Darren was exuberant. "Those are our receipt totals, but somehow we still have ten dollars!" He reached into his jeans pocket and pulled out a rumpled green bill. "See? This is exactly enough for gas! We're going to make it to payday just fine," he announced, planting a million-dollar kiss on me.

Darren continued to glow about the confirmation of his faith, but I couldn't figure it out. We ought to have been twenty dollars in the hole, and we still had ten dollars left over. I knew we'd started the month flat broke. No matter how I figured it, those numbers did not add up. He persisted in calling this fluke a blessing, but I was content with the results of the coincidence.

During the months that followed, our lives got a pretty hefty serving of coincidences just like the unexplainable receipts. I did not think of them as the blessings that follow those who pay tithing, but Darren took every possible opportunity to point them out that way to me. I didn't realize he was already plotting a path for our future—one that required a full tithe. Nor did I dream that he was praying that I'd see God's hand in our lives because he knew I needed to grow in faith if I were to travel that road with him.

I was so busy with everyday life and the sudden influx of jobs that followed my work with Sister Johansen (domestic help, weekend baby-sitting, house-sitting, etc.) that I never guessed what Darren was planning. The here and now required all of my energy.

Afraid of myself and the latent anger that smoldered within me, I was constantly reading books on parenting. I never hit my precious Scottie, but I often screamed with frustration. It seemed I couldn't deal with the past and cope with the challenges of the present.

Someone else was having similar troubles: Maria. We kept in touch by mail and then one day she called. "Liz, do you realize it's been more than a year, and Daddy is still the main topic of conversation around here?"

I wasn't surprised.

"Well, a lot of things have been coming out of the woodwork. From what I heard Grandma telling Mom, Grandpa seriously abused Daddy and all his brothers and sisters."

"Abused?" I asked. "Like how?"

"Physical, emotional, verbal, and so on. And the girls were sexually abused when they were little."

That didn't surprise me, either.

"Grandma Hughes told me it was her opinion that Daddy was seriously mentally ill, and with just cause."

"It's about time she caught on," I put in.

"But the rest of her opinion is that we need to overlook the things Daddy did to us and forgive him. It wasn't his fault."

My insides started boiling. "Maria! Do you realize what that means? Forgiving is forgetting. We'd have to forget everything! How are we supposed to do that?"

Maria didn't answer. But I was so angry I couldn't take this quietly.

"I still have nightmares, Maria! Did you know that? I wake up sweating and panting with terror. I still sleep in long, heavy pajamas no matter how hot it is. I have to watch every single move I make and double-think every thought so I won't do things the way he did."

The line hung silent.

"I don't want to become another link in the chain of victims-turned-abusers!" I fumed. "Don't you see? I could become like him unless I keep myself carefully under control. I feel like a diseased person who never knows when she'll start a plague. There's no way I can protect myself and my family if I just forget it all, Maria. Forgiving's forgetting," I said again. "I don't dare do that."

NOTE

[^2]1. George H. Brimhall, in LeGrand Richards, A Marvelous Work and a Wonder (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1975), p. 394.

---
Notas:
[^1] See Moroni 10:32.
[^2] For example, Martha Nibley Beck and John C. Beck have said of compulsive behavior cycles in their research: "We did not observe one case of a victim overcoming a compulsive cycle alone." Breaking the Cycle of Compulsive Behavior (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1991), pp. 19-21.
