Michele R. Sorensen, Chainbreakers ( 1993)

26

I suppose these steps for healing overlap quite a bit," Ben commented, writing in his binder.

"You bet," I answered.

"So, tell me where you began," Ben asked with a smile, almost teasing. "Did you two say, 'Let's start with the recognizing phase,' and then outline a plan?"

Darren leaned back in his chair, crossing his long legs and chuckling. "Hardly! Remember how I said we were led by the Holy Ghost? We followed each prompting, not knowing what would come next."

"And the first step?"

"Well, the first step and the ultimate goal were the only things that were clear to me. Liz wanted peace of mind more than anything else. We just had to find the road leading there. And the first step seemed to be helping her regain hope."

"Remember that term soul-murdered?" I asked.

Ben turned toward me, nodding.

"Well, that describes my life back then. I could no longer feel certain emotions—like joy. Anger and pain were familiar to me, but I dared not exercise joy. It seemed to have been crushed out of me over time. Perhaps it raced through my feelings sometimes—I'm quite sure I tasted it the first time I held Scottie—but I was powerless to recognize it, to hold onto it, or to create it."

"So what's that got to do with hope?" Ben pressed.

Darren smiled, took Ben's Book of Mormon, and leafed through the pages. "Okay. In Moroni 10:22 it says, 'If ye have no hope ye must needs be in despair; and despair cometh because of iniquity.' . . . ." Returning the open book to Ben, Darren explained, "Liz needed to feel hope because hope leads to joy and faith. Hope is the opposite of despair, and despair grew out of the iniquity that had been forced upon her."

Although Ben was writing furiously, I was too excited to be patient while he caught up. "Hope is the beginning of resurrecting what seems entirely lost. Without hope we can't possibly exert enough faith in the Lord to have Him heal us."

Hearing my exuberance, Ben looked up, smiled at me, and then bent again over his notes.

"But we can begin with hope, applying the tools available to us and nurturing it. Then hope will give birth to trust and faith, and upon them Christ will add His grace, which is sufficient for everyone." [^1]

/ / / / /

I wanted peace of mind so desperately that my desire consumed me, but for a long time, my spirit was too bruised to dare believe that this could be possible for me.

Half the time I wondered what planet Darren was from or if he would ever "get real." On the other hand, I wanted freedom from my chains badly enough that I was willing to do anything—even listen to what he was saying.

"Liz," he remarked one evening, "the ward's starting up a temple preparedness class. The bishop has invited us to attend, and I'd like you to go with me." His voice was as casual as if he were asking me to go to a movie with him.

But anything to do with temples reopened a powerfully sore wound in my heart. I glared at Darren with hate-filled eyes. "We've had this conversation before!" Slamming my book down on the end table, I growled, "I am not going to marry you in the temple and get myself locked into anything! I won't become some polygamist wife who has no opinions of her own and no self-worth! I don't have any intention of—"

"Liz," Darren interrupted, "I don't believe that what your mother said was true."

"How do you really know?" I retorted. "You've never been to the temple."

"No," he answered in his perturbingly calm voice, "I haven't. But I'm absolutely certain your mom misunderstood." He tried to put his arm around me—I shrugged him off. "Besides," Darren went on as if I'd kissed him instead of pulling away, "we can get all the answers to our questions from people who've been there. This class is the place to do it."

I shot him a long, stony stare as he walked over to the sink and ran himself a glass of water.

"Let's don't be afraid to hear both sides of the story," he added, after drinking it all.

"I'm not afraid!" I said. But I was.

I'd hoped for a celestial family once before. My prayers had been long and earnest, yet the wonder of the temple hadn't lasted and the love I'd felt there had fled. Maybe it was all nothing more than a little girl's dream. Maybe such things weren't really possible—at least not for me. The only thing I was sure of was I didn't want to open myself up to that pain ever again.

But Darren was insistent. Although I figured the best progress toward shaking off my chains would be found in self-help books, I went to Darren's class because he said answers were there, too. And after all, I had promised the Lord I'd do anything.

The teachers of the class frightened me. They said they knew this was true and that was true. They bore strong testimonies that intimidated me. But for some reason I kept going anyway, doubting and wondering. Are they truly happy they've been to the temple? I asked myself, trying to determine whether or not they, too, had second faces. Why are they trying to get us to go?

Behind everything the teachers said, I kept hearing my mother's voice: "Women are just possessions to kiss a man's feet. No brains and pregnant—that's what they want."

Then one evening, the lesson centered specifically on the importance of families being sealed. Our teacher's words were sharp, lancing cleanly to the core of my deepest pain. Being an eternal family in the celestial world was the ultimate reward, he said. That was the meaning of eternal life.

Tears began to course down my face as my heart burned. Two voices were struggling inside my head: my own reason and another voice—a whisper that I knew from so long ago.

I'm afraid, I said inside.

But this is true, the soundless inner voice answered warmly. You don't have to be afraid of the truth.

I don't want Darren to treat me badly! Maybe he will if I—

Darren loves you, my heart reassured me. Things will get better.

How can things get better? I wondered. This is the best I've ever had. I don't want to lose it.

Temple marriage is a deeper commitment to your relationship.

Right, I thought cynically. I'll be stuck forever.

No, the voice gently reassured. You will be happy and together in the eternities. These words burned with great force inside me. Suddenly I felt the same joy—that very wonderful, overwhelming joy I'd reveled in the day my parents and Maria and I had been sealed together.

No matter what fears gripped me, no matter what doubts filled my mind after the class was over, I couldn't deny how right that joy had felt.

/ / / / /

"Isn't it funny how we perceive ourselves?" I asked, changing the subject abruptly. "I mean, to make use of the tools available to us, we have to allow ourselves to leave our comfort zone. Of course I wanted to leave my comfort zone of fear and anger, to enter a trusting world filled with love and joy. But first I had to risk believing in myself enough to think I might be worthy of those hopes being realized. I was afraid to use the tools I had."

"Yeah," Darren said, laughing. "Can you believe this lady was worried about a long-term commitment with me?"

Ben grinned.

"If you'd said that back then, I'd have denied it," I admitted. "I was waiting and watching all the time for his second face to show itself. I just knew it was in there somewhere."

This time it was Ben's turn to change the subject. "Which tool were you most afraid of using?"

"Love," I answered without hesitation. "Yes, love. Allowing Darren to love me and nurturing the love I felt."

"How does love act as a tool?" Ben asked.

Does he have any idea how difficult his questions are? I thought to myself.

Darren saved me. "Research has shown that people cannot pull themselves out of compulsive behavior cycles alone. [^2] They need a helping hand. And the Lord has said He will most often help us through another person." [^3]

"Right," I broke in. "Every situation is unique. In my case, I had Darren to turn to. He was my source of the 'priesthood assistance' Elder Scott refers to." [^4]

"What about those who don't have husbands who hold the priesthood?" Ben asked.

I didn't answer right away. Maria and Mom were in that position, and I had worried endlessly over their plight. "The Lord will provide caring priesthood leaders for every one of us, if we will seek them out," I said after some thought. "But don't forget, many women have family members who are willing to help. And talking things through with a therapist can also straighten out confusion."

"If they are chosen prayerfully, therapists can be important helpers for many abuse victims," Darren agreed. "They're trained to assist people in gaining a healthy perspective."

Ben asked, "Did you seek counseling, Liz?"

"No," I answered. "We could never afford professional treatment. But my sister Maria is in therapy right now, and I'm delighted. It's been so painful, watching my family struggle. I want to just walk into their lives and offer what I've found to make them feel better." I looked Ben right in the eye to make sure he understood how intensely I felt about this. "But I can't. They're the only ones who can use the tools and let go of the pain. We each must do these things for ourselves."

/ / / / /

Despite my fear, I decided to take the chance. I agreed to be sealed to Darren.

Numberless obstacles hedged us in, threatening to prevent our trip to the temple. But we found ourselves humbled and grateful as friends and family rallied around us. In response to our prayers, an inspired solution answered each problem. Darren's boss reversed a policy that would have prevented Darren's getting time off. When our car died, transportation to Arizona was arranged. One of Darren's aunts even sewed a little white suit for Scottie and a lovely white dress for me.

Some of the hurdles were bigger than others. One particular incident nearly shook my confidence altogether.

We were at our first temple-recommend interview. Darren and I sat side by side, holding each other's hands, staring into the bishop's eyes, and waiting to hear the big question, "Are you worthy?"

Instead, he visited with both of us for a while before interviewing us separately. My interview was first, and then I waited outside the door during Darren's interview. I wasn't trying to eavesdrop, but when the bishop asked if there was anything in Darren's past or present that needed to be confessed and resolved, I was shocked to hear him say, "Yes." All my senses went on alert, and my hearing became astonishingly acute.

"What?" I gasped under my breath.

Darren's ever-calm voice was steady as he replied, "I've never confessed to a priesthood leader my part in Liz's being pregnant before we were married."

The bishop responded softly, and Darren must have turned his head or something, because I couldn't hear any more. I began pacing the hall furiously. Questions raced across my mind: Is he sorry he's stuck with me? Is Scottie a daily reminder of his sin? Does Darren resent me for getting pregnant?

I'd never regarded our premarital relationship as a bad thing. After all, it wasn't as if I'd slept around. Darren hadn't been promiscuous, either. I'd told the bishop before we got married, but my confession hadn't been the unloading of a terrible burden—it hadn't been a confession at all, just plain fact.

As soon as we got home that evening, I let Darren have it. I felt his love for Scottie was in question, and that threatened me. I yelled at him and told him off, asking him every question I could think of. If he'd shown any sign of being ashamed of his beautiful boy, I'd have called everything off.

But Darren passed the test beautifully. My love and gratitude for him grew stronger. And another of the roadblocks between us and the temple was removed.

Caught up in what seemed a miraculous whirlwind, Darren and I finally found ourselves in Mesa at Eastertime. We went with his family to see the pageant on the beautiful temple grounds (we'd both seen it before), but our thoughts kept wandering from the performance to what was going on inside those sacred walls.

On the night before our session, I listened to the silence, wide awake in the guest room of Darren's parents' house. My husband rolled over and hugged me.

"Can't sleep, huh?"

"Sorry," I said, realizing how restless I'd been. "I didn't mean to keep you awake."

"Scared again?" Darren asked. I could just make out the hint of his smile in the darkness.

"Oh, Darren! It's not you, really! I love you. You've been wonderful to me—patient and kind. You have no idea what you mean to me."

"But you're still scared, and you can't forget what your mother said?"

How did he know? I was hearing her words in my mind right then, and the things she'd told me sounded like slavery. My understanding of the gospel was so innocent I didn't even realize that if Darren did indeed have a second face, I wouldn't be bound to him anyway. I'd not yet heard of the Holy Spirit of Promise; all I knew was commitment when I was so afraid to trust.

"Darren," I breathed, and my words trembled in the still night. "I'm terrified!"

"I've been wanting to pray together in the morning, but maybe we'd better not wait until then. Would you join me, Liz?" he asked, sliding out of bed and onto his knees.

Darren stretched out his hand to me. "If you can describe your fears to Heavenly Father, He will send the Comforter to care for you tonight and tomorrow."

It always sounded so wonderful when Darren suggested we pray, but I was still uneasy with the process. After listening to Darren's eloquence, I felt like a toddler trying to explain my thoughts. I knelt beside him on the floor, but I couldn't bring myself to begin.

"Darren," I finally conceded, "I'm not sure what to say. I can't really describe how I'm feeling."

Even in the darkness, I could tell Darren was smiling again. "Liz, He knows. He just wants you to tell Him about it. Just talk. You don't have to be a poet."

Hesitantly, I began. As I made the first preliminary efforts to express myself, a calm feeling washed over me. Soon it became easy to explain myself, and I told Heavenly Father the things I believed happened in the temple. I held nothing back in describing my fear. And then I added, "Please help me understand the true meaning of the words that will be spoken. Please don't let me come out of Thy house feeling the way my mother did. I need to know I'm worth something to Thee. I want to come out knowing I did the right thing."

With surging emotion I concluded, "Please Father, I want an eternal family."

When the prayer was finished, we both knelt in silence. Then Darren put out his arms and pulled me close. As he did so, I brushed against his cheek and discovered that my face was not the only one bathed in tears.

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] Years later, when I read this phrase in Robert Schuller's book, the Spirit filled me again. These words exactly expressed what the Spirit had taught me the day we were sealed. Tough Times Never Last, but Tough People Do! (New York: Bantam Books, 1983), p. 87.
[^2] Matthew 11:6.
[^3] 2 Kings 5:9-14.
[^4] "If the very jaws of hell shall gape open the mouth wide after thee, know thou, my son, that all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good" (D&C 122:7). "My grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me; for if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them" (Ether 12:27).
