Michele R. Sorensen, Chainbreakers ( 1993)

27

Thinking back on that tender moment of communion, I told Ben, "Prayer is a mighty tool—lots more powerful than we can guess until we've really invested in it."

"What strikes me as significant about prayer," Ben ventured, "is that it reveals our desire to trust God. The very act of praying showed you were making an effort toward hope."

"And it invited the Lord to intervene more directly in our lives," Darren agreed. "All these things reaffirmed our desire for help. Liz and I have noticed that whenever we make a point of watching for the answers to our prayers, and then give thanks for those answers, our hope and trust have grown."

/ / / / /

Early the next morning, I dressed Scottie in a cute romper and packed up his new white suit. As I washed his face, I noticed he was running a low fever.

"He's probably just teething," Darren's mother said cheerfully as we trundled all our things out to the car.

We drove through the temple gates, parked, and walked between the luscious-smelling orange and grapefruit groves toward the front of the temple. Suddenly, I found myself standing between the two crystalline reflection pools and the temple doors, with their striking ornamentation of gold circles.

It was all so marvelously beautiful that my breath caught in my throat. The same palm and date trees stood as majestic sentinels; the same clear sunshine danced across the temple walls and bas-relief carvings. My thoughts settled on those carvings of the pioneers pulling their heavy handcarts. Their struggles almost came to life in the play of morning sunlight, and—after all Darren and I had been through—I felt a sort of kinship to them, knowing we both understood heavy burdens.

The workers were as kind as they'd been when I was a child. We were meeting our escorts and shuffling recommends in the foyer, when Scottie suddenly squeaked and got sick right down the front of Darren's suit. Tossing me an uncomfortable grin, Darren announced, "It's not teeth."

"What do we do now, Darren? We can't send a sick child into the nursery! He'll be terrified! He's never had the flu, and he doesn't know any of these people—"

A tiny but capable-looking grandmother in white interrupted me. "Don't you worry, Mom. We'll care for this little darling as if he were our very own. We're equipped to handle any situation, you know."

I just stared at her. I hadn't known.

"It's going to take a whole lot more than a little flu bug to stop this day from happening," she said, scooping Scottie out of my arms with tender efficiency. "Go on now. You've come a long way for this."

You have no idea how far, I thought, as someone took my elbow. I had no family member who could attend the temple with me, so I'd asked Teri to be my escort. (She'd received her own endowment four months earlier, just before marrying a wonderful, returned missionary.) Linking her arm in mine, she smiled and led me toward the recommend desk. Our eyes brimmed with tears at being together again, especially in this place. After exchanging a long hug, we stepped into a waiting room and I looked around.

Darren's escort was his dad, and all his extended family was there—a very great number. My eyes were wet again, this time with awe at the support and love his family shared.

Perhaps it was my day for crying. I'm not sure if I ever stopped after that. The initiatory ordinances were a word-for-

word answer to the prayer I'd asked the night before. The endowment made complete sense to me. I even understood the things my mother had misinterpreted and how she'd misunderstood them.

This day couldn't possibly be any better, I thought, admiring the huge bouquet of fresh-cut flowers in the soaring celestial room. Everything was so perfect.

"Darren," I whispered, as he kissed me, "this must be what heaven is like." My eyes traced the lovely, upward-sweeping lines of the walls, the sparkle of the lights. "I'm sure of it. Somehow Heavenly Father has given us a piece of heaven right here on earth."

Darren smiled. "Shall we go to the sealing room?" he asked. "Everyone tells me that's where we'll enjoy the most special ordinance of all."

There was standing room only at our sealing. So many family members and friends filled the room that I couldn't look up without crying. In a lovely, simple ceremony, Darren and I knelt across the sacred altar and were united for all eternity.

Then one of the workers from the nursery appeared at the door. "Your little Scottie got sick on the elevator just a moment ago. We'll have him cleaned up in a jiffy, if you'll just wait," she said.

Suddenly, I felt guilty. Had my baby been throwing up and crying all this time? I didn't have to wonder long. Soon the doors opened, and in came another sister, carrying Scottie. But instead of a sickly looking child, I was surprised to see him looking as bright and perky as ever. The Spirit swept over me once more, and I began to cry again. So did everyone else.

Following another ceremony, Darren and Scottie and I stood looking into the mirrors of eternity, as I had ten years earlier with my own mother and father. The Spirit whispered inside me just at that moment. More clearly than ever before, I heard these words: This is the Lord's answer to your prayers, Liz. This is your forever family.

/ / / / /

"Prayer gave me the courage to leave my past behind," I told Ben. "On the day Darren and I were sealed, the Holy Spirit showed me the answer to the prayers I'd offered for all those years—the ones I thought God had ignored."

"Prayers for a happy family?"

"Yes." I couldn't restrain my smile. "And along with this knowledge came some other, very important realizations. As we looked into the mirrors, I understood that 'God's delays are not God's denials.' [^1] I also discovered I'd been harboring anger toward God. That was a shocking realization for me because I knew those feelings were unfair. God hadn't hurt me. Yet I had been so filled with anger that I didn't see until then that He had never abandoned me. As I looked back on my life, the Spirit showed me specific ways Heavenly Father blessed me, how the Comforter had been with me, how Christ had carried me through when my own strength was lost." No wonder I wept!

Ben nodded, sharing my happiness in that discovery. "Did it last?" he asked.

"Yes," I answered without hesitation. "I made a promise while we were standing beside the altar. I covenanted with God that I would keep myself temple-worthy. I also promised to be committed to my family. Being committed no longer meant being stuck—but it meant I wasn't leaving, either."

"I get the feeling your sealing in the temple was a very significant turning point in your life," Ben said.

"Oh, it was!" I answered. "After our trip to the temple, I started over from scratch. I felt I had to become truly converted to my religion. I could no longer be a Mormon if I went on thinking and doubting as I had in the past. The Spirit whispered to me that I needed to come unto Christ, so over the next several years I took advantage of every chance I could find to do that."

Ever analytical, Ben responded, "How?"

"Like with the scriptures," I answered. "I learned how to study them, not just read them. God doesn't put things on a silver platter and tell us to eat, you know. Adam was told he'd have to work for his supper, and that's true of spiritual bread, too. The answers to my questions were all there, but I had to study and pray and research to find them. Certain things come quicker than others. I'm still working on most of them."

Ben set his pen down on his open notebook and leaned back in his chair with an amused look on his face. "Liz, have you ever noticed that there aren't all that many scriptures dealing specifically with abuse?"

"Yes." I wondered what he was getting at.

"You just told me that all the answers are available if you use the tools," he added.

I could stand Ben's questions because he obviously knew the answers already. He just wanted to see what I'd say. So I echoed his grin. "I also pointed out that you have to work at it over time. The scriptures must be coupled with prayer. For example, I've heard it said that God never gave parents a handbook. But through prayer and study, I've found many scriptural instructions and insights into that very process."

"You win," Ben chuckled, leaning forward again and taking up his pen once more. "I can tell you have searched the scriptures and developed a testimony of prayer. I just wish I knew a way to dispense this kind of healing professionally."

"It might seem too obvious an answer, but the Lord really is the greatest physician of all," I said. "When you go to men, you get what men can do. And that's right, because we need to do everything in our power before we call on Him. But when you go to the Lord, you experience healing that only He can provide. Only He can ultimately heal us so perfectly that there won't even be scars."

/ / / / /

In time, Christ promises the faithful a perfect resurrection of both body and spirit. Until then, we need to work along the best we can.

Darren graduated with a degree in chemical engineering and a brand-new job right back home. I finished high school, graduating with a 3.7 grade-point average. Our family was blessed with three lovely daughters, another son, and many good years together. During all that time, I concentrated on recovering by coming unto Christ.

Heavenly Father blessed me with many opportunities for growth. While I was expecting our sixth child, I served in the Young Women organization. I loved working with the fine young women in our ward; I felt privileged to set personal goals right along with them. The values they studied seemed to be a tailor-made blessing for my own self-esteem, as well as theirs.

From the start, I discovered a soft spot in my heart for the girls who came to church alone. We had several part-member and less-active families, so I spent extra time getting to know the daughters in those homes. It hadn't been all that long since I'd been coming to church alone.

As I served those choice young women, I began to feel a deep love and concern for them. I could sense when a lesson touched off a spark of shame or hurt in their eyes. Because of my own experiences, my love did not change when I saw their troubles. Rather, I understood them. My gratitude grew with the discovery that I could be sensitive to hidden griefs that others might overlook.

"The value this month is integrity," our president said during leadership meeting. "We need to reinforce how important it is for a young woman not to jeopardize her integrity during dating experiences. So I've put together an object lesson to share in each class."

I watched as our president took a bunch of perfectly white rose buds and explained how they symbolized each girl and her own special beauty. White was, of course, to represent purity.

"Suppose the worst," she said, as if we were the class. "Imagine you slipped and lost your chastity and virtue." Dipping the rosebud into a bowl of black ink, she returned it to the bouquet of flowers. Its blotched petals sagged as a dark stain ran down the stem. "When a young man comes to choose his companion for eternity from this bouquet," she asked, "would this one be selected?"

I stared at her powerful presentation, tears flooding my eyes. My purity had been stolen before I'd even reached dating age. There was a time when I would have identified myself as that tainted flower. What if one girl among our number suffered from those same scars?

Carefully, I explained to the sisters the dangers of this presentation. Talking to them from my own experiences, I asked, "Can we risk teaching this principle so callously?"

"Truth is truth," one sister said. "There is repentance."

"Yes, but we haven't illustrated that with our ink. When you need the Atonement's healing power through no fault of your own, black ink looks awfully harsh. Let's not dip the rose if we can't show its potential for being cleansed."

With care and a little more effort, we were able to alter our presentation to reach all the young women. To me, they really were like those tender rosebuds. I felt a great desire to protect them from pain caused by a lack of understanding or thoughtlessness.

But I also learned I had to protect myself the same way. Going to church required that I not let my feelings be hurt by the remarks of others. With time, I resolved that no one was going to take my testimony away from me. No matter how thoughtless someone else was, I could not afford to let others' words or actions stand in the way of my relationship with the Lord.

One night, while reading in the Bible, I found the story of John the Baptist sending two of his disciples to ask Jesus if He was "the one," meaning the Messiah, or if they should keep looking for someone else. Christ answered them with His miracles, pointing out that since He had come, the blind could see, the lepers were cleansed, the deaf could hear, the dead were raised, and the poor (who had previously been shut out of the synagogues) were being taught the gospel. Then He said something very curious, something that stuck in my heart and came to my mind many times afterward. He said, "Blessed is he, whosoever shall not be offended in me." [^2]

I had been offended in the Lord. Until I was sealed in the temple, I'd blamed my pain on the One who wants my happiness more than anything. But my heart was comforted when I discovered that scripture. Someone may give offense, but I have determined that I will not take it. And I especially won't blame it on God.

When people say things now—usually unknowingly—that hurt me, I pray for them. I hope in time the Lord will gently teach them to understand.

/ / / / /

"Ben, do you know the story of Naaman?"

"The great servant of the king of Syria, who was also a leper? Yes, I know how he came to Elisha the prophet and was told to wash seven times in the Jordan river. Naaman wanted to know why the Jordan was different from any other river, but eventually he humbled himself and did it anyway."

"What happened when he washed?" I asked.

" . . . .'His flesh came again like unto the flesh of a little child, and he was clean,' . . . ." Ben quoted. [^3]

"Do you see?" I said, excited that he knew the story so well. "God has the power to heal wounds all the way! In His own time, the Savior heals spiritual wounds as completely as He healed Naaman. Not only was Naaman's skin as it had been before the leprosy, but his very flesh was as perfect as on the day of his birth."

"You're saying that blessings come with spiritual healing," Ben summarized.

"Yes," I answered emphatically. "As we go through that process, we discover we've progressed." Without giving Ben a chance to ask for specifics, I added, "I've still got scars. The process isn't over for me yet, but the wound is no longer a gaping hole. And along the way I've discovered that I have compassion and discernment I probably wouldn't have developed without knowing pain firsthand. I have a close relationship with the Savior and an appreciation of the Atonement that can come only from needing Him, getting to know Him, and experiencing His mercy. I wouldn't wish my experiences on anyone, but the Lord can use them to improve me. In fact, He promises He'll turn them to my good." [^4]

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] Richard G. Scott, "Healing the Tragic Scars of Abuse," Ensign, May 1992, p. 32.
[^2] Janice Kapp Perry, "No Ordinary Man," The Light Within, 1985, pp. 15-17; emphasis added. Used by permission.
[^3] 2 Kings 5:9-14.
[^4] "If the very jaws of hell shall gape open the mouth wide after thee, know thou, my son, that all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good" (D&C 122:7). "My grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me; for if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them" (Ether 12:27).
