Michele R. Sorensen, Chainbreakers ( 1993)

28

I suddenly noticed Darren hadn't been adding anything to our conversation. Casting a glance in his direction, I saw he was still leaning back in his chair, but now his entire face was caught up in a grin. Even without words, his thoughts were clear to me. I knew my abuse had been the result of human decisions and moral agency—not something God had exploded on my childhood. But, here I was, talking to my doctor and husband about abuse as if it had been a prescribed treatment that had strengthened my spiritual self.

"Don't get me wrong, Ben. I really mean what I said about Heavenly Father's ability to take the most horrible affliction and turn it into a blessing. I know that for those who have faith, He will do that."

Ben glanced up from his notes for a moment, curious at the sudden change in my tone.

"This knowledge has been a great comfort to me after the fact. But getting to the point where I could even trust God or myself enough to believe these things is a whole different story. It has taken a long time—"

"Years," Darren broke in.

"And staying on top will be the work of a lifetime," Ben added. When Darren and I nodded, Ben thoughtfully tapped his pen a couple of times against his notebook. "I'm wondering what tools can help you stay on top of this. I mean, this abuse is like a horrible monster you've bashed into the ground. But throughout your life, aren't there times when it seems to rear its ugly head and haunt you?"

He understood so much! Then, before I could respond, he added, "And I bet you're going to tell me that using those same spiritual tools is the best means of handling this."

I nodded, wondering if there was some significance in the way we kept coming back to the same principles.

"So, I want you to name me three useful tools for keeping that monster's head down."

I glanced over at Darren and he smiled, apparently enjoying this. "Three of the most effective tools . . . ," I repeated, thinking. "Okay. Well, the first is obviously the one Elder Scott mentioned in his conference address—gratitude. [^1] When I am troubled, I concentrate on all the good things I can find in my life—even the most miniscule, small things. The scriptures teach us that everything good comes from God, so I take that principle literally and give Him the credit. After I count my blessings, the Lord always seems to bless me with increased trust and faith, the things I need to keep going."

"I'll buy that," Ben said. "Second?"

"I still say the blessings of the priesthood are irreplaceable."

"For example?" Ben prodded.

"Um," I paused, my mind running back over the years. "Well, when I was fourteen, I received my patriarchal blessing. It might as well have been in French!"

Darren smiled. He remembered how I'd resented my blessing because it made no sense in my world.

"I didn't have any idea who Joseph was or why a tribe should be important to me. And the 'morning of the first resurrection' wasn't in my vocabulary. To be honest, I didn't understand a single word of it."

"So what happened?" Ben asked.

"Darren showed me how to look at it like a map. He taught me how to 'translate' it using prayer and scripture study and time as my compass. Eventually, I began to see that my blessing was an individualized guide containing information that could help me get where I wanted to be."

"Point number two, well taken," Ben smiled. "Three?"

Darren interrupted my mental search for the third tool. "May I name the third?"

"Sure!"

"During her childhood," he addressed Ben, "Liz fought against the bad things that happened to her."

At Darren's words my mind slid backwards. I remembered the day I'd quit pretending my chores weren't done when they were, the times Maria and I had run away, the terrible moments when I'd escaped prying fingers and dark eyes. I remembered how I'd hammered my five-year-old fist into the sky when the "silent treatment" succeeded. I felt the same elation now, except that victory wasn't mine alone. My triumph is built on humble, reverent gratitude.

Darren was still talking about what he thought should be the third tool: a determined attitude. "Liz wanted peace of mind more than anything. And she was willing to fight for happiness with the same vigor she'd summoned to survive the abuse. It took time for her to become Liz—not the formerly abused Liz."

"Sounds to me," Ben began, with his careful way of understating things he knew perfectly well, "like the healing process has, in many ways, been even harder than enduring the initial abuse. I mean, it requires more of the survivor because the person has to take the initiative. No longer are things just happening to him or her. Instead, the survivor has to recognize what things he or she can control and make results happen there."

"You can't imagine how many times I've wanted to literally lie down and die," I said, the depth of my feelings clearly exposed in the sound of my voice. "But after I fought to keep going, I always discovered the Lord had been carrying me along. With hindsight I can honestly say that once I made the initial effort, He never let me down."

The room was silent again. Ben scrawled along the page for a moment and then was still.

"Ben? Can I share a story with you that I heard from a Finnish woman? It has everything to do with abuse—or rather, it has everything to do with moving on."

"You bet," he said, closing his notebook and folding his arms across his chest. "I'd love to hear it."

"Well," I began, remembering my wise friend's broken English, the kind music of her voice. "Once there were two men who met in the sunshine on the street. These men often spoke of important things. And one day one of them said, 'Good and evil are like two dogs inside me, clawing and biting and snarling.'

" . . . .'Oh?' his companion asked. 'Which one wins the fight?'

The first man looked at his friend with candid eyes and answered simply, 'The one I feed.'. . . ."

/ / / / /

The summer of 1990 was a hot one in Boulder, Colorado. We'd moved there so Darren could take a position at Rocky Flats. He was spending a lot of time getting started at his new job, so he flew the twins up to help us. I was well into my sixth pregnancy and discovering the same frustrations my mother had felt when she'd had to stay down. Doing nothing was driving me crazy. And, knowing I hadn't the willpower to follow the doctor's orders, Darren had deputized Charlene and Vaughn for his personal police force.

They were fifteen years old now. Charlene was an easygoing young woman. For her, life was one day at a time, and she took everything in stride. But Vaughn was very sensitive; he seemed to carry his troubles on his shoulders.

With the differences in our ages and my leaving home when they were so small, I'd never developed a real bond with them as individuals. My relationship to them had been that of a big sister or a baby-sitter. So, even though this pregnancy was hard, I was grateful it had given me a chance to get to know them. And I still had no idea what a blessing they would be to me.

Late one summer evening when Charlene had gone off to play volleyball with some of the youth from our new ward, Vaughn helped me put the children to bed. After they'd all had a bath and a drink and said their prayers, Vaughn and I went outside to sit on the steps where it was cool. The only sound in the darkness was an occasional car or the whirr of a cricket.

"Liz," Vaughn asked, interrupting our companionable silence. "Can we talk?"

"Sure," I answered, a little surprised and concerned by the intensity of his voice.

It seemed to take a long time for Vaughn to continue, as if he had to work up to vocalizing what was on his mind. "I . . . I want to know what my dad was like, Liz," he said at last, looking up at me with searching eyes. "Every once in a while someone slips and makes a negative comment, but for the most part the subject seems off-limits. Why?"

Vaughn's earnest voice cut sharply through the dark August night. Guilt penetrated my heart as I realized for the first time that I'd never said a single good thing about his dad to him, or to his sister, either.

As I looked into Vaughn's face, a pale oval in the light of the streetlamp, his eyes revealed the depth of his need. He craved knowledge of who he was. He yearned to know that he had been loved.

Even as my heart went out to him, a shudder ran through me. Vaughn looked so much like his father: light brown, close-cropped hair, the intense, searching gray eyes, the latent physical strength in the movements of his young body. Even the ears—! But there was something different from what I remembered in my father—something humble and vulnerable.

"Vaughn," I began. Why was my mouth suddenly so dry? "Vaughn, I—"

My mind sailed back into the past, to a time I'd tried to bury. I did not want it intruding on my here and now. Not that I'd forgotten it, but, rather, I hadn't let myself dwell on those things after our wonderful day in the temple.

Now, as my thoughts rushed back over the years, I was looking for something I'd never seen before. I was hunting for goodness. The longer Vaughn's intent, longing gaze remained fixed on me, the more feverishly I tried to find something—anything that would encourage him.

"Well, Vaughn . . . " Inwardly I begged Heavenly Father for help. "It . . . it's not easy for me to . . . well, I, uh—" My stuttering slowly gave way to smooth, regular speech. "The greatest quality about your dad, Vaughn, was his knowledge. He was extremely intelligent—very! Even when something didn't come easily to him" (I was remembering all those high school and college tests), "he mastered the task at hand. Years after he'd taken a test, he could still pull his textbook off the shelf and turn straight to the page where specific information was."

Vaughn's face relaxed a little as I went on talking. His hands slowly moved from where they'd been clamped around his bent legs. Soon the elbows were braced against his knees, and his chin rested in his cupped palms.

"Your dad was a hard worker, you know." I went on, being careful not to say something just because I had a desire to please Vaughn. Whatever I said had to be true. And although the process was painfully difficult, I was discovering it wasn't impossible. The person I'd hated for so long, the man I'd once vowed never to forgive, did in fact have some good qualities. "He was very neat, too. He took meticulous care of himself and his things. He had a fantastic sense of humor. Did you know that?"

Vaughn shook his head and smiled. "Nah, really?"

"Really! People liked being around him. He made them laugh and relax. He knew how to have lots of fun." After I told him about the Wild West party and how he taught me to dance and some of the funny things Daddy had done while chaperoning our swing-choir tour, we were quiet again. Then I got around to the obvious. "You look a lot like him, you know." I grinned and rumpled his hair. "Spitting image."

"Yeah," Vaughn answered, not minding what I'd done to his hair. "Grandma told me that."

"Know what else?" I asked, and my voice wavered. Tears sprang into my eyes as this boy looked up at me with sweet innocence. "Your dad loved you. He really did. I'll never forget the day he blessed you two. He was so proud of you! Everyone could see that he loved you very, very much."

Vaughn's eyes were wet. Tears began to slide down his smooth cheeks.

I went on, my face soon as wet as his. "Your dad baptized me, you know. He baptized me and Maria and Mom. That was perhaps the most important thing anyone has ever done for me," I said, realizing that Mom had never taken the twins to church. "Besides Mom's giving me birth, the gospel is the most precious gift anyone ever gave me. That and my family—all the people I love so much. The day Daddy baptized me was very special. After that, nothing in my life was ever quite the same again."

We talked for a long, long time that night. Vaughn asked me questions about Chuck's likes and dislikes, about his work and his hobbies. There were a lot of words said, but the conversation meant much more than a dialogue about Daddy's interest in horses and inability to cook. Something happened inside for both Vaughn and me—something wonderful.

For weeks afterward, our conversation stayed in my mind. Although it brought peace to both of us at the moment, it left me somewhat uncomfortable, too. I tried to bury the memory of our discussion, but it kept hanging around the back of my mind. And every time I let myself think about it, I realized that the terrible monster I'd despised so long had actually been a human being. He was a father. He'd once been a tender child. There were admirable things about his character. In fact, there were things he'd taught me—things I'd emulated.

Like the man in my friend's story, I had two dogs inside me, and even as I had been seeking to return to the presence of God, I'd nurtured hate within myself. That irony was something I simply couldn't ignore. But I didn't know what to do about it, either. Forgetting all those injustices wouldn't be a fair solution. They were real, and they had hurt.

So I threw myself with increased vigor into my family and my Church callings. I tried to keep busy every second, even though I was presumably laid up. And through it all I prayed for understanding, for peace.

One beautiful afternoon the kids were playing down at the park. In spite of doctor's orders, I couldn't stand to just lie around. So I went into the kitchen to wash dishes. Sunlight slanted through my window and made rainbows across the soap bubbles. It felt so good to sink my hands into the water, right up to the elbows.

I'd been asked to sing in church that Sunday, and so, as I enjoyed that simple, routine chore, I began practicing my song:

Jesus was no ordinary man. But there were some who did not understand. They saw Him working miracles, but some were still deceived. Why did they not believe? When with few loaves and fishes the multitudes were fed; When He showed them His pow'r to heal, and even raised the dead; When He walked upon the water and He calmed the raging sea, Why did they not believe? When His faith filled the fishnets; gave sight unto the blind; When they saw at His bidding even water turned to wine; When He offered all He had to them if they would but receive, Why did they not believe? Jesus was no ordinary man. The pow'r to bless and heal was in His hands. They saw Him cleanse the leper; They saw Him heal the lame; They must have sensed divinity and known from whence He came, But understanding not His cause, They crucified the Son of God, And even then they did not understand that Jesus was no ordinary man. [^2]

My hands were idle in the dishes; my tears fell among the pretty bubbles. How many times I had sung that song before! And yet never, never had I felt the way I did right then.

I knew the story; I understood the events of the Savior's life. But at that instant something spoke to my heart and told me much more. I'd always known the accounts of His life were true, but until that moment I'd never really felt it. I'd tried to draw closer to Christ by understanding the events of his life. Now I knew I had to grow closer by coming to know Him.

And in that simple fact lay all the healing I'd been seeking for so long.

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] Neal A. Maxwell, Not My Will, but Thine (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1988), p. 51.
[^2] Neal A. Maxwell, All These Things Shall Give Thee Experience (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979), p. 28.
