Michele R. Sorensen, Chainbreakers ( 1993)

29

Those two dogs are inside each of us," I explained to Ben. "And being ambivalent toward them won't make us more like Christ. We can't feed both dogs and expect goodness to win. We can't have love and joy fill our lives if we're nurturing ha—"

Blip! Blip! Blip!

I jumped six inches at the loud beeping sound coming from Ben's belt. Smiling, he reached down and shut off the buzzer on his pager. "Excuse me," he said, walking behind his desk to reach the phone.

"We'd better scoot," Darren said, looking at his watch.

"Wow," I breathed, following his line of thought. I'd lost all track of time. Options for our date were now down to a very late movie or a dessert, but Darren didn't mind any more than I did. We slid our coats back on and moved toward the door.

"Looks like Jennie Finch has broken her leg," Ben said, after hanging up the receiver. "I need to meet her family down at the hospital."

"Oh," Darren said, "that's too bad." He swung the office door open for me, and we stepped out into the hall.

"Maybe it's just a fine fracture," Ben added, zipping the case of his planner shut. He pulled his coat on and began buttoning it, turning the collar up against the cold. He flipped off the lights and locked the office door with that ponderous set of keys. "Listen," he swung around to face us once more, "it's been good talking with you—really good."

I looked again at Ben's face as he reached out to shake our hands. He seemed lighter, brighter now than when I'd discovered him standing in the hall. I remembered how one of my friends always says abuse is a disease that can be cured by talking about it, by bringing it out of the shadows, exposing it for what it is, and realizing what can be done about it.

"Maybe we'll talk about this again sometime," Ben added, as if he'd read my thoughts. "Can I call you if I ever write that book?"

"Absolutely!"

He pushed open the bar-handle of the foyer door, and a rush of bracing air swept in. "It sure is a blessing to know a pair of honest-to-goodness chainbreakers," he grinned, and we all stepped out into the swirling snow.

When had snow begun falling? I wondered vaguely. Chainbreakers. As I watched Ben disappear into the whirling white flakes, my mind tumbled back one last time to the day when the biggest chains had been cut from my life, the day I'd finally let them go.

That was during a flu season, too. In fact, the summertime bug got me down not long after Vaughn and I had talked. The virus hadn't upset my stomach much, but I did have an irritating, exhausting cold that seemed to drag on and on.

One afternoon contractions set in after a fit of coughing. Eventually, because they didn't let up and because I was bored, I began timing them. Although irregular, they kept coming, again and again.

Frustration welled up beneath my tiredness. No matter what I'd done during this pregnancy, it seemed as if my body was always threatening to go into labor. Now I couldn't even find a way to lie in bed without having contractions.

Finally I closed my eyes tightly against the pain and started praying. I explained to Heavenly Father that I felt I simply couldn't take this anymore. I told Him I was beyond the limits of exhaustion that my physical self could endure. The baby wasn't due yet, and I wasn't sure if I should take these contractions seriously. Was there something wrong? Could He tell me whether I needed to be worried or not?

When my prayer was finished, I rolled over and tried to breathe deeply.

"Hi there!" Darren said, coming around the corner.

"What are you doing home already?" I asked, surprised and wondering if this was the Lord's answer to my prayer.

"Oh, I don't know," Darren responded with smiling eyes. "Just thought you might like to see me." Looking around, he added, "Where are the kids?"

"At the pool with Vaughn and Charlie." Then another spasm clenched inside me. "Darren," I said, my breath catching in my throat. "Maybe you were inspired to come home. I'm having labor pains again."

"I can see," he answered, sitting down on the bed beside me and taking my hand.

When the pain passed I added, "I was just about to call the doctor. I think he'll want me to be checked again."

At five-thirty the next morning our new arrival cried out with such a big wail that everyone in the room was soon chattering about her lungs being well developed for a "preemie." And she weighed in right at six pounds—much bigger than the doctor had expected.

But I had a funny feeling about it all. My little darling kept gasping and making raspy noises. "Is she okay?" I asked the pediatric nurse.

"Oh, yes," she said, exuding confidence. "I think so." She thumped my baby on the back and cleaned out her mouth one more time, checking for phlegm. Then she said, "Say, how about if I take this angel straight to the nursery and have a doc check her out, just as a precaution?"

"Please," I said, wishing I could hold my new daughter at least a moment longer in spite of my suspicions.

But I had to stay in surgery after my baby was gone. I have a horrible record of overreacting to drugs, and this was no exception. When the anesthesia was administered, my whole body tried to go to sleep. The nurse yelled at me and squeezed my hands and arms. "Breathe, Liz! Breathe!" She put an oxygen mask over my face and shouted in my ear, "You have to stay awake, Liz!"

The oxygen and her yelling stopped me from slipping away, but I felt tired beyond explaining, almost beyond caring.

After a couple of hours they considered me stable enough to return to my room, still on oxygen. As they wheeled me in, unfamiliar faces began introducing themselves. Among them were a neonatologist, the hospital counselor, and the head nurse from the newborn intensive care unit. My new daughter, they explained, had the same virus I had. Her pneumonia was so advanced that one lung was full, the other half-full. Darren was down in intensive care with her.

A very strange feeling encompassed me as they each shook my hand, promising to come back and answer my questions when I was more rested. In the empty silence of the sterile room, my mind told me I ought to be worried. Yet my heart was whispering something far different.

Was I just too tired to cope? Was I slipping away from caring about things the same way I had in surgery?

But in my mind the song I'd sung only days before was running on and on. "Jesus was no ordinary man. . . . The power to bless and heal was in His hands . . ."

I reached for the bedside phone and called my former visiting teacher, who had become my best friend. "Hi, Judy, it's Liz." After the regular questions about sex and length and weight, I explained that our newborn was seriously ill. "Could you do me a favor, Judy? I need Phil to come down and help Darren. I think the baby needs a blessing."

Then I asked the nurse to call Darren in from the newborn intensive care unit. When Phil arrived, the two of them gave our new daughter a blessing.

"You have quite a miracle on your hands!" the neonatologist announced some time later, without suspecting just how accurate his choice of words was. "The antibiotics haven't even had time to kick in yet, but apparently they have. Your little girl is already coming out of the woods."

The head nurse was with him, and she smiled at me. Perhaps she recognized the origin of that miracle. "How long has it been?" she asked, looking at her watch. "Only about three hours?"

The doctor beamed. "Mm hm. Really amazing. One lung is clear; the other, halfway."

After they were gone, I lay for a long time, peaceful and warm. I knew where the miracle had come from. And the music was still playing over and over in my mind, "The power to bless and heal was in His hands . . . "

Like most spiritual experiences, this was a simple event. There was no lightning or thunder. No court of law could prove my baby's recovery had been the result of divine intervention. But the Spirit whispered unmistakably to my heart. Like the night Vaughn and I had sat on the steps, like the day I'd been singing while washing dishes, something significant was happening inside me.

Through this miracle, all the things I'd been studying about the Savior were suddenly very real and immediate. Something I'd read weeks before sank into my mind as if I were hearing the words for the first time: "In addition to bearing our sins . . . Jesus [came] to know our sicknesses, griefs, pains, and infirmities as well. . . . Jesus . . . not only satisfied the requirements of divine justice but also . . . demonstrated and perfected His capacity to succor His people and His empathy for them. He came to know, personally and perfectly, 'according to the flesh' how to help us become more like His fully comprehending Father." [^1]

The price Christ paid in Gethsemane not only endowed Him with a perfect understanding of all our struggles but opened the way to salvation. His sacrifice and empathy bought us eternal possibilities. "We were literally purchased by Jesus," I whispered to myself, recalling the words of Elder Maxwell. [^2] But for once I wasn't repeating what I'd heard others say. For once it was real. I meant it. In my heart I knew it, and somehow through the Spirit, I understood it. "We were literally purchased by Him!"

Without realizing it in so many words, I now had the necessary faith and strength to take a big step in my own healing. Until then, I'd been using a file on my chains, but in that moment it was as if the Savior had handed me a cutting torch. With it, I could reach out and sever those heavy bands.

/ / / / /

After only four days, my newborn daughter and I were discharged from the hospital. What my doctor insisted on calling an amazing coincidence, I knew to be a miracle. A few weeks later, when life was again functioning in a semiorganized fashion, Darren stayed home with the older children, while the baby and I drove the twins home to Arizona. After visiting my mother and letting her see her newest granddaughter, I planned to return straight to Boulder. But before I left Mesa, I made a little detour. The distance wasn't far, though I followed a route I hadn't taken in nearly fifteen long years.

Every detail of that day stands out vividly in my memory. The sun was shining bright and hot, the trees and lawns were deep green, and the flowers around people's houses seemed to radiate vibrant color.

I turned in between a set of white gates and drove slowly along the narrow, palm-lined path. This was a very reverent place. Baby Betsy seemed to sense it, too. Even before I pulled over to the side of the road, she was sleeping peacefully, sucking her lower lip. I opened the windows and turned off the motor. Carefully, I eased out of my car and walked a few yards across the lawn. I read the names on the stones as I went, until I reached my father's last resting place.

I stood above the marker for some time, quiet with my thoughts. I clearly remembered the last time I'd visited this place. It had been such a dreary day: cool, misty, angry. Today's warm peacefulness made an almost overwhelming contrast. I sat down on the soft grass beside his grave.

"Well, Daddy," I said, not realizing at first that I was talking out loud. "Here we are, and it's been a long time. I don't think a day has passed since you died that I haven't thought of you. I wish I could say they'd been good thoughts. It's only been recently that I've even tried to have any good thoughts."

A pretty little bird with red on its wings flew down and landed on the headstone. It hopped up and down for a moment, chirped, and then flew off.

"I don't feel as if I ever really knew you," I went on. "There were so many secrets. I'm sorry your childhood wasn't a good one. I'm sorry your life in general wasn't very happy."

I hadn't planned what I was going to say, but I wasn't searching for words, either. I had something to tell him, and it felt as if Daddy was listening.

"The things you did to us hurt us a lot. Even after you died, they caused us so much pain! For a long time, that pain and anger were destroying me. But then I began to realize I can't allow that to happen. I don't really understand all your anger; I don't know all the pain you've endured. But I do know there's Someone who does. You can draw near Him where you are."

The little bird swooped past again, gliding low and then up into the palm trees that lined the road.

"I'm letting you go, Daddy," I explained, and my voice cracked. Tears of peace began streaming down my cheeks. "God can take care of the past," I said, and for the first time I truly meant it. "The past is behind me now. Maybe you were suffering and ill. Maybe you were bound by chains and unable to free yourself. If so, I know we'll meet in the eternities. But if you were wrong and responsible—" my voice cracked again and I sat crying for a moment, compassion washing over me, cleansing me on the inside. "Please, please, Daddy, make the changes you need to and seek to be forgiven."

After letting the silence lie for a while, warm around me like the sunshine, I went on. "I forgive you for the past, Daddy. All the wrongs and all the pain and all the sadness are burdens I'm not going to carry any longer. I'm turning it all over to the only truly just Judge. It's between the two of you now."

Standing, I smoothed my skirt. I could hear the little bird singing overhead somewhere in the palms. "Good-bye, Daddy," I said.

As I turned to walk away, tears still flooded my cheeks. But they were so different from the hard, angry feelings I'd had the last time I'd visited this place. The walk to my car was easier than before. The chains that had bound me were cut loose. I felt light and free, much as I'd felt the day I'd risen from the waters of baptism. Life was going to be great.

I was alive again.

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] Neal A. Maxwell, Not My Will, but Thine (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1988), p. 51.
[^2] Neal A. Maxwell, All These Things Shall Give Thee Experience (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979), p. 28.
