Various authors, Testimonies of Book of Mormon Witnesses

Reports by Critics of Oliver Cowdery's Testimony

Source: "The Golden Bible," Painesville Telegraph, 16 Nov 1830, p. 3.

The Golden Bible.—Some two or three years since, an account was given in the papers, of a book purporting to contain new revelations from Heaven, having been dug out of the ground, in Manchester in Ontario County, New York. The book, it seems, has made its appearance in this vicinity.—It contains about 500 octavo pages, which is said to be translated from Egyptian Hieroglyphics, on metal plates, by one Smith, who was enabled to read the characters by instruction from angels. About two weeks since some persons came along here with the book, one of whom pretends to have seen angels, and assisted in translating the plates. He proclaims destruction upon the world within a few years,—holds forth that the ordinances of the gospel, have not been regularly administered since the days of the apostles, till the said Smith and himself commenced the work—and many other marvelous things too numerous to mention. In the neighboring township of Kirtland, we understand that twenty or thirty have been immersed into the new order of things; many of whom had been previously baptized.—The name of the person here, who pretends to have a divine mission, and to have * seen and conversed with angels, is Cowdrey [Cowdery]. We understand that he is bound for the regions beyond the Mississippi, where he contemplates founding a "City of Refuge" for his followers, and converting the Indians, under his prophetic authority.

Source: "The Book of Mormon," Painesville Telegraph, 7 Dec 1830, p. 3.

THE BOOK OF MORMON For the Telegraph

Those who are the friends and advocates of this wonderful book [The Book of Mormon], state that Mr. Oliver Cowdry [Cowdery] has his * commission directly from the God of Heaven, and that he has credentials, written and signed by the hand of Jesus Christ, with whom he has personally conversed, and as such, said Cowdry [Cowdery] # claims that he and his associates are the only persons on earth who are qualified to administer in his name. By this authority, they proclaim to the world, that all who do not believe their testimony, and be baptized by them for the remission of sins, and come under the imposition of their hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, and stand in readiness to go to some unknown region, where God will provide a place of refuge for his people, called the "New Jerusalem," must be forever miserable, let their life have been what it may. If these things are true, God has certainly changed his order of commission. When Jesus sent his disciples to preach, he gave them power against all unclean spirits, to cast them out, to heal all manner of diseases, and to raise the dead. But these newly commissioned disciples have totally failed thus far in their attempts to heal, and as far as can be ascertained, their prophecies have also failed.

Source: Journal of Ashbel Kitchell, in Richard L. Anderson, Investigating the Book of Mormon Witnesses (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book 1981), p. 55.

"Late in the fall a member of that society came to our house to visit the Believers. His name was Oliver Cowdery. He stated that he had been one who assisted in the translation of the golden Bible, and had * seen the angel, and also had been commissioned by him to go out and bear testimony that God would destroy this generation. By his request we gave liberty for him to bear his testimony in our meetings . . . . He appeared meek and mild."

Source: "Great Accession to the Van Buren Cause," Painesville Telegraph, 20 Feb 1835, p. 3.

The Mormonites in this country, as if weary of the dull monotony of dreams and devotion, of vision and vexation - of profitless prophecies, and talking in tongues have concluded to turn their attention to political matters. A paper entitled The Northern Times has made an appearance from their press in Kirtland, bearing the name of O. Cowdery, one of their leaders and preachers, as editor. The editor breaks forth with a flood of words, filling seven columns under his editorial head—pounces upon the dead carcass of the United States Bank with Quixotic ferocity - talks about "WIGS"—praised the President—and says, the nomination of Van Buren "we still add, would meet our mind and receive our strong support." As the editor [Oliver Cowdery] professes to have * communion with the spirits of the invisible world, and certifies that he had seen an angel, and "hefted" the golden plates of the Prophet, he will be a political anomaly, if not a dangerous opponent.

Source: "Extract of a letter to the Editor of the Telegraph, dated Kirtland April 14, 1835," Painesville Telegraph, 17 April 1835.

Mr. Editor:—It may be a matter of some little curiosity to the public to know that the band of Mormon fanatics, whose headquarter is in this town, are now publishing a political paper for the special benefit of the office seekers in this county. Since Oct. last they have issued two whole papers, and two extras, mostly filled with the lowest cant, and thread-bare hobbies of the tory prints, culled from the Kitchen Cabinet factory at Washington, down through every grade, to the brain of the moonstruck editor himself. But who is the editor of this wonderful print? His name is O. Cowdery, and may be found to a certificate in the Mormon Bible, in which he says he had * seen and hefted the wonderful plates from which said bible was manufactured. He has also seen angels, who disclosed to him that the engraving upon the plates, which appeared to be of ancient workmanship, were correctly translated by Joseph Smith, Jun. He was the amanuensis of Smith, the impostor, as he says, in preparing their book of absurdities for the press. At the start of Mormonism he was dubbed an elder by Smith, and subsequently a high priest, apostle, prophet, etc.
