Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Taylor, John

JOHN TAYLOR IN 1887.

Taylor, John, third president of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, was a son of James and Agnes Taylor, and was born Nov. 1, 1808, at Milnthorpe, Westmoreland county, England. His parents owned a small estate at the village of Hale, in that county. They were members of the Church of England, and he was brought up in the doctrines of that church until he was about fifteen years old. He then joined the Methodists, and was soon after appointed a local preacher, and continued as such until he left England about the year 1828 or 1829. His father's family had left about two years previously and gone to the neighborhood of the city of Toronto, upper Canada. After a short residence in New York, Brooklyn and Albany, he visited his parents in Canada, and took up his residence at Toronto. At that city he married Miss Leonora Cannon, daughter of Captain Cannon, of the Isle of Man, who was a member of the Methodist society, to which John Taylor had attached himself on his arrival at Toronto. Here he united with a few sincere and well educated gentlemen in the search of the Scriptures, some of whom belonged to the Methodist society, In the course of their researches they became convinced of many important truths, such as the gathering of Israel, the restoration of the ten tribes, and the personal reign of Jesus on earth. They also believed in the necessity of revelation: of men being called of God to preach as they were formerly; of the gifts of prophecy, tongues healings and other gifts of the Holy Ghost. They came to the conclusion that the churches of the day had departed from the order of God, and were consequently corrupt and fallen, and that if the Bible was true, the religions of the day were false. With these convictions they fasted and prayed much, that if God had a church on the earth, He would send a messenger unto them. John Taylor heard, investigated and rejected Irvingism, and shortly after was waited upon by Elder Parley P. Pratt, with a letter of introduction from a merchant of their mutual acquaintance. Having heard many of the stories current about the Book of Mormon and Joseph Smith, he received Elder Pratt cautiously. After a rigid scrutiny, however, he and several of his friends believed the doctrines laid before them, and were baptized in 1836. Taylor was ordained Elder by Elder Pratt, and was shortly after set apart, by Elders Pratt and Orson Hyde, as presiding Elder in upper Canada. During a visit of Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, and Thomas B. Marsh (the latter then being president of the quorum of the Twelve), to Toronto in 1837, Elder Taylor was ordained a High Priest under their hands. He paid several visits to the Temple at Kirtland, Ohio, and was Joseph Smith's guest while there. During the great apostasy of 1837, when many leading men turned away and became so embittered against the Prophet that the lives of men who defended him were endangered, Elder John Taylor stood up boldly in the Kirtland Temple in the midst of foes, and with that eloquent power which came from God, and which ever characterized Elder Taylor's speech, declared that Joseph Smith was a Prophet of the living God and had not fallen, as alleged by apostates. He was equally diligent in private conversation, in maintaining the integrity of the Prophet Joseph and spreading the gospel among the people. From Canada he removed to Kirtland by request of the Prophet. From Kirtland he removed to Missouri, joining the body of the Church at Far West in 1838. In his migration he preached the gospel on the way and organized a branch of the Church near Indianapolis, Ind. Before reaching Far West, he and a little company of twenty-four people encountered a mob, led by two ministers, Abbott Hancock, a Baptist, ans Sashiel Woods, a Presbyterian. July 8, 1838, the Lord, by revelation, called Elder Taylor to the Apostleship to fill the vacancy occasioned by the fall of John F. Boynton. At a conference in Far West, Oct. 5, 1838, he was sustained by the vote of the Saints, and ordained an Apostle Dec. 19, 1838, by Apostles Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball. Elder Taylor entered immediately upon the duties of his new calling, and as in all previous callings soon proved himself truly an Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ. While a resident of Missouri he shared in all the persecutions heaped upon the Saints. He was so bold and powerful in his defense of their rights, and so terrible in his denunciations of the wicked, that he was designated "The Champion of Right," and this title was ever accorded him by the Latter-Day Saints. While Joseph and Hyrum Smith were imprisoned in Missouri Elder Taylor paid them several visits. He was selected by the Saints of Caldwell county as one of a committee to draft a memorial to the legislature of Missouri setting forth the persecutions, and asking that body for a redress of the wrong imposed upon them. Himself and Bishop Partridge were also appointed to write a petition to the general government. Elder Taylor was among the number who, after the expulsion of the Saints from Missouri, returned to Far West to fulfil a revelation given July 8, 1838, that the Twelve were to take their departure for their mission to Europe April 26, 1839, from the Temple ground sat Far West. The enemy having learned of this revelation, swore that it should not be verified. They were baffled, however. The brethren arrived after midnight, held a conference, excommunicated a number of persons, and ordained George A. Smith to the Apostleship. On the 8th of August, Elder Taylor left Nauvoo for England. He was sick for eleven weeks on the way. He left his family in the old military barracks at Montrose, Iowa, in very poor circumstances. Most of the Twelve and many of the Saints were sick, having just passed through the persecutions and hardships attending their residence in and exodus from Missouri. Elder Taylor was a man of great faith in God and believed thoroughly in preaching the gospel "without purse or scrip." When traveling to a certain destination, if he had but a pittance, he would purchase with that transportation in the best conveyances attainable, thus placing himself among the best educated people in his travels. When his means were exhausted, with an inexhaustible store of faith, he would stop and preach the gospel. The Lord would raise up friends who would give him money, with which he would proceed on his journey. In doing this he would never ask a human being for help. He asked the Lord, and his prayers never went unanswered. When they were about to sail from New York to Liverpool, he and two other brethren were almost destitute of means, not having sufficient to pay one passage, much less three. Notwithstanding their predicament, a very short time before the vessel was to sail Elder Taylor told one of his companions to go and engage passage for all three to Liverpool. His fellow-laborers were non-plussed and asked where on earth they could get means in so short a time. Elder Taylor answered that there was plenty of means in the world and the Lord would send them enough before the vessel sailed to pay their way. His words were most remarkably fulfilled. He asked no person for money, and yet immediately after he made the prediction one after another came to them and proffered assistance, until enough was provided to meet their expenses to Liverpool. He arrived in Liverpool Jan. 11, 1840, and immediately commenced his missionary work, preaching, baptizing, organizing branches, and with his brethren regulating the Church throughout the British Isles. He introduced the gospel into Ireland and the Isle of Man, extending his labors into Scotland. He published several tracts, setting forth principles of the gospel and refuting falsehoods. He corrected the proof sheets of the Book of Mormon, and with President Young and Elder Parley P. Pratt prepared and published the first edition of the Latter-Day Saints' Hymn Book. While laboring of the Isle of Man he had secured the printing of some tracts, which he wrote in reply to the falsehoods circulated by ministers and others regarding the character and doctrines taught by the Prophet Joseph Smith. When the tracts were ready the printer would not deliver them until every penny was paid which was due him. Elder Taylor did not have sufficient to meet the demand, and being very anxious to obtain the tracts went immediately into a private room, and, kneeling down, told the Lord in plain simplicity exactly how much he needed to pay for the matter he had published in defense of his cause. In a few minutes after his prayer was offered a young man came to the door, and upon being invited to enter handed Elder Taylor an envelope and walked out. The young man was unknown to him. The envelope contained some money and a little note which read: "The laborer is worthy of his hire," and no signature was placed thereon. In a few minutes later a poor woman engaged as a fish vender came to the house and offered a little money to assist him in his ministerial labors. He told her there was plenty of money in the world and he did not wish to take her money. She insisted that the Lord would bless her the more and she would be happier if he would accept it, whereupon he received the offering, and to his surprise the poor woman's mite, added to what the young man had given him, made exactly the amount sufficient to pay the printer the balance due him. After a very active and successful mission he returned to America, arriving in Nauvoo July 1, 1841. Upon his arrival home he found his wife very near to death, being seriously ill. He called to his aid about twenty Elders. They administered and prayed for her and she was restored to health. In October, 1841, John Taylor and Elias Higbee were appointed a committee to petition Congress for a redress of the wrongs heaped upon the Saints in Missouri. He was also appointed by the Prophet to present the petition. Elder Taylor edited the last three volumes of the "Times and Seasons," by appointment of the Prophet. He also edited and published the "Nauvoo Neighbor." As well as attending to his high calling in the Apostleship, he was a city councilman, one od the regents of the University, and Judge Advocate of the Nauvoo Legion, all of which he filled with ability and distinction. Elder Taylor was very firmly attached to the Prophet Joseph Smith. He often attended to him in scenes or persecution and trial. When Joseph and Hyrum were taken to Carthage and lodged in jail on false charges, and promised by the governor of the State protection from mob violence, and a fair trial, Elders John Taylor and Willard Richards accompanied them as friends, and were in the prison when the awful tragedy took place, which resulted in the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith. Just before the assault made upon the prisoners, Elder Taylor sang the hymn, "A poor wayfaring man of grief." By request of Hyrum Smith he sang it the second time, although he expressed himself as not feeling in a very favorable mood to sing. Between 4 and 5 o'clock p.m., June 27, 1844, an armed mob rushed up the stairs of Carthage jail leading to the apartment where the brethren were confined. They shot through the door, and a ball pierced the face of the Patriarch Hyrum Smith. While the mobbers were forcing the door open and pushing their guns through the opening, Elder Richards held the door the best he could, while Elder Taylor parried their guns off with his walking cane. Of a sudden the Prophet Joseph sprang to the window and leaped out. His motive in doing this could not have been to save his own life, for he sprang into the open fire of his enemies. It must have been, as believed Elders Taylor and Richards, to save the lives of the two last named brethren, by calling the attention of the mob from the inside to the outside of the building. His action had the desired effect, for instantly the mob rushed from the stairway of the jail to the ground below, and concentrated their murderous fury upon the Prophet, as he fell a martyr by the curb of the old well by the side of Carthage jail. Elder Taylor ran to the window and was shot in and near the thigh with four balls. He was about to fall out from the window when a bullet struck the watch in his vest pocket and forced him back. He fell upon the floor, not knowing at first what had forced him back, and thus providentially saved his life. Elder Richards, who escaped unhurt, dragged him to a small room and covered him with an old bed. The mob soon dispersed in confusion, and as soon as convenient thereafter Elder Taylor was removed to Nauvoo, where he recovered, but carried one or more bullets to his grave forty-three years later. He was a man of wonderful vitality and nerve, bearing all physical pains, as he did trials and tribulations of another kind with fortitude unexcelled. Upon his restoration to health he resumed the performance of his duties, and was one with President Young and his brethren of the Twelve Apostles in presiding over the Church. He helped the Saints in their troubles by every means in his power, assisted in the completion of the Nauvoo Temple, and suffered the trials of another great exodus when the Saints were driven from their homes in Nauvoo. He journeyed with the first company of his brethren to Winter Quarters, assisted in organizing the Mormon Battalion, and was from this point called with Elders Orson Hyde and Parley P. Pratt on a mission to Great Britain. He responded cheerfully, again leaving his family in the wilderness in tents and wagons. He arrived in England Oct. 3, 1846, and performed an excellent work, in company with his associates regulating the affairs of the mission. He returned in the following spring and had charge of a large company of British Saints which entered Salt Lake Valley in the fall of 1847. He now spent two years in Salt Lake valley, and was active in founding and building Salt Lake City. He was ingenious in mechanism, and withal truly a philosopher under all circumstances. He built one of the first saw mills in Utah, and worked in it himself. March 12, 1849 he was chosen one of the associate judges of the provisional State of Deseret. In October, 1849, he was called on a mission to France, which he filled with marked ability and success. Upon his arrival in Boulogne, 1850, he was challenged to a discussion with several clergymen, the proceedings of which were published in pamphlet form in Liverpool and subsequently in Orson Pratt's works. His opponents found themselves utterly powerless to meet him upon Scriptural or reasonable grounds, and speedily resorted to subterfuges, lying and slanderous reports, all of which were refuted in a masterly manner by Elder Taylor. During his mission the Book of Mormon was translated into French and German under his direction, the latter being published in Hamburg, where he introduced the gospel. He also edited and published in France a monthly paper called "L'Etoile du Deseret," and in Germany a periodical entitled "Zions Panier." During his labors several branches of the Church were organized in France. He also wrote while upon this mission, and published it after his return, the sublime treatise entitled "The Government of God." After his return to Salt Lake valley Aug. 20, 1852, he labored with his hands, and traveled much, preaching the gospel among the Saints. In 1854, he was elected a member of the Territorial legislative council, bus subsequently resigned this position to fill a mission in New York, and to preside over the Church in the Eastern States. At that particular time heavy attacks were being made upon the Latter-Day Saints through the press. Elder Taylor published a paper called "The Mormon" in New York City, establishing his headquarters near the office of the noted writer and editor, James Gordon Bennett, to whose attacks Elder Taylor replied in such a vigorous manner as to surprise the anti-Mormon element in that city. His arguments were unanswerable, and as usual the opponents of the truth resorted to falsehood and buffoonery. He continued "The Mormon" until 1857, when he was called home on account of the threatened war against the Saints under the administration of President Buchanan. During the times and circumstances leading to the action of the government in sending an army to Utah, Elder Taylor was active and fearless in defending the rights of the Saints and denouncing the preachers and politicians who were industriously circulating falsehoods against the Saints. His replies to Vice-President Schuyler Colfax's ungentlemanly and unwarranted attacks upon the Saints exhibit the fearless character of the man, as well as the clearness of his mind in penetrating the right and wrong side of every proposition under consideration. He was very active in his efforts to secure the admission of the State of Deseret into the Union. It was upon his return from the publication of "The Mormon" that President Young designated Elder Taylor as the best editor of a paper among the Latter-Day Saints. From this time on, for many years, his time was occupied in traveling, preaching, organizing and regulating the Church in the various settlements of the Saints. He was many times a member of the Utah legislature, and speaker of the house. As a legislator he showed marked ability, he also served as probate judge of Utah county, He was present at the dedication of the St. George Temple, the first built in Utah. He took part with President Young in the organization of the Stakes of Zion. At the death of President Young in 1877, Elder Taylor was president of the Twelve Apostles, and in October, 1880, was sustained as President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints and Prophet, Seer, and Revelator to the Church in all the world. Apostles Geo. Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith were chosen as his counselors. During the thirty-three years the Saints had lived in Utah, many had been emigrated from distant countries by the perpetual emigration fund and many of them were very much in debt to that fund. The year 1880 being the fiftieth or jubilee year since the organization of the Church, President Taylor was moved upon to forgive the people their debts to this fund, and thus as in olden times make the captive free. This was hailed with delight by the Saints, and is remembered by the grateful with a sense of love and esteem toward President John Taylor. President Taylor presided over the Church with dignity and ability. He traveled and visited the Saints, as far as circumstances would permit. When the crusade against plural marriage came to be waged with bitterness, under the rule of the Edmunds-Tucker act, President Taylor, to prevent trouble and to place himself beyond the possibility of prosecution for an infraction of the law, lived in the Gardo House, having for housekeeper his venerable sister, Agnes Schwartz, while all his families occupied their own homes. He was a just man. Yet notwithstanding his observance of the law, his enemies were determined to arrest him, and if possible precipitate an eruption, which would give them a pretense for still stronger measures to oppress the Saints. Upon his return from a trip to Arizona and California he appeared in the large Tabernacle Feb. 1, 1884, and preached his last public discourse in that building. It was a powerful address, exhorting the Saints to faithfulness and forbearance, long suffering and charity in all their trials. From this time on until his decease he lived in exile, attending, however, from his place of seclusion by letters, epistles and otherwise to his public duties. During his exile one of his wives died, after a season of illness. During her sickness he was prevented from seeing her, as her home was closely watched by miserable spotters, whose characters were as far beneath that of President Taylor as a slough of corruption is beneath the glittering rays of the celestial sun. Being denied necessary exercise, to which he was accustomed, he became enfeebled in body and his life shortened. He died in exile July 25, 1887, at Kaysville, Davis co., Utah, truly a double martyr. His life was shortened by exile from home, under the oppression of unjust men and measures. During the life of President Taylor he traveled thousands of miles for the gospel's sake without purse or scrip, baptized many people, organized numerous branches of the Church, published many tracts and several larger works introduced the gospel to new countries. He was the author of many choice hymns and poems. He received many revelations to guide him in his duties, as well as being a constant medium of inspiration, and received revelations which were written guidance of the Church. Before Prophet Joseph was martyred he to President Taylor: "Elder Taylor have received the Holy Spirit; if you heed His teachings the same will become within you a constant stream of revelation." Those who know what revelation is and knew President John Taylor know that the Prophet's words were literally verified. Among the striking prophecies uttered by Elder Taylor was one concerning Gov. Ford, of Illinois, who had virtually betrayed Joseph Smith into the hands of a howling mob. President Taylor prophesied that Gov. Ford would live until the flesh had well nigh withered from his bones, that he would lose his property and die a pauper, the subject of charity. A non-Mormon lady who heard this prophecy and also attended the funeral of Gov. Ford, testified (as did all the facts connected with the subsequent life, death and burial of Thomas Ford), that President Taylor's prediction was fulfilled to the very letter. President Taylor was a man of fine appearance; he stood about six feet high, his countenance was heavenly, and whosoever went into his presence, either in private or in public, felt intuitively that he was in the presence of a great man, a man of honor and merit. His abilities were varied, and though pre-eminently spiritual, he had a strong liking for good literature. In pioneer, exodus life, across the weary plains afoot and with teams, under trying ordeals, as in all other experiences, John Taylor was master of the situation. He cheered the Saints, by faith-promoting anecdotes of past experience and history, with prophetic inspiration, pointed them to a future of long respite from mob violence. He could compose and sing hymns and pleasant songs with high moral sentiment embodied in them. There was nothing in his nature and sentiments of a pettish or groveling character. He spurned every sentiment that was low or dishonorable in thought, word or deed. His language and manner of address was always chaste and dignified to the very extreme. He left a noble family of wives, sons and daughters, to whom he bequeathed as a rich legacy his noble virtues of honor, self-denial, integrity, purity, faith and devotion to God. He lived, labored and died the perfect exemplification of his favored motto. "The Kingdom of God, or nothing."-Partly by Matthias F. Cowley.
