Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Woodruff, Wilford

WILFORD WOODRUFF IN 1852.

Woodruff, Wilford, fourth president of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, was born March 1, 1807, in Farmington (now Avon). Hartford county, Conn. He, like his predecessors in the prophetic office of the Church, came of a sturdy, industrious race of men and women. His progenitors were among the early settlers of New England. They figured nobly in the American revolution, and naturally transmitted to posterity a love of liberty and traits which go to make patriots and martyrs. Wilford Woodruff possessed all these admirable qualities of character, which were crowned with a veneration for God, and strong religious element in his being This led him in early youth to the consideration of spiritual subjects. He was also very industrious. His father, Aphek Woodruff, was a miller, and Wilford assisted him in running the Farmington grist mills, and, though tender in years, proved himself a man in thought and labor. From 1827 to 1832 he took charge of a flour mill for his aunt. Although religious he did not join any denomination until he was twenty-six years of age, because he found none which harmonized in doctrine and organization with the Church of Christ as described in the New Testament. When only a boy he would ask his Sunday school teacher why there were no Apostles and prophets in this age, as in olden times. The answer he received only tended to disgust him with sectarianism. It was the same old story, "Apostles and prophets are all done away with, because no longer needed," and yet with all the learning of modern ministers, they were unable to come to a unity of the faith as taught by the Savior and His Apostles. Under these circumstances Wilford. Woodruff could only turn to the Lord in prayer for guidance, and find comfort in reading and believing the prophecies and doctrines of the Holy Bible. In 1832 he felt a strong inspiration to go to Rhode Island. Why, he did not know, and having already arranged to remove with his brother, Azmon Woodruff, to Richland, Oswego county, New York, he did not heed the inspiration to visit Rhode Island, but moved to the State of New York.'They purchased a farm and saw mill, settling down to the business of farming and milling. Dec. 29, 1833, over a year from the time they left Connecticut, two "Mormon" Elders, Zera Pulsipher and Elijah Cheeney, came to that section of country preaching that an angel had visited the earth, restored the everlasting gospel, and that Joseph Smith was a prophet of the Lord. Wilford and Azmon Woodruff, who went to hear them preach, immediately received a testimony of the genuineness of their message, and offered themselves for baptism. Wilford was baptized Dec. 31, 1833, by Zera Pulsipher. Bro. Woodruff now learned that at the time he received the impression to visit Rhode Island there were Elders preaching in that State, and had he gone there, the opportunity to receive the gospel would have been afforded him one year earlier. From the time of his baptism until he departed for a better sphere, Wilford Woodruff proved by a life of devotion to the cause of God that he was grateful for his existence in this age of the world. A branch of the Church was organized in Richland Jan. 2, 1834, and Bro. Woodruff was ordained a Teacher. During this winter Elder Parley P. Pratt and others visited Richland. Elder Pratt became much impressed with Bro. Woodruff, and immediately told him that his duty was to repair to Kirtland, join Zion's Camp, and go with that body to Missouri. He took this counsel, closed his business in Richland, and left for Kirtland, where he arrived April 25, 1834. He was invited to be the guest of the Prophet Joseph Smith, which invitation he accepted, and he had a glorious time in his acquaintance with the Prophet and other leading men of the Church. He started with Zion's Camp for Missouri May 1, 1834, which journey was accomplished with considerable hardship, but throughout all the varied experiences incidental to the journey, Wilford Woodruff was, like Caleb and Joshua, among the number who sustained the Prophet, and never complained nor murmured because of trial and privation. After accomplishing all that could be done as a body, the Prophet advised the young men without families to remain in Missouri, Bro. Woodruff sojourned with Lyman Wright in Clay county, spending the summer quarrying rock, cutting wheat, making brick and doing other kinds of hard manual labor. During this time he was possessed of a strong desire to go into the world and preach the gospel, but did not express his desires, lest he should be considered aspiring, this being farthest from his humble unassuming disposition. The Lord, however, knew the honest desire of his heart, and one day, while walking along the road, he was met by one of the leading Elders in that section, who said to him in substance, "Bro. Woodruff, it is the will of the Lord that you should be ordained a Priest and go on a mission." Bro. Woodruff answered, "I am ready." He was ordained a Priest and went on a mission to Arkansas and Tennessee in the fall of 1834. On this mission he was grossly assailed by an apostate named Akeman, who, when Bro. Woodruff was leaving his premises, came towards him in a savage manner as if to do him violence, when the apostate suddenly fell dead at his feet. This event had been shown to Bro. Woodruff in a dream, though he did not understand the full import, until it was fulfilled. He and companion traveled on foot without purse or scrip, and on their journeyings they passed through Jackson county, Missouri, where it was dangerous for a Latter-day Saint to be seen. They were frequently preserved in a providential manner from mobocrats. Bro. Woodruff's first attempt at preaching was at a tavern, one Sunday in December, 1834. He was weary from a long walk through mud and slush, but the people desired to hear him. He enjoyed the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, speaking with freedom and power, testifying to the restoration of the everlasting gospel. In their travels Bro. Woodruff and his companion frequently lost their way and were obliged to wade swamps, and to avoid expenses would travel down some of the rivers in small canoes. Between Little Rock, Ark., and Memphis, Tenn., they became exhausted while crossing an alligator swamp. Bro. Woodruff's companion left him in the swamp suffering with a severe pain in his back. He knelt down in the mud and prayed intently, when the Lord healed him, and he went on his way rejoicing. Being joined by Elder Warren Parrish in April, 1835, they traveled together over seven hundred miles in less than four months, preaching the gospel every day. They baptized twenty in their travels. Elder Parrish also ordained Bro. Woodruff an Elder, placing him in charge of the branches they had organized in Tennessee. Elder Woodruff being left to travel alone, he extended his field of labor, and baptized quite a number, among whom were several of the Campbellite persuasion. In 1835, he traveled 3,248 miles, baptized 43, organized three branches, and held 170 meetings. Subsequently, in the spring of 1836, he traveled respectively with Abraham O. Smoot and Apostle David W. Patten. After performing a faithful two years' mission, accomplishing the conversion and baptism of many souls, Elder Woodruff returned to Kirtland, Ohio, in the fall of 1836. In May of that year he was ordained into the second Quorum of Seventy by Apostle Patten and Warren Parrish. He also received his blessings in the Kirtland Temple, and attended school. April 13, 1837, he married Phebe W. Carter, of the State of Maine. A few days later he received a remarkable patriarchal blessing under the hands of patriarch Joseph Smith, senior, in which much of his future life was plainly foretold. During the troubles of 1837, when many leading men became embittered against the prophet Joseph Smith, Wilford Woodruff was among the number who did not murmur, and was true to the Prophet of the Lord. In May, 1837, he started on a mission to Fox Islands. En route he preached the gospel to his relatives in Connecticut and baptized a number of them. Together with Jonathan H. Hale he landed on North Fox Island, Aug. 20, 1837, where they immediately commenced preaching the gospel. The first fruits of their labors was Justin Eames, a sea captain, and his wife, who were baptized Sept. 3rd. These were the first to embrace the gospel in this dispensation upon an island of the sea. A Baptist minister by the name of Newton first allowed them to preach in his chapel, but he afterwards opposed them, and was humiliated by seeing the best of his flock leave him and embrace the gospel as taught by these Elders. Two branches of the Church were organized and the two Elders returned to Scarborough, Maine, in October, where Elder Woodruff had left his wife with her father's family. Elders Woodruff and Hale having parted, the former returned to Fox Islands in November, this time accompanied by his wife. He continued missionary work, baptizing a goodly number until persecution became so intense that he deemed it wisdom to return to Maine. Accompanied by Elder James Townsend, he introduced the gospel in the city of Bangor and other places in the State of Maine. From this labor he returned to Fox Islands. In harmony with counsel from the Prophet Joseph, he advised the Saints to sell their property and accompany him to the land of Zion. Early in 1838 he visited Providence, New York; also Boston and his native town, Farmington, Conn. In this place he preached the gospel to and baptized his father, stepmother, sister and other relatives and organized a branch of the Church. Bidding his relatives a loving farewell, he returned to Scarborough, Maine, where his first child, a daughter, was born, July 14, 1838. He again visited Fox Islands to encourage the Saints and prepare them for gathering to Missouri. While laboring in North Vinal Haven, Aug. 9, 1838, he received an official communication from Thos. B. Marsh, president of the Twelve, to the effect that he had been called by revelation, in connection with three other brethren, to bear the Apostleship and occupy a place in the Council of the Twelve. Thus his early dreams of Apostolic days were coming to a living reality, in which Wilford Woodruff himself was to be one of the Apostles. He was requested to come to Far West, Mo., as soon as he could arrange his affairs and prepare himself to preach the gospel in Great Britain, with his associates, the Twelve, the following year. With great promptness he set about preparing the Saints on Fox Islands to gather to Missouri. About one hundred people had embraced the gospel, chiefly through his labors, upon the islands. About fifty of these now prepared to gather with him to Missouri. Bro. Nathaniel Thomas sold his property and had considerable money. To assist his brethren and sisters Bro. Thomas loaned them about $2,000, which was placed in the hands of Elder Woodruff for their benefit. With this he purchased ten new wagons, ten sets of harness and twenty horses. After making these preparations he preceded the emigrating Saints to Scarborough, Maine, to prepare his own family for the journey. The company were counseled by President Woodruff to start by Sept. 1st, but they failed to do so, and did not leave until the early part of October. In consequence of this late start the journey proved a very hard one. Oct. 13, 1838, while crossing the Green Mountains, Elder Woodruff was taken very sick. A little later his wife was stricken down and came nigh to the gates of death. Both, however, were restored to health by the power of the Almighty. Respecting this new experience of migration, of which he did so much in later years, Elder Woodruff wrote the following in his journal: "In the afternoon of Oct. 9th, we took leave of Father Carter and family in Scarborough and started upon our journey of two thousand miles, at this late season of the year, taking my wife with a suckling babe at her breast with me to lead a company of fifty-three souls for their journey from Maine to Illinois, to spend nearly three months in traveling in wagons through rain, mud, snow, and frost." Upon arriving in Rochester, Illinois, Dec. 19, 1838, he learned of the Persecutions and unsettled condition of affairs in Missouri and concluded to stop in that place the rest of the winter. In the spring of 1839 he removed his family to Quincy, Ill., and from this point accompanied the Twelve to Far West, and was ordained with Elder Geo. A. Smith to the Apostleship April 26, 1839, on the Temple site, by President Brigham Young, assisted by other members of the Twelve. After returning from Missouri, he moved his family to Montrose, Iowa, where he was severely attacked with chills and fever. While still sick he started Aug. 8, 1839 on his mission to England, leaving his wife also sick, and like all the families of the Twelve, in destitute circumstances, so far as temporal necessities were concerned. To New York he traveled with private conveyance, by stage, on foot and as best he could. In company with Elders John Taylor and Theodore Turley he arrived in Liverpool, England, Jan. 11, 1840, having been five months on the journey. He was assigned to labor in the Staffordshire Potteries, where he was successful. In the following March the spirit of the Lord prompted him to go south. He had plenty to do where he was, but he heard the voice of the spirit and obeyed. He went south to Worcester, where he met Mr. John Benlow, a wealthy farmer, who told him that in that vicinity there were about six hundred people, including forty-five ministers, who had dissolved themselves from the Wesleyan Methodists for the purpose of independent research after truth. They owned several houses of worship, and styled themselves "The United Brethren." Elder Woodruff commenced at once to lay before these people the truth as God had revealed it to the Prophet Joseph Smith, bearing witness as an Apostle of the Lord to the ministry of angels, and the complete restoration of the ancient gospel in these last days. The ministry of Elder Woodruff was not attended with the eloquence of speech, nor the well skilled argument which attend the labors of some men, but there was an earnestness in his talk and movement, and an honest straightforward, God-like simplicity in his plain statement of truth, accompanied by the influence of the Holy Spirit, which carried early conviction to the hearts of all who were honestly seeking after truth. Through eight months' labor, chiefly by Elder Woodruff in Herefordshire, Worcestershire, and Gloucestershire, eighteen hundred people were brought into the Church. This included the six hundred United Brethren, all but one. Two large conferences were organized. In August, 1840, he accompanied Elders Heber C. Kimball and Geo. A. Smith to London where they introduced the gospel under very difficult circumstances. The first convert in London was baptized Aug. 31, 1840. Elder Woodruff remained in London but a short time when he returned to Herefordshire, and Staffordshire, strengthening the Saints. From thence he attended conference in Manchester, and labored most of the following winter in London, visiting also several other parts of the country. While in England the adversary made desperate efforts to impede the progress of the Elders in their ministry. At one time evil spirits attacked Apostles Woodruff and Smith, in a literal manner, when, by the exercise of faith and the authority of God by these brethren, these spirits departed. Bro. Woodruff saw them as literally as he could see the physical being of people tabernacled in the flesh. After a very prosperous mission, he returned to America, arriving in New York May 20, 1841; he met his wife at Scarborough, Maine, after two years' absence. A month later they returned to Nauvoo, where they were heartily welcomed home by the Prophet Joseph Smith. Bro. Woodruff became a member of the city council of Nauvoo, and served the interests of that city with energy and efficiency. His time during the winter of 1841-42 was mainly occupied in attending meetings and performing manual labor. In February, 1842, he became the business manager of the "Times and Seasons." In July of the same year he went on a mission to the Eastern States for the purpose of collecting funds to further the building of the Temple and Nauvoo House. He returned to Nauvoo Nov. 4th, and again spent the winter in Nauvoo, and much of the ensuing year. He received his endowments in the Nauvoo Temple under the direction of the Prophet Joseph Smith. He built a brick dwelling for himself and family on a lot given him by the Prophet Joseph. In the spring of 1844, he was called on another mission to the Eastern States. When about to take passage on a steamer from Portland, Maine, to Fox Islands, he learned of the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith. He immediately went to Boston and met in council with the Twelve, and with them returned to Nauvoo, where he arrived Aug. 6, 1844, and took part with his brethren of the Twelve in presiding over the affairs of the Church. Wilford Woodruff was a personal witness to the power of God as it rested upon President Brigham Young, on the occasion when the latter was transfigured in the presence of the people, so that he appeared in person, and spoke as with the voice of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Aug. 12, 1844, Apostle Woodruff was called to preside over the British Mission. He left Nauvoo, Aug. 28, 1844, and reached Liverpool Jan. 3, 1845. He presided with ability and much industry over the mission about one year, when he returned to Nauvoo, early in 1846, just in time to participate with the Saints in their great exodus from Illinois. He, with many others, left their homes and property, which they had toiled to procure, under trying ordeals, to the disposition of their enemies, very few receiving more than a nominal price for their hard earned homes. He was active in helping the Saints to migrate, not only looking to the comfort of himself and family, but to the well being of his brethren and sisters on every hand. Early in 1847 he joined the Pioneer company, consisting of 148 souls. After a toilsome journey they entered the valley of the Great Salt Lake, July 24, 1847. President Young was in feeble health when the pioneers entered the valley, and Apostle Woodruff had the honor of conveying him in his carriage into the valley. Later, in 1847, Elder Woodruff returned to Winter Quarters, and was present Dec. 5, 1847, when Brigham Young was chosen President of the Church. In 1848, he was sent on a mission to the Eastern States, from which he returned to the valley in 1850, and in December of that year he was elected a member of the senate of the Provisional State of Deseret. Subsequently he served several terms in the Territorial legislature. In the spring of 1852, he accompanied President Young on an exploring trip to southern Utah, and at the October conference, 1853, he and Ezra T. Benson were called to gather fifty families to strengthen the settlements in Tooele county. When the Horticultural Society was organized in Salt Lake City, Sept. 13, 1855, he was chosen its president. At the semi-annual conference of the Church held in October, 1883, Apostle Woodruff was sustained as Church Historian and general Church recorder; he had been sustained as assistant Church historian since 1856. From the time he was a boy he kept a complete journal of his daily life. Many items of important history would doubtless have been lost, had it not been for the journal of Wilford Woodruff. His long personal experience and the accuracy of his journal assisted him very much as Church historian. When President John Taylor succeeded to the Presidency of the Church, in 1880, Elder Woodruff became the President of the Twelve Apostles, which place he filled with honor, until, subsequent to the decease of President Taylor, he became the President of and Prophet, Seer and Revelator to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in 1889. During his presidency of the Twelve, President Woodruff spent much of his time in exile, owing to the unholy crusade against the Latter-day Saints. During this time, like John the Revelator, he was favored with visions and revelations of the Holy Spirit. On one occasion the departed Prophet, President Young, appeared to him, as he traveled along a road in Arizona, to attend a conference, and urged upon President Woodruff the necessity for the Saints to more thoroughly secure the companionship of the Holy Spirit and keep it with them. President Woodruff was greatly interested in the salvation of the dead. Combining works with his faith, he secured from New England much genealogical information concerning his dead progenitors, and for their salvation he would work in the Temple whenever possible; his family and friends would assist. He was so thoroughly loved by the Saints and respected for his interest in the salvation of the dead that on one anniversary of his birthday several hundred of the Saints in St. George and vicinity joined him in the St. George Temple and received ordinances in behalf of his deceased relations. About this time one of his choicest and most spiritual-minded sons, Brigham Y. Woodruff, was drowned in Bear river, in Cache valley. President Woodruff, having attached considerable importance to the future of this noble son, was very much grieved because of his death. Although he never murmured at the providences of the Almighty, he inquired of the Lord to know why it should be thus. The Lord revealed to him that as he was doing such an extensive work in the Temples for the dead, his son Brigham was needed in the spirit world to preach the gospel and labor among those relatives there. Many other manifestations of the Spirit were given to President Woodruff from the time he embraced the gospel until the time of his decease. During his administration as President of the Church, dating from April 7, 1889, George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith, acting as counselors, President Woodruff did much to encourage the cause of Church school education, making, as trustee in trust, as liberal appropriations as the Church could afford to sustain the Stake academies and other Church schools. In 1890 President Woodruff issued the manifesto respecting the discontinuance of plural marriages in the United States, and later the political address, which provides that men who are called to spend all their time in the ministry

WILFORD WOODRUFF IN 1898.

shall not run into politics to the neglect of their spiritual calling without being properly released for that purpose. President Woodruff was for many years, and up to his death, president of the organization instituted by President Young, known as the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association, throughout the Church. In this capacity he was greatly loved and respected by the young people of the Church. He attended their conferences whenever it was feasible, and constantly bore to them his earnest testimony as an Apostle of the Lord, that Jesus is the Christ and that Joseph Smith was a mighty Prophet of the Lord. President Woodruff's 90th birthday was celebrated March 1, 1897, by a grand gathering of his friends and admirers at the Tabernacle, Salt Lake City. He officiated at the great Pioneer Jubilee celebration, July 20, 1897, when the statue of President Brigham Young was unveiled and the dedicatory prayer was offered by him. In the afternoon, he attended a meeting of the pioneers, which was held in the Tabernacle, and w&s there presented with the gold Pioneer badge, which had ,been designed for the oldest Pioneer present. July 22, 1897, he was honored by being crowned with flowers in the Tabernacle by the children who had marched in the procession to the number of about ten thousand. During the latter years of his life he suffered from insomnia, and occasionally went to the Pacific coast, where upon the sea level he could sleep better and would recruit. It was upon one of these visits to the coast that he became prostrated, and passed peacefully away, Sept. 2, 1898, to his glorious rest. A portion of his family and President Geo. Q. Cannon and others were at his bedside. His remains were brought home for interment. The funeral which occurred Sept. 9, 1898, in the large Tabernacle, was attended by many thousands of people, who knew and loved President Woodruff as a Prophet of the Lord, a humble, honest, upright man of God. President Wilford Woodruff can be classed among the most industrious men the world has ever produced. He attended as first consideration to the duties of his calling, and then his manual labors in building homes and redeeming the soil from sterility were unexcelled, Every position, whether religious or otherwise, into which he was called, he filled with distinction and credit. No man took greater interest in fruit-raising and farming, as well as in all enterprises looking to the general well-being and self-sustaining powers of the people than Apostle Woodruff. He labored with his hands as well as his head. Much younger men than himself were not his equals in the performance of heavy labor. No class of labor, however laborious or undesirable, which was honorable in the sight of God, would he ever ask any man to do, if he was not willing to do it himself. He cut hay with a scythe; he cradled wheat by hand; he followed the reaper, and bound the golden grain in bundles; he pitched to the rack the bunches of hay and the bundles of grain; he worked upon the threshing machine; he planted, irrigated, gathered and hauled from the farm, potatoes, corn and all other products of his well tilled land; he planted vineyards, orchards, made ditches, watered, and pruned the trees and bushes of his orchard; he made roads, built bridges, hauled wood from the canyon, made adobies and did all forms of manual labor which came in his way. There was not an idle thought in his brain, not a useless nor impure sentiment in his heart, not an idle bone nor a drop of idle blood in his body. He was honest, unassuming, faithful and industrious, and in the days of Joseph he was designated as "Wilford the Faithful." He deserved such a title, and maintained it to the end. His industry was so conspicuous a part of his being that when, at the age of ninety years, one of his grandsons excelled him a very little in hoeing some vegetables in the garden, he said with apparent humiliation: "Well, it is the first time in my life that one of my children has ever outdone me in hoeing." He continued his hard labors upon the farm, whenever at home, until beyond the ripe age of seventy-five years, when the duties and conditions associated with his calling were such as to occupy his entire time and attention. During the fifty-one years of his life in Utah, he performed missions at home and abroad, in America and Europe and filled many positions of honor with credit and distinction. From the year 1834 to the close of 1895 he traveled 172,369 miles, held 7,555 meetings, attended 75 semi-annual conferences and 344 quarterly conferences; preached 3,526 discourses; established 77 preaching places in the missionary field; organized 51 branches of the Church; received 18,977 letters; wrote 11,519 letters; assisted in the confirmation into the Church of 8,952 persons, and in addition to his work in the St. George temple, labored 603 days in the Endowment House in Salt Lake City. He traveled through England, Scotland, Wales, six islands of the sea, and twenty-three States and five Territories of the United States. He frequently testified that two powers had been at work with him all his life, one to destroy him, the other to protect him and enable him to complete his mission in honor upon the earth. During his very eventful life, he met with a number of severe accidents, many of which would have killed an ordinary person. He frequently remarked that he had broken nearly every bone in his body except those of his spine and neck. Because of his remarkable recovery from these disasters, he reached the conclusion that there were two powers seriously affecting his life-one engaged to destroy him, and the other to preserve him. He recognized in the latter the hand of divine Providence, protecting him for a wise purpose. (For further details see "Historical Record," Vol. 5, p. 93; "Tullidge's Quarterly Magazine," Vol. 3, p. 1; "Faith Promoting Series, book 3;" "Sketch by Matthias F. Cowley in "Southern Star," Vol. 2, p. 112, etc.)
