Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Snow, Lorenzo

LORENZO SNOW IN 1852.

Snow, Lorenzo, fifth President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, was born April 30, 1814, In Mantua, Portage county. Ohio. He is the eldest son of Oliver Snow and Rosetta L. Pettibone. His parents were of the old Puritan stock, and, naturally enough, from them he inherited the sterling qualities which characterized the early promoters of civil and religious liberty in America. Ohio, at that time, was considered in the extreme west and although President Snow was reared upon a farm in the "wild west," and inured to hard manual labor, he early exhibited a strong desire to secure a good education and was often found by those seeking his company "hid up with his book." He also entertained an inclination to military tactics and gave them considerable attention. His faithful sister, Eliza R., made him a suit of uniform. She became somewhat alarmed at her brother's aspirations, lest he should become a military man, become identified with the armies of his country and end his career upon the gory battlefield. Her anxiety, however, was relieved when she found him turning his attention more completely to a collegiate course of education. He attended the celebrated Oberlin college, which at that time, was strictly Presbyterian. In the meantime his sister Eliza had identified herself with the Latter-day Saints. He would write home and ask her many questions regarding the subject of religion, on one occasion stating in a letter that if he found nothing better than he did at Oberlin college, "good-bye to all religions." During these years the Saints were building up the town of Kirtland, Ohio, and regions round about which were not very distant from the home of the Snow family. This brought them in close contact with the Latter-day Saints. On one occasion while journeying to Kirtland he fell into the company of Elder David W. Patten, who engaged him in conversation on religious matters. The ideas advanced by Elder Patten were both reasonable and Scriptural. They made such a lasting and favorable impression upon the youthful seeker after truth, that he constantly meditated upon them until he became fully convinced of the truth and embraced the gospel. In Kirtland he joined the Hebrew class and applied his mind closely to the study He became intimately acquainted with the Prophet Joseph Smith, and as his association increased, so did his love and admiration for the Prophet of God. In June, 1836, he was baptized by Apostle John F. Boynton and confirmed by Hyrum Smith. Upon joining the Church he was filled with the desire to obtain a testimony for himself, and while pondering upon the promised witness, the adversary sought to darken his mind and weaken his faith. While In this frame of mind he retired to a secret place and sought the Lord in humble prayer. The following is a description of the result, given in his own words: "I had no sooner opened my lips in an effort to pray than I heard a sound just above my head like the rushing of silken robes; and immediately the Spirit of God descended upon me, completely enveloping my whole person, filling me from the crown of my head to the soles of my feet, and oh, the joyful happiness I felt! No language can describe the almost instantaneous transition from a dense cloud of spiritual darkness into a refulgence of light and knowledge, as it was at that time imparted to my understanding. I received a perfect knowledge that God lives, that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and of the restoration of the Holy Priesthood, and the fulness of the gospel. It was a complete baptism-a tangible immersion in the heavenly or element, the Holy Ghost; and even more physical in its effects upon every part of my system than the immersion by water. In the winter of 1836-37 he was ordained an Elder by Alva Beeman. Subsequent to the dedication of the Kirtland Temple, President Snow attended meetings there with the Prophet of the Lord, and other leading men of the Church. He enjoyed the rich outpouring of the Holy Spirit in that sacred edifice. During the trouble and apostasy in Kirtland, Elder Snow remained faithful and true to the Prophet Joseph Smith. In the spring of 1837 he performed his first mission, traveling in the State of Ohio "without purse or scrip." In the year 1838 the Snow family joined the Saints in Missouri, and there witnessed the scenes of mobocracy enacted in that State. From Missouri Lorenzo Snow went on his second mission, on which he labored in Kentucky Illinois and Missouri. While in Kentucky he learned of the expulsion of the Saints from Missouri, and walked five hundred miles to Kirtland, Ohio. The two winters following, Elder Snow was occupied in Portage county, Ohio, as a school teacher, in which profession he was very successful. He was ordained a Seventy July 17, 1840, by Joseph Young, and the following day ordained a High Priest by Don Carlos Smith. Soon afterwards he went on a mission to England. It was prior to his mission in England that President Snow had revealed unto him this glorious principle, "As man now is, God once was; as God now is, man may be." This sublime truth was not then known to the Latter-day Saints. It had not been taught by the Prophet, and Brother Snow wisely kept the matter to himself, except that he confided in his sister Eliza R. Snow and President Brigham Young. The latter also cautioned him not to confide the matter to others. He presided over the London conference, besides laboring in Manchester, Liverpool and Birmingham. After the Twelve had left England, he acted as counselor to Parley P. Pratt, who presided over the European mission. Before leaving England, President Brigham Young, who had succeeded in raising means to publish the Book of Mormon, gave directions for copies to be specially prepared and richly bound for presentation to her Majesty and the Prince Consort. The honor of this devolved on Lorenzo Snow, who was at that time president of the London conference. The presentation was made in 1842, through the politeness of Sir Henry Wheatley; and it is said her Majesty condescended to be pleased with the gift. A pamphlet entitled "The Only to be Saved," which Elder Snow published while on this mission, has been translated into nearly every language, where the fulness of the gospel has been preached under the "Mormon" dispensation. At the close of this mission of nearly three years, he took charge of a large company of Saints, with whom he safely landed in Nauvoo, via New Orleans and the Mississippi river, April 12, 1843. On his return to Nauvoo he was welcomed by the Prophet Joseph. President Young now informed Brother Snow that the doctrine he had mentioned concerning God and man was true, the Prophet Joseph Smith having taught it to the Twelve. Until that time Elder Snow was unmarried, his intellectual and spiritual pursuits having excluded from his mind to a very considerable degree the subject of matrimony. While on a brief mission to Ohio Elder Snow heard of the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith. Previous to the Prophet's death he taught Elder Snow the doctrine of celestial marriage, including a plurality of wives. He left with the exodus from Illinois, when the companies for emigration were organized by President Young, and he became a captain of ten. At Mount Pisgah, a temporary resting place for the Saints, Elder Snow was appointed to preside. Here he distinguished himself as a leader by organizing and planning to alleviate the sufferings of the people and to provide for their maintenance. He moved to Great Salt Lake Valley in the fall of 1848. In his new location he was among the most industrious and cheerful in the performance of every labor and duty incidental to building a city in the desert. Early in 1849 he was called to the Apostleship and was ordained a member of the Council of the Twelve Feb. 12, 1849, by Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball and Willard Richards. As an Apostle of the Lord President Lorenzo Snow has labored with ability and energy since his ordination, covering a period of over half a century. At the October conference, 1849, he was called on a mission to Italy, to introduce and establish the gospel in that land; his mission also extended to other nations and countries wherever the opportunity should present itself. En route he visited London and Paris, and arrived in Genoa, Italy, June 25, 1850. Among the Catholics Elder Snow and companions made but little progress, but in the Piedmont valley they labored with considerable success among the Protestant Waldenses. In the prosecution of missionary work Elder Snow issued a number of pamphlets which were as widely circulated in their mission as circumstances would permit. Among these were "The Voice of Joseph" and "The Ancient Gospel Restored." He caused the Book of Mormon to be translated into Italian and under his direction the gospel was introduced to Switzerland, where good success attended the Elders. Elder Snow was so thoroughly filled with the spirit of preaching the gospel to all nations, that he planned for missions to Turkey, Russia, Malta and other countries. He also sent missionaries to Calcutta and Bombay, where branches of the Church were organized. While engaged in missionary labors on Malta, he received his release to return home. He arrived in Salt Lake City, Aug. 30, 1852. The following year he was elected a member of the Utah legislature, and he subsequently served in that body for twenty-nine years. During several sessions he presided over the council. In 1853 he was called by President Young to remove to Box Elder county, and locate fifty families there. He cheerfully consented, and for forty years made his home at Brigham City, where he was the leading spirit, not only in spiritual matters, but in every laudable enterprise looking to the development of the country and the growth of the people in every desirable way. He also presided for years over Box Elder Stake of Zion. He organized the Brigham City Mercantile and Manufacturing Association, under which several industries were brought into successful operation, such as a woolen mill, tannery, shoe factory, hat factory, sheep and cattle herd, cheese factory, saw mills, tailor, furniture, blacksmith, wagon and tin shops. The products of these industries in 1875 amounted in value to $260,000. The enterprises were conducted as nearly as possible under the existing conditions in the spirit of the United Order. Although the organization became extinct, and the industries ceased, President Snow fully demonstrated the fact that under a more perfect condition of the people spiritually the United Order is an absolute possibility. In 1864 Elder Snow, with Elders Ezra T. Benson, Joseph F. Smith and other Elders, went on a short mission to the Sandwich Islands. While attempting to land at Lahaina, Maui, the small boat carrying them was capsized and president Snow was thrown into the sea. When rescued he was to all appearances dead. The brethren exercised great faith and worked over him for more than an hour, when life came back to his body. He concluded his mission in Hawaii successfully and returned to resume his labors in Zion. In 1873, he, with his sister Eliza R., and other tourists, visited the land of Palestine. The interesting account of their visit will be found in "The Palestine Tourist" Upon his return home President Snow was active in his calling, frequently visiting the settlements of the Saints in company with President Brigham Young and other leading men. During the crusade against the Saints under the Edmunds-Tucker act, President Snow personally suffered the persecution incidental to those times. He was arrested by seven United States deputy marshals at his residence at Brigham City, Nov. 20, 1885, on a charge of unlawful cohabitation, three indictments having been found against him by the grand jury of the First District court. There were three regular trials, the first one commencing Dec. 30, 1885, and the last one ending Jan. 5, 1886, conviction being the result in each case. He was sentenced by Judge O. W. Powers, Jan. 16, 1886, the judgment being the full penalty of the law-imprisonment for six months and a fine of $300 and cost-under each conviction. Under this segregation process inaugurated by the Utah courts, but afterwards reversed by the United States supreme court, President Snow served eleven months without a murmur or complaint. Before being sentenced he was offered his liberty if he would do violence to his own conscience by making a certain promise. This he refused to do. After being sentenced, the defendant took an appeal to the Territorial supreme court and was in the meantime allowed to remain at large under bonds. The decision of the Territorial supreme court confirmed the judgment of the lower court, Chief Justice Zane concurring with Associate Justices Boreman and Powers in the first case, but dissenting from them in the other two. The two associate justices held that unlawful cohabitation was proved, in the absence of any other evidence, when it was shown that the defendant had lived with a plural wife while he had a legal wife living and undivorced. They held that the law presumed the living with the legal wife. In this view Judge Zane did not concur. The defendant took an appeal to the supreme court of the United States. In order to have the cases advanced upon the calendar of the court of last resort, it was necessary that he should be in durance. For the benefit of many of his brethren who had been indicted and others who were likely to be under the "segregating" process, he elected to go to prison to have the question of the right of the lower courts to so construe and administer the law, and other points, tested as early as practicable. The cases were argued and submitted, and, on May 10, 1886, the United States supreme court dismissed the cases for want of jurisdiction. Oct. 22, 1886, Brother Snow petitioned the First District court for a writ of habeas corpus, which was denied the following day, but on the 25th, pursuant to section 9 of the Organic Act of Utah and section 1909 of U. S. Revised Statutes, an appeal to the supreme court of the United States was allowed. This finally came up for hearing, Jan. 20, 1887, and a decision was rendered on Feb. 7th to the effect that: (1.) There was but one entire offense for the continuous time. (2.) The trial court had no jurisdiction to inflict a punishment in respect of more than one of the convictions. (3.) As the want of jurisdiction appeared on the face of the proceedings, the defendant could be released from imprisonment on a habeas corpus. (4.) The order and judgment of the court below must be reversed, and the case remanded to that court, with a direction to grant the writ of habeas corpus prayed for. The next day (Feb. 8th), agreeable to this decision, Apostle Snow was liberated from the Utah Penitentiary. At the general conference, April 7, 1889, Lorenzo Snow was sustained as President of the Twelve Apostles, which position he filled with distinction until he became President of the Church( subsequent to the death of President Woodruff) October 13, 1898. Soon after the dedication of the Salt Lake Temple in 1893, President Snow was installed in it as president, which honored position he still holds. No more fitting appointment could possibly have been made. He had ever been interested in Temple work. He is spiritually minded to a very high degree, and with his heavenly countenance and sweet, gentle dignity, no one living was better, if so well, qualified to stand as the watchman at the door which opens between the living and the dead. When President Snow succeeded to the Presidency of the Church, he said to his brethren: "I do not want this administration to be known as Lorenzo Snow's administration, but as God's in and through Lorenzo Snow." President Snow chose for his counselors George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith, who had served faithfully in the same relationship to Presidents Taylor and Woodruff. During the first and very foremost subjects of consideration with President Snow was how to relieve the Church from the heavy burden of debt which has rested upon it since the confiscation of Church property by the government. He issued Church bonds, and with money borrowed almost entirely from our own people, liquidated the most pressing obligations of the Church. Soon after this he was impressed to make a tour among the settlements of the Saints in southern Utah. While in St. George the Lord revealed to him that the Saints must repent of their indifference to the law of tithing, reform and do better or many blessings would be withdrawn from them. On the other hand, if the Latter-day Saints would do their duty in this regard the obligations of the Church would be fully met, the land more thoroughly sanctified as a land of Zion, and the people prepared for the great redemption. President Snow and the brethren have visited many Stakes of Zion, and in all 1899 was a year of tithe preaching and tithe paying. The spirit of obedience to this law has permeated every Stake of Zion and every land and clime where a mission is established, and the Elders

Lorenzo Snow in 1900.

are found proclaiming the gospel to the nations of the earth. With the advancement made as a result of this movement, it may be safely believed that the administration of the Lord through President Snow will be one of the most remarkable the Church has ever seen. President Snow is now 87 years of age; he has been true and absolutely undeviating from the testimony he received sixty-five years ago. In reviewing the history of his life, we find him a humble farmer's boy, a student at college, a teacher and a missionary in many lands, "without money and without price," a pioneer colonizer, a promoter and manager of financial enterprises, a legislator and an Apostle of the Lord, a Prophet of God; truly a man who can sympathize with the people in all the conditions of life, especially those common to the experiences of a Latter-day Saint, thus aptly fitting him by experience for the high station he now occupies. He has suffered privation, hardships, persecutions, bonds and imprisonment, yet through it all he bears the same testimony given over sixty-five years ago. President Snow stands erect, is active in body and bright in every faculty of his mind, and, as said of Moses, "his natural force abateth not, neither doth his eye wax dim." (For further information see Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow, by Eliza R. Snow Smith; "Historical Record," Vol. 6, p. 138; sketch by Matthias F. Cowley in "Southern Star," Vol. 2, p. 193, etc.)
