Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Rigdon, Sidney

Rigdon, Sidney, first counselor to President Joseph Smith, from 1833 to 1844, was born Feb. 19, 1793, in St. Clair township, Alleghany county, Pa.; he was the youngest son of William and Nancy Rigdon. Sidney's father was a farmer and had three sons, Carvil, Loami and Sidney, and a daughter Lucy. When Sidney was seventeen years old, his father died, and when he was twenty-six years of age his mother also passed away. In his twenty-fifth year he became a member of the society of "Regular Baptists," and the next year he left the farm and went to live with Andrew Clark, a Baptist preacher. While there, Sidney received a license and commenced to preach, and after March, 1819, he gave up farming altogether. In May, 1819, he went to Trumbull county, Ohio, and while living with Adamson Bentley, another Baptist preacher, he became acquainted with Phebe Brook, a native of Bridgetown, Cumberland county, New Jersey, whom he married June 12, 1820. He continued to preach in that region until November, 1821, when he left Warren to take charge of the First Baptist Church in Pittsburg, where he preached with considerable success, and the church soon rose from a very low, confused state to a rapid increase of members, and to be one of the most respectable churches of the city. He became a most popular preacher, but after awhile he was greatly perplexed with the idea that the doctrines taught by the church with which he was connected was not altogether in accordance with Scripture, and after great deliberation and reflection and solemn prayer he resolved to follow his convictions; and in August, 1824, he announced to the members of the church that he had determined to withdraw from it, as he could no longer uphold its doctrines. In consequence of his great popularity, this unexpected announcement caused amazement, sorrow and tears to his congregation. At that time Alexander Campbell, a native of Ireland, was a member of the Baptist association, but he afterwards separated from it. Waiter Scott, a native of Scotland, and a printer by trade, also left it about the same time. After leaving the Baptist church, these three gentlemen, being very friendly, often met together to discuss religious topics. Eventually, from this connection, sprang a church, the members of which called themselves "Disciples," but which are generally known as Campbellites. For the maintenance of his family, Sidney Rigdon labored for two years as a tanner, after which he removed to Bainbridge, Geuaga county, Ohio, where he was solicited to preach, it having become known that he had been a popular preacher. Thenceforth he devoted himself to the work of the ministry, confining himself to no special creed, but holding the Bible as his rule of faith and advocating repentance and baptism for the remission of sins and the gift of the Holy Ghost-doctrines which he and Alexander Campbell had been investigating. He labored in that vicinity one year with much success, and built up a large and respectable church at Mantua, Portage county, Ohio. His doctrines were new, and crowded houses assembled to hear him, though some opposed and ridiculed his doctrines. He was then pressingly invited to remove to Mentor, an enterprising town, about thirty miles from Bainbridge, and near Lake Erie, which he did soon afterwards. At this place there were remnants of a Baptist church, the members of which became interested in his doctrines. But many of the citizens were jealous of him, and slanderous reports were circulated concerning him. By continuing his labors, however, the opposition weakened, prejudice gave way and he became very popular. Calls came from every direction for him to preach, and his fame increased and spread abroad. Both rich and poor crowded his churches, Many became convinced and were baptized, whole churches became converted and he soon had large and flourishing societies throughout that region. He was a welcome visitor wherever he went, and his society was courted by the learned and intelligent. With his wife and six children he lived in a small unfinished, frame building, but the members of his church, resolving to erect him a suitable residence, purchased a farm and commenced the erection of a good house and outbuildings for him. His prospects with regard to temporal things had thus become brighter than ever before, when, in the fall of 1830, Elders Parley P. Pratt, Oliver Cowdery, Ziba Peterson and Peter Whitmer, jun., called at Mentor on their mission to the Indians on the western boundaries of Missouri. Elder Pratt had been a preacher in the same church as Sidney Rigdon and had resided at Amherst, Lorain county, Ohio. He had gone on a mission for his church, into the State of New York, where he became acquainted with the circumstances of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon and was introduced to Joseph Smith and other Latter-day Saints. After reading the Book of Mormon, Mr. Pratt became convinced that it was of God, was baptized and ordained an Elder, and began to preach. Being called on a mission to the west he resolved, during his journey through Ohio, to call on his old friends and associates in that State, believing that many of them were honest seekers after truth. Arriving at Mentor, Sidney Rigdon's house was the first place Elder Pratt and his missionary companions visited. They presented him with a copy of the Book of Mormon, saying that it was a revelation from God. He had not heard of it before, and was much prejudiced at the assertion, replying that he was acquainted with the Bible which he believed was a revelation from God, but he had considerable doubts regarding their book. He, however, consented to read it, and after a fortnight's careful perusal of the sacred volume, and after much prayer and meditation, he was convinced of its truth. His wife, also, became a believer, and both were baptized Nov. 14, 1830. Together with others who were baptized about the same time, they were organized into a branch of the Church. Brother Rigdon and others were ordained to the ministry, after which Elder Pratt and missionary companions continued their journey further west. In December, 1830, Elder Rigdon visited Joseph the Prophet in Fayette, New York, and was commanded by revelation to preach the gospel and assist the Prophet in his labors. From that time till Joseph's death, the two were closely associated together. Early in 1831, the Prophet Joseph and wife accompanied Sidney Rigdon and Edward Partridge to Kirtland, Ohio, where they were kindly received and welcomed by Bro. Newel K. Whitney and family. Soon afterwards, the Prophet Joseph and Sidney Rigdon were called by revelation to preach the gospel, and in June, accompanied by others, they started for Missouri, where Sidney Rigdon dedicated the land of Zion for the gathering of the Saints. He also wrote a description of the country. After his return to Ohio, Sidney Rigdon assisted the Prophet Joseph in translating the holy Scriptures, and while thus employed in the town of Hiram, Portage county, he, together with Joseph, was attacked by a party of mobocrats, abused most shamefully and tarred and feathered. He was dragged out of his house by the heels and injured so much that he became delirious and remained so for several days. Elder Rigdon and family, who were sick with the measles, then removed to Kirtland, but he soon afterwards accompanied the Prophet on another visit to Missouri, from which he returned to Kirtland in June, 1832. He then spent most of the summer with Joseph in translating the Scriptures. March 18, 1833, Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams were ordained and set apart as counselors to Joseph Smith in the First Presidency. After preaching extensively in Ohio, Sidney Rigdon accompanied the Prophet on a missionary trip to upper Canada in October, 1833. While on this mission Sidney Rigdon was called by revelation to be a spokesman to Joseph. After their return, Joseph wrote as follows: "Brother Sidney is a man whom I love, but he is not capable of that pure and steadfast love for those who are his benefactors, as should possess the breast of a president of the Church of Christ. This, with some other little things, such as selfishness and independence of mind, which, too often manifested, destroy the confidence of those who would lay down their lives for him. But, notwithstanding these things, he is a very great and good man-a man of great power of words, and can gain the friendship of his hearers very quickly. He is a man whom God will uphold, if he will continue to his calling." Early in 1834 Sidney Rigdon assisted in obtaining volunteers for Zion's Camp, and while Joseph journeyed to and from Missouri with that body of men, Elder Rigdon had charge of affairs at Kirtland. He was also one of the trustees and conductors of the "Kirtland school," wherein penmanship, arithmetic, English grammar and geography were taught during the winter. He was also a member of a committee appointed to arrange "the items of the doctrine of Jesus Christ, for the government of the Church," which resulted in the "Book of Doctrine and Covenants" being published in 1835. At the time of the dedication of the Kirtland Temple, March 27, 1836, Sidney Rigdon preached a powerful discourse, and afterwards took an active part in blessing his brethren. Soon afterwards he performed a short mission to the Eastern States. In 1837, he accompanied the Prophet on another trip to Missouri "to appoint other Stakes or places of gathering." On their return to Kirtland, Ohio, they found the spirit of apostasy and mobocracy prevailing there to an alarming extent, in consequence of which Elder Rigdon, together with the Prophet, was obliged to flee from Kirtland, in January, 1838. Elder Rigdon and family arrived at Far West, Mo., April 4, 1838. He assisted in organizing a Stake of Zion called Adam-Ondi-Ahman in Daviess county, and preached and sat in council with his brethren. July 4, 1838, he delivered an oration at Far West, in which he denounced the enemies of the Saints in very strong terms, which caused much bitterness of feeling among the non-Mormons. In the meantime, the persecutions against the Saints in Missouri were renewed, and Sidney Rigdon was among the brethren who were betrayed into the hands of the mob-militia by Geo. M. Hinkle, Oct. 31, 1838. Together with the Prophet Joseph and other fellow-prisoners, he was sentenced to be shot; but this being prevented he was incarcerated in Liberty jail from November, 1838, till February, 1839, When he was released on bail. After his escape into Illinois, he advocated the cause of the persecuted Saints with much diligence, and his arraignment of the actions of the Missourians aroused much sympathy on the part of the inhabitants of Quincy, who showed the exiled Saints many acts of kindness. After the escape of the Prophet Joseph from his imprisonment in Missouri, Elder Rigdon took an active part in the founding of Nauvoo, where he passed through sickness and much suffering. He also accompanied Joseph the Prophet to Washington, D.C., to present the grievances of the Saints to the government and to Congress. When Nauvoo became a chartered city, Sidney Rigdon was elected a member of the city council. He also served as city attorney and postmaster, and in other public capacities; but he did not discharge his duties as counselor to President Joseph Smith with that religious zeal and ability which had characterized his early career in the Church. He was accused of being associated with the plans of John C. Bennett and other enemies of the Church, but this he always denied. At the general conference of the Church, held at Nauvoo in October. 1843, President Joseph Smith rejected him as his counselor; but through the intercession of Hyrum Smith, he was retained in his office. Early in 1844, when Joseph Smith became a candidate for president of the United States, the same convention that nominated Joseph nominated Sidney Rigdon for vice-president. Soon afterward Bro. Rigdon left Nauvoo, for Pittsburg, Pa., where he remained until after the prophet's death. The news of the terrible tragedy at Carthage having reached him, he hastened back to Nauvoo to offer himself as a guardian for the Church. His claims were duly considered, but at the memorable meeting, held at Nauvoo, Aug. 8, 1844, he was rejected by the people, and the Twelve Apostles were recognized as the head of the Church. The subsequent course of Elder Rigdon, however, not being at all satisfactory, his case was taken before the High Council at Nauvoo. Sept. 8, 1844, and carefully tried. It resulted in his excommunication from the Church. Soon afterwards he left Nauvoo and located in Pennsylvania; but in 1847 he made his home in the village of Friendship, Alleghany county, New York, where he lived uninterruptedly till his death, which occurred at that place July 14, 1876. The "Register," a paper published in Friendship, stated at the time of his death "that numerous pilgrimages had been made to him from different parts by various persons desirous of obtaining further information from him relative to the origin of the Book of Mormon; but he unwaveringly adhered to his original theory on this matter, being the same as that held by the Mormons; and he treated with great scorn and contempt the statement of parties imputing the authorship of the work to himself." (For further particulars, see History of Joseph Smith, and early Church publications generally; also "Improvement Era," Vol. 3.)
