Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Smith, George Albert

Smith, George Albert, first counselor to president Brigham Young, from 1868 to 1875, was the son of Patriarch John Smith and Clarissa Lyman, and a cousin to Joseph the prophet. He was born June 26, 1817, in Potsdam, St. Lawrence county, N.Y., and was trained strictly in the religion of the Congregational church, of which his father and mother were members, until he was fifteen years of age. While living on a farm on Rackett river and attending school in the village of Potsdam, George A. grew very rapidly, attaining his full growth several years before he became of age. This gave him an awkward address, as of an overgrown boy; and as children growing fast are usually weak, it was so with him. In addition to these misfortunes for a school boy, he was near-sighted, and being contented with his studies, the society of older people and the companionship of his own thoughts, he paid little attention to cultivating the good will and currying favor with the boys at school. The consequence was that they made fun of him, bullied him more or less, and at one time, shortly after a period of illness, carried their fun to such an extreme that George A. resolved on retaliation; but knowing his weakness at the time, he refrained attempting his revenge then and harbored his strength until a favorable opportunity should be presented. The time came, and it developed a phase of his character which was new to his schoolmates but distinguished him then and ever after. His sensitive nature had been repeatedly outraged; he felt that he had been abused by his schoolmates, that they had taken advantage of him unfairly and that the insult to his honor and manhood demanded reparation. If any of the boys were not guilty of this general arraignment, he did not stop to discriminate in their favor. He felt that all were down on him, and he determined to whip the school. And he succeeded. He started in and kept at it until he had whipped every boy of his size and age. They never made fun of him after that. In the winter of 1828, Father John Smith received a letter from his nephew Joseph, who then lived in western New York, in which a very striking prediction occurred, foretelling awful judgments upon the present generation because of wickedness and unbelief. The letter made a deep impression upon the mind of George A., who, but a boy of eleven years, was capable of appreciating the statements it contained, which he treasured in his memory. His father observed on reading them, "Joseph writes like a Prophet!" In August, 1830, the father of the Prophet and his brother Don Carlos visited their relatives in Potsdam and vicinity. They brought with them a copy of the Book of Mormon, which they left with George A.'s father, while they went on to visit with Father Asahel Smith and family. During their absence George A. and his mother read a great deal in the strange new book, or "Golden Bible," as it was popularly called. The neighbors, who often came in and heard portions of it read, ridiculed it and offered many objections to its contents. These young George A. soon found himself trying to answer, and although he professed no belief in the book himself, having in fact noted many serious objections to it, he was so successful in refuting the charges the neighbors brought against it that they generally turned from the argument discomfited, with the observation to his mother that her boy was a little too smart for them. When his uncle and Don Carlos returned, George A. laid before them his objections, which he believed to be unanswerable. His uncle took them up carefully, quoted the Scriptures upon the subject, showed the reasonableness of the record, and was so successful as to entirely remove every objection, and to convince him that it was just what it purported to be. George A. from that time ever after advocated the divine authenticity of the Book of Mormon. He was also convinced of the necessity of religion, and not being sufficiently instructed by his relatives how to obtain it, after they had left, he attended a protracted series of Congregational revival meetings. These lasted seventeen days, and effected the "conversion of every sinner in Potsdam" who attended them except George A., who went to the meeting regularly, sat in the gallery listening attentively, but waited in vain for the sensation of religion which should bring him down to the anxious bench. Finally, prayers and exhortations having failed, the minister, Rev. Frederick E. Cannon, pronounced him reprobate and sealed him up unto eternal damnation, saying, "Thy blood be upon thine own head!" Nine times he thus delivered this inoffensive but unsatisfied seeker for religion to the buffetings of Satan and the burning of an endless hell. For two years George A. had performed the greater part of the labor on his father's farm, but in the winter of 1832-33, he attended school, and gave considerable attention to studying the gospel and its requirements. He was baptized by Joseph H. Wakefield Sept. 10, 1832. In May, 1833, he started with his parents to Kirtland, Ohio; they arrived there on the 25th of that month, and were warmly welcomed by the Prophet Joseph Smith and by the Saints who had gathered there, numbering about five hundred. Immediately on reaching' Kirtland; George A. became interested in the affairs of the Church, and was delighted with his cousin, the Prophet, whom he had never seen before. He was on hand for any duty required, and spent many nights guarding' the houses of the brethren who were in much danger from mobs. During the summer and fall he was engaged in quarrying and hauling rock for the Kirtland Temple, attending masons and performing other labor about the walls. The first two loads of rock taken to the Temple ground were hauled from Stanard's quarry by George A. and Harvey Stanley. In May, 1834, George A. started from Kirtland with Zion's Camp for the State of Missouri, and returned again to Kirtland in the summer, walking on foot two thousand miles. He was ordained a Seventy March 1, 1835, under the hands of Joseph Smith, sen., Joseph Smith, jun., and Sidney Rigdon, the latter being spokesman. He was the junior member of the First Quorum of Seventy. On the 30th of the following May he was appointed to a mission to preach the gospel in the East. Elder Lyman Smith, a second cousin, and member of the same quorum, was his traveling companion. They started June 5, 1835, traveled on foot about two thousand miles, without purse and scrip, held about eighty meetings in the States of Ohio. Pennsylvania and New York, baptized eight, and returned to Kirtland, where George A. arrived October 5th. In the spring of 1836 he received his endowments in the Kirtland Temple, after which he performed a mission in Ohio, traveling on foot about twelve hundred miles. In the spring of 1837 he commenced a mission in Ohio and Virginia, which continued about one year. On this mission he traveled about two thousand and five hundred miles; nearly half of his journeyings were on foot. In 1838, he emigrated with his father's family to Daviess county, Mo., where he was ordained a High Councilor June 28, 1838. In the autumn, he was sent on a mission to Kentucky and Tennessee, traveling some eight hundred miles on foot and about seven hundred by water, including the return journey. After his return, he removed his father's family to Illinois. In 1839, he returned to Far West, in Missouri. On the morning of April 26, 1839, he was ordained one of the Twelve Apostles, on the southeast corner stone of the intended Temple at Far West. He returned to Illinois, whence he started for England on a mission in September, and arrived in Liverpool April 6, 1840. He labored for over one year with much success, and returned to Nauvoo, Ill., where he arrived July 5, 1841. On the 25th of the same month he married Bathsheba W. Bigler, who is still alive. In the fall of 1842, he preached in the principal places in Illinois, and returned to Nauvoo Nov. 4th. In the summer and fall of 1543, he traveled about six thousand miles, preaching in the middle and eastern States. In the spring of 1844, he attended conferences and preached in Illinois, Indiana and Michigan, and was in the last named State when he heard of the death of the Prophet and Patriarch of the Church. He immediately returned to Nauvoo and took an active part in the councils and deliberations consequent upon that sad event. He was elected quartermaster of the Nauvoo Legion, Sept. 17, 1844; was also elected a trustee of the Nauvoo House Association, and labored actively in forwarding the erection of that building. He continued these labors until the mob commenced its outrages upon the Saints in the fall of 1845, from which period he was active in counseling, fervent in his labors on the Temple and diligent in making preparations for the exodus of the Saints from Nauvoo. "Before leaving the Temple of Nauvoo," writes George A., "my wife, under the law of Abraham and Sarah, gave me five wives, viz: Lucy Smith, born February 9, 1817, at Newry, Maine: Nancy Clement, born October 31, 1515, at Dryden, Tompkins county, N.Y.; Zilpha Stark, born July 3, 1818, at Hartland, Niagara county, N. Y.; Sarah Ann Libby, born May 7, 1818, at Ossipee, Stratford county, N. H., and Hannah Maria Libby, born June 29, 1828, at Ossipee, Stratford county, N.H." He also married Susan E. West after he reached G. S. L. Valley. Five of Brother George A.'s wives survived him. They bore unto him twenty children, eleven of whom, among them Apostle John Henry Smith, are yet living. Early in February he crossed the Mississippi river with his family, on his way to find an asylum in the Far West from the rage of mobs and the persecutions of bigoted professors of religion. The ensuing winter he tarried with the main camp at Winter Quarters. While there the people suffered severely from scurvy, a disease induced through lack of vegetable diet. George A.'s third wife and four children died of this disease. He visited all the camps, and urged the cultivation of the potato as a cure for the scurvy. But little seed could be obtained; what was, however, produced in a marvelous manner. As they had no vegetables for one year, their bread was mostly made of corn, bought two hundred miles away, in Missouri. The season after Geo. A. had left Pottawattamie county the potato crop was a failure, and the saying went forth that it was because George A., "the potato Saint," had gone to the mountains. In 1847 he accompanied President Young and the company of pioneers in searching out and making the road to and finding the location for the Church in the Great Basin. During this journey he walked seventeen hundred miles, and rode, mostly on horseback, eight hundred; much of the distance with raw hide soles on his shoes. He was six weeks without bread, though he was better off than most of the pioneer company, for he had about twenty-five pounds of flour locked up in his trunk, unknown to any one. He lived as the rest on buffalo bulls and other wild meat, which was not always plentiful. He issued his reserved flour by cupfuls to the sick, some of whom attribute to this circumstance the preservation of their lives. He planted the first potato that was put in the ground in Salt Lake valley, and built a house for his father in the fort, before starting on his return to Winter Quarters, where he arrived Oct. 31st of the same year. In 1848 he removed to the neighborhood of Kanesville and opened a farm. In 1849 he took charge of tile emigration in Council Bluffs, organizing and starting the companies. With the last of these he started westward with his family, July 4, 1849. Their teams were heavily laden, and they encountered hall and rain storms. Their cattle also stampeded, and at the South Pass they were overtaken by a heavy storm, in which 70 animals were frozen. They made the journey to G. S. L. City, 1034 miles, in 155 days, arriving Oct. 27th. George A. was elected a member of the senate of the Provisional State of Deseret, and reported a bill for the organization of the judiciary, which was the first bill printed for the consideration of members. He also reported a bill in relation to the construction of a national railway across the continent. In December, 1850, he raised a company of one hundred and eighteen volunteers, accompanied by about thirty families, and started for the purpose of planting a colony near the Little Salt Lake. The day after they started the thermometer was at zero. His company was organized at Peteetneet creek (Payson), Utah county, and consisted of twenty-five cavalry, thirty-two infantry-picked men-and thirteen men in charge of a piece of artillery; the residue was organized as a permanent camp guard. They crossed five ranges of mountains, and arrived at Centre Creek, 265 miles from Salt Lake City, Jan. 13, 1851. This place had been designated by Elder Parley P. Pratt, and a company of explorers, as the place in the Little Salt Lake valley most suitable for a settlement. As soon as the site of the town was determined upon, the settlers commenced working a road into a canyon about six miles, which cost them five hundred days' work, where they cut down a pole ninety-nine feet long, which they erected and on which they raised the "Stars and Stripes." They dedicated the ground by prayer, and saluted the emblem of civil and religious liberty by the firing of cannon. The organization of Iron county had been provided for by the General Assembly of Deseret, which had elected Geo. A. its chief justice, with power to proceed with its further organization. An election was held, when two associate justices, a county recorder, a treasurer, sheriff, assessor and collector, justice of the peace, constable, and a member of the House of Representatives of the General Assembly of Deseret, were elected. In the winter of 1850-1, though it was very cold, the settlers built a fort, in which were located dwelling houses and a meeting house, which served for meetings, schools and watch tower. It was in the shape of a Greek cross, and was of hewn logs. It served the town, which was named Parowan, for fifteen years, when it was replaced by a stately stone edifice. Geo. A. taught school during the first winter, having thirty-five pupils to whom he lectured on English grammar around the evening camp fires. At the first Territorial election, in August, 1851, Geo. A. was elected a member of the council of the legislative assembly. He was commissioned by Postmaster-General Hall, Oct. 29, 1851, postmaster of Centre Creek, Iron county, and on the 29th of November, by Governor Young, colonel of cavalry in the iron Military District. Afterwards he was placed in command of the militia of the southern part of the Territory, and was instructed to take measures for the defense and safety of the inhabitants against the Utah Indiana, who had commenced, under their chief Walker, to rob and kill the inhabitants. In 1852 he left Iron county, and was appointed to preside over the affairs of the Church in Utah county. He traveled and preached a great deal in all the settlements, over which he had the watch care. At the general conference of the Church, in April, 1854, the was elected Historian and General Church Recorder, and immediately went to work compiling the documentary history of Joseph Smith. Feb. 2, 1855, he was admitted as a member of the bar of the Supreme Court of the Territory of Utah, and received his certificate as an attorney, counselor-at-law and solicitor in chancery. He was elected a member of the convention and one of the committee which drafted a constitution, and on March 27, 1856, was elected by said convention, in connection with Elder John Taylor, a delegate to Congress, to present the constitution and accompanying memorial, asking for admission into the Union on an equal footing with the original States. This mission was a respite from his close application in the Historian's Office, where he had, with the assistance of four clerks, compiled and recorded, in large records, the history of Joseph Smith from Feb. 20, 1843, until his martyrdom in June, 1844. He also supplied, from memory and otherwise, blanks in the history and records compiled by President Willard Richards, his predecessor in the Historian's Office, who had, with prophetic pencil, written on the margin, opposite the blanks, "to be supplied by George A. Smith." In 1856-57, during a sojourn of about eleven months in the States, in addition to his duties as delegate, Geo. A. preached in the States of Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Virginia, Ohio, Illinois, Iowa and Missouri. April 11, 1866, he received from Governor Durkee the commission of brigadier-general and was appointed aid-de-camp to the lieutenant-general of the Nauvoo Legion. At the October conference, in 1868, he was appointed to succeed the late President Heber C. Kimball as first counselor to President Brigham Young. The political career of President Geo. A. Smith covered almost the whole period of his residence in Utah. He was an earnest worker in establishing the provisional government of the State of Deseret, and afterwards in organizing and enacting laws for the government of the Territory of Utah. He was elected a member of the first legislature and re-elected to every succeeding session but one, when absent in the States, until 1870. The last six years he was president of the council, and was distinguished for his punctuality and impartiality in the discharge of his official duties. More than half of his life was occupied in traveling and preaching the gospel. He had, before 1870, delivered three thousand eight hundred discourses in various parts of the world, as a labor of love, and never failed to use every opportunity to advocate the principles of the gospel, which his long and laborious missionary experience afforded him. In the internal affairs of the Territory, Pres. Smith was an active laborer. He was recognized as the father of the southern settlements, the chief of which, St. George, was named in his honor. He was president of several irrigating canal companies, and was foremost in public enterprises leading to the occupation and development of the country, the establishment of home industries and of commercial relations among the people that would tend to make them free and independent of other communities, and at the same time utilize the natural resources with which the Territory abounds. Oct. 15, 1872, he started on a mission and visit to the various European nations and visit to Jerusalem, from whence he returned June 18, 1873. During his absence on this tour, he was appointed and sustained as Trustee-in-Trust for the Church, which office he held until his death. After his return he gave considerable attention to the building of the Temple at St. George, where he spent a great deal of time. He was a zealous advocate and laborer in the establishment of the United Order among the people. The discourses he delivered in many of the towns of Utah, upon that subject, were pre-eminently characteristic of him as a political and domestic economist. In the spring of 1875, about the time of his return from St. George, he was attacked by a severe cold, which, locating on his lungs, inflamed and irritated them in such a manner as to prevent their use in public speaking. This affliction was supplemented with a very peculiar affection preventing sleep, except in an upright posture, and then but at short intervals. He suffered intensely from this combination of diseases for several months, resisting the power of the destroyer with all the fortitude of a strong will and a desire to' live, aided by the most sublime faith. He had the support of the prayers of all the people, among whom he was ever a great favorite; but they did not prevail over the decree of Him who doeth all things well. "Brother George A.'s time had come," was the expression of all his friends, and on Wednesday morning. Sept. 1, 1875, they bowed to the eternal fiat. President Young remarked on the morning of his death: "I have known Brother George A. Smith for forty-two years, have traveled and labored in the ministry with him for many years, and have believed him to be as faithful a boy and man as ever lived; and, in my opinion, he had as good a record on this and the other side of the vail as any man. I never knew of his neglecting or overdoing a duty; he was a man of sterling integrity, a cabinet of history, and always true to his friends." President Geo. A. Smith was a wise counselor, great preacher, a sound statesman, pioneer and colonizer of the highest ability, an able lawyer and an efficient educator. He was always ready in public and private. No one ever wearied of his preaching. He was brief and interspersed his doctrinal and historical remarks with anecdotes most appropriate and timely in their application. Short prayers, short blessings, short sermons, full of spirit, was a happy distinction in the ministry of Geo. A. Smith. He was humble and meek, yet full of courage and unbounded energy in the cause of right. He always had time to notice young people and children and leave his impress of love and kindness upon the tablets of their hearts. (For further particulars see "Contributor," Vol. 6; "Southern Star," Vol. 2, p. 345; "Historical Record," Vol. 5, etc.)
