Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Thompson, Robert Blashel

Thompson, Robert Blashel, General Church Recorder from 1840 to 1841, was born Oct. 1, 1811, in Great Driffield, Yorkshire, England, and was educated at Dunnington, in the same county. He united with the Methodists at an early age, and preached what he believed to be the gospel, in connection with that sect for a number of years: emigrated to Upper Canada in 1834, and embraced the gospel there, being baptized and confirmed by Elder Parley P. Pratt in May, 1836. He was ordained an Elder by Elder John Taylor, at a conference held in Upper Canada, July 22, 1836, removed to Kirtland in May, 1837, where he married Mercy Rachel Fielding, June 4, 1837, and being appointed to take a mission to Upper Canada, he returned in the same month, and commenced preaching in Churchville and the villages adjacent. He baptized a considerable number, and continued his labors there until he was called upon to remove to Missouri. He arrived in Kirtland in March, and starting from there in company with Hyrum Smith and family, he arrived in Far West, June 3rd, where his daughter Mary Jane was born on the 14th of June. He remained there until November, when he, with many of the brethren, were forced to flee into the wilderness to escape the fury of the mob, who swore they would kill every man who had been engaged in the Crooked river battle. He stood near David W. Patten when he fell. Together with the rest ot the brethren he suffered much from exposure and lack of food. After his arrival in Quincy, Ill., he engaged as clerk in the court house, and remained there until the liberation of Joseph and Hyrum from prison. When the Saints settled at Commerce, he removed there, and engaged as scribe to Joseph the Prophet. At the general conference of the Church held at Nauvoo, Oct. 3, 1840, he was appointed "General Church Clerk," in place of Geo. W. Robinson, who intended to remove to Iowa. Elder Thompson entered upon the duties of his office with energy and zeal. When the Nauvoo Legion was formed, he received the office of colonel, and also aid-de-camp. In May, 1841, he became associated with Don Carlos Smith in the editing of "The Times and Seasons." On the 16th of August he was seized with the same disease of which Don Carlos had died on the 7th. The attachment between them was so strong, it seemed, as though they could not long be separated. He died Aug. 27, 1841, leaving one child, By his special request no military procession was formed at his funeral, which took place on the 29th.
