Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Jaques, John

Jaques, John, assistant Church Historian from 1889 to 1900, was the son of Thomas Jaques and Mary Ann Heighington, and was born Jan. 7, 1827, at Market Bosworth, Leicestershire, England. At the age of seven years he entered the Market Bosworth grammar school, and became at once a bright and diligent student. When about fourteen years old he was apprenticed to learn the trade of a cabinet maker. Becoming a convert to "Mormonism," he was baptized by Thomas Brown Ward, in the fall of 1845, at Gresley, Derbyshire. He was ordained an Elder at Whitwich, Leicestershire, Sunday, Jan. 9, 1848, under the hands of John Fidoe, Thos. Stevenson and Wm. Cartwright. At the time of his baptism he became a member of the Branstone branch, but was later identified with the Stratford-on-Avon branch, of the Warwickshire conference, in which conference he labored as a traveling Elder. Subsequently, he was appointed to labor in the mission office at Liverpool. While thus engaged, he married Miss Zilpah Loader, of Oxfordshire, England, Oct. 31, 1853, at Liverpool. Having received an honorable release from his missionary labors in Great Britain he emigrated with his family to America, sailing from Liverpool May 22, 1856, on the packet ship "Horizon," which arrived in Boston, Mass., June 30, 1856. Reaching the frontiers, Elder Jaques made the necessary arrangements for crossing the plains in Captain Martin's handcart company. This was one of the companies that suffered so much in the snow storms on the mountains, and in which many emigrants lost their lives; among those who succumbed to the hardships of that memorable journey was Bro. Jaques' eldest child, a daughter, who died near Green river Nov. 23, 1856. Elder Jaques, with family, arrived in Salt Lake City Nov. 31, 1856; and he soon afterwards found employment on the public works. He was ordained a Seventy Feb. 2, 1857, by Wm. Burgess, and became a member of the 9th quorum of Seventy. When Johnston's army approached Salt Lake City in 1858, Bro. Jaques and family, together with many others, moved to Springville, Utah county, but returned to the city the same year. In the latter part of 1859 he was called by Pres. Brigham Young to labor as a clerk in the Historian's Office, where he was employed until September, 1863. Next, by the consent of Pres. Young, he associated himself with Thos. B. H. Stenhouse and became assistant editor of the "Daily Telegraph," a newspaper published in Salt Lake City. Subsequently he located temporarily in Ogden, where the "Telegraph" was continued in 1869; and Elder Jaques remained with the paper until he was called on a mission to Great Britain. During this mission, which lasted from 1869 to 1871, he labored principally in the Liverpool office as assistant editor of the "Millennial Star." After his return from his mission he entered the "Deseret News" Office, where he was employed about eight years, or until he became permanently associated with the Historian's Office, where he now labored the remainder of his days. From 1889 till his death he was sustained as assistant Church historian. Besides the numerous ecclesiastical positions held by him both at home and abroad, he served two terms in the Utah legislature, was a commissioned captain of topographical engineers of the Nauvoo Legion, and was twice elected school trustee in the 12th Ward, Salt Lake City, where he resided. For many years he acted as private secretary to Pres. Wilford Woodruff, and was also secretary of the Genealogical Society of Utah. In his younger days he was a ready writer, and became the author of several books and pamphlets treating upon gospel principles. Among those may be mentioned his "Cathechism for Children," which passed through a number of editions and was for many years used as a text book in Latter-day Saints schools. It has also been translated into several foreign languages. His pamphlet entitled "Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" became very popular among both Saints and strangers. Among the authors of Latter-day Saint hymns, his name also appears, and the beautiful production, "O say what is truth," etc., together with other soul-inspiring productions from his pen, which are published in the Latter-day Saints hymn books, will perpetuate his memory for many generations to come. In 1872 he yielded obedience to the law of plural marriage by taking to wife Miss Mary Ann Amott, who bore him two sons. (She died April 24, 1901, in Salt Lake City.) He was the father of eleven children, seven sons and four daughters, of whom six sons and one daughter survived him. His oldest son was born on the journey across the plains, near Florence, Neb., in 1856. Elder Jaques was set apart as a president in the 8th quorum of Seventy, April 19, 1876, and in December, 1893, he became senior president of said quorum, which position he held till Dec. 31, 1898, when he was ordained a High Priest by Angus M. Cannon. After seven weeks' illness, Elder Jaques died of Bright's disease at his home in Salt Lake City, June 1, 1900. In speaking of his life's labor the "Deseret News" said: "John Jaques was a strong man, his abilities rising high above the average. He was useful wherever he was placed. * * * He was not a demonstrative man, and every one did not gain access into the inner circles of his life, but those who did enjoy his confidence and who knew his heart knew him to be genuine-a man of strong character and one who would lay his head on the block for a conviction. * * * He did not shine among his fellows with that glitter that is sometimes taken for brilliant mentality. He was retiring in manner and not forward in speech. He made no special effort at oratory. Even in conversation his words were few and sometimes brusque, though not antagonistic. He had opinions of his own which he was not afraid to express whatever might be the views of those who surrounded him. Yet he was not offensive in his language. He was for many years a great worker. For full half a century he labored incessantly in that which he firmly believed was the cause of human redemption. His first literary efforts were known through the "Millennial Star." The brightness of that luminary received much of its lustre for a considerable period from his active mind and facile pen. In poetry and in prose he reflected the light of truth for the benefit of his fellows, and his logical thoughts and spiritual sentiments were a comfort and a strength to many honest souls."
