Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Penrose, Charles W.PPPenrose, Charles William

Penrose, Charles W.PPPenrose, Charles William, assistant Church Historian from 1896 to 1899, was born Feb. 4, 1832, at Camberwell, London, England. Being naturally of a studious and inquiring turn of mind, with quick perception and remarkable memory, he speedily mastered at school the common rudiments of education. He read the Scriptures when only four years old, and was well versed in the doctrines of the Bible, the wonderful sayings and predictions of the Savior, and the ancient Prophets and Apostles. This paved the way for his acquaintance with, and his subsequent acceptance of, Mormonism, which, from its Scriptural character, its reasonable and substantial doctrines, feasible theories, and sound, practical results, attracted his attention while a mere lad, and, in due time, after he had thoroughly investigated and compared its teachings with the Bible, numbered him among its converts. He joined the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in London, May 14, 1850, and is the only member of his father's family who has ever embraced the faith. His scriptural attainments and spiritual inclinations soon brought him under notice of the presiding authorities of the London conference, and in January, 1851, when not yet nineteen years old, he was ordained an Elder, and two months later was sent on a mission to Maldon, in Essex, to preach the gospel, "break new ground," and build up branches of the Church. This movement was much in opposition to the wishes of his friends, and to his own pecuniary interests, as he had been offered, on condition of his remaining home, a life situation in a government office. Shutting his eyes to the gilded bait of temptation, he took up the cross of the Master, and literally "without purse or scrip," taking not a penny in his pocket, nor even a change of dress, started out afoot upon his mission as a servant of the Lord. With bleeding feet but undaunted heart, he reached the town of Maldon, having slept out of doors for the first time in his life the chilly night previous. He was an utter stranger in the place, and the first "Mormon" Elder to visit that region of the country. He met with much opposition, but steadily worked his way in the town of Maldon, and the country round about, and succeeded in raising up branches of the Church in Maldon, Danbury, Chelmsford, Colchester and other places, baptizing a great number of persons of both sexes, many of whom are now in Utah, and being instrumental, by the laying on of hands, in the restoration to health of many persons afflicted with disease. He possessed the gift of healing to a remarkable degree, and several of the cures performed were of a miraculous order. He labored for seven years in poor agricultural districts, opening new missionary fields, building up branches, suffering many hardships and trudging on foot between three and four thousand miles every year. It was during this period, on Jan. 21, 1855, that he married Miss Lucetta Stratford, of Maldon, sister of the late Bishop Edward Stratford, of Ogden, who with all the family he had was brought into the Church. Elder Penrose was next called to preside over the London conference, and subsequently over the Cheltenham pastorate, consisting of the Cheltenham, Worcestershire, Monmouthshire and Herefordshire conferences; and later over the Birmingham pastorate, consisting of the Birmingham, Warwickshire, Staffordshire and Shropshire conferences. His pen, ever brilliant and keen, at this time was almost as busy as his ready tongue. He wrote many theological articles for the "Millennial Star," the principal Church organ of the European mission, and out of the silken and golden threads of his poetical thoughts and emotions, wove the fabric of those beautiful songs of Zion which have cheered the hearts and fired with patriotism and holy zeal the drooping souls of thousands. In the year 1861, after over ten years of gratuitous and successful service in the ministry, he was released from his labors and emigrated to America. He crossed the sea in the sailing ship "Underwriter," assisting in the charge of 620 passenger, and living with them in the steerage during the thirty days from Liverpool to New York. He also helped to care for them during the journey through the States and up the Missouri river. He crossed the plains, driving his own ox team, with his family and his wife's relatives, and was eleven weeks on the toilsome way. Arriving in Utah he settled in Farmington, Davis county, and for the first time in his life went to work in the fields, climbing the mountains for firewood, and laboring at the hardest kind of physical work, for which he was naturally unfit, and teaching school in the winter. He made headway, however, and acquired a small home. During his three years' residence there, he was ordained one of the Presidents of the 56th quorum of Seventy. In the fall of 1864, at the solicitation of Apostle Ezra T. Benson, he removed to Cache Valley and again labored for a home, teaching school in the winter, He had scarcely more than secured some land, a log cabin and lot, when he was called, in April, 1865, to go to England on a mission, and was notified to be in Salt Lake City by the first of May, prepared with means to carry him on his journey. In company with forty other missionaries, in charge of Captain Wm. B. Preston, Elder Penrose set out upon his second journey across the plains, with mule teams, but walking most of the way. They were thirty-six days in reaching Omaha. The Indians were very hostile at the time, and people were killed before and behind the little band of missionaries, but they got through in safety, despite many fears and predictions to the contrary, and reaching New York, sailed for Liverpool. Elder Penrose arrived in England, labored first among the colliers in Lancashire, with success, and on the first of February, 1866, was sent to preside over the Essex conference, which he had built up several years before. On the 6th of June following he was appointed to preside over the London conference. He traveled all over the British isles and visited Paris during the great exposition. The last two years of his mission he assisted to edit the "Millennial Star," under Pres. Franklin D. Richards; also preaching on Sundays in different places, baptizing many in Liverpool, and helping to ship many companies of emigrating Saints. At the close of the emigration season of 1868, he was released from his mission and sailed for home; taking rail from New York to Point of Rocks, and thence by stage line to Salt Lake City, arriving in Utah after an absence of three and a half years. He next engaged in mercantile pursuits, with Wm. H. Shearman, in Logan, under the firm name of Shearman and Penrose, and did a fine business until the cooperative movement was instituted, when the whole stock was turned over to the new institution. May 1, 1869, Elder Penrose became secretary and treasurer of the Logan Co-operative Institution, and bookkeeper for the store. He acted as a home missionary, traveling and preaching on Sundays, often in company with Apostle Benson; was a member of the High Council, and took an active part in all Church movements in the county. In January, 1870, he resigned his position in the Co-operative Institution, bade adieu to Logan and took up his residence in Ogden, having been invited by Apostle Franklin D. Richards to take editorial charge, under his supervision, of the "Ogden Junction," which had just been started as a semi-weekly. This was an occupation for which he was peculiarly well fitted, not only by nature which undoubtedly designed him for a journalist, but by education and experience; and the paper which he did so much to build up and render popular, and which lived and prospered as long as he was connected with it, will be long remembered for the interest and pointed vigor, the "snap and ginger" of his pungent writings. He was assistant editor one year, and was then made editor-in-chief, and afterwards business manager as well, He started the "Daily Junction" in September, 1872, and much of the time was its editor, local business manager, and traveling agent, and-to use his own terse expression-was "worked half to death." Having previously become naturalized, he was elected, Feb. 13, 1871, a member of the Ogden City council. He took active part in all the affairs and improvements of the municipality as long as he remained in Ogden, and he was re-elected to the council every term; his name was found on both tickets whenever there were two parties in the field. He served, in all, four terms, and before the expiration of the last one had removed to Salt Lake City. At the organization of the Weber Stake of Zion he was ordained a High Priest and made a member of the High Council, and remained so for a long time after his removal from Ogden. He also acted as a home missionary both in a Stake and Territorial capacity. His political record in the municipality having won him influence and the confidence of his associates and the people generally, he was chosen delegate from Weber county to the constitutional convention of 1872, being elected by the popular vote Feb. 5th, of that year. He helped to frame the constitution of the State of Deseret and the memorial to Congress, being on the committees having that work in hand. The same year he represented Weber county in the Democratic Territorial convention, which was composed of both "Mormons" and Gentiles, and nominated for his wing of the party, Hon. George Q. Cannon as delegate to Congress, making a pointed speech in the convention. He was a member and secretary of the People's County Central Committee, and a live worker in all political movements, making speeches and using his influence in every way for the success of the People's party. During the same period, he was busily engaged in ecclesiastical affairs under Pres. Franklin D. Richards. In August, 1874, he was elected a member of the legislature, representing Weber county in the Territorial assembly. He took an active part in all general measures, introduced a number of bills, drafted public documents, and rendered other valuable service for which his literary ability and native legal acumen well qualified him. At the same time he wrote all the editorials and reports of the legislature for the "Ogden Junction." In 1875 he found himself so overworked that he resigned the business management of the "Junction," but continued as editor, and did all the literary work, local and telegraph included, for both the daily and semi-weekly issues. He also continued active in municipal and Church affairs. In the fall of 1876, Elder Penrose went to California to represent Thomas and Esther Duce, mother and son, in the adjustment of a pecuniary issue. In September of that year the Duces had been shot by a Wells, Fargo and Co.'s guard, who dropped his gun, a double-barrelled weapon loaded with slugs, the whole contents being fired into them. Thomas was literally riddled, and his mother was shot through the windpipe. Elder Penrose, assisted the doctor to dress the wounds; both patients recovered. The company disclaimed responsibility for the accident, but Elder Penrose met with the managers in San Francisco, prevailed on them and obtained five thousand dollars' compensation for the Duees. In June, 1877, by request of Pres. Brigham Young, he came to Salt Lake City and became connected with the "Deseret News," under the general editorial management of Hons. Geo. Q. Cannon and Brigham Young, jun., the "Junction" Company keenly felt his loss, and offered to give him the paper entirely. On the organization of the "Deseret News" company, at the first meeting of the Board of Directors held Sept. 3, 1880, Charles W. Penrose was made editor-in-chief of that veteran journal and remained so for years. He became a home missionary of the Salt Lake Stake, and traveled and preached in many places. At a special election in 1879, held for the purpose of filling the vacancy caused by the death of Hon. Albert P. Rockwood, member-elect of the legislature for Salt Lake county, Charles W. Penrose was the People's choice for that office, which he filled with credit to himself and to the satisfaction of his constituents. He served during the session of 1880 on various important committees, including the judiciary, and introduced many bills, among them a bill to take away all political disabilities from women. The bill created no end of discussion, comment and debate, its author making able and pithy speeches in its favor, and finally it passed both houses, but was vetoed by the Governor. Elder Penrose was re-elected and served in the legislative session of 1882; he was chairman of the committee on claims, and did a great deal of work on various committees; being particularly useful in drafting public documents and correcting errors in the framing of bills. He was elected to the constitutional convention and helped to frame the constitution of the State of Utah, which was making another effort under a change of name from "Deseret," for its long withheld right of admission into the Union. He also assisted to prepare the memorial to Congress. All this time he was performing editorial work for the "Deseret News." The death of David O. Calder, in the summer of 1884, caused a vacancy in the presidency of the Salt Lake Stake of Zion which was filled Aug. 2, 1884, Elder Penrose being then appointed, at the quarterly State conference, second counselor to President Angus M. Cannon, a position which he still holds. Since that time his voice has often been heard in the Tabernacle and in other congregations of the Saints; he is an ever ready and apparently unfailing fountain of instruction. As one of the presidency of the Salt Lake Stake of Zion it is also a part of his duty and labors to sit in the High Council in judgment upon all matters before that tribunal. In the fall of 1883, in order to recuperate his energies, which were sorely taxed by overwork, he took a trip in company with Charles R. Savage, Esq., over the D. and R. G. Railway to Denver, thence through Colorado, south to New Mexico, Arizona and California, returning to Utah via the Central Pacific route. On his return he resumed his manifold duties. He had previously written a valuable work entitled "Mormon Doctrine." In the fall of 1884 he delivered several Sunday evening lectures in the Twelfth Ward Assembly Hall, answering anti-Mormon objections and charges against the faith and practice of the Latter-day Saints. Chief of these lectures were those on "Blood Atonement" and the "Mountain Meadows Massacre," completely refuting the common stories in relation thereto. Both lectures were published at the "Juvenile Instructor" office. He continued to defend the "Mormon" cause politically and religiously, by press discussions as well as public speeches and private interviews with strangers. These vigorous labors excited the hostility of the anti-Mormon ring, and he was singled out, in the crusade under the Edmunds law, as a conspicuous target for their animosity. In the beginning of January, 1885, he was sent on a brief mission to the States, and during his absence his legal wife and family, down to a boy eight years old, were compelled to go before the grand jury. The wife refused to testify against her husband, but the evidence desired was extorted from the children. While in the States Elder Penrose was appointed on a mission to England, and forthwith bade farewell, by letter, to those he held most dear this side of the water, and once more crossed the bosom of the mighty deep. After a rough passage and safe landing at Liverpool, he was appointed by Pres. Daniel H. Wells to preside over the London conference, and assist editorially on the "Millennial Star." He revived the work in London, his old field of labor, was gladly hailed by former acquaintances, wrote several articles for London papers, helped to ship emigrants of every company from Liverpool, and attended conferences with Pres. Wells all over England, Scotland and Wales. He also visited Ireland and preached in the open air in the city of Belfast to three thousand people. A great uproar ensued, followed by a spirited discussion in the Belfast papers. He visited Dublin and the Isle of Man, and from there went to the Lake District of England. He accompanied Pres. Wells on his continental tour through Denmark, Sweden, Norway, Germany and Switzerland, preaching in Copenhagen, Christiania, Stockholm, Berlin and Berne, returning to England by way of Paris. He made a stir in several English towns and brought many persons into the Church, besides writing articles for the "Star" and also for the "Deseret News." He returned home from this mission by call from Pres. John Taylor, and resumed active work as editor of the "Deseret News." He then went to New York and Washington, D.C., and wrote a number of articles for several newspapers, defending the Church from attacks of enemies. Together with Franklin S. Richards he visited personally nearly every member of Congress, and also President Cleveland and cabinet, explaining the situation in Utah. He also wrote articles for the "Deseret News." He spent two winters in Washington in this missionary work, wrote articles for the "Forum" and other magazines on the "Mormon" question, and interviewed prominent newspaper men. Having been indicted under the Edmunds act and been sought for by Federal officers in Utah, Pres. Cleveland, at the request of a few influential friends, issued a full amnesty to Elder Penrose, just before retiring from the presidency. Elder Penrose then returned to Salt Lake City and took up his daily labors on the "News." He also traveled much in the Territory in company with leaders of the Church. Nov. 16, 1890, Elder Penrose was called to testify as an expert in "Mormon" theology before Judge Thos. J. Anderson in the Third District Court as to the loyalty of "Mormons" and their doctrines. An endeavor was made at that time to refuse naturalization to "Mormons" because they belonged to a "treasonable organization." After a long examination, Elder Penrose was cross-examined and refused to answer a certain question as to his marital relations, as that subject was not in the examination direct. After a long discussion by lawyers, Judge Anderson decided that he must answer the question, and as he still refused, he was committed to the penitentiary until he would answer, no matter how long his refusal might last. He was accordingly incarcerated Nov. 20, 1890, and treated as a criminal for five days, when the case before the court was submitted, and as no further testimony could be presented, he was reluctantly released. When the "Deseret News" was leased by the Cannons, Oct. 1, 1892 Elder Penrose was secured by the "Salt Lake Herald" on its editorial staff, and made a remarkable and rapid journey down through the settlements to St. George, making several speeches a day and replying through the "Herald" to political arguments. In 1893 he became editor-in-chief of the "Herald" and continued in that capacity until the fall of 1895 when he was appointed by the First Presidency to assist in the Historian's Office. At the general conference, April 4, 1896, he was sustained as assistant Church Historian. In addition to compiling matter for current history, he wrote many articles on "Mormonism" for eastern publications and a series of twelve tracts called "Rays of Living Light;" also "Priesthood and Presidency," and articles for the "Improvement Era." His reply to Ingersoll in that magazine attracted wide attention. Jan. 1, 1899, by appointment of Pres. Lorenzo Snow, he resumed his labors as editor-in-chief of the "Deseret News," which rapidly sprang into new life and has since increased in circulation and influence until it is now read in every settlement of Utah and surrounding regions. Elder Penrose is still engaged in laboring and writing for the cause to which he has consecrated his time and talents for so many years. He has a firm and thorough belief in the truth and triumph of "Mormonism." At the age of sixty-nine he retains apparently all his original activity of mind and physical energies. Time and toil have made but moderate inroads upon his extraordinary vitality. This is all the more remarkable from his not being of a robust constitution, though of healthy physique and strictly temperate habits, and his persistent and almost incessant mental activity. It exemplifies anew the truth of the proverb that it is better to wear out, than to rust away. Elder Penrose is of a highly sensitive and sanguine temperament, quick to think, speak and act. His talents are so versatile it is almost a question as to "wherein kind nature meant him to excel." He is poetical, musical, has fine spiritual perceptions, and also leans to science and law. His forte is generally thought to be journalism, in which he shines with lustre, while as a preacher and polemical writer and debater he has but few equals. His talents and energy fit him eminently for a missionary, in which important calling he meets invariably with success. His practical experience in various walks of life gives him an insight into the thoughts and workings of all classes of society; his advice is sought in difficulty and doubt, and he wins his way easily to the hearts of his fellow-men. Charles W. Penrose is a remarkable man. Nature stamped him as such, and his life work, thus far, confirms the truth of her decree. (See also Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, Bio., p. 140.)
