Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Jenson, AndrewPPJenson, Andrew

Jenson, AndrewPPJenson, Andrew, Assistant Church Historian, is the son of Christian Jenson and Kirsten Andersen, and was born Dec. 11, 1850, in Torslev parish. Hjorring amt, Denmark. His parents were among the first converts to "Mormonism" in that part of Denmark, being baptized in 1854. Andrew was therefore taught the principles of the gospel in his early youth, and was baptized Feb. 2, 1859, by Elder Carl W. J. Hecker. He received a good common school education, and at the age of fourteen he was successfully engaged in a small business enterprise, earning thereby enough money to pay his own passage to Wyoming, Neb., U. S. A. With his parents and a younger brother, he "bade his native land farewell," in May, 1866, and crossed the Atlantic in the ship "Kenilworth," which arrived in New York July 17, 1866. He crossed the plains in Capt. Andrew H. Scott's ox train, which arrived in Salt Lake City Oct. 8, 1866. The family located in Pleasant Grove, Utah county, where Andrew also made his home for sixteen years. Nearly seven years of his life were spent at hard manual labor, working on farms, on railways, and in other avocations. During these years his natural inclination led him to spend most of his spare time in home study and in going to school. In 1870, he went to the "States" in search of experience; loaded with what he sought, he returned to Utah the following year, crossing the plains and mountains with a drove of Texan cattle, which were being taken to the Pacific coast. He was ordained an Elder, April 10, 1873, by Wm. H. Folsom, and received his endowments on the same day in Salt Lake City. Being called on a mission to Scandinavia, he was ordained a Seventy May 4, 1873, by Pres. Geo. Q. Cannon, and, together with other missionaries, departed shortly thereafter for his native land, where he labored as a traveling Elder in the Aalborg conference over two years. Soon after his return home, in 1875, he married Kirsten Marie Pedersen, who subsequently bore him four children. Later he married Miss Emma Howell (who has borne him three children) and Miss Bertha Howell. His first wife died Jan. 3, 1887. In 1876, he began the compilation and translation of the history of Joseph Smith the Prophet into the Danish language, entering the following year into partnership with Johan A. Bruun, a young Norwegian Elder, who had recently emigrated to Utah and who joined the work of translation. Prior to publishing the work, Elder Jenson visited Pres. Brigham Young in St. George, and readily obtained his endorsement to the contemplated translation. At the same time the President appointed Apostle Erastus Snow to supervise their labors. The book was completed in three years, and 2,000 copies thereof were published in 1879. Elder Jenson had personally visited nearly every settlement of the Saints, where Scandinavians resided, and taken subscriptions beforehand. "Joseph Smith's Levnetslob," the Danish-Norwegian title of the work, was the first book published in the interest of the Church in Utah in a foreign language. In 1879-81 Elder Jenson filled a second mission to his native land, during which he labored most of the time as translator and assistant editor of "Skandinaviens Stjerne." Under the direction of Niels Wilhelmsen, president of the Scandinavian Mission, at that time, he commenced a monthly periodical in the interest of the young Saints in Scandinavia entitled "Ungdommens Raadgiver," which subsequently was published regularly for eight years. He also compiled a new work of Bible references, of which 16,000 copies were printed and sold in a remarkably short time. Together with Pres. Wilhelmsen he revised the Book of Mormon and nearly all the smaller books and publications previously circulated in the mission, which were all republished at the time. Pres. Wilhelmsen took sick and died at Copenhagen, Aug. 1, 1881, after which Elder Jenson took temporary charge of the mission until the arrival of Pres. Christian D. Fjeldsted, in September following. He returned home late in 1881, and the next year (1882) removed to Salt Lake City. He erected a home in the Seventeenth Ward, where he still resides. Early in 1882, he commenced the publication of "Morgenstjernen," a monthly historical periodical in the Danish language. After publishing four volumes, he changed the name to the "Historical Record," of which he published five volumes. In 1888, he filled a short mission to the United States, and in company with Elders Edward Stevenson and Joseph S. Black visited nearly all the "waste places of Zion" in Missouri, Illinois, Ohio and New York in the interest of Church history. A detailed account of that interesting mission was published by Elders Jenson and Stevenson in a pamphlet, entitled "Infancy of the Church." In 1891, his services were engaged by the First Presidency, and he was blessed and set apart by Apostle Franklin D. Richards April 16, 1891, as "an historian" in the Church. In that capacity, during the following four years, he visited almost every settlement of the Saints in the Rocky Mountains, from Mexico in the South to Canada in the North, gathering important historical information. In 1893, he filled a second mission to the States, during which he visited places of historical importance in Missouri, Iowa and Nebraska, and also succeeded, while visiting Richmond, Ray county, Mo., in obtaining a copy of John Whitmer's history of the Church from 1831 to 1838, embodying important documents which Mr. Whitmer refused to deliver to the Church during his lifetime. From 1882 to 1895 Elder Jenson also labored as a home missionary in the Salt Lake Stake of Zion. In 1895-97 he filled a special mission to the several Latter-day Saint missionary fields throughout the world. On his return in June, 1897, he reported that he had visited all the missions and conferences and nearly every important branch of the Church in the entire world, outside of the United States, and traveled nearly 60,000 miles, obtained valuable historical information and forwarded to Utah about fifteen hundred old and valuable record books, which he gathered in the different conferences. On this special mission he visited British Columbia, Hawaii, Fiji, Samoa, Tongs, New Zealand, Cook's Islands, Society Islands, Tuamotu Islands, Australia, Ceylon, Egypt, Syria, Palestine, Italy, France, Great Britain, Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Germany, Switzerland, Holland, etc. Descriptive of his journeyings he wrote about eighty letters, which were published in the "Deseret News" under the caption "Jenson's Travels." Since his return from this mission he has spent most of his time performing historical labors at the Historian's Office; and has also traveled considerably, visiting many of the Stakes of Zion on special appointments. In order to raise means for the erection of a new Historian's Office he gave to the Church the result of many years' extra labor and research in his "Church Chronology," of which an edition of 25,000 copies was published in 1899. Elder Jenson's historical notes, gathered principally during the past ten years and now at the Historian's Office, contain the foundation for histories of every Stake, Ward, quorum and auxiliary organization in the entire Church, from 1830 to the close of the year 1900, or detailed annals of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints for the Nineteenth Century. His historical and descriptive articles, which have appeared in the "Deseret News," "Contributor," "Improvement Era" and other publications, are indications of the nature of Elder Jenson's historical compilations in general. Aside from his historical and missionary labors, Elder Jenson has been active in Church matters generally, having found time to labor as Ward Teacher and Sunday School Teacher and superintendent. He presided over the first Y. M. M. I. A. organized in Pleasant Grove, Utah, in 1875, and over the first association of a similar kind organized in Copenhagen, Denmark, in 1879. In civil positions, he has served as a school trustee, city councilman, justice of the peace and member of the constitutional convention of 1887.-Edward H. Anderson.
