Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Whitmer, David

Whitmer, David, one of the Three Witnesses to the Book of Mormon, was born Jan. 7, 1805, at a small trading post, near Harrisburg, Pennsylvania. While yet an infant his father, who served his country through the revolutionary war, removed with his family to western New York and settled on a farm in Ontario county, near Watkin's Glen-at a point midway between the northern extremities of Cayuga and Seneca lakes, two miles from Waterloo, seven from Geneva, and twenty-five from Palmyra-where David lived until the year 1831. The father, who was a hard-working, God-fearing man, was a strict Presbyterian and brought his children up with rigid sectarian discipline. Besides a daughter who married Oliver Cowdery, there were five sons-Peter, Jacob, John, David and Christian-who helped their father on his farm until they had arrived at the age of manhood. The following is David Whitmer's own statement to a reporter of the Kansas City "Journal;" published June 5, 1881: "I first heard of what is now termed Mormonism, in the year 1828. I made a business trip to Palmyra, N. Y., and while there stopped with one Oliver Cowdery. A great many people in the neighborhood were talking about the finding of certain golden plates by one Joseph Smith, jun., a young man of the neighborhood. Cowdery and I, as well as many others, talked about the matter, but at that time I paid but little attention to it, supposing it to be only the idle gossip of the neighborhood. Mr. Cowdery said he was acquainted with the Smith family, and he believed there must be some truth in the story of the plates, and that he intended to investigate the matter. I had conversation with several young men, who said that Joseph Smith had certainly golden plates, and that before he had obtained them he had promised to share with them, but had not done so, and they were very much incensed with him. Said I, 'How do you know that Joe Smith has the plates?' They replied, 'We saw the plates in the hill that he took them out of, just as he described it to us before he had obtained them.' These parties were so positive in their statements that I began to believe there must be some foundation for the stories then in circulation all over that part of the country. I had never seen any of the Smith family up to that time, and I began to enquire of the people in regard to them, and learned that one night during the year 1823, Joseph Smith, jun., had a vision, and an angel of God appeared to him and told him where certain plates were to be found, and pointed out the spot to him, and that shortly afterward he went to that place and found the plates, which were still in his possession. After thinking over the matter for a long time, and talking with Cowdery, who also gave me a history of the finding of the plates, I went home, and after several months, Cowdery told me he was going to Harmony, Penn., whither Joseph Smith had gone with the plates, on account of the persecutions of his neighbors, and see him about the matter. He did go, and on his way he stopped at my father's house and told me that as soon as he found out anything, either truth or untruth, he would let me know. After he got there he became acquainted with Joseph Smith, and shortly after wrote to me, telling me that he was convinced that Smith had the records, and that he (Smith) had told him that it was the will of heaven that he (Cowdery) should be his scribe to assist in the translation of the plates. He went on and Joseph translated from the plates, and he wrote it down. Shortly after this Mr. Cowdery wrote me another letter, in which he gave me a few lines of what they had translated, and he assured me that he knew of a certainty that he had a record of a people that inhabited this continent, and that the plates they were translating from gave a complete history of these people. When Cowdery wrote me these things, and told me that he had revealed knowledge concerning the truth of them, I showed these letters to my parents, and brothers and sisters. Soon after I received another letter from Cowdery, telling me to come down to Pennsylvania, and bring him and Joseph to my father's house, giving as a reason therefor that they had received a commandment from God to that effect. I went down to Harmony and found everything just as they had written me. The next day after I got there they packed up the plates and we proceeded on our journey to my father's house, where we arrived in due time, and the day after we commenced upon the translation of the remainder of the plates. I, as well as all of my father's family, Smith's wife, Oliver Cowdery and Martin Harris, were present during the translation. The translation was by Smith, and the manner as follows: He had two small stones of a chocolate color, nearly egg shape, and perfectly smooth, but not transparent, called interpreters, which were given him with the plates. He did not use the plates in the translation, but would hold the interpreters to his eyes and cover his face with a hat, excluding all light, and before his eyes would appear what seemed to be parchment, on which would appear the characters of the plates in a line at the top, and immediately below would appear the translation, in English, which Smith would read to his scribe, who wrote it down exactly as it fell from his lips. The scribe would then read the sentence written, and if any mistake had been made, the characters would remain visible to Smith until corrected, when they faded from sight to be replaced by another line. The translation at my father's occupied about one month, that is from June 1 to July 1, 1829." (See "Millennial Star, Vol. 43, page 421, etc.) Joseph Smith, in his history, writes as follows: "Shortly after commencing to translate, I became acquainted with Mr. Peter Whitmer, of Fayette, Seneca county, N.Y., and also with some of his family. In the beginning of the month of June (1829), his son David Whitmer came to the place (Harmony), where we were residing, and brought with him a two-horse wagon, for the purpose of having us (Joseph Smith and his wife and Oliver Cowdery) accompany him to his father's place, and there remain until we should finish the work. He proposed that we should have our board free of charge, and the assistance of one of his brothers to write for me, as also his own assistance when convenient. Having much need of such timely aid in an undertaking so arduous, and being informed that the people of the neighborhood were anxiously awaiting the opportunity to enquire into these things, we accepted the invitation and accompanied Mr. Whitmer to his father's house, and there resided until the translation was finished and the copyright secured. Upon our arrival, we found Mr. Whitmer's family very anxious concerning the work, and very friendly toward ourselves. They continued so boarded and lodged us according to proposal, and John Whitmer, in particular, assisted us very much in writing during the remainder of the work." In the meantime David, John and Peter Whitmer, jun., became the Prophet's zealous friends and assistants in the work, and being anxious to know their respective duties, and having desired with much earnestness that Joseph should enquire of the Lord concerning them, Joseph did so, through the means of the Urim and Thummim, and obtained for them in succession three revelations. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 14, 15 and 16.) In June, 1829, David Whitmer was baptized by Joseph Smith, in Seneca lake, and was soon afterward Privileged to behold the plates of the Book of Mormon as one of the Three Witnesses. After the organization of the Church with six members, of which David was one, he commenced to preach and accompanied the Prophet on several of his missionary trips to Colesville and other places. He also baptized quite a number of those who joined the Church at that early day. After the Prophet had moved back to Harmony, Hiram Page, one of the Eight Witnesses, got in possession of a stone, by which he received certain revelations that conflicted with the order of the Church. The Whitmer family, Oliver Cowdery and others believed in these spurious revelations, for which the Lord, through the Prophet, reprimanded David Whitmer and instructed him not to give "heed to those whom He had not appointed." (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 30.) Joseph Smith succeeded in setting matters right after his return to Fayette in August, 1830, and from that time until his removal to Ohio in the beginning of 1831, Joseph Smith resided with the Whitmer family. The Whitmers removed to Ohio about the same time. At a conference held at Orange, Cuyahogo county, Ohio, Oct. 25, 1831, David Whitmer was ordained a High Priest by Oliver Cowdery. Soon after this he removed to Jackson county, Mo., and located on the Big Blue river, at a point three miles east of the present town of Westport. Prior to this (in 1830) he had married Julia A. Jolly at Fayette, N.Y. David Whitmer and his young wife shared in the persecutions heaped upon the Saints in Jackson county. In the fall of 1833 he was finally driven out of that county by the mob, together with the rest of the Saints. Next he located in Clay county, where he, July 3, 1834, was appointed president of the High Council, organized there by the Prophet. For nearly four years after this he acted as one of the leading Elders of the Church in Missouri, and after the location at Far West, in Caldwell county, Mo., he was sustained as president of the Saints there; but falling into transgression, he was rejected as such, in a general conference held in Far West, Feb. 5, 1838, and finally he was excommunicated from the Church by the High Council, at Far West, April 13, 1838, the following charges having been sustained against him: "lst. For not observing the Word of Wisdom. 2nd. For unchristianlike conduct in neglecting to attend meetings, in uniting with and possessing the same spirit as the dissenters. 3rd. In writing letters to the dissenters in Kirtland, unfavorable to the cause, and to the character of Joseph Smith, jun. 4th. In neglecting the duties of his calling, and separating himself from the Church, while he had a name among us. 5th. For signing himself President of the Church of Christ, after he had been cut off from the Presidency, in an insulting letter to the High Council." Shortly after his excommunication David Whitmer left Far West and removed to Clay county, and in the latter part of 1838 located in Richmond, Ray county, where he resided until his death. In 1878, he was visited by Apostles Orson Pratt and Joseph F. Smith, who in their report about said visit wrote as follows: "On Saturday morning, Sept. 7 (1878), we met Mr. David Whitmer (at Richmond, Ray county, Mo.), the last remaining one of the Three Witnesses of the Book of Mormon. He is a good-sized man, 73 years of age last January, and well preserved. He is close shaven, his hair perfectly white, and rather thin; he has a large head and a very pleasant, manly countenance that one would readily perceive to be an index to a conscientious, honest heart. He seemed wonderfully pleased, as well as surprised, at seeing Elder Orson Pratt, and said he would not have known him as he had grown so fat and stout; he remembered him as a slender, bashful, timid boy. After a few moments' conversation he excused himself, saying he would return again to see us. This meeting was in the barroom of the hotel. When he called again he was in company with Col. Childs, a middle aged man, and a resident of the place. By invitation we accompanied them to Mr. Whitmer's office, where we were introduced to Mr. David J. Whitmer (eldest son of David), Mr. George Schweich (grandson of the old gentleman), Mr. John C. Whitmer (son of Jacob Whitmer), Col. James W. Black, of Richmond, and several others. A couple of hours were very pleasantly passed in conversation, principally on Utah matters, when we parted for dinner, agreeing to meet Mr. Whitmer again at his office, at 4:30 p.m. Agreeable to appointment we met Mr. Whitmer and his friends, at his office, but as the place was too public for private conversation and as it seemed impossible to obtain a private personal interview with David Whitmer, by himself, we invited him and such of his friends as he saw proper to fetch along to our room in the hotel. Mr. Whitmer apologized for not inviting us to his house, as it was 'wash day,' and he and his wife were 'worn out' with the extra labor, exposure, etc., etc., consequent on rebuilding since the cyclone. He accepted our invitation to our room and brought with him James R.B. Vancleave, a fine looking, intelligent, young newspaper man, of Chicago. George Schweich, John C. Whitmer, W. W. Warner and another person whose name we did not learn. In the presence of these the following, in substance, as noticed in Brother Joseph F. Smith's journal, is the account of the interview: * * *Elder Orson Pratt to David Whitmer: Do you remember what time you saw the plates? David Whitmer: It was in June, 1829, the latter part of the month, and the Eight Witnesses saw them, I think, the next day or the day after (i.e. one or two days after). Joseph showed them the plates himself, but the angel showed us (the Three Witnesses) the plates, as I suppose to fulfill the words of the book itself. Martin Harris was not with us at this time; he obtained a view of them afterwards (the same day). Joseph, Oliver and myself were together when I saw them. We not only saw the plates of the Book of Mormon, but also the brass plates, the plates of the Book of Ether, the plates containing the records of the wickedness and secret combinations of the people of the world down to the time of their being engraved, and many other plates. The fact is, it was just as though Joseph, Oliver and I were sitting just here on a log, when we were overshadowed by a light. It was not like the light of the sun, nor like that of a fire, but more glorious and beautiful. It extended away round us, I cannot tell how far, but in the midst of this light about as far off as he sits (pointing to John C. Whitmer, sitting a few feet from him), there appeared, as it were, a table with many records or plates upon it, besides the plates of the Book of Mormon, also the sword of Laban, the directors (i.e., the ball which Lehi had) and the interpreters. I saw them just as plain as I see this bed (striking the bed beside him with his hand), and I heard the voice of the Lord, as distinctly as I ever heard anything in my life, declaring that the records of the plates of the Book of Mormon were translated by the gift and power of God." Pratt: Did you see the angel at this time?" Whitmer: "Yes; he stood before us. Our testimony as recorded in the Book of Mormon is strictly and absolutely true, just as it is there written. Before I knew Joseph, I had heard about him and the plates from persons who declared they knew he had them, and swore they would get them from him. When Oliver Cowdery went to Pennsylvania, he promised to write me what he should learn about these matters, which he did. He wrote me that Joseph had told him his (Oliver's) secret thoughts, and all he had meditated about going to see him, which no man on earth knew, as he supposed, but himself, and so he stopped to write for Joseph. Soon after this, Joseph sent for me (Whitmer) to come to Harmony to get him and Oliver and bring them to my father's house. I did not know what to do, I was pressed with my work. I had some twenty acres to plow, so I concluded I would finish plowing and then go. I got up one morning to go to work as usual, and on going to the field, found between five and seven acres of my ground had been plowed during the night. I don't know who did it; but it was done just as I would have done it myself, and the plow was left standing in the furrow. This enabled me to start sooner. When I arrived at Harmony, Joseph and Oliver were coming toward me, and met me some distance from the house. Oliver told me that Joseph had informed him when I started from home, where I had stopped the first night, how I read the sign at the tavern, where I stopped the next night, etc., and that I would be there that day before dinner, and this was why they had come out to meet me; all of which was exactly as Joseph had told Oliver, at which I was greatly astonished. When I was returning to Fayette, with Joseph and Oliver, all of us riding in the wagon, Oliver and I on an old-fashioned wooden spring seat and Joseph behind us-when traveling along in a clear open place, a very pleasant, nice-looking old man suddenly appeared by the side of our wagon and saluted us with, 'good morning, it is very warm,' at the same time wiping his face or forehead with his hand. We returned the salutation, and, by a sign from Joseph, I invited him to ride if he was going our way. But he said very pleasantly, 'No, I am going to Cumorah.' This name was something new to me, I did not know what Cumorah meant. We all gazed at him and at each other, and as I looked around inquiringly of Joseph, the old man instantly disappeared, so that I did not see him again. Joseph F. Smith: Did you notice his appearance? Whitmer: I should think I did. He was, I should think, about five feet eight or nine inches tall and heavy set, about such a man as James Vancleave there, but heavier; his face was as large; he was dressed in a suit of brown woolen clothes, his hair and beard were white, like Brother Pratt's, but his beard was not so heavy. I also remember that he had on his back a sort of knapsack with something in, shaped like a book. It was the messenger who had the plates, who had taken them from Joseph just prior to our starting from Harmony. Soon after our arrival home, I saw something which led me to the belief that the plates were placed or concealed in my father's barn. I frankly asked Joseph if my supposition was right, and he told me it was. Some time after this, my mother was going to milk the cows, when she was met out near the yard by the same old man (judging by her description of him), who said to her: 'You have been very faithful and diligent in your labors, but you are tired because of the increase in your toil; it is proper, therefore, that you should receive a witness that your faith may be strengthened.' Thereupon he showed her the plates. My father and mother had a large family of their own, the addition to it, therefore, of Joseph, his wife Emma and Oliver very greatly increased the toil and anxiety of my mother. And although she had never complained she had sometimes felt that her labor was too much, or at least she was perhaps beginning to feel so. This circumstance, however, completely removed all such feelings and nerved her up for her increased responsibilities. * * * Pratt: Have you in your possession the original manuscript of the Book of Mormon? Whitmer: I have; they are in Oliver Cowdery's handwriting. He placed them in my care at his death, and charged me to preserve them as long as I lived; they are safe and well preserved. Joseph F. Smith: What will be done with them at your death? Whitmer: I will leave them to my nephew, David Whitmer, son of my brother Jacob, and my name-sake. Pratt: Would you not part with them to a purchaser? Whitmer: No, Oliver charged me to keep them, and Joseph said my father's house should keep the records. I consider these things sacred, and would not part with nor barter them for money. Joseph F. Smith: We would not offer you money in the light of bartering for the manuscript, but we would like to see them preserved in some manner where they would be safe from casualties and from the caprices of men, in some institution that will not die as man does. Whitmer: That is all right. While camping around here in a tent, all my effects exposed to the weather, everything in the trunk where the manuscripts were kept became mouldy, etc., but they were preserved, not even being discolored. (We supposed his camping in a tent, etc., had reference to his circumstances after the cyclone, in June last.) The room in which the manuscripts were kept, was the only part of the house which was not demolished, and even the ceiling of that room was but little impaired. 'Do you think,' said Phil. Page, a son of Hiram Page, one of the Eight Witnesses, 'that the Almighty cannot take care of His own!' Next day (Sunday, Sept. 8th) Mr. Whitmer invited us to his house, where, in the presence of David Whitmer, Esq. (son of Jacob), Philander Page, James R. B. Vaneleave, David J. Whitmer (son of David the Witness), George Sehweich (grandson of David), Colonel Childs and others, David Whitmer brought out the manuscripts of the Book of Mormon. We examined them closely and those who knew the handwriting pronounced the whole of them, excepting comparatively a few pages, to be in the handwriting of Oliver Cowdery. It was thought that these few pages were in the handwriting of Emma Smith and John and Christian Whitmer. We found that the names of the eleven Witnesses were, however, subscribed in the handwriting of Oliver Cowdery. When the question was asked Mr. Whitmer if he and the other witnesses did or did not sign the testimonies themselves, Mr. Whitmer replied that each signed his own name. 'Then where are the original signatures?' David Whitmer: 'I don't know, I suppose Oliver copied them, but this I know is an exact copy.' * * * Joseph F. Smith suggested that perhaps there were two copies of the manuscripts, but Mr. Whitmer replied that, according to the best of his knowledge, there never was but the one copy. Herein, of course, he is evidently uninformed. Elder Orson Pratt again felt closely after the subject of procuring the manuscript, but we found that nothing would move him on this point. The whole Whitmer family are deeply impressed with the sacredness of this relic. And so thoroughly imbued are they with the idea and faith that it is under the immediate protection of the Almighty, that in their estimation, not only are the manuscripts themselves safe from all possible contingencies, but that they are a source of protection to the place or house in which they may be kept, and, it may be to those who have possession of them. Another reason why they cling to this relic is that David Whitmer has reorganized the 'Church of Christ' with six Elders and two priests, after the pattern of the first organization, the two priests, as we suppose, representing Joseph and Oliver as holding the Aaronic Priesthood from the hand of John the Baptist. David and John Whitmer were two of these six Elders, four others, viz, John C. Whitmer, W. W. Warren, Philander Page and John Short, having been ordained by David and John. And as the recent death of John has diminished the number to five Elders it would be interesting to know if, according to their strict construction, the vacancy can be filled. Their creed is to preach nothing but the Bible and the Book of Mormon." The following was published in the Richmond (Mo.) "Conservator" of March 25, 1881:

"Unto all Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and People, unto whom these presents shall come:

"It having been represented by one John Murphy, of Polo, Caldwell county, Missouri, that I, in a conversation with him last summer, denied my testimony as one of the Three Witnesses of the Book of Mormon.

"To the end, therefore, that he may understand me now, if he did not then; and that the world may know the truth. I wish now, standing as it were, in the very sunset of life, and in the fear of God, once for all to make this public statement:

"That I have never at any time denied that testimony or any part thereof, which has so long since been published with that book, as one of the Three Witnesses. Those who know me best well know that I have always adhered to that testimony. And that no man may be misled or doubt my present views in regard to the same, I do again affirm the truth of all my statements as then made and published.

"'He that hath an ear to hear, let him hear;' it was no delusion; what is written is written, and he that readeth let him understand. * * *

"'And if any man doubt, should he not carefully and honestly read and understand the same before presuming to sit in judgment and condemning the light, which shineth in darkness, and showeth the way of eternal life as pointed out by the unerring hand of God?'

"In the Spirit of Christ, who hath said: 'Follow thou me, for I am the life, the light and the way,' I submit this statement to the world; God in whom I trust being my judge as to the sincerity of my motives and the faith and hope that is in me of eternal life.

"My sincere desire is that the world may be benefited by this plain and simple statement of the truth.

"And all the honor to the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, which is one God. Amen!

"DAVID WHITMER SEN.

"Richmond, Mo., March 19, 1881.

"We, the undersigned citizens of Richmond, Ray county, Mo., where David Whitmer, sen., has resided since the year A. D. 1838, certify that we have been long and intimately acquainted with him and know him to be a man of the highest integrity, and of undoubted truth and veracity.

"Given at Richmond, Mo., this March 20, A. D. 1881.

"A. W. Doniphan. "Geo. W. Dunn, Judge of the Fifth Judicial Circuit. "T. D. Woodson, President of Ray Co. Savings Bank. "J. T. Child, Editor of 'Conservator.' "H. C. Garner, Cashier of Ray Co. Savings Bank. "W. A. Holman, County Treasurer. "J. S. Hughes, Banker, Richmond. "D. P. Whitmer, Attorney-at-law. "J. W. Black, Attorney-at-law. "L. C. Cantwell, Postmaster, Richmond. "Geo. I. Wasson, Mayor. "James A. Davis, County Collector. "C. J. Hughes, Probate Judge and Presiding Judge of Ray County Court. "Geo. W. Trigg, County Clerk. "W. W. Mosby, M.D. "Thos. McGinnis, ex-Sheriff, Ray County. "J. P. Quessenberry, Merchant. "W. R. Holman, Furniture Merchant. "Lewis Slaughter, Recorder of Deeds. "Geo. W. Buchanan, M.D. "A. K. Reyburn."

The "Conservator" made the following editorial comments on the "notice:" "Elsewhere we publish a letter from David Whitmer, sen., an old and well known citizen of Ray, as well as an endorsement of his standing as a man, signed by a number of the leading citizens of this community, in reply to some unwarranted aspersions made upon him. There is no doubt that Mr. Whitmer, Who was one of the Three Witnesses of the authenticity of the gold plates, from which he asserts that Joe Smith translated the Book of Mormon (a fac simile of the characters he now has in his possession with the original records), is firmly convinced of its divine origin, and while he makes no efforts to obtrude his views or belief, he simply wants the world to know that so far as he is concerned there is no 'variableness or shadow of turning.' Having resided here for near a half of a century, it is with no little pride that he points to his past record, with the consciousness that he has done nothing derogatory to his character as a citizen and a believer in the Son of Mary to warrant such an attack on him, come from what source it may, and now, with the lilies of seventy-five winters crowning him like an aureole, and his pilgrimage on earth well nigh ended, he reiterates his former statements and will leave futurity to solve the problem that he was but a passing witness of its fulfillment." Elder Edward Stevenson in a letter dated Feb. 16, 1886, and addressed to Pres. Daniel H. Wells, writes: "After my visit to Independence I took a run down to Lexington Junction, 42 miles from Kansas City, and up the Lexington railroad five miles to Richmond, Ray county, Mo., and called on David Whitmer, desiring to see once more the only surviving witness of the visitation of the angel who commanded him with others to bear record of the truth of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon and this gospel dispensation of the nineteenth century. Eight years ago I visited him, and 52 years ago I heard him bear his testimony, as also Oliver Cowdery and Martin Harris, when I was only a boy fourteen years of age, and I am a witness that each time their testimony has been by the power of God, that thrills through the whole system like a two-edged sword. David Whitmer is now just past 81 years of age; and only by a hair's breadth has escaped from a death bed. He is very feeble, his frame weighing less than one hundred pounds. In this his last testimony he said to me, 'As sure as the sun shines and I live, just so sure did the angel appear unto me and Joseph Smith, and I heard his voice, and did see the angel standing before us, and on a table were the plates, the sword of Laban, and the ball or compass.' Although so weak and feeble, yet he fired up, so that after a time I was necessarily obliged to check him and let him rest, while in turn I talked to him." In April, 1887, David Whitmer and his family and friends published a pamphlet of 75 pages, with the following title: "An address to All Believers in Christ, by a Witness to the Divine Authenticity of the Book of Mormon." In this pamphlet David Whitmer explained at considerable length wherein he differed in his religious belief with the Saints in Utah. He denounces polygamy and other advanced doctrines. David Whitmer died at his residence in Richmond, Ray county, Mo., Jan. 25, 1888, aged 83 years and 18 days. From the "Richmond Democrat" (of Feb. 2, 1888), a weekly paper published at Richmond, the following is culled: "David Whitmer bore his long illness with great patience and fortitude, his faith never for a moment wavering, and when the summons came he sank peacefully to rest, with a smile on his countenance, just as if he was being lulled to sleep by sweet music. Just before the breath left the body, he opened his eyes, which glistened with the brightness of his early manhood. He then turned them toward heaven, and a wonderful light came over his countenance, which remained several moments, when the eyes gradually closed and David Whitmer was gone to rest. On Monday last (Jan. 23, 1888), at 10 o'clock a. m., after awakening from a short slumber, he said he had seen beyond the veil and saw Christ on the other side. His friends, who were constantly at his bedside, claim that he had many manifestations of the truths of the great beyond, and which confirms their faith beyond all shadow of doubt. On Sunday evening, at 5:30 (Jan. 22, 1888), Mr. Whitmer called his family and some friends to his bedside, and addressing himself to the attending physician, said: 'Dr. Buchanan, I want you to say whether or not I am in my right mind, before I give my dying testimony.' The doctor answered: 'Yes, you are in your right mind, for I have just had a conversation with you.' He then addressed himself to all around his bedside in these words: 'Now you must all be faithful in Christ. I want to say to you all, the Bible and the record of the Nephites (Book of Mormon) is true, so you can say that you have heard me bear my testimony on my deathbed. All be faithful in Christ, and your reward will be according to your works. God bless you all. My trust is in Christ forever, worlds without end. Amen.' * * * On Friday morning last (Jan. 27, 1888), at 10:30, a number of the friends of the deceased assembled at his late residence, to pay a last tribute of respect to the worthy dead. Mr. John J. Snyder arose and read the first fourteen verses of the 22nd chapter of Revelations, and stated that the deceased had selected the 14th verse, to be read at the funeral service over his remains. It reads as follows: 'Blessed are they that do His commandments, that they may have right to the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the city.' After the reading, an appropriate eulogy was pronounced by Mr. John C. Whitmer, a relative and intimate associate of the deceased. It was then announced that all present who desired to take a last look at the remains would be given an opportunity to do so at the house, as the coffin would not be opened at the grave. All present took advantage of this opportunity to once more look upon the features of the dead. The following old and well-known citizens of Richmond acted as pall-bearers: Joseph S. Hughes, Thomas D. Woodson, Dr. H. C. Garner, George L. Wasson, John P. Quessenberry and Col. J. W. Black, who then took charge of the remains and bore it to the hearse. Notwithstanding the cold, damp weather, a large number of friends and acquaintances followed the hearse and mourning family to the new cemetery, west of the city, where the body was laid to rest, and all that was mortal of one of the most remarkable men, ever connected with the history of Ray county, was forever hidden from view. * * * David Whitmer lived in Richmond about half a Century, and we can say that no man ever lived here who had among our people more friends and fewer enemies. Honest, conscientious and upright in all his dealings, just in his estimate of men, and open, manly and frank in his treatment of all, he made lasting friends who loved him to the end. * * * He leaves a wife and two children, two grandchildren and several great-grandchildren." (See also "Millennial Star," Vol. 45, p. 538; Vol. 48, pp. 35, 341, 420, 436, etc.; "Historical Record," Vol. 7, p. 622.)
