Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Whitmer, ChristianPPWhitmer, Christian

Whitmer, ChristianPPWhitmer, Christian, one of the Eight Witnesses to the Book of Mormon, was the eldest son of Peter Whitmer, sen., and Mary Musselman, and was born Jan. 18, 1798, in Pennsylvania. He removed while quite young with his parents from Pennsylvania to Seneca county, western New York, where he married Anne Schott Feb. 22, 1825, and established himself as a shoemaker. He was among the number who first embraced the fullness of the gospel as revealed through the youthful Prophet, and was baptized together with his wife in Seneca lake, April 11, 1830, by Elder Oliver Cowdery. This was only five days after the Church was organized. As early as June, 1830, he held the office of Teacher in the Church and was ordained an Elder in 1831. In that year (1831) he removed with the rest of the Whitmer family and the Saints generally from New York State to Ohio, and the following year to Jackson county, Mo., where he at a council meeting held Sept. 15, 1832, was appointed to preside over the Elders in Jackson county. In a council of High Priests held Aug. 21, 1833, he was ordained a High Priest by Simeon Carter. He passed through all the scenes of persecutions and mobbings which took place in that part of the country until he, in connection with the rest of the Saints, was driven out of Jackson county in November, 1833. He settled temporarily in Clay county, where he was chosen as one of the High Councilors of the Church in Missouri, July 3, 1834. This position he occupied until his death, which occurred in Clay county, Nov. 27, 1835. For several years before his demise he suffered considerably from lameness, having an ugly sore upon the leg, which was the direct cause of his early death. He was faithful and true until the last, and always bore a strong testimony of the divinity of the Book of Mormon. He left no children. After his demise his wife returned to her parents in New York State, where she married again, but was divorced from her second husband. She died many years ago in Seneca county, N.Y.
