Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Whitmer, JacobPPWhitmer, Jacob

Whitmer, JacobPPWhitmer, Jacob, one of the Eight Witnesses to the Book of Mormon, was the second son of Peter Whitmer, sen., and Mary Musselman, and was born in Pennsylvania Jan. 27, 1800. He removed with his parents to New York State when a boy, and married Elizabeth Schott, Sept. 29, 1825, with whom he had nine children, of whom only two were alive in the year 1888. Jacob Whitmer was one of the first who became convinced that the principles revealed by the Prophet Joseph were true, and, together with his wife, he was baptized by Oliver Cowdery, in Seneca lake, April 11, 1830, a few days after the Church was organized. With the rest of the Whitmer family he removed to Ohio in 1831, and subsequently settled in Jackson county, Mo., from whence he was driven by a mob in 1833., He was also identified with the Church in Clay and Caldwell counties. In the latter county he acted a short time as a temporary High Councilor and also as a member of the building committee for the erection of the Lord's House at Far West. He severed his connection with the Church in 1838, after which he settled near Richmond, Ray county, where he remained until his death, which occurred April 21, 1856. He was 56 years, 2 months and 26 days old at the time of his demise. He was a shoemaker by trade and also owned a little farm at the time of his death. One of his sons, David P. Whitmer, was a lawyer of considerable prominence and served one or more terms as mayor of Richmond. One of his daughters, Mrs. Mary Ann Bisbee, widow of the late J. P. Bisbee, lived in 1888 near Richmond, Mo., and had been a widow for a number of years. John C. Whitmer, his only remaining son, also lived about a mile south of Richmond in 1888. He was then the custodian of the original Church record which his uncle John Whitmer refused to give up to the proper authorities, and he also presided over the so-called "Whitmer Faction" or the Church of Christ, who believe in some of the doctrines taught by the Prophet Joseph and reject others. John C. Whitmer testified to Elder Andrew Jenson in September, 1888, as follows: "My father (Jacob Whitmer) was always faithful and true to his testimony in regard to the Book of Mormon, and confirmed it on his deathbed." From other sources it is known that Jacob Whitmer ever remained firm and steadfast to his testimony of the divinity of that sacred record, of which he was permitted to be so important a witness.
