Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Whitmer, Peter, Junior

Whitmer, Peter, Junior, one of the Eight Witnesses to the Rook of Mormon, was the fifth son of Peter Whitmer, sen., and Mary Musselman, and was born Sept. 27, 1809, in Fayette Seneca county, New York. Soon after Joseph's arrival at Fayette from Pennsylvania in the summer of 1829, Peter became a zealous friend of the Prophet and an able assistant in the work of God, and he desired most earnestly that Joseph should inquire of the Lord for him in order that he might know his duties and the Lord's will concerning him. The Prophet did so through the Urim and Thummim, and received a revelation commanding Peter to preach repentance to this generation. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 16.) This was in June, 1829. About the same time he was baptized by Oliver Cowdery in Seneca lake, being at that time less than twenty years old. In September, 1830, he was called by revelation (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 30) to preach the gospel, together with Oliver Cowdery, and in the following month he was chosen by revelation to accompany Parley P. Pratt, Oliver Cowdery and Ziba Peterson on a mission to the Lamanites. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 32.) They started for the West soon afterwards, and had an eventful journey, fraught with many hardships and much suffering. In Kirtland, Ohio, they raised up a large branch, after which they traveled nearly one thousand miles through mud and snow, mostly on foot, to Jackson county, Missouri, where they arrived in the early part of 1831. While Parley P. Pratt and Oliver Cowdery commenced a mission among the Lamanites across the borders, Peter Whitmer, jun., and another missionary companion found employment as tailors in the town of Independence, remaining there until the arrival of Joseph Smith and a number of the brethren in July following. Subsequently Peter Whitmer, jun., took an active part with the Saints in Jackson county, where he was ordained a High Priest Oct. 25, 1831, by Oliver Cowdery. He suffered together with the rest of the Saints during the Jackson county persecutions in 1833, and was among those who found a temporary home in Clay county. He took sick and died on a farm about two miles from Liberty, Clay county, Sept. 22, 1836, and was buried by the side of his brother Christian, who died about ten months previously. He had been consumptive for a number of years previous to his demise. He left a wife and three children, all daughters, one of them being born after his death. One of his daughters lived in Richmond, Missouri in 1888, another in Fort Scott, Kansas, and the third one in Moberly, Randolph county, Missouri. Like all the other witnesses to the Book of Mormon, Peter Whitmer, jun., was true and faithful to his testimony till the last.
