Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Page, Hiram

Page, Hiram, one of the Eight Witnesses to the Rook of Mormon, was born in the State of Vermont in the year 1800. He commenced to study medicine when quite young, and traveled considerably in the State of New York and Canada as a physician. Finally he located in Seneca county, N.Y., where he became acquainted with the Whitmer family, and finally married Catherine Whitmer, a daughter of Peter Whitmer and Mary Musselman, Nov. 10, 1825, with whom he had nine children. Having become a firm believer in the fulness of the gospel as revealed through the Prophet Joseph, he was baptized by Oliver Cowdery, in Seneca lake, April 11, 1830. His wife was baptized at the same time. Soon afterwards he came in possession of a stone by which he obtained certain revelations concerning the order of the Church and other matters, which were entirely at variance with the New Testament and the revelations received by Joseph Smith. This happened at a time when Joseph was absent, and when he heard of it, it caused him much uneasiness, as a number of the Saints, including Oliver Cowdery and the Whitmer family, believed in the things revealed by Hiram Page. At a conference held in September, 1830, when Joseph presided, this matter was given close attention, and after considerable investigation Hiram Page, as well as all the other members who were present, renounced everything connected with the stone. The Lord also said in a revelation that the things which Hiram Page had written from the stone were not from him. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 28.) In 1831 Hiram Page removed to Kirtland. Ohio where he remained until the following year, when he settled in Jackson county, Missouri, near the town of Independence. During the persecutions of the Saints in Jackson county in 1833, he was selected, together with three others, to go to Lexington to see the circuit judge and obtain a peace warrant. Upon their affidavits, Judge John F. Ryland issued writs against some of the ringleaders of the mob, to be placed in the hands of the Jackson county sheriff, but these writs never accomplished any good. After the expulsion from Jackson county. Bro. Page took an active part with the Saints in Clay county, and in 1836 became one of the founders of Far West, Caldwell county. In 1838 he severed his connection with the Saints and subsequently removed to Ray county, where he remained until the end of his earthly career. He died Aug. 12, 1852, on his farm, near the present site of Excelsior Springs, about fourteen miles northwest of Richmond, Ray county, Mo., and near the boundary line between Ray and Clay counties. Of his nine children only four were alive in 1888. His eldest living son, Philander Page, resided at that time two and a half miles south of Richmond. Another son lived near by, and a daughter resided in Carroll county, Missouri. Philander Page testified to Elder Andrew Jenson in September, 1888 as follows: "I knew my father to be true and faithful to his testimony of the divinity of the Book of Mormon until the very last. Whenever he had an opportunity to bear his testimony to this effect, he would always do so, and seemed to rejoice exceedingly in having been privileged to see the plates and thus become one of the Eight Witnesses. I can also testify that Jacob, John and David Whitmer and Oliver Cowdery died in full faith in the divinity of the Book of Mormon. I was with all these witnesses on their deathbeds and heard each of them bear his last testimony." John C. Whitmer, a nephew of Hiram Page by marriage, testified in the presence of Elder Jenson: "I was closely connected with Hiram Page in business transactions and other matters, he being married to my aunt. I knew him at all times and under all circumstances to be true to his testimony concerning the divinity of the Book of Mormon."
