Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Marks, William

Marks, William, president of the Nauvoo Stake of Zion from 1839 to 1844, was born Nov. 15, 1792, in Rutland, Rutland county. Vermont. His name occurs for the first time in the history of Joseph Smith under date of May, 1837, when "the 'Messenger and Advocate office and contents were transferred to William Marks, of Portage, Allegany county, New York; and Smith and Rigdon continued the office, by power of attorney from said Marks." At a conference held at Kirtland, Ohio, Sept. 3, 1837, Wm. Marks was chosen as a member of the High Council at that place, and on the 17th of the same month he was "elected agent" to Bishop Newel K. Whitney. Under date of March 29, 1838, the Prophet Joseph records that he saw Bro. Marks in a vision while on the road, and that he was closely pursued by an innumerable concourse of enemies, who pressed upon him hard; and when they were about to devour him, and had seemingly obtained some degree of advantage over him, "a chariot of fire came, and near the place, even the angel of the Lord, put forth his hand upon Bro. Marks and said unto him: "Thou art my son, come here.' And immediately he was caught up in the chariot and rode away triumphantly out of their midst. And again the Lord said, 'I will raise thee up for a blessing unto many people.'" In a revelation given through the Prophet Joseph, Wm. Marks was commanded to settle up his business in Kirtland speedily and remove to Missouri," where he should reside over the Saints in Far West. (Doc. and Cov., 117:1, 10.) He obeyed this command, but before he could identify himself with the Saints in Missouri, these were expelled from that State; and we next hear of Wm. Marks in Quincy, Ill., where he sat in council with his brethren. At a conference held at Quincy, May 6, 1839, he was appointed to preside over the Church at Commerce, Ill., where the Saints were then locating; and at the general conference held at Commerce, Oct. 5, 1839, he was appointed to preside over the Stake of Zion, which was then organized at Commerce (afterwards Nauvoo). This high and responsible position he occupied till October, 1844, When the first election of municipal officers took place in Nauvoo, Feb. 1, 1841, Wm. Marks was elected alderman. Two days later he was chosen one of the regents of the University of the City of Nauvoo. He was also one of the incorporators of the Nauvoo Agricultural and Manufacturing Association, and assisted in the laying of the corner stones of the Nauvoo Temple in April, 1841. He took an active part in all public affairs, both ecclesiastical and secular, being constantly in counsel with the general authorities of the Church. He also acted as associate justice of the municipal court, served on the grand jury and filled numerous other positions of honor and responsibility. After the Prophet Joseph's death he sympathized with Sidney Rigdon, and for this reason and because he did not acknowledge the authority of the Twelve Apostles he was "dropped" by the High Council, and at the general conference held at Nauvoo Oct. 7, 1844, he was rejected as president of the Nauvoo Stake of Zion. Patriarch John Smith being chosen as his successor. This ended Wm. Mark's services for the Church, and when the Saints went into the wilderness, he remained in the East, though he left Nauvoo for other parts of the country. Becoming convinced that Sidney Rigdon's claims were untenantable, Wm. Marks commenced to affiliate with James J. Strong, and attended a Strangite conference held at Voree, Wisconsin, in April, 1847. Prior to this he had been chosen as a counselor to Mr. Strong, and he acted in that capacity for several years. But he finally withdrew from the Strangite movement, and in 1855 associated himself for a short time with John E. Page and others. In 1859 he joined the promoters of the "Reorganized Church," and became one of the leading men of that organization, with which he continued until his death. At the time of his demise, which occurred May 22, 1872, at Plano, Ill., he was first counselor to Pres. Joseph Smith, of the "Reorganized Church."
