Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Fullmer, David

DAVID FULLMER, ABOUT 1842.

Fullmer, David, president pro tem. of the Salt Lake Stake of Zion from 1852 to 1856, was the son of Peter Fullmer and Susannah Zerfoss, and was born July 7, 1803, at Chillisquaque, Northumberland county, Pennsylvania. He was brought up on a farm and received a common school education. He left the farm and for a while taught school, after which he went to merchandising. In September, 1831, he married Miss Rhoda Ann Marvin, daughter of Zera Marvin and Rhoda Williams. In the year 1835 he moved to Richmond county, Ohio. While here he heard that the Lord had revealed his gospel again unto man on earth. He believed and was baptized Sept. 16, 1836, by Elder Henry G. Sherwood. The following winter he went to Kirtland,

where, for the first time, he had the pleasure of meeting the Prophet Joseph Smith. Shortly afterward he was ordained an Elder under the hands of Reuben Hedlock, in the Kirtland Temple; he also received a patriarchal blessing under the hands of Patriarch Joseph Smith, sen. In September, 1837, he removed to Caldwell county, Missouri, that he might be near the principal gathering place of the Saints, and in the spring of 1838 he removed to Daviess county in the same State. The following summer he had a severe attack of sickness which threatened his life, but through the healing power of God he was restored to health. At this time great persecution raged against the Saints, and after Governor Lilburn W. Boggs had issued an order of extermination against them, they were compelled to leave their homes and possessions in Missouri. Elder Fullmer and his family were among the number forced to leave all and flee for their lives. He removed to the State of Illinois, where he left his family while he continued the journey to Ohio, and assisted in moving his father to Illinois. Settling in Nauvoo, Hancock county, Ill., Elder Fullmer was ordained to the office of a High Priest in 1839 and appointed one of the High Council for that Stake of Zion. In 1844 he was appointed one of the electioneering missionaries in behalf of the Prophet Joseph Smith, and was engaged in this labor and in preaching the gospel in the State of Michigan, when the news was received of the martyrdom of the Prophet Joseph and Patriarch Hyrum Smith. Elder Fullmer immediately returned to his home in Nauvoo and attended the general meeting of the Church, at which the claims of Sidney Rigdon, as guardian of the Church, were rejected, and the Twelve Apostles, with Brigham Young at the head, were sustained as the rightful leaders of the Church. Elder Fullmer was appointed as a member of "The Living Constitution" committee, the business of which was to settle all difficulties which might arise among the different mechanical associations. He was also a member of the Nauvoo City Council; and when the State legislature repealed the charter of the city of Nauvoo, he was elected to the town council of Nauvoo. He was also chosen a member of the Council of Fifty. When the Nauvoo Temple was opened for work, Elder Fullmer, with companions, received all the ordinances and blessings which were given to the Saints at that time. In the winter of 1846, when the Saints were expelled from their homes, and the presiding authorities of the Church decided to journey into the wilderness to seek a new home and a gathering place in the Rocky Mountains, Elder Fullmer was appointed a captain of hundred, and started west with the first company of the Camp of Israel, to find a home in a land that the Lord should show unto them. In 1846, when it was decided to make a temporary settlement or resting place for the rear company of Saints and all those, who, from lack of means, were unable to proceed further, at a place they called Garden Grove, in the State of Iowa, Brother Samuel Bent was appointed to preside at this place, and Elder Fullmer was appointed as his first counselor. Here the exiled Saints made a large farm and worked together to raise grain. There were many poor among them who were almost destitute both of food and clothing. Soon after Pres. Bent died and the presidency of the place devolved upon Elder Fullmer, who sent missionaries out along the great rivers to solicit aid for the relief of the poor, and by this means help was afforded. From this place the company removed to another temporary settlement called Winter Quarters, on the Missouri river, where Elder Fullmer acted as a member of a committee of vigilance by appointment of Pres. Young. Elder Fullmer traveled from this place in the company of Pres. Willard Richards, and arrived in due time in Great Salt Lake valley. He served as a member of the legislature of the Provisional State of Deseret, and was appointed first counselor to Daniel Spencer, president of the Salt Lake Stake of Zion, in 1849. When a company of brethren were appointed to travel southward on an exploring expedition, Elder Fullmer was appointed counselor to Apostle Parley P. Pratt and for five months he traveled with this company in the dead of winter. As captain of a relief company, Elder Fullmer traveled east to Independence Rock to assist a company of Saints who were journeying westward. During Pres. Spencer's absence on a mission to England, from 1852 to 1856, Counselor Fullmer presided over the Salt Lake Stake. When the Territory of Utah was created, Elder Fullmer was elected a member of the legislature for Salt Lake county, and at various times was called to important duties, such as treasurer of the University, treasurer pro tem of Salt Lake county; treasurer of Salt Lake City; delegate to one of the early Territorial conventions; director of the Agricultural Society, and home missionary. Elder Fullmer served as first counselor to Pres. Spencer until April, 1866, when he was released at his own request, because of failing health. He died in Salt Lake City Oct. 21, 1879. Several years before his death he was ordained a Patriarch. At the time of his decease he was in full fellowship, beloved and respected by all his associates.

DAVID FULLMER IN 1877.
