Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Wallace, George Benjamin

Wallace, George Benjamin, president of the Salt Lake Stake of Zion from 1874 to 1876, was the son of John Wallace and Mary True, and was born Feb. 16, 1817, at Epsom, Merrimack county. New Hampshire. Becoming a convert to "Mormonism," he was baptized and confirmed in December, 1842, by Elder Freeman Nickerson, and he was ordained a High Priest in Boston in July, 1844, by Brigham Young. In the spring of 1844 he was selected by the Prophet Joseph to electioneer in his interest as candidate for President of the United States. This was at a time when agitation over the slave question was being brought to the front as a national issue in the politics of the country. At this time Bro. Wallace was carrying on an extensive lumber business in Boston, employing hundreds of men. He emigrated to Nauvoo in 1844, soon after the Prophet's death. At that city he acted as undertaker during some of the most trying days experienced by the Saints there. He was also the first sexton who dug civilized graves in the valley of the Great Salt Lake. When the emigration, which followed the Pioneers to Great Salt Lake valley in the fall of 1847, was organized, Geo. B. Wallace was appointed a captain of fifty, which he led to the valley, arriving on the present site of Salt Lake City in September, of that year. He built one of the best and most commodious houses in the Old Fort, and the general authorities of the Church held many important council meetings at his residence. At a meeting of the First Presidency held at the house of Bro. Wallace, in the Old Fort, Feb. 12, 1849, Charles C. Rich, Lorenzo Snow, Erastus Snow and Franklin D. Richards were ordained Apostles. The more Permanent organization of the Salt Lake Stake of Zion and the ordaining of nearly all the first Bishops in Salt Lake City also took place in Elder Wallace's house, in February, 1849. When the first missionaries were called in Great Salt Lake valley to go to the nations of the earth, Elder Wallace was one of the number. He was called to Great Britain, and crossed the mountains and plains late in the fall of 1849, together with four of the Apostles, and many other Elders. He arrived in Liverpool, England, June 9, 1850, and labored in the British Isles about two years, most of the time as counselor to Franklin D. Richards in the presidency of the British Mission. "He returns to Zion," wrote Elder Richards editorially, "with our blessing, and the blessing of thousands of Saints who have been instructed, strengthened and built up in their most holy faith, by his ministrations while on his late mission." Returning home from his mission, Elder Wallace sailed from Liverpool, March 20, 1852, and arrived in Salt Lake City in August following. After his return from this mission, Elder Wallace yielded obedience to the higher law of marriage and again took an active part in Pioneer labor in the sterile valley of the Great Salt Lake. As a member of the High Priests' quorum he participated in the ceremonies of laying the corner stones of the Salt Lake City Temple, and offered the dedicatory prayer at the laying of the northwest corner stone of that noted structure. In 1867, among others, he was instrumental in securing the organization of the Brighton Ward, on the west side of Jordan river, At the April conference, 1860, he was sustained as second counselor to President Daniel Spencer, of the Salt Lake Stake, and at the April conference in 1866 he was promoted to the position of first counselor. He acted in the latter position till May 9, 1874, when he was called to preside over the Stake, succeeding John W. Young in that office. He filled this position about two years. From 1877 to the time of his death, which occurred at his residence at Granger Jan. 30, 1900, he acted as president of the High Priests' quorum in the Salt Lake Stake of Zion.
