Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Taylor, Joseph Edward

Taylor, Joseph Edward, first counselor to Angus M. Cannon, president of the Salt Lake Stake of Zion, is the son of George Edward Grove Taylor and Ann Hicks, and was born Dec. 11, 1830, in the town of Horsham, county of Sussex, England. He was baptized by Elder Henry Beecroft at Hull, Yorkshire, Aug. 11, 1848, being then only seventeen years old. He was ordained to the office of a Priest Oct. 4, 1848, and was called at that time to travel in the Lincolnshire conference. After being ordained an Elder, Oct. 1, 1849, he continued to travel in the same conference (besides visiting others at times) until released in January, 1851. During a period of two years and three months he walked to fill appointments 3,693 miles, and rode during that time (mostly by railway) 3,166 miles, preached 247 regular discourses, besides delivering nearly 200 exhortations, held 27 discussions, presided at 52 Sacrament meetings, baptized nearly two hundred persons who had been convinced of the truth under his testimony, and assisted at the baptism of a great many more. He organized several branches of the Church and received during that time from the Saints in voluntary gifts of money $65.05 and about $300 from strangers. During the summers of 1849 and 1850 he often held five meetings in one or more large towns or cities on Sabbath days, sometimes two outdoor and three indoor and vice versa, in many instances doing all the preaching and praying himself, besides leading the singing at each meeting, no other Elder or Priest being associated with him in opening up a great deal of new ground. He often worked with his hands on weekdays, to obtain money to help pay for hall rents and defray other necessary expenses, and says he seldom felt weary in body or mind. He took passage on board the ship "Ellen," which left Liverpool Jan. 8, 1851, James W. Cummings being the president of the company, and arrived in St. Louis, Mo., in the latter part of March. He remained in that city until the spring of 1852, having been prostrated by sickness nine months of the time; left Winter Quarters June 12th, in company No. 4 (Captain Joseph Outhouse) and arrived in Great Salt Lake valley Sept. 6th of that year. Feb. 17, 1853, he was ordained to the office of a Seventy and became identified with the 31st Quorum; received his endowments Aug. 24, 1854, was ordained a High Priest Sept. 12, 1854, and set apart to act as counselor to Bishop John Lytle of the Eleventh Ward, Salt Lake City. He continued to act in that capacity until August, 1856, at which time Bishop Lytle was sent to Carson valley on a mission. Jan. 25, 1857, he was called to act as counselor to Alexander McRae who had been appointed to fill the vacancy occasioned by Bishop Lytle's removal. Elder Taylor continued to act as counselor to Bishop McRae until 1868, having previously removed to the Thirteenth Ward. Dec. 22, 1875, he was called by Pres. Brigham Young to go on a mission to the States of Nebraska, Iowa and Illinois, to labor among the Josephites and others who had seceded from the Church. He was accompanied on this mission by Elder Claudius V. Spencer, of Salt Lake City, who had been appointed at the same time; they were joined by Elder Isaac Bullock, of Provo, at Council Bluffs upon his return from the East. As the result of this mission 36 persons were baptized, three branches organized, eight children blessed and one couple married; meetings were held nearly every night; 24 of the 36 baptized emigrated to the Valley in less than one year. While upon this mission Elder Taylor paid a personal visit to Emma Smith, widow of the Prophet Joseph Smith, who was residing in the Mansion house in Nauvoo at that time with her husband, Lewis C. Bidaman, to whom she was married some time after Joseph's death. Elder Taylor's object in making this visit was to learn from Emma's own lips some things in relation to the "Reorganized church," which was presided over by her oldest son Joseph. Among other things he propounded this question, "Why did you use your influence to have your son Joseph installed as the president of the Re-organization, knowing, as you must have done, that the men who would confer upon him this authority were apostates and some of them had been cut off from the Church?" To which she replied somewhat evasively, but from her remarks he discovered her intense dislike for Pres. Brigham Young, whom she accused of entirely ignoring Joseph's family. She claimed that the family had a right to not only recognition but to representation. For this reason and her utter distaste of the man from other causes had led her to do as she had done. Brother Taylor replied by taking out of his pocket a photograph of Pres. Young, and showing it to her, remarking: "After all, Emma, he appears to be pretty well preserved personally, and the Church has not lost any of its strength either numerically or otherwise from the opposition which I think you have very unwisely aided and abetted." At this point the conversation ended. Elder Taylor returned home April 7, 1876, and on the following day (April 8th), in general conference, he was called to act as second counselor to Angus M. Cannon, who was called at the same time to preside over the Salt Lake Stake of Zion. Oct. 18, 1884, he was set apart under the hands of the late Pres. John Taylor, George Q. Cannon and Angus M. Cannon, to act as first counselor to the latter, Brother David O. Calder, who had heretofore filled that position, having died a short time previous. Elder Taylor still occupies the latter position. He has always been prominent in sustaining the institutions in Zion, which have for their object the advancement of the people. This has been exhibited by him in a very marked manner in relation to Church schools and especially in regard to the L. D. S. University, formerly the L. D. S. College, in Salt Lake City. When it seemed impossible to longer maintain the college, he personally undertook the task of raising means for its support, for he had expressed himself as believing that the Lord would be displeased with the Saints if they discontinued it. In his effort he was eminently successful. Liberal donations were made by a great many of the citizens, prominent among whom was Elder Taylor himself. President Snow expressed himself as highly pleased with the successful effort made, and nobly responded with the gift in behalf of the Church of one quarter of the block east of the Temple, upon which a very creditable building has recently been erected and is now fully occupied with students. Following this, Sister M. Barratt's gift of money sufficient to erect upon this ground the "Barratt Memorial Building" for school purposes, and the transfer of real estate by the heirs of President Young to the University, will furnish enough means to erect a third building. The gift of $1,000 for library purposes by Ezra T. Clark and other prospects in view give additional promise of perpetual success to this institution of learning, in which Elder Taylor has taken so much interest.
