Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Lewis, William Hendricks

Lewis, William Hendricks, president of the Benson Stake of Zion, is the son of Neriah Lewis and Rebecca Hendricks, and was born Oct. 14, 1837, in Macoupin county, Ill. His parents were raised in Simpson county, Kentucky. His father was a descendant of a family of three Welsh brothers who emigrated from Wales to America in an early day and who took part in the Revolutionary war. It is said that twenty-two men of the Lewis family fought in one battle under General Geo. Washington. William's father and mother, who were married quite young, removed to Illinois, where they made a new home and were prosperous for about nine years. Pres. Lewis writes: "In the winter of 1846-47 my uncle David Lewis came to my father's house and preached the gospel to my parents. My father accepted the same, and a few weeks later sold out and moved to Nauvoo, where the family stopped with my father's and mother's people for about two weeks. We then started for the great unknown west, traveling through Iowa to the Missouri river. I was present when Colonel Allen and other United States officers called for the Mormon Battalion, and I saw the wives and mothers of these soldiers left on the bleak prairie without a protector and with scarcely food enough to eat. A rude flat boat was constructed on which we crossed the Missouri river. We then joined Bishop George Miller's company and continued our journey westward, hoping to reach the Rocky Mountains that same season; but after traveling a few hundred miles, winter came on, and meeting some Punca Indian chiefs, who told us that they had grass, timber and water, and that we had better winter with them, we accepted their kind offer, left the trail we had been following, and wintered with them. It was a cold bleak winter, and we suffered much from the want of food. About eighty persons of our company died of black leg or scurvy, and were buried without coffins. We had a little corn in camp, which the women would grind on a hand mill, and there were at times as many as twenty or thirty persons waiting their turn to grind. When we first arrived at the place where we wintered, some two or three hundred young warriors came on horseback to serenade our camp; they rode at full speed in single file, and in their war paint, and fired their guns as they came, not forgetting to give the Indian war whoop. This made it very exciting for our people, many of whom had never seen an Indian before. Just at that moment the old chief appeared on the scene in great excitement, waving his hands and giving the word of command, saying that a war party of Pawnees was at their camp, killing their women and children. On hearing this the warriors broke their serenade and went at full speed to their own camp, where they had a desperate battle with their enemy. They fought like demons for their wives and children; their war chief was killed, and I have never before or since listened to such howling and mourning. While in this camp our corral of wagons (which was a very large one, containing our cattle and horses) was broken one night by the stampeding of the cattle, which ran over the wagons, as though there was nothing in the way, and made kindling wood of most of our vehicles and their contents. Two boys or young men were sleeping under one of the wagons at the time, but an old iron pot, which stood under the axletree, saved their lives. During the fall and early winter we dug roots, which we called hog potatoes, to eat; they were a great help to us, but later the frost became so intense (the ground freezing three or four feet deep) that there could be no more digging of roots. When the cattle died of hunger and cold, some of the people would dress, boil and eat some of the meat. As soon as winter broke up, we made our way back to Winter Quarters, where we remained and farmed during that season. We then moved on to the Iowa side of the Missouri river, and lived there one year. My parents next moved down into Platte county, Missouri (near Saint Joseph), where we remained for two years. Having there earned sufficient means to purchase a good outfit to come to the Valley, we started for Utah in April, 1851. At Winter Quarters we joined Orson Pratt's company, with James Cummings as captain of one hundred, and Ormus Bates, captain of fifty. A short distance out on the plains we left the old road and went around the Elkhorn, which compelled us to travel about five hundred miles without a road. We had a successful trip, and arrived in Salt Lake City Oct. 7, 1851. My father purchased a home in the 15th Ward, Salt Lake City, and we farmed the following season. In the fall of 1852 we moved to Centerville, Davis county, but returned soon afterwards to Salt Lake City, where my mother died in the fall of 1854. My father was left with my mother's four children and her brother's two orphan children-six motherless children in all. Then came a hard struggle to make a living. I worked at whatever I could get to do, and finally obtained employment from Captain Wm. H. Hooper, and did fairly well. The captain seemed to think a good deal of me. I attended meetings in the Old Tabernacle regularly for ten years, and listened with delight to Pres. Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball and the old Apostles and veterans of the Prophet Joseph's time; they spoke with power, and I learned to love them, and to cherish their teachings. Leaving the city to assist my father on his farm in Fort Herriman, I became acquainted with a young lady (Martha Petty), whom I married in November, 1856. Henry Harriman, one of the Seven Presidents of Seventies, performed the ceremony. I built us a snug little home in Fort Herriman, though we commenced married life without a dollar in pocket. But we never wanted for anything that we could not pay for, and for ten years we were never indebted to any one. I participated in the Echo Canyon war, and also in the move south. Returning from the south with the main body of the people, I engaged in farming and was getting along very well, when I concluded to go to Cache valley. I arrived there July 18, 1859. We followed an Indian trail through Wellsville, and arriving on the spot where Richmond now stands, I staked off a claim, and in company with my brother-in-law, a boy of some sixteen years, and a neighbor by the name of A. F. Stewart, I put up fifty tons of hay. We then returned to Fort Herriman, loaded up some ox teams with lumber for floors and roofs, and returned to Cache valley to put up our log cabins. After building them, we considered them very comfortable, for they had lumber floors and roofs. Returning once more to Fort Herriman I sold out there, and moved my family to our new home where Richmond now stands. We arrived there Oct. 31, 1859. On the day after our arrival, my oldest daughter Rebecca A. Rawlins was born. About two weeks later Apostles Orson Hyde and Ezra T. Benson came to my house and ordained me a High Priest and set me apart as a member of the High Council in Cache Valley Stake, which position I held about twelve years. In the meantime I officiated in many different callings, such as Ward Teacher, minute man, and in various callings. In 1864 I went down to the Missouri river after the poor Saints; and in 1872 I was called to be Bishop in the Lewiston Ward." As the presiding officer in Lewiston for nearly twenty-nine years, Bishop Lewis witnessed the growth of that settlement from a small hamlet, consisting of only four cabins built in the desert, to one of the most flourishing settlements in the mountains. When the settlements in Cache valley were divided and organized into three Stakes of Zion, Bishop Lewis was chosen and set apart as president of the Benson Stake, which embraces all the settlements on the north end of Cache county. Pres. Lewis is still young in heart and strong in body, and has no doubt a long career of usefulness yet before him.
