Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Sessions, Byron

Sessions, Byron, president of the Big Horn Stake of Zion, is the son of Perrigrine Sessions and Mary Call, and was born Nov. 7, 1851, in Bountiful, Davis county, Utah. His father was the first settler in Bountiful, which was originally called Sessions' settlement in his honor. In this place Byron was raised and educated, and here he was baptized May 31, 1858, by Henry Rampton, and confirmed the same day by Henry Tingey. As a young man he was ordained to the several grades of the lesser Priesthood, and finally to the office of an Elder. He married Ida Teombly Oct. 31, 1870, and moved to Woodruff, Rich county, Utah, in 1873. Here he labored for several years as a Ward and a Sunday school teacher. He was ordained a High Priest and set apart as second counselor to Bishop Wm. H. Lee Aug. 19, 1888, by Geo. Osmond; set apart as second counselor to Bishop John M. Baxter in the fall of 1890, by Wm. Budge, and set apart as first counselor to Pres. John M. Baxter in the presidency of the Woodruff Stake June 6, 1898. He left Woodruff April 22, 1901, in response to a call from the authorities of the Church to take charge of the Big Horn colonization movement, and arrived in the Big Horn country May 26, 1900. The ground was first broken on the Sidon canal May 28, 1900, on which occasion Bro. Sessions drove the team and Apostle Abraham O. Woodruff held the plow. Elder Sessions contracted in behalf of the colony for building twenty miles of railway track, which work was completed satisfactorily. When the Saints residing in the Big Horn country were organized into a Stake of Zion in May, 1901, Byron Sessions was chosen and set apart as president of the Stake, with Jesse W. Crosby, jun., as his first, and Charles A. Welch as his second counselor. Pres. Sessions has always been a public spirited man, and active in all matters pertaining to the welfare of the Church, both spiritually and temporally. For several years he was the manager of the Bear River Land and Canal company. He is the father of ten children.
