Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Haight, Horton David

Haight, Horton David, president of the Cassia Stake of Zion, was born June 20, 1832, in the town of Moravia, Cayuga county, New York. His father was Hector Caleb Haight, who for many years served as probate judge of Davis county, Utah. His mother was Julia Van Orden, a woman noted for her business ability as well as domestic qualities. In 1837, the family moved to the northern part of the State of Illinois, where they remained till the spring of 1845. At this time Horton's parents became identified with the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and moved to Nauvoo. In the spring of 1846 the family, in company with others of the Saints, started on the westward journey, and during the summer crossed the State of Iowa. The following winter was spent in the rushes on the Missouri bottoms. In the spring of 1847 the family left Winter Quarters for the Rocky Mountains. The subject of this sketch was then only fifteen years of age, but still did his part in driving three yoke of cattle and taking his turn as camp and cattle guard when occasion required. The company arrived in Great Salt Lake valley Sept. 22, 1847. In the spring of 1848, when a relief company was sent out to meet the Saints coming to the valley, young Horton was among the number sent back, and he experienced the same difficulties that the Saints encountered the year before. At this time the company went back as far as Chimney Rock, a distance of about seven hundred miles, before they met the company. Horton D. Haight was one of the first settlers in Davis county, Utah, and took an active part in the development of the same, proving himself to be a public spirited man. In February, 1854, he married Miss Louisa Leavitt, after which he lived in Kaysville and Farmington until his removal to the State of Idaho. In the summer of 1855 he accompanied Pres. Brigham Young to Fort Limhi on the Salmon river, for the purpose of visiting the Saints at that place. The year 1857 found him doing service with Lot Smith on the plains in the interest of the people, observing the movements of Johnston's army. In March, 1858, he left Utah with fifty men for Fort Limhi, on Salmon river, to relieve the colony there once more. When returning he found the people moving southward, preparatory to the arrival of the army, and he, with his family, moved to the Provo bottoms, living here during the summer months. Sept. 14, 1858, he started east with Joseph W. Young for the purpose of buying work-cattle for the Church. In the summer of 1859 he brought out a Church train of seventy-five wagons. In 1860 and 1861 he was in the employ of Hooper and Eldredge, superintending their trains of merchandise. In 1863 he went to the frontiers again and brought out some freight and about three hundred emigrants. In 1866 he brought the wire for the first telegraph line in Utah from Wyoming, Neb. He crossed the plains seven times as captain of emigration companies and made himself beloved by the people placed under his care and also by the men working under him. Words of praise are often heard yet when the name of Pres. Haight is mentioned in the presence of the men and women who crossed the plains in his trains. His married life was a success, ten children (five boys and five girls) having come to cheer the lives of Pres. and Sister Haight. All of their children, with the exception of two, are living at the present writing, and occupying positions of honor in their communities and in the Church. Pres. Haight's public life is well known for the fidelity and integrity of the man whenever his superiors or the people at large entrusted anything to his care. He had the confidence of his co-laborers and the Presiding authorities in the Church. He served as a major in the Utah militia, as selectman of Davis county for two terms, as sheriff one term, and in 1861 represented his county in the Utah legislature. In 1882 he was called to Oakley, Idaho, to act as Bishop at that Place; later (1887) he was chosen as the first president of the Cassia Stake. While living in Cassia county he served the people in the capacity of county commissioner and also acted as president of the Oakley Co-operative Mercantile Institution, an institution that owes its solidity to the wise business forethought of Pres. Haight. As a Latter-day Saint he tried to follow in the Master's foot-step; as a leader he was kind and considerate; as a citizen his life was above reproach. Pres. Haight died Jan. 19, 1900, mourned by a large, devoted family and spoken highly of by the people of Cassia Stake. The estimation the president was held in by his family is beautifully set forth on his tombstone: "Whither thou goest, we will go. Thy people shall be our people, thy God, our God."
