Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Haight, Louisa Leavitt

Haight, Louisa Leavitt, wife of the late Pres. Horton D. Haight of Cassia Stake, was born in Harley county, Lower Canada, Dec. 10, 1835. Her parents were Wiar Leavitt and Phebe Cole. When she was two years of age the family moved to Illinois, settling near Joliet, in what was known as the Twelve Mile Grove. Here Brother Wiar Leavitt died and the mother was left with a family of two boys and two girls to support. Selling out her place at Twelve Mile Grove, the family journeyed by team to Nauvoo, in order to be with the Saints. It was the intention of Bro. Leavitt when leaving Canada, to gather with the Saints, but he was prevented by circumstances to do so. While living in Nauvoo, Louisa attended a school which was conducted by Mrs. Emmeline B. Wells. With the rest of the Saints, Sister Leavitt and her family, in the spring of 1846, moved westward, resting at what is now called Florence during the following winter. Here Louisa attended a school, taught by Brother McGuire. In October, 1847, she came into Great Salt Lake valley and remained in Salt Lake City until the death of her mother in the year 1851. She then moved to Centerville and attended school here off and on until her marriage to Horton D. Haight in the year 1854. From that time she made her home at Blooming Grove, in Davis county. She became the mother of five boys and five girls, all of whom are living with the exception of two. She was connected with the first Primary association, organized in the Church, acting as first counselor to Sister Aurelia Rogers. In 1882 Pres. Horton D. Haight and Louisa, his wife, moved to Oakley, Idaho, and while here she served as first counselor to Sister Sarah Grant, president of the Ward Relief Society. When the Stake was organized, Sister Louisa Haight was chosen as Stake president of the Relief Societies, which position she holds at this writing. Sister Haight has proven herself a dutiful wife, a loving mother, and a true Latter-day Saint in all her walks of life.
