Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Williams, Frederick Granger

Williams, Frederick Granger; second counselor to President Joseph Smith from 1833 to 1837, was born Oct. 28, 1787, in Suffield, Hartford county, Conn., was baptized in October, 1830, near Kirtland, Ohio, and soon afterwards accompanied Oliver Cowdery and fellow missionaries on their journey from Ohio to Missouri. After his return to Ohio, he became one of the leading and influential men of the Church, at Kirtland, and according to revelation (Doc. & Cov., 90: 6), he was ordained and set apart as second counselor in the First Presidency by Joseph Smith, March 18, 1833. In a subsequent revelation he was called to preach the gospel. He labored as a member of a committee to arrange the interior of the Kirtland Temple, and also took a leading part in establishing a printing office at Kirtland, after the destruction of the press in Jackson county, Mo. In 1834 he went to Missouri as a member of Zion's camp, acting as paymaster in that organization. After his return to Ohio, he accompanied the Prophet Joseph on a short mission to Michigan. As a counselor in the First Presidency he took all active part in everything pertaining to the building up of Kirtland as a Stake of Zion, and especially in the erection of the House of the Lord at that place, for which purpose he contributed liberally of his time and means. When the sacred edifice was dedicated in March, 1836, he enjoyed the glorious privilege of seeing an angel. Soon afterwards he yielded to improper influences, and became recreant to the duties pertaining to his high and holy calling, in consequence of which he was rejected as a counselor in the First presidency at an important conference held at Far West, Mo., Nov. 7, 1837. He was finally ex-communicated from the Church at a conference held at Quincy, Ill., March 17, 1839. At a general conference, held at Nauvoo, Ill., in April, 1840, he presented himself on the stand and humbly asked forgiveness for his past conduct and expressed his determination to do the will of God in the future. His case was presented to the conference by Hyrum Smith, and he was freely forgiven. Soon afterwards he was received into the fellowship of the Church by baptism. He died as a faithful member of the Church Oct. 10, 1842, at Quincy, Illinois. His only living son, Ezra Granger Williams, resides at Ogden, Utah.
