Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Parkinson, William Chandler

Parkinson, William Chandler, president of the Hyrum Stake of Zion, is the son of Samuel R. Parkinson and Arabella Ann Chandler, and was born Aug. 2, 1855, at Kaysville, Davis county, Utah. In the spring of 1860 he removed with his parents to Franklin, Oneida county, Idaho, where he was baptized by Elder William Woodward, Nov. 24, 1867, and confirmed the same day by John Thompson. He was ordained an Elder by his father May 26, 1868. Up to this time he had worked on a farm and in the canyon during the summer months and attended the district school during the winter months. In the fall and winter of 1871-72 he was freighting from Corinne, Utah, to Dear Lodge, Montana, with horse and mule teams. In the winter of 1872-73 he attended the B. Y. College in Logan one term (Chas. Davis, teacher), and again in the winter of 1873-74 (Jas. Z. Stewart, teacher); in 1874-75 he attended the High School at Ogden (L. F. Monch, teacher). In the spring of 1875 he had his first experience in merchandising, working in Wallace Foulger's store at Ogden. In the fall of 1875 he was engaged to manage the co-operative store at Franklin, which position he held until January, 1877. In the spring of 1878 he worked on the Logan Temple and also hauled material from the canyon and fenced one hundred and sixty acres of land, situated about three miles north of Franklin. This land he had previously entered under the pre-emption law. During the following winter he built a two-roomed log house for himself, and on Dec. 12, 1878, he married Miss Ellen Elvira Nash. The marriage ceremony was performed in the Endowment House, Salt Lake City, by Daniel H. Wells. In August, 1879, his father having contracted to furnish lumber for the Z. C. M. I. and the Assembly Hall, Salt Lake City, Wm. C. was given charge of hauling the lumber from the mill in Maple creek canyon to the Franklin depot. This work he conducted very successfully. During 1879 he labored as a home missionary in the Cache Stake. He was also made a counselor in the first Y. M. M. I. A. organized in Franklin, Idaho. March 10, 1880, he was called on a mission to Europe, being the first missionary ever called, in the regular way, from Franklin. He left his home April 4th (less than a month from the time he received his call) and went to Salt Lake City, where he, after attending the general conference of the Church, was set apart for his mission. On his arrival at Ogden he became seriously ill, and was taken to the home of Andrew Kershaw, where he was kindly treated and finally taken from his bed to the train to start for Europe in company with thirty-seven other Elders. They arrived in Liverpool April 29th. Wm. C. was appointed to labor in the Newcastle conference, where he spent about seventeen months. He then labored in the Liverpool conference till April 13, 1882, when he was honorably released to return home. During his sojourn in Great Britain he visited his mother's birth place, Cheltenham, also his father-in-law's people in Wales. In both these places he met many relatives and also gathered much important family genealogy. In returning home he stopped at St. Louis, Mo., where he found his aunt, who came to Utah with him and was there baptized. He also found many other relatives in that city. After returning home, May 12, 1882, he assisted his mother in building a home, and also did some contract work for the Cub River Middle Ditch Co. In the fall he was engaged to work for the Franklin Co-op store. Later he was elected justice of the peace and served in that capacity two years. He served as a home missionary in Cache Stake for about three years. Feb. 24, 1884, he was ordained a High Priest by Bishop Nahum Porter, and on June 2, 1884, ordained a Bishop and set apart to preside over the Preston Ward by Moses Thatcher; John Larson and Geo. T. Benson were chosen as his counselors. Years later, Moses Thatcher remarked that Bishop Parkinson and his counselors were the most united Bishopric in the Church. In the spring of 1884, Elder Parkinson bought a small mercantile business which has since grown into the large general merchandise establishment now known as W. C. Parkinson & Co. After being called to the Bishopric he immediately took up the labors of that calling. He also worked on the Preston & Cub River canal and assisting to develop the resources of the Ward. He moved to Preston Oct. 16. 1884, and presided there as Bishop about fourteen years, during which time a townsite was located and surveyed, and the present meeting house built. The following named public grounds were also purchased: A ten-acre public square, a tithing lot, a meeting house lot, a burial ground and a 40-acre missionary farm. Three district school houses, and the Oneida Stake Academy were erected and the Mink Creek canal was located, surveyed and partly constructed. The Ward grew from about thirty families until three other wards were organized out of it, and there still remains about two hundred and fifty families in Preston Ward proper. Bishop Parkinson also built himself a comfortable home, costing about $4,000, and in 1887 he yielded obedience to the higher law of marriage by taking to wife Miss Louisa Benson, daughter of Geo. T. Benson. Up to the present time he is the father of fifteen children. In the fall of 1884 he was nominated for assessor and collector of Oneida county, but was fraudulently defeated by the anti-Mormon party. He served as a member of the Board of Education in the Oneida Stake upwards of ten years, during which time he was chairman of the executive committee, treasurer and assistant secretary. In the spring of 1896 he accompanied his brother Frank-who was called on a mission to California-on a trip to Portland, Seattle, Victoria, San Francisco, Los Angeles and San Bernardino. Having been set apart as a missionary, prior to starting on this trip, he enjoyed himself very much in the society of the Elders whom he met and in doing some missionary labors. In February, 1898, together with his brother Samuel, he was called on a short mission to the Northwestern States. They labored very successfully and with great pleasure, opening up that mission in Baker City, Walla-Walla, Pendleton, Vianto, Portland, Oregon City, Salem, Vancouver, Astoria and other places. After being absent about two months they were released and returned home by way of California in April, 1898. Aug. 8, 1898, Bishop Wm. C. Parkinson was called and set apart to preside over the Pocatello Stake of Zion, by Apostle Heber J. Grant. Subsequently Wm. A. Hyde, of Downey, and Noah S. Pond were chosen as his counselors. Before taking his departure from Preston, the good people of that Ward arranged a grand farewell festival in his honor, and as a token of their love and good will towards him, they presented him with a costly gold watch. In 1899 he worked for the Studebaker Bros. Mfg. Co., and traveled during the year in nearly all the counties of southeastern Idaho. In that year also he sold his home and land in Preston, and as he was not yet ready to move to Pocatello, he rented a small house until he could dispose of his business. When it was decided by the Church authorities to divide Cache Stake, President Parkinson was recalled from Idaho and appointed to preside over the Hyrum Stake, which embraces the settlements situated in the south end of Cache valley. He was accepted and sustained in this position by the people at a conference held at Hyrum April 30, 1901. Elder Parkinson is a humble and unassuming man and ranks high among his brethren for his integrity and faithfulness to the cause of truth. His great reverence for God and the authorities of the Church, his obedience to parents and respect for old age, and his considerate treatment of all his associates, has made him popular and beloved by all who know him.
