Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Lind, Niels

Lind, Niels, clerk and historian of the Jordan Stake of Zion, is the son of Johannes Lind and Anna Pehrson, and was born Sept. 25, 1862, in Swedala, Malmohus lan, Sweden. He writes: "My mother died when I was but three years of age, and my early childhood was spent to a great extent with my grandmother, who was a devout religious Worshipper in the Lutheran church, which is the dominant or state church of my native land. From my grandmother I therefor received my early religious training, and although I was not religiously inclined, her instructions had a great effect upon my young mind. When I was twelve years of age my father moved to the city of Malmo, and while in that place, having received a good common school education, I had some very tempting offers of good positions, and many opportunities for a successful future presented themselves; yet I became an apprentice to the shoemaker trade, which I heartily despised; but, as I look upon it now, that was my opportunity of hearing the gospel, I was baptized April 23, 1880, by Elder Nils B. Edler, and confirmed the same day by Elder John A. Halvorsen; ordained a teacher by Elder N. T. Vigren, Sept. 1, 1880; ordained a Priest June 6, 1881, by Elder Nils B. Edler, and ordained an Elder by Nils B. Edler Aug. 29, 1881, and appointed to labor as a local traveling Elder in the Scone conference. During the following two years I traveled constantly without purse and scrip, preaching the gospel, of which I was and am now the only representative of my family. My experience in so doing did not differ materially from that of my brethren who have labored in the ministry, and though from a business point of view my best years were spent in the ministry. I have never had occasion to regret it. On the contrary, those were times of happiness and pleasure always to he remembered. In 1883, I emigrated to Utah, arriving in Salt Lake City July 8th. I took up my abode in East Mill Creek and later removed to West Jordan. I have pursued various avocations in Utah, but have not been very successful in accumulating this world's goods. October 17, 1888, I married Sarah A. Nelson in the Logan Temple. Our union thus far has been blessed with six children, five of whom are now living. I was ordained a Seventy Dec. 22, 1889, by Enoch B. Tripp, and set apart as a president in the 33rd quorum of Seventy in August, 1892, by Elder Brigham H. Roberts. Dec. 15, 1895, when the East Jordan Ward was organized, I was selected to act as Ward clerk. The labors of clerk and historian are especially pleasing to me. Upon the organization of the Jordan Stake of Zion, Jan. 21, 1900, I was set apart as clerk of the Stake by Apostle Anthon H. Lund; and thus I am privileged to labor in my favorite calling. During my residence in West and East Jordan Wards I have labored as a Ward Teacher and in the Sunday School and Y. M. M. I. A. and in various other capacities, under the direction of my Bishops. I love to be associated with the work of God, which I know to be true."
