Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Ivins, Anthony Woodward

Ivins, Anthony woodward, president of the Juarez Stake of Zion, is the son of Israel Ivins and Anna Lowrie, and was born Sept. 16, 1852, at Toms River, Ocean county, New Jersey. He came to Utah with his parents in 1853, and removed with them to southern Utah in 1861; thus he became one of the first settlers of St. George. In 1878, he married Elizabeth Ashby Snow, daughter of Apostle Erastus and Elizabeth R. Snow. In 1875, he performed a mission to Mexico, in company with Dan. W. Jones, Heleman Pratt, James Z. Stewart, R. H. Smith, Ammon M. Tenny and Wiley C. Jones. They went as far south as the city of Chihuahua, west to the Sierra Madre mountains, and thence went north through the section of country where the colonies of the Saints are now established. Having explored the Salt river valley, the Little Colorado river country and northern Chihuahua, they returned home. In 1878, in company with Erastus B. Snow, Elder Ivins went on a mission to the Navajo and Pueblo Indians, in Arizona and New Mexico. In 1879, he was chosen president of the Y. M. M. I. A. of the 4th Ward in St. George, and at a later date, when the four associations in that town were consolidated, he was chosen to preside over the association thus formed. In 1881, he was chosen as a member of the High Council in St. George Stake, and later (1888) he was called and set apart to act as first counselor to Daniel D. McArthur, of that Stake. He occupied that position until 1895, when he was chosen president of the Juarez Stake, in Mexico, which was organized Dec. 9, 1895. In consequence of this call, he removed with his family to Mexico. Besides the many ecclesiastical positions which he has filled, he has held many political and civil offices in the communities where he has resided. Thus he served as constable of St. George precinct, city councilor, city attorney and mayor, deputy sheriff of Washington county, county prosecuting attorney, and for six years assessor and collector of said county. He was also a representative to the legislature in 1894, and a member of the State Constitutional convention in 1895. He secured the first appropriation for the benefit of the Shebit Indians, and was appointed government Indian agent for these Indians, under which appointment he acted two years, when he resigned to accept nomination for representative to the legislature. Pres. Ivins now resides at Colonia Juarez, Chihuahua, Mexico, occupied with the duties pertaining to his high and responsible position as president of the Stake and vice president and general manager of the Mexican Colonization and Agricultural company. Before going to Mexico he engaged successfully in the cattle business, both privately and as manager of the Mojave Land and Cattle company and the Kiabah Cattle company, both of which were incorporated companies with ranches in the northern part of Arizona. Pres. Ivins ranks high among his brethren as a public speaker, and is considered in many respects, one of the ablest and most influential men in the Church.
