Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Smith, Hyrum

Smith, Hyrum, second counselor to president Joseph Smith, from 1837 to 1841, was the second son of Joseph Smith and Lucy Mack, and was born Feb. 9, 1800, at Tunbridge, Vermont, and removed with his father's family to western New York when about nineteen years old. He married Jerusha Barden, at Manchester, N.Y., Nov. 2, 1826, by whom he had six children, Lovina, Mary, John, Hyrum, Jerusha and Sarah. He became a widower Oct. 13, 1837, while absent at Far West, Mo., and married Mary Fielding the same year, by whom he had two children, Joseph F. and Martha. Like his brother Joseph, Hyrum spent his early years in agricultural labors, and nothing of particular note characterized that period of his life. He speedily became a believer in Joseph's mission, and by him was baptized in Seneca lake, in June, 1829. He was one of the eight persons permitted to view the plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated, and his name is prefixed to it as a witness. Nov. 7, 1837, at a conference assembled in Far West, Mo., he was appointed second counselor to Pres. Joseph Smith, instead of Frederick G Williams, who was rejected. Jan. 19, 1841, he was called by revelation to take the office of Patriarch to the whole Church, to which he had been appointed by his deceased father, by blessing and also by birthright, and was likewise appointed a Prophet, Seer and Revelator. He was personally connected with many of the principal events of the Church, up to the time of his death, and in the various offices he filled won the love and esteem of all persons. In the revelation calling him to be the chief Patriarch, the Lord thus spoke of him: "Blessed is my servant Hyrum Smith, for I the Lord love him, because of the integrity of his heart, and because he loveth that which is right before me, saith the Lord." (Doc. & Cov., 124: 15.) He was tenderly attached to his brother Joseph, whom he never left more than six months at one time, during their lifetime. He was arrested with him at Far West, Mo., and imprisoned with him at Liberty, and finally spill his blood with him at Carthage, Ill., June 27, 1844. In this catastrophe he fell first, exclaiming, "I am a dead man," and Joseph responding, "0 dear Brother Hyrum!" In the "Times and Seasons" we find the following beautiful eulogy: "He lived so far beyond the ordinary walk of man, that even the tongue of the vilest slanderer could not touch his reputation. He lived godly, and he died godly, and his murderers will yet have to confess, that it would have been better for them to have had a millstone tied to them, and have been cast into the depths of the sea, and remain there while eternity goes and eternity comes, than to have robbed that noble man of heaven of his life." At his death he held various military and civil offices in the Nauvoo Legion and in the municipality. (For further particulars see sketch of Joseph Smith jun. and early Church publications generally.)
