Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Pond, Lysander Christensen

Pond, Lysander Christensen, clerk and historian of the Pocatello Stake of Zion, is the son of Stilman Pond and Anna Regina Swenson, and was born Dec. 31st, 1870, in Richmond, Cache county, Utah. While in his eighth year, his father died. He received his early education in the schools of that place until eleven years of age, when he moved with his mother and brothers to Preston, Idaho, where they resided for two years. Then the family moved to Eagle Rock (now Idaho Falls). Idaho, and soon afterwards Lysander became employed in the railroad shops as an apprentice in the boiler-maker's department. At the instance of the shops being moved to Pocatello, Idaho in 1887, the family soon followed, and he was again engaged, this time going into the blacksmith shop, and there served full time as an apprentice to the trade. The school year of 1887-88 he attended the Brigham Young College at Logan, Utah, and also from 1891-93 with his brother Noah; completed the normal course and graduated May 26, 1893. He married Miss Louie Prescindia Kimball, daughter of Joseph and Lathilla Pratt-Kimball, in the Logan Temple, June 28, 1893. Shortly afterwards he was called on a mission to the Island of Tasmania in the South Seas. His wife was also called to accompany him; and there, in conjunction with Elder Fred W. Ellis of North Ogden, Utah, they opened up the Tasmania mission, now a part of the Australian mission. Through their earnest, assiduous labors, and those who have followed after, a fruitful field has been developed. Two little daughters were born to Elder Pond and wife during their sojourn in Tasmania. They were absent nearly three years. Since their return Elder Pond has been engaged with some of the business houses of Pocatello as bookkeeper and clerk. He has held various positions in the auxiliary organizations of the Church from his early boyhood. When the Pocatello Stake was organized, Aug. 7, 1898, he was selected a member of the High Council and superintendent of Sunday schools, and on Sept. 3, 1900, was appointed Stake Tithing clerk. The date of his baptism and ordination to various grades of the Priesthood are as follows: Baptized, Feb. 16, 1879, in Richmond, Utah, by Elder N. Robt. Lewis, and confirmed the same day a member of the Church by Thomas Moore; ordained an Elder Sept. 3, 1887, by Wm. Thomas, of Idaho Falls, Idaho; ordained a Seventy Oct. 22, 1893, by Apostle Francis M. Lyman, and ordained a High Priest Aug. 7, 1898, by Pres. Geo. C. Parkinson.
