Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Smith, Jesse Nathaniel

Smith, Jesse Nathaniel, president of the Snowflake Stake of Zion, was born Dec. 2, 1834, in Stockholm, St. Lawrence county, New York. The following is a brief autobiography of his life: "I was the youngest child of a second marriage. My ancestors were, on the father's side, Silos Smith and Mary Aikens; Asahel Smith and Mary Duty. Samuel Smith and Priscilla Gould; Samuel Smith and Rebecca Curtis; Robert Smith and Mary his wife, who came from England in 1666, and settled at Topsfield, Mass. On the mother's side, my grandparents were Nathaniel Aikens and Mary Tupper, whose parents were Solomon Aikens and Dorcas Whitcomb, whose parents came from England. Both my grandfathers were engaged in the Revolutionary war, Nathaniel Aikens serving under the immediate command of Gen. Washington. Asahel Smith was a somewhat visionary man; he predicted that something would come forth in his family that would transmit his name with honor to posterity. When near his death in 1830, his son Joseph, father of the Prophet, and grandson Don Carlos, visited him at my father's house, having with them the Book of Mormon, and the tidings of the gospel. He received with gladness the testimony of his son, and remarked that he had always been expecting the coming forth of the true gospel. At this Jesse Smith, his oldest son, who lived in the neighborhood, became greatly enraged, and conducted himself like a madman. Grandfather died a few days after, over eighty-six years of age. His wife moved to Kirtland with my father in 1836, but died soon after arriving, being ninety-three years old. Father was baptized by Hyrum Smith in the summer of 1835; he had been convinced for nearly five years, but owing to the opposition of my mother, his oldest children and other relatives, he refrained from taking the decisive step. My mother had not joined the Church when the family moved to Kirtland, but took with her a certificate of membership in the Presbyterian church; she was baptized by Hyrum Smith, July 18, 1837. On the 13th of April following, my father with his family left Kirtland for Far West, Missouri, but losing a horse stopped near Mount Vernon, Knox county, Ohio. Here also father became acquainted with a family named Jackson, and prophesied that they all would join the Church, which proved true, though some of them afterwards apostatized. In the fall we again proceeded on our journey. When near Huntsville, Missouri, we were met by a man living in the State, who had a copy of the exterminating order of Governor Boggs, as it was called, which he read. It was to the effect that all the "Mormons" at Far West should leave the State forthwith, and all that were on the road should turn back on pain of death. Some who, despite the order, persisted in going forward, were deprived of their teams and whipped with hickory withes. Halting for the night we remained in camp the following day, but understanding that a mob was preparing to attack us, we turned back early the next day, and were soon overtaken by a number of others who, like ourselves, were fleeing before the exterminating order. One Isaac Russell, claiming to have authority from the authorities of the Church at Far West, gathered together quite a number of these fugitives, and located them on the western bank of the Mississippi river, in the State of Missouri, where they built log cabins and prepared to pass the winter. Not being able to get grinding done, we lived principally on boiled corn for some weeks. My brother, John Aikens Smith, died, over six years old, from exposure to wet and cold. Finding that Russell was acting without authority, the camp broke up in February, 1838, and crossed the river, halting at Pittsfield, Ills. Here one Thomas Edwards made offers of land on favorable terms, and the brethren concluded to settle; being joined by others, a branch of the Church was organized. Father attended a conference of the Church at Commerce, afterwards called Nauvoo, Hancock county, Ills., where he met the Prophet Joseph and many others of our faith; he returned with the intention of moving there, but was taken sick and died Sept. 13, 1839, nearly sixty years of age. He was ordained an Elder and afterwards a High Priest. He was in the war of 1812, as captain of militia. My mother moved to Nauvoo where we were kindly received by our relatives. Being a school teacher, she took a school, by which means I received some schooling; she also taught me the principles of the gospel, to exercise faith in God and pray to Him. Aug. 13, 1843, I was baptized by John Smith, who also confirmed me. I was in Nauvoo when Joseph and Hyrum Smith went to Carthage, and I heard the speech of Governor Ford to the people of Nauvoo on the day of the martyrdom. I saw the bodies of the martyrs after they were prepared for burial. In the summer of 1845 the mob spirit again broke out in Hancock and adjoining counties. In February, 1846, the great exodus commenced: the leaders of the Church departed for the west, accompanied by such of the Saints as were able to fit themselves out for the journey. My mother passed the summer about six miles west of Nauvoo, in Lee county, Iowa. While we were there the mob forces of the State of Illinois attacked the remnant of the Saints in Nauvoo and drove them across the river. The Church teams that came down from Council Bluffs for the outcasts of Nauvoo, also picked up my mother. We reached Winter Quarters, afterwards Florence, Nebraska, Nov. 30, 1846. I made a trip to Missouri for grain during the winter. Before the grass grew in the spring, I was engaged for several weeks, felling elm trees for the cattle to browse upon the swelling buds. The Pioneers set out in April, 1847. On the 9th of June the later companies were organized near the Elk Horn river, where Jacob Wetherby was killed by Indians. We traveled with a company if fifty wagons; Perregrine Sessions was our captain. I drove Uncle John Smith's ox team. We followed the track of the Pioneers up the north side of the Platte river. In the Black Hills we met some men who had been in the Mormon Battalion, on their return to their families. We crossed the South Pass of the Rocky mountains and met the Pioneers on the Little Sandy. A meeting was called and glowing descriptions given of the Valley and surrounding country. The Pioneers tarried with us one day. We reached the Valley Sept. 25, 1847. Here we found a detachment of the Mormon Battalion who came from Santa Fe by way of Pueblo, where they wintered; also a few Saints from the State of Mississippi, who joined the above named detachment on the Arkansas river. The settlement consisted of an adobe fort enclosing ten acres, only partly built. There were gates in the center of each of the four sides, with no other opening except port holes for rifles. The fort was afterwards enlarged by adding ten acres on the south and ten more on the north of the first enclosure, the houses facing each of the three squares thus formed. It soon became evident that there would be great scarcity of provisions before a harvest could be produced. There were not many cows and the most of them had worked in the yoke while crossing the plains, so they gave but little milk. Fortunately the winter of 1847-8 was very mild and the worn out cattle found abundant grass on the ranges. Nearly everybody went on short rations of food, as was strictly true with our little family, not receiving more than half as much nourishment as was required. Our houses were mostly log cabins without floors, the roofs being fiat and made of poles and earth. A big field was fenced and a crop planted. The first attempts to irrigate the soil were unsuccessful, but with practice the difficulties were measurably overcome. Then came the crickets to destroy the crops, and no doubt would have succeeded but for the swarms of beautiful gulls from beyond the lake. These appeared to be organized in armies and to move against the enemy under strict discipline, their movements being regulated with much precision. The first mills for grinding grain were of the primitive construction, and without bolting apparatus; the flour was wretched in the extreme. Much of the corn was frost-bitten and the meal correspondingly poor. Very few vegetables could be obtained; potatoes were out of the question owing to the difficulty in procuring seed. Fruit was not to be thought of, excepting service berries, which were sometimes bought of the Indians. The people were entirely without swine's flesh in any form, and beef and game were quite scarce. Some fish were caught in the Utah lake, but the supply was not equal to the demand. So great was the scarcity of timber that no one was permitted to cut any green tree except there was some pressing necessity therefor. With the arrival of Pres. Brigham Young, in the fall of 1848, a change came over the spirits of the people. He lifted the embargo that rested on the cutting of green timber, proclaiming that there would be enough for all, and more, a thing which then seemed very unlikely, and he also put forth what seemed to me a very hazardous prediction, that was, that in a few years the crickets would entirely disappear, so that there would hardly be a specimen left. I have seen these predictions fulfilled, though at the time they were made, they were opposed to all human probability. The Church was more fully organized, the presiding quorums being filled. The outlook generally was more encouraging. Permission was given to leave the fort, and parties began to build on their city lots. Brownsville, afterwards Ogden, and Provo were settled, and farmers began to scatter out. My brother and I tried our fortunes in what afterwards became Davis county. July 6, 1851, I was ordained an Elder by Patriarch John Smith, and in the fall of the same year, with my brother, was called, by Pres. Young, to go to Parowan to help strengthen the settlement, and develop the country. In May following I married Emma S. West. In 1853 the Utah Indian war broke out. Our settlement was under martial law for several months. I bore a part of the hardships of the war, in common with other citizens. I received my endowments in Salt Lake City early in March, 1854, and on the 12th of the same month was ordained a Seventy by Pres. Joseph Young and was placed in the 9th quorum; was elected district attorney by the legislature of Utah, officiated as county clerk of Iron county, and during the winter of 1854-5 taught school. In the spring Pres. Young organized a Stake at Parowan, with John C. L. Smith as president, and James H. Martineeau and myself counselors, I having been ordained a High Priest. At the August election I was elected a representative to the legislature from Iron county. This year my crops were entirely destroyed by grasshoppers. The legislature convened at Fillmore; of the important acts passed, was one providing for a convention to form a State government. Pres. John C. L. Smith having died, the Stake was reorganized by Apostle Geo. A. Smith, with William H. Dame president, and Calvin C. Pendleton and myself counselors. I was appointed to preside over the High Priests in Parowan. In the latter part of the winter of 1856, while I was in Great Salt Lake City, another war with the Utah Indians broke out. Governor Young gave orders to break up the smaller settlements of southern Utah, and consolidate them with the larger settlements. I was the bearer of his dispatches, and reached home after a very cold and dangerous journey, during which I was reported to have been killed by the Indians. I taught school the following winter and also performed missionary work among the settlements. I assisted to move the public machine-shop from Salt Lake City to Parowan. At the time of the move Pres. Young sent by me the first sorghum cane seed to be tried in the south. I was with the White mountain exploring party from May 21st until the party came in, and was at one time in great peril with Indians, fourteen of them having surrounded me and one companion, with a view to rob us; we, however, showed fight and thereby escaped. Being sent out for that purpose, with a small party, I explored the valleys on the head waters of the Sevier and Rio Virgen rivers, and made a report thereof to the Church Historian. Feb., 1859, I was elected mayor of Parowan City. The following spring I assisted in making a settlement at Minersville, Beaver county, Utah. Sept. 12, 1860, while harvesting at Minersville, I received a letter from Geo. A. Smith, informing me that I was called on a mission to Europe, and that the Elders would leave Salt Lake City the 25th inst. I arranged my business and left for Parowan the following morning. On the 17th, leaving my business in my brother's hands, I started on my mission; arriving in Salt Lake City I was informed that my mission was to Scandinavia. Receiving an Elder's certificate from the First Presidency, and a blessing at the hands of the Apostles, I crossed the plains with about fifty Elders on missions to various parts of the world. Among them were Orson Pratt, Erastus Snow and Geo. Q. Cannon. We reached Florence after a hard journey of forty days; sold our teams and took the last boat of the season going down the river, which was overcrowded with returning miners from Pike's Peak. At St. Joseph we took rail for New York; turned aside and visited relatives in the northern part of the State of New York; found most of them very bigoted; the spirit of intolerance seemed to inhere in the very soil. We joined the Elders in New York in time to take steerage passage with fourteen others, on the steamship "City of Baltimore," for Liverpool Dec. 1, 1860, where we arrived after a stormy passage of twelve days. We reported to Presidents Lyman and Rich. Not wishing to go on before the arrival of Pres. Cannon, who was daily expected. We took a tour into the country, where Joseph F. and Samuel H. B. Smith were laboring as missionaries. At London I obtained an American passport at the legation of the United States. I also received a letter of appointment from the presidency in Liverpool to labor in the Scandinavian mission, and sailed from London Jan. 1, 1861, in company with Wm. W. Cluff and J. P. R. Johnson for Rotterdam, that being the most northerly port on the continent free from ice, as was learned by telegraph. Detained by bad weather, we were four days getting across the channel and then our steamer grounded in the mouth of the Meuse. Having paid our way twenty miles further, we waited for high tide, but there being no prospect of the ship getting afloat soon, we left with the boat that went ashore for provisions. We entered Brielle in Belgium, from the country side, where they spoke French, and made ourselves understood with difficulty. The cold was intense. We crossed the mouth of the Rhine in an ice boat into Holland where Dutch was the prevailing language, and hired a carriage to Leyden. The road was very narrow, and lined on each side with trees and raised about ten feet above the surrounding surface. At Leyden we reached the railroad, The cold was so great that the trains were often behind times; there was a delay at all the junctions of the roads; at one time we waited eight hours in one place, not knowing when the train would move on. We suffered a great deal with the cold, and for want of proper nourishment, for we traveled third class, being short of money. We reached Copenhagen in the evening of Jan. 11, 1861, and reported ourselves to John Van Cott, president of the mission. I was sent out to travel for a short time with Ola N. Liljenquist, who was traveling Elder for the mission; after which I was assigned to C. A. Madsen's pastorate, comprising the conference of Aalborg and Vendsyssel. I was very kindly and considerately treated by all with whom I came in contact, especially by Elder Anthon H. Lund, who assisted me in my efforts to learn the Danish language. I remained here some three months and formed a pleasant acquaintance with many Saints; afterwards passed some time in Bro. Knud H. Brown's pastorate, comprising the Fredericia and Fyen conferences. Christmas times found me in the Aarhus conference, presided over by Peter C. Geertsen, when I was called to headquarters by the president of the mission. I enjoyed my labors among the people very much, and rejoiced to learn that my presence gave strength to the local Elders, and consolation to the Saints. It was seven months after leaving home before I received a letter from my family. They seemed to think I had gone so far away that it was of no use to write. I applied myself assiduously to the study of the language. I accompanied Pres. Van Cott upon his journey in the interests of the emigration; attended regularly our meetings in the city where often as many as 400 persons were present. On Sunday March 16, 1862, at a conference of nearly one thousand Saints, Pres. Van Cott announced that I had been appointed his successor by Pres. Young. This was sanctioned by the vote of the assembly. At this time there were in the mission 5,157 officers and members, including 9 Elders from Zion. All had emigrated who had the means to pay the expenses of the journey. W.W. Cluff and H. P. Lund were appointed traveling Elders for the mission. In the course of the summer we were visited by Pres. Geo. Q. Cannon and wife and Elders Joseph F. and Samuel H. B. Smith, and with them came Patriarch John Smith, a missionary from Zion. I traveled with them and held conferences in Aalborg, Aarhus and Copenhagen. I accompanied Pres. Cannon and his wife through Germany, Holland and Switzerland. In Holland we met Elder Paul A. Schettler and in Switzerland Elder John L. Smith. I returned to my field; found there had been some disturbances in the meetings of the Copenhagen branch, by mobs, during my absence. I occasionally crossed the Sound, and attended meetings in Malmo, Sweden; revised the Swedish hymn book, with the assistance of Elder Jonas Engberg, and published a new edition; I also revised the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, and issued a new edition. I was very successful in collecting legacies and other dues for parties in Utah from whom I had powers of attorney. In company with Elder Cluff I visited the Saints in Norway; they were under the immediate care of Elders Carl C. N. and John F. F. Dorius. I labored earnestly to induce the brethren in the ministry to abstain from using strong drink and tobacco, the latter especially being very common; negotiated with several companies about forwarding our emigrants as far as England, and secured better terms than were ever had before, and defended our cause in the daily press of the city from the scurrilous attacks by an anonymous correspondent. I was sometimes followed in the streets by gangs of boys, who hooted me, crying "Mormon Priest." During the year 1,177 Church members and officers emigrated, including eight Elders from the Valley, besides children under eight years of age. Our force had been strengthened by the arrival of four Elders from the Valley. The whole branch of Hamburg emigrated, being helped by the Church. I accompanied the emigrants as far as Liverpool; made a tour of the Isle of Man. A. W. Winberg was appointed traveling Elder for the mission. Elders Chauncey W. West and Brigham Young, jun., visited Copenhagen. Pres. Cannon visited Scandinavia, and I accompanied him to Sweden and Norway. On our return an Elders' conference was convened in Copenhagen. Peter O. Thomassen having emigrated, Carl Larsen assisted on "Skandinaviens Stjerne." By invitation I attended an Elders' conference at Birmingham, England, Dec. 31, where the blessings and power of God were plainly manifest. Four more young Elders from the Valley came some months before. Elder Mons Peterson came from Norway to work in the office. A war broke out between Prussia and Austria on one side, and Denmark on the other, over the Schlesvig-Holstein question, and many brethren, including some of the local ministry, were called into the army. I helped some of the brethren to emigrate who expected to be called into the military service. The war closed up the usual line of travel by way of Kiel and Hamburg, so a route was taken by way of Lubeck and Hamburg. I again contracted with Morris & Company to forward our emigrants. The city of Copenhagen, through its officers, extended to me the right to vote, which was unsolicited on my part. Pres. Cannon informed me that it was Pres. Young's wish that I should turn over the mission, when I went home, to Samuel L. Sprague, jun. I wrote to Elder Sprague accordingly. Pres. Cannon also sent Elder Thomas Taylor to help with the emigration. I received the accounts of the mission with a deficit of 874 Rigsdaler; through the profits of the publishing department I was enabled to pay this off and pass the accounts to my successor square. Six Elders returned home this year and 601 Church members, besides children, emigrated; the returns showed 5,454 members in the mission, so the increase almost kept pace with the emigration. I left Copenhagen with the last of the season's emigrants April 13, 1864, but receiving some letters while at Liverpool informing me of some transgression, Pres. Cannon sent me back to inform the brethren remaining of the matter, and to ascertain how far the evil had spread. Elder John W. Young accompanied me. Having performed the duty assigned me, I again left Copenhagen, May 24th. I was invited to join a party for a tour on the continent of Europe, went accordingly with Geo. Q. Cannon, John W. Young, Wm. W. Riter and John Sharp, jun. We traveled through Holland, Germany, Switzerland and France and took notes by the way. Returning to Liverpool I took passage for New York on board the steamship "Australasia." At Wyoming on the Missouri river, I assisted in fitting out the last trains of the season; crossed the plains in Joseph W. Young's company. The Indians were hostile, and we saw several places where they had lately made raids on trains and burned ranches. Reaching Salt Lake City I gave an account of my mission to the Saints in the Bowery. I reached home Oct. 22, 1864, and found my family in great poverty, everything that I possessed had barely sufficed for their support. I rented a farm and raised a good crop. Was chosen regimental adjutant for the Iron Military District, was also appointed county clerk. January, 1866, I was elected probate judge for Iron county. During the year a state of war again existed with the Utah Indians. The Sevier river country, including all above Gunnison, was organized into what was known as Piute Military district, of which I was elected colonel, and the duty of organizing the militia therein was assigned me. I made the organization in full and reported to military headquarters at Salt Lake City. During the year I was engaged on six military expeditions, for which I furnished my own horse, arms and outfit, and for which service I have never received any pay from any quarter. After assisting in establishing a co-operative store in Parowan, I left home on a second mission to Scandinavia in 1868. At Salt Lake City I was blest and set apart to preside in Scandinavia by the First Presidency, and left Salt Lake City in company with Elder Albert Carrington; traveled by stage as far as Laramie city, where we took railway for New York. Here we were joined by Elder George Teasdale and took passage for Liverpool on the steamship "City of Antwerp," arriving in due course after an extraordinary fine passage. I met Pres. Franklin D. Richards, Elders Carl Widerborg, late president of the Scandinavian mission, and others. In council on the subject of our emigration, I expressed the opinion that we ought not to forward any more emigrants by sailing ships, but send them altogether by steamships, thereby saving many lives that would otherwise be lost through being longer exposed, possibly to contagious diseases, sea sickness and other dangers on the sea. I went by way of London and took steamer to Hamburg; from thence by rail, steamer and again by rail to Copenhagen, arriving Sept. 19th. I was very kindly welcomed by Elder C. D. Fjeldsted, traveling Elder in the mission, and by other acquaintances and friends. I inaugurated a quarterly settlement with all book agents, with instructions to return all surplus books and pamphlets on hand at the end of each quarter. The emigrants sailed in good order, some Elders returning home, but there arrived more than enough to keep the number good. Elder Carl Larsen assisted with the emigration business. By means of powers of attorney I collected a number of small legacies for parties in Utah. Elder C. D. Fjeldsted took charge in Norway and Elder L. Larsen officiated as traveling Elder for the mission. Pres. Carrington and Elder Lewis W. Shurtliff visited Scandinavia and I accompanied them through the principal places in the mission. Bro. Wm. W. Cluff came to take charge of the mission. The reports showed that during the past two years we had emigrated nearly eleven hundred adults besides children, and the numbers in the mission still remained about the same as before. When I received the mission there was a deficit in the accounts of 1,343 Rigsdaler. This I paid up through the profits of the publishing department and passed over the accounts square to my successor. I started home with the emigrants and nine other returning Elders, July 15, 1870. Took passage from Liverpool to New York, on board the steamship "Minnesota," being president of the company of emigrants numbering nearly six hundred, and made a very successful journey both by sea and land. Just before reaching Salt Lake City we were met and welcomed by the First Presidency, the presiding Bishop and other prominent citizens. I gave an account of the mission in the old tabernacle, speaking both in English and Danish, and accompanied Pres. Young and party, by his invitation, on an exploring trip to the Pahreah. I next officiated as county clerk and justice of the peace; assisted in reorganizing the co-operative store at Parowan and organizing a co-operative stock raising company, for both of which I was secretary; made a journey of exploration with Apostle Erastus Snow and others through Arizona Territory. Being called to preside over the Eastern Arizona Stake, I moved a part of my family to Snowflake, Apache county where I obtained some land. Lorenzo H. Hatch and Oscar Mann were set apart as my counselors. I assisted in organizing the Wards of the Stake, returned to Utah and served a term in the legislature, where I took strong ground against appropriating Territorial funds to cover deficiency bills in the district courts under the Poland law. I was set apart to preside over the Eastern Arizona Stake by Apostle Erastus Snow. I sold out at Parowan and moved to Arizona. Upon arriving, I found such a scarcity of breadstuff that, with John W. Young and Ammon M. Tenney, I took a small contract of grading on the A. & P. railroad near the continental divide in New Mexico. I was appointed probate judge by the governor of the Territory, to fill an unexpired term. Gov. Fremont appointed me notary public. I was called by the First Presidency, with Erastus Snow, Brigham Young and John W. Young to work on the railroad, and at the same time preach the gospel among the railroad camps while the road was being built near our settlements. I engaged in this duty some months. I assisted to start a small grist mill on Silver creek in the Taylor Ward, also a co-operative herd in Snowflake; was called as a Lamanite or Indian missionary at the October conference, 1883. I assisted in organizing and incorporating the Arizona Co-operative Mercantile Institution, a successful and reliable firm at Holbrook, with branch house at Snowflake, Arizona; was among the first to be prosecuted under the Edmunds-Tucker law in the Territory. As there was no chance for protection under the law, I was appointed by the First Presidency of the Church one of a committee of five to select locations and purchase land for some settlements of the Saints in Mexico. The committee was composed of the following members: Moses Thatcher, Christopher Layton, Alexander F. McDonald, Lot Smith and myself. In the discharge of this duty I labored in Mexico nearly a year in the States of Sonora and Chihuahua. So strong was the opposition of the Church party to our gaining a foothold in that land, that we would have been expelled, had it not been for the protection extended by the president of the Republic, Porfirio Diaz. I returned to my duties in eastern Arizona, where I labored to incorporate our irrigation companies and build reservoirs to hold the flood waters against the dry part of the year. As much of the land we occupied was a portion of a grant made by the government to the Atlantic and Pacific R. R. Company, we were ordered by that company to vacate the land, or pay for it. As it would break up our settlements to vacate, I went east with Apostle Brigham Young to negotiate a purchase. In New York we bought of the Aztec Land and Cattle Company seven sections of land in the Snowflake and Taylor Wards at $4.50 per acre. I afterwards bought one section in the Woodruff Ward from the railroad authorities at Albuquerque, New Mexico, at $8 per acre. The Church authorities advanced the money, to be refunded by those occupying the land. Afterwards, when all had been collected that came readily, the remainder was appropriated to the settlements for assisting to build reservoirs and to help the Church schools. I assisted in organizing an incorporation called the Snowflake and Taylor Irrigation Company, and also the Woodruff Irrigation Company, and a similar company at St. Joseph. These companies greatly benefitted our irrigation interests. I also took a lively interest in building reservoirs to hold the surplus water until the time of the year when the water would be scarce. For several years the country suffered much from drouths, culminating with the close of the century. But the settlements just named got off fairly well owing to their reservoirs, and well organized irrigation organizations. I attended the 19th session of the Arizona legislature as a member of the House."
