Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Hatch, Lorenzo Hill

Hatch, Lorenzo Hill, first counselor to Jesse N. Smith, president of the Snowflake Stake of Zion, is the son of Hezekiah Hatch and Aldura Sumner, and was born Jan. 4, 1826, in the town of Lincoln, Addison county, Vermont. He was baptized by Elder Sisson A. Chase in February, 1840, being then fourteen years of age, and emigrated with his mother to Nauvoo, where he was ordained a Seventy April 14, 1844, by Joseph Young. The next day he started out on a mission in company with Thomas B. Fuller, and he was laboring in Vermont, his native State, when the news of the Prophet's assassination reached him. He returned to Nauvoo in 1845, and assisted his brother Jeremiah to build a house near that city, which they were forced to leave at the time of the exodus the following year. But Lorenzo, instead of grieving over going into the wilderness, rejoiced, as it had been prophesied over his head that he should go to the Rocky Mountains and there perform a great work. He married Hannah Fuller, Feb. 3, 1846, and soon after that left Nauvoo for the west, together with his father-in-law and family. They joined Geo. Miller's camp, and this being the advance company of the emigration from Nauvoo, Lorenzo became early accustomed to building bridges, making roads and doing other pioneer work which qualified him for the labor which he was destined to perform later in life. While journeying westward he made several trips into the State of Missouri to obtain provisions for the camp. Remaining with Miller's company, he wintered in the Ponca Indian country. He spent three years on the frontiers, part of the time on what was called Brigham's farm, ten miles above Winter Quarters, on the Missouri river, where about forty families of Saints had located for the purpose of raising crops. After harvest he went to Missouri, where he spent the winter of 1847-48, chopping wood and hauling logs. In order to obtain means to defray the expenses of going to the Valley, he, together with his brothers Jeremiah and Abram, established a wagonshop in St. Joseph. Mo., and after a successful year's business they purchased cattle and cows for the journey across the plains, and early in the spring of 1850, together with his brother Abram, Lorenzo left St. Joseph for the Valley. They became a part of a company consisting of fifty wagons, of which David Evans was appointed captain. The company entered Great Salt Lake valley by way of Parley's canyon Sept. 15, 1850. After spending the winter in Salt Lake City, Lorenzo located in Lehi, Utah county, in the spring of 1851, and thus became one of the first settlers of that prosperous commonwealth. Feb. 27, 1851, he married Sylvia S. Eastman, whose first-born is now the Bishop of Franklin, Idaho. His first wife had died while journeying in the wilderness. Together with his brother Abram and Nathan Packer he built a grist mill, at the mouth of American Fork canyon, which was the first grist mill in the north end of Utah county. The mill was completed in 1851; it was burned down in 1852, but the owners rebuilt it in 1852, agreeable to counsel from Pres. Willard Richards. Bro. Lorenzo was chosen as first counselor to Bishop David Evans, of Lehi, and was ordained a High Priest in May, 1855, and presided over the Ward while the Bishop was away on a mission. He also served as a member of the city council of Lehi, and in the Utah legislature (1855). In 1856 he was called on a mission to Europe. Together with about forty other Elders, including Apostle Orson Pratt, Geo. A. Smith, Ezra T. Benson and Erastus Snow, they left Salt Lake City April 23, 1856. On his arrival in England, Elder Hatch was made pastor of four conferences, namely Sheffield, Bradford, Lincolnshire and Hull. In February, 1858, when nearly all the Elders were called home from their foreign missions on account of the Utah war, Elder Hatch left England to return home. Together with six others he crossed the plains with a B. Y. X. company outfit, which was in charge of Elder Samuel W. Richards, and rejoined his family in Lehi in the fall of 1858. This was at the time of the move, and Elder Hatch reported his mission to Pres. Brigham Young and the Saints in Provo. After his return home, he was elected mayor of Lehi and served three terms in the Utah legislature. In 1860 he yielded obedience to the principle of plural marriage by taking to wife Alice Hanson, who has borne him eight children. In 1863 he was called to Franklin, Idaho, to preside as Bishop. He served in that capacity for thirteen years, or until 1876. Together with Bishop (now Apostle) Merrill he was sent to locate Weston and Oxford. In 1872 and 1873 he served as the first "Mormon" representative in the Idaho legislature; he was also elected a director in the Utah Northern railroad. While serving in the legislature he succeeded in getting several important bills through and obtained a city charter for Franklin. The people appreciating his efforts in their behalf elected him the first mayor of that municipality. June 27, 1873, he was ordained a Patriarch by Geo. A. Smith, since which he has given about two thousand patriarchal blessings. In 1875 he was sent on a mission to southern Utah, where he traveled as a home missionary in company with Patriarch John L. Smith. In June, 1875, he was called to visit the camps of the Saints in Arizona, and started for that Territory in company with Pres. Daniel H. Wells and others. In crossing the Colorado river he had a narrow escape from drowning. At Kanab, on his return from Lee's Ferry he was called on a mission to the Indians in Arizona and New Mexico; responding to which he returned to Arizona with part of his family, whom he left, at Obid, on the Little Colorado river, while he proceeded to the Indian villages. Being rejected by the Zunis, he located at the Mexican town San Lorenzo, where he and fellow missionaries baptized a number of Navajos. Subsequently he made a trip to Utah to bring out the remainder of his family. Having attended to ordinance work in the St. George Temple, he left that place early in 1878, and traveled by teams to the Little Colorado settlements, Arizona. On his arrival there he learned that he had been chosen a counselor to Pres. Lot Smith, in the presidency of the Little Colorado Stake. He located at what is now Woodruff, and with his family passed through untold hardships. In his missionary experience among the Navajos he witnessed many miraculous manifestations of the power of God. When the Eastern Arizona Stake of Zion was organized in 1879, Elder Hatch was chosen as first counselor to Pres. Jesse N. Smith; and when the Eastern Arizona Stake was divided in 1887, he was again chosen first counselor to Pres. Jesse N. Smith in the presidency of that Stake. This high and responsible position Elder Hatch has nobly filled; and he has been very energetic in discharging every duty entrusted to him. He has traveled extensively in different parts of Arizona and helped to found and organize settlements on both sides of the Mogollon mountains in that part of the country which is now included in the Snowflake. St. Johns and St. Joseph Stakes of Zion. He has also made several trips to Utah in the interest of the Saints in Arizona. Elder Hatch has from the beginning been one of the foremost factors among the Saints in Arizona, and in the histories of the Stakes of Zion in that land (which are now being written), Elder Hatch will receive the credit which his indefatigable labors merit.
