Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Freeman, Elijah Norman

Freeman, Elijah Norman, counselor to David K. Udall, president of the St. Johns Stake of Zion, is the son of Elijah Norman Freeman and Mary Bingham, and was born May 20, 1845, in La Harpe, Hancock county, Ill. His father enlisted in the Mormon Battalion and died on the march to California, in New Mexico. Elijah emigrated to Utah in Daniel Spencer's company and arrived on the site of Salt Lake City Sept. 19, 1847; he moved to Weber county in 1850 and lived a short time in what is now the north part of Ogden; later he resided at Bingham's Fort, north of Ogden. He was baptized when eight years old by his grandfather, Erastus Bingham. His mother having married Pres. Lorin Farr, be again became a resident of Ogden, and when about seventeen years old he was ordained a Seventy by Luman A. Shurtliff and became identified with the 60th quorum. When about twenty years old he was ordained a High Priest and set apart as a High Councilor in the Weber Stake of Zion. For a number of years he acted as a Ward Teacher in the Third Ward of Ogden; labored as a home missionary, presided over the Y. M. M. I. A. in Ogden 3rd Ward about three years, and was counselor in the presidency of the Weber Stake Y. M. M. I. A. for several years. March 11, 1872, he married Miss Anna M. Poulsen; she died Jan. 17, 1873, leaving a little baby girl. At the April conference, 1873, Elder Freeman was called on a mission to Great Britain; on his arrival in Liverpool he was appointed to preside over the Bristol conference, which at that time embraced a part of seven counties. After presiding in Bristol conference about a year, he was called by Pres. Joseph F. Smith to preside over the Sheffield conference. By invitation he visited the London, Birmingham, Manchester and Glasgow conferences; and also accompanied Pres. Joseph F. Smith and other brethren on a tour to continental Europe, in 1875, on which he attended several meetings in Denmark, Germany and Switzerland. He also visited his wife's relatives in Frederikshavn, Denmark, and spent a few days in Paris, France, on the return trip. Being honorably released from his missionary labors in Great Britain, he returned home with a company of Saints which sailed from Liverpool June 16, 1875, and arrived in Salt Lake City July 7, 1875. During the following winter Elder Freeman assisted Apostle Franklin D. Richards in Weber county with reformation work. April 24, 1876, he married Mary Ellen Farley, and in April, 1881, he was called to St. Johns, Arizona, where he arrived June 2nd following: a few months later (March 26, 1882) he was chosen second counselor to Bishop David K. Udall in the St. Johns Ward. He labored in that capacity until July 23, 1887, when the St. Johns Stake was organized, and he was chosen first counselor to Pres. David K. Udall. This high and responsible position he still holds.
