Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Lesueur, John Taylor

Lesueur, John Taylor, second counselor in the presidency of the St. Johns Stake of Zion since 1900, was born on the little isle of Jersey, off the French coast, Dec. 4, 1852. His parents, John Lesueur and Caroline Le Gresley, who had embraced the gospel a short time prior to his birth, emigrated to Zion in 1855, settling in Bountiful, Davis county, Utah, where his father died in 1863. The widowed mother with her children soon afterwards removed to Bear Lake valley, Idaho, where Elder Lesueur grew up to manhood and was married to Geneva Casto Oct. 17, 1875. His natural instincts and inclinations were in the direction of financial pursuits; and his employment, while a young man, in a store for a few years, served to increase his desire to become a business man. With his young wife he removed to Arizona, locating in St. Johns in the spring of 1880, where they have since resided and now have an interesting family of seven sons and two daughters. Their second son, Frank, a very intelligent and faithful young man, was killed in March, 1900. by outlaws, while serving his country with a sheriff's posse. Since locating in St. Johns, Elder Lesueur has been engaged in business pursuits, having taken an active interest in various enterprises, particularly the mercantile and sheep business, in all of which he has been remarkably successful. He has taken an active part in the management of the St. Johns Co-operative Mercantile and Manufacturing Institution, either as superintendent or president since 1885, assisting materially in making that institution one of the most solid business house in Arizona. In political affairs he has served as county treasurer, probate judge and member of the legislature, having been elected by the Democratic party. He also served under an appointment of Gov. Hughes as Territorial Prison Commissioner for two years. Upon the organization of the St. Johns Stake, Elder Lesueur was sustained as a member of the High Council (having been set apart to that calling and ordained a High Priest by Pres. Elijah N. Freeman July 23, 1887). He held his position as a High Councilor until Dec. 16, 1900, when he was called to be a counselor in the Stake presidency, being set apart by Pres. Joseph F. Smith.
