Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Law, William

Law, William, second counselor to president Joseph Smith, from 1841-44 was born Sept. 8, 1809. In the early days of the Church, when Elders John Taylor and Almon W. Babbitt labored in Canada as missionaries, William Law, who lived twenty-five miles from Toronto, became a convert to "Mormonism," and it is stated in the history of Joseph Smith that he arrived at Nauvoo, Ill., in the latter part of 1839, "with a company of Saints, traveling in seven wagons from Canada." He soon became a prominent man in Nauvoo, where he served as a member of the municipal council, a captain in the Nauvoo Legion, etc. He also kept a store, owned several mills and was considered wealthy. In the revelation given through Joseph the Prophet, at Nauvoo, Jan. 19, 1841, he was called to the office of second counselor to President Joseph Smith, succeeding Hyrum Smith, who was called to the position of presiding Patriarch. Soon afterwards he filled a short mission to the East, and was for a season considered a good and faithful man. He was among the chosen few who on May 26, 1843, received their endowments under the administration of Joseph the Prophet, and who were instructed in the Priesthood and on the new and everlasting covenant. Towards the close of 1843 he began to show symptoms of apostasy and associated himself with the enemies of Joseph and the Saints generally. This led to his excommunication from the Church April 18. 1844, in a council meeting held at Nauvoo and attended by the leading authorities of the Church. After this occurrence Wm. Law came out openly as an enemy and was one of the promoters and owners of the libel sheet called the "Nauvoo Expositor," published at Nauvoo. His name is classed in history with those of his brother Wilson Law, Robert D. Foster, Charles Foster, Francis M. Higbee, Chauncey L. Higbee, Joseph H. Jackson, Sylvester Emmons and others, who were the instigators and abettors of the murder of Joseph and Hyrum Smith. In 1887 he was interviewed by a newspaper reporter at Shullsburg, Lafayette county, Wisconsin, where he then resided with his son, Judge Thomas Law. On that occasion he still exhibited great animosity towards Joseph the Prophet and the "Mormon" people, and related some extraordinary stories concerning his experience with the Saints at Nauvoo. The interview is published in full as a part of an appendix to an anti-Mormon work, entitled "The Prophet of Palmyra," written by Thomas Griggs of Hamilton. Ill. Wm. Law died at Shullsburg, Wis., Jan. 19, 1892, in the 83rd year of his age.
