Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Kingston, Charles

Kingston, Charles, second counselor to John M. Baxter, president of the Woodruff Stake of Zion, is the son of Fredrick Kingston and Mary Ann Hunter, and was born Nov. 9, 1865, in Petersboro, Lincolnshire, England. In the fall of 1879 he emigrated to Utah as an unbeliever in the "Mormon" faith and settled in Morgan county, where his father resided, he having left the son with his mother in England over twenty-one years before. Charles had been reared to believe that the "Mormons" were a bad people, in consequence of which much prejudice existed in his mind. However, being of a studious nature, and finding nothing in his father's house but "Mormon" literature, he was obliged to read that in order to satisfy his craving for something to study. At the commencement of his investigation he had no idea whatever that he would find "Mormonism" true, but after several months of very careful study his prejudices gave way to belief in the gospel as taught by the Latter-day Saints. He then, for the first time, attended a meeting and listened to discourses delivered by Junius F. Wells and Apostle John Henry Smith. The sermon preached by this first Apostle he had ever seen made a deep impression on his mind, and although he was not yet a member of the Church, he commenced from that day to keep the Word of Wisdom (that being the subject spoken upon by Apostle Smith), and has ever since done so to the best of his ability. On his 23rd birthday, he was baptized and confirmed a member of the Church by Bishop Albert D. Dickson of Richville, Morgan county. Shortly afterwards, on retiring to his bed one night, and while pondering over the great blessing he had received, he seemed of a sudden to be carried away into a large and spacious building, the walls of which were built of massive masonry; and so dark was the surroundings that he tried in vain to grope his way out of what appeared a fearful darkness. In this dilemma he fell upon his knees and in mighty prayer implored God to deliver him; suddenly, as he prayed, a bright light appeared over his head, and he distinctly heard the air cut by what appeared the decent of seven heavenly beings, all dressed in flowing white raiment, reaching to their feet; these beings encircled him about and one had a two edged sword in his hand which he held point upward, with his arm bent at the elbow; neither spoke, but as he continued to pray, the vision closed and he found himself wide awake and wondering at what he had seen. Jan. 7, 1883, he was ordained an Elder under the hands of James H. Mason. May 17, 1883, he was married to Mary P. L. Tucker by Daniel H. Wells in the Endowment House. Ten children has been the issue of this union. He acted as a teacher in the South Morgan Ward for several months, and was also called to labor as Stake clerk, which position he filled for two years. He was ordained a Seventy under the hands of Seymour B. Young. Oct. 19, 1884, and in May, 1886, he was called to fill a mission to Great Britain. On his return he settled in Rock Springs, Wyoming, where he was chosen first counselor to Joseph Soulsby, of the Rock Springs branch. After two years' residence in Rock Springs, he settled in Star valley, and upon the organization of the Star Valley Stake, was ordained a High Priest by George Osmond and set apart as a member of the High Council, and was soon after chosen a member of the Stake Board of Education. In 1894, he was chosen to preside over the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association of the Stake, which position he held, together with his other callings, until he was honorably released, he having been appointed in June, 1897, by Pres. William McKinley to be Register of the U. S. Land Office at Evanston, Wyoming. The same year he was set apart by Pres. Lorenzo Snow, at Coalville, to a special mission, in which he was to travel and look up the scattered Saints located along the line of the Union Pacific railroad, in Wyoming, at such times and places as he should be able to visit. When the Woodruff Stake of Zion was organized, he was chosen second counselor to Pres. John M. Baxter, which position he now holds. In addition to his religious duties, Elder Kingston has been active in all temporal affairs pertaining to the welfare of the people among whom he has resided.
