Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

McArthur, Daniel Duncan

McArthur, Daniel Duncan, president of the St. George Stake of Zion from 1888 to 1901, is the son of Duncan McArthur and Susan McKeen, and was born April 8, 1820, at Holland, Erie county, New York, where his earliest years were spent. He writes: My parents joined the Church in the spring of 1833, and I, believing the doctrines taught, became a member by baptism in 1838, in Missouri. Early in the year 1836 my father and family moved to Kirtland, Ohio. In the fall of 1838 many of the Saints from Ohio journeyed to Far West, Caldwell county, in the so-called Kirtland Camp; we were members of that organization, and located in Adam-Ondi-Ahman, Daviess county. Under threat of extermination in ten days, we were forced to leave that place, after which we made our abode for three months at Far West. Thence, leaving Missouri, we went to Quincy, Ill., where we arrived in the spring of 1839. While my father was absent on a two years' mission, I, together with my younger brothers, took care of the large family. In 1841, I married Miss Cordelia Clark. From Quincy father's family moved to Nauvoo, while I remained in Quincy. Here my wife died. After the death of the Prophet Joseph Smith I went to Nauvoo, where I was ordained a Seventy in 1844. I married Miss Matilda C. Fuller, Dec. 14, 1845. Preparing to leave Nauvoo, I was engaged in wagon building and other occupations. My wife and I were endowed and sealed in the Nauvoo Temple, Feb. 1, 1846. In a day or two afterwards we crossed the Mississippi river on the ice and passed to the general camp ground of our people on Sugar creek. Thence, we traveled to Garden Grove. Here we built houses and fenced five hundred acres of land for the poor, who were unable to go further. Bridge building, road making, etc. were necessary occupations for us on our way to the Missouri river. In the spring of 1846 one of my brothers joined the Mormon Battalion. I remained with my father and family until 1848, when we crossed the plains, arriving in Salt Lake City in the fall of that year. I was called on a mission to Europe in 1852, and succeeded Andrew Ferguson in the presidency of the Dundee conference, in Scotland. Being released early in 1856, I was chosen second counselor to Elder James Ferguson, who presided over the Saints who crossed the Atlantic in the ship "Enoch Train." Reaching Iowa, a hand-cart company was given into my charge. By the blessings of God I landed safely in Salt Lake City, Oct. 2nd of said year, with all my passengers. Jan. 4, 1858, I was set apart as the senior president of the 57th quorum of Seventy. At the general conference held in October, 1861, I was called on a mission to settle in "Our Dixie." Thus I became one of the first settlers of St. George. In 1862, I was ordained a High Priest and called to act as first counselor to Bishop Robert Gardener. Nov. 15, 1862, I was ordained a Bishop by Apostle Orson Pratt and set apart to preside over the Third Ward, St. George. In 1863 I was appointed to take charge of a train of sixty wagons (ox teams) and teamsters and go to the Missouri river to bring in the poor. May 14, 1864, I was elected a member of the High Council of the St. George Stake of Zion. I served in that capacity until Sept. 15, 1869, when I was called to act as presiding Bishop in southern Utah. In 1866 I was called to make another trip to the Missouri river after the poor, But was released by Bishop Edward Hunter, in order that I might attend to other duties. In 1868 I was again called to go with teams to the frontiers and bring in the poor Saints. I performed this mission to the satisfaction of the First Presidency. June 4, 1877, I was called on another mission to Great Britain, and labored principally in the Manchester conference. Returning home, I acted as first counselor to Elder Henry W. Naisbitt in leading a company of Saints home to Zion. We arrived in Salt Lake Lake City Oct. 3, 1878. March 20, 1881, I was set apart as second counselor to Pres. John D. T. McAllister, president of the St. George Stake of Zion. Sept. 26, 1888. I was unanimously chosen by the Council of the Apostles to succeed Pres. McAllister in the presidency of the St. George Stake, and to that position I was set apart by Apostle John W. Taylor, Dec. 17, 1888. At various times I have been called to do military and police service-notably during the troublous times of Nauvoo-lawfully defending our liberties and homes against the base and cruel assaults of bigoted citizens, which were headed chiefly by persons who called themselves ministers of the gospel. In Utah, during the Walker, Ute and Navajo raids and wars, I took part, also in the so-called Buchanan war. I served for some time as major under Gen. Daniel H. Wells and was afterwards commissioned colonel of infantry by Governor Durkee. During the anti-polygamy raids I was hunted for six years. The officers succeeded in finding me in April, 1890, and in order to save my family from exposure, insult and insolence of court officials, I pleaded guilty to the charge of unlawful cohabitation, and was fined $321.00, which was promptly paid. Having almost totally lost my eyesight, I was honorably released from the presidency of the St. George Stake, June 14, 1901, and ordained a Patriarch in the Church. And now, in conclusion, I bear this my solemn testimony: God has in these last days spoken from the heavens and organized His Church through the instrumentality of the Prophet, Joseph Smith. He has also spoken through his (Joseph's) successors until the present time; and to God and the Lamb be all praise forever. Amen."
