Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Spencer, Orson

Spencer, Orson, president of the St. Louis Stake of Zion, was the son of Daniel and Chloe Spencer, and was born March 14, 1802, in the town of West Stockbridge, Berkshire county, Massachusetts. His parents belonged to that virtuous, industrious class of New Englanders of the Puritan stock, which has produced so many eminent men to figure on the stage of action in all the various departments of life. At the age of twelve years he was taken ill, and little or no hopes were entertained of saving his life for some two weeks. This sickness occasioned a fever sore in one of his legs, which was the cause of its imperfect development. In 1817 he entered the Academy at the town of Lenox, in his native county, where he received the highest honors of his class. Here, at a public examination, the high sheriff of the county, Henry C. Brown, noticed his unusual proficiency, and ascertaining that his father was in very moderate circumstances, voluntarily offered to loan the necessary means for his education, and wait until he could pay it after its completion. He entered Union College, at Schenectady, State of New York, in 1819, and graduated with great honor and credit to himself in 1824. In 1825, he obtained a situation as teacher in an academy, in the town of Washington, Wilkes county, State of Georgia. Here, in addition to the duties of his calling, he turned his attention to the study of law. About this time he had some singular manifestations on the subject of religion, and soon after, either at Washington, or on his return home in 1827, joined the Baptist Church. He now changed his mind with regard to a future profession, and left the study of the law for that of theology. He accordingly, the same year, entered the theological college at Hamilton, State of New York, where he graduated in 1829. After this he labored in the ministry about twelve years in his native county, and in Connecticut. He received the gospel in 1841, from his brother Daniel, who baptized him in the spring of that year. Soon after his baptism, he bid adieu to a numerous circle of acquaintances and friends, and cast his lot with the persecuted people of God at Nauvoo. Here he was soon called to act his part in those scenes of scathing trial and affliction which are recorded in the archives of eternity, with the blood of innocence as a testimony against this generation. He for some time ably filled the office of alderman in the city of Nauvoo, and when the Saints were driven from that beautiful monument of their peaceful industry and virtues, he, with his wife and little ones, shared their fate and participated in the sufferings of that memorable winter, in which the Saints were driven over the bleak prairies of Iowa, to find a home among prowling savages, who were less ferocious than the Christian mobs of Illinois. How many a pang of sorrow even at this late day throbs in the bosoms of the living, when vivid recollection calls up before the mind the husbands and fathers, the wives and children that were sacrificed in that memorable exodus, to appease the fury of blood-thirsty mobs. Mrs. Spencer, an accomplished and refined lady, sunk under the accumulated sufferings of the journey, and left Elder Spencer to pursue his way with a solitary heart and a family of six small children, all under thirteen years of age. In the midst of this trying scene, having been appointed on a mission to England, he left his children in the care of friends, and started on his journey to Europe, landing in Liverpool Jan. 23, 1847. He presided over the British mission, and ably edited the "Millennial Star," about two years. During his ministry there, he wrote the most of a series of letters to the Rev. Mr. Crewel, which were embodied and published as Spencer's Letters. He left Liverpool for the United States, in 1849, and gathered to Great Salt Lake valley the same year. When the University of Deseret was founded in 1850, he was appointed its chancellor, which position he occupied at the time of his death. He was a judicious, discriminating man, a wise counselor, and occupied an honorable position in the legislative council of Utah Territory on its first organization. In 1852 he was again appointed on a mission to Europe. In his travels he visited the kingdom of Prussia, with a view of introducing the gospel there, but was rejected and expelled from the kingdom. He returned again to Utah in 1853. In 1854 he was called upon to perform a mission to the United States. He spent most of his time in Cincinnati, until July, 1855, when he was requested by Pres. Erastus Snow to occupy the editorial chair of the "St. Louis Luminary." He arrived in St. Louis, Missouri, on the 7th of July. Here he remained but a short time, as he was called upon to go on a mission to the Cherokee Nation. He left St. Louis on the 21st of July for the camp of emigrating Saints near Atchison, where he remained until the last company of the outfitting Saints had started for Utah. On the 5th of August, accompanied by Elder James McGaw, he proceeded on his mission to the Cherokee Nation, where he remained until the 5th of September. Here he was attacked with chills and fever. His mission being accomplished, he immediately returned to St. Louis, arriving there Sept. 17th, sick, and in a debilitated condition. After an illness of forty days he died at St. Louis Oct. 15, 1855. At the time of his demise the following was published in the "Millennial Star:" "Orson Spencer's honesty of heart, sterling integrity, and determination of purpose were forcibly manifest in his embracing the truth for the love of it, forsaking an enviable position in society, and an extensive circle of influential acquaintances and friends, and cleaving to a persecuted and down-trodden people for the gospel's sake. These characteristics have marked his entire career in this Church. Always willing and ever ready, he never failed to be at the post of duty, and fulfil the requirements made on him. He bore trial and affliction with the most unflinching fortitude. Knowing that he was right, with him consequences were no consideration. He needs no praise, no eulogy, to embalm his name to preserve it from oblivion. It is written in the Lamb's Book of Life-indelibly inscribed in the hearts of his brethren, and his generations will become as innumerable as the stars of heaven, for the Lord will have them in remembrance before Him. The crowning act of his life was administering the gospel to one of the nations of Israel. He could not leave this stage of action without doing a deed that would witness that he loved these remnants of Jacob, and longed for their redemption. Death has sealed up his testimony to them and this generation. His body sleeps for a little season only, while his spirit labors with Joseph and Hyrum, Willard and others of the faithful who have gone before him to prepare a counterpart in the spirit world to the great work that is being done in this, that both may be blended in one in the day when all things are perfected." ("Millennial Star," Vol. 17, p. 762.)
