Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Cluff, William Wallace

Cluff, William Wallace, president of the Summit Stake of Zion from 1877 to 1901, is the fourth son of David Cluff and Betsey Hall, and was born March 8, 1832, in Willoughby, Lake county, Ohio. His father joined the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in 1833, and moved to Kirtland Ohio, in 1834, where he worked on the first Temple built by the Latter-day Saints. The family left Kirtland for Missouri in 1837, but were compelled to remain at Springfield, Ill., on account of sickness. In 1840, as soon as the Saints commenced to gather at Nauvoo, after the expulsion from Missouri, the family moved thither from Springfield, and here William's father worked on the Temple until it was finished. William was baptized in the Mississippi river by Elder Peter Shurtz in 1842. He well remembers the Prophet Joseph Smith and his brother Hyrum, the Patriarch. All the trying and exciting scenes attending their martyrdom, and the expulsion of the Saints from the beautiful Temple and city of Nauvoo, are still vivid in his mind; especially will he never forget the occasion when the lifeless bodies of the beloved Prophet and Patriarch were brought back from Carthage jail, where these great and good men had been murdered in cold blood. William's parents went with the main body of the Church when the Saints left Nauvoo for the wilderness, in the great "unknown West!" On their journey west the Cluff family halted temporarily at Mount Pisgah and at Council Bluffs, in Iowa, remaining two years at each place. In 1850 they crossed the Plains, arriving in Great Salt Lake valley in October; the family settled in Provo. William served as a cavalry-man in the Indian war (known as the Walker war) in 1853. In 1854, he was called on a four years' mission to the Sandwich Islands, where he passed through a varied experience, learning the language, manners of living etc. of that strange people. In 1860 he was called to take a mission to Scandinavia. After learning the Danish language, he spent over three years traveling through Denmark, Norway and Sweden under the presidency of Elder Jesse N. Smith. In October, 1863, he married Miss Ann Whipple who has borne him five sons and three daughters. In March, 1864, in company with Apostles Ezra T. Benson and Lorenzo Snow, and Elders Joseph F. Smith and Alma L. Smith, he was called to take a second mission to the Sandwich Islands. The object of this mission was to investigate certain charges preferred, by native Elders, against Walter M. Gibson. Elder Cluff was in the boat with Apostles Benson and Snow and Elder Alma L. Smith when it was capsized in a heavy surf, on attempting to land at Lahaina, on the island of Maui, March 31, 1864, when Apostle Snow, came so near losing his life, but was miraculously saved. In March, 1865, Elder Cluff was called by Pres. Brigham Young, to preside over the settlements, in Morgan, Summit and Wasatch counties, as presiding Bishop. He located with his family at Coalville, that town being centrally located in the district. In 1870-71 he filled a second mission to Scandinavia, and presided over the mission. Between 1865 and 1885 he was twice elected a delegate to Territorial constitutional conventions, and served six terms as a members of the Territorial legislature; the last term he was elected president of the council of that body. On the organization of the Summit Stake of Zion, July 9, 1877, he was called and set apart as its president-a position which he filled with honor and zeal for twenty-four years, or until 1901, when he was honorably released. In financial matters Pres. Cluff has been quite successful; he has served as president of the Coalville Co-operative Mercantile Institution for thirty-three years. In November, 1900, he left home, to accompany Pres. Geo. Q. Cannon on a special mission to the Sandwich Islands. The object of the visit was to participate in the semi-centennial jubilee which had been arranged in commemoration of the arrival in Honolulu of the first Latter-day Saint missionaries Dec. 12, 1850. After a most pleasant visit Presidents Cannon and Cluff returned to Utah early in 1901.
