Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Eldredge, Alma

Eldredge, Alma, counselor to Wm. W. Cluff (president of the Summit Stake of Zion) from 1877 to 1901, is the son of Ira Eldredge and Nancy Back, and was born Oct. 13, 1841, in Warren township, Marion county, Indiana. The Book of Mormon name Alma, given him by his father, suggests that the family had already cast their lot with the Saints when the subject of this sketch was born. In 1845 Alma accompanied his father on a visit to Nauvoo, Ill., and the next year the family joined the Saints going into exile, arriving in Great Salt Lake valley in the fall of 1847. His father was a captain of fifty in crossing the plains, and he located his family five miles southeast of Salt Lake City, in 1849. In the spring of 1850, young Alma was sent to American Fork, Utah county, to live with his father's brother, John S. Eldredge. There he was baptized when he was about eight years old. In March, 1861, when in his twentieth year, he went (in company with others) into the Weber river valley and located at a place since known as Eldredge's Spring, 1 1/4 mile south of Chalk creek. Alma was elected a delegate to the first convention held in the newly formed Summit county for the nomination of candidates for the ensuing August election, and this was his first experience in politics. In October, 1861, he went east to meet a company of emigrating Saints, of which his father was captain, and pilot them in over the new route down Chalk creek. In November, 1861, he was ordained an Elder. He worked on his place on the Weber, keeping his own home until Jan. 24, 1863, when he married Miss Marinda M. Merrill, the daughter of Gilman and Rebecca Sevier Merrill. In 1863 he made a trip to the Missouri river as a teamster in Horton D. Haight's train, driving an ox team. After his return he labored in making improvements on his farm. At the election, Aug. 7, 1865, he was elected sheriff of Summit county. During the Indian hostilities in 1866, the presidency of the Church advised the people to move together on good locations for mutual protection. Alma Eldredge, complied with this counsel, took down his improvements on the Weber, and moved to the town of Coalville, the site of which he helped to survey and where he has resided ever since. In 1867, the first city council of Coalville elected him city marshal. The next year (1868) he initiated the manufacture of brick in Summit county and built the first house in Coalville of that material. In August, 1868, he, in connection with Wm. H. Smith, took a contract of grading on the Union Pacific railroad, which undertaking proved a financial success. They also, by contract, furnished the telegraph poles for the Union Pacific railroad company from the Muddy to Ogden, a distance of ninety miles. Having been ordained a Seventy he filled a mission to Great Britain in 1868-71. After laboring for some time in the Birmingham conference and Wales, he was called to preside over the Bristol and Lands End conferences; later he presided over the Sheffield conference, and also traveled in Ireland and Scotland. In the spring of 1872, in company with his brother Edmond, he took a contract to grade a portion of and furnish ties for the Summit County Railroad. This road was constructed by the citizens of the county and others, to convey coal from the mines of Spring Hollow to Echo. In 1874 he became mayor of Coalville, which office he held for several years. When the Summit Stake of Zion was organized in July, 1877, he was appointed second counselor to Pres. Wm. W. Cluff, and was ordained a High Priest by Apostle Lorenzo Snow. Two years later he was promoted to the position of first counselor, which position he held till 1901. In 1878 he was elected prosecuting attorney of Summit county and appointed a member of the Territorial Board of Trade. In 1879 he was chosen superintendent of the Coalville Co-operative Institution. In the spring of 1880, together with Wm. W. Cluff and others, he contracted to grade the Echo and Park City Railroad, a distance of 27 miles, and in addition a branch road of five miles. The job was completed in December the same year. The amount received on the contract was $90,000, and it furnished much profitable labor to the citizens of Summit, Utah and Salt Lake counties. In 1881, Bro. Eldredge went east on business, and in 1882 he served as a member of the constitutional convention. In 1883, he was elected probate judge of Summit county; in 1886 he was chosen a member of the first Territorial Central Committee of the People's Party, and in 1887 he served as a member of another constitutional convention; again, in 1895, he assisted in framing the constitution of the State of Utah, as a member of a similar convention. In 1890 he made a pleasure trip to the Pacific coast. At the November election, 1893, he was elected a member of the council branch of the Territorial legislature on the Republican ticket, and did efficient service as a law maker. In September, 1898, he was nominated by the Republican party for a member of Congress. He made an extensive campaign tour through the State of Utah, visiting the principal places from Richmond in the north to Kanab and St. George in the south, but he was defeated by the Democratic nominee. Brigham H. Roberts. Since 1895 Pres. Eldredge has carried on the business of merchandising, besides working on his farm and attending to his duties as a member of the Stake presidency. "The beginning of the 20th century," writes Bro. Eldredge, "finds me surrounded by all my children-two daughters and one son married and living in Coalville, and three sons and myself and wife at home in good health."
