Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Robison, Willis Eugene

Robison, Willis Eugene, president of the Wayne Stake of Zion, is the son of Benjamin Hancock Robison and Lillis A. Andree, and was born March 1, 1854, in the town of Crete, Hill county, Illinois. When but a mere babe he came to Utah with his parents and was reared to manhood in Fillmore, Millard county. In his childhood he received the limited education common to boys on the frontiers, attending school during the winter, and the balance of the year engaged in farming, freighting and stock-raising. When seventeen years of age, he was engaged as a clerk in the co-operative store, where he worked about three years. At the age of twenty years he married Miss Sarah A. Ellett, and the young couple moved to Scipio, Millard county. Here Bro. Robison engaged in farming until the year 1882, when he was called on a mission to the Southern States, where he labored as a traveling Elder for two years. It then fell to his lot to bring home to Utah the mangled bodies of two of his co-laborers, namely Elders John H. Gibbs and William S. Berry, who were martyred for the truth's sake in Tennessee. After his return from this mission, he was set apart as one of the presidents in a quorum of Seventy, and also labored as a home missionary. In 1888, he moved to Piute county, where he could get more land, and settled in the town of Fremont. He remained there one year, after which he was called to Loa and ordained a Bishop to preside over the Ward. In 1889 he was elected to the legislature, representing Beaver and Piute counties in the house of representatives. Piute county being very large, it was deemed advisable in 1892 to divide it, and create a new county out of the eastern part, and the legislature accorded the honor of naming the new county and also its first set of officers to Bro. Robison. He called the newly created county Wayne, after one of his sons, who was unfortunately soon afterwards killed by a horse falling upon him. When the Wayne Stake of Zion was organized in 1893 Elder Robison was chosen to preside over it. This position he still occupies. He has filled many positions of trust among the people; thus three times in succession he was elected superintendent of schools in the county, and was also a member of the Constitutional convention which framed the constitution of the State of Utah. His main avocation is farming and stock raising, and he prides himself in the fact that he never was sued for a debt and has never collected one by law.
