Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Bastian, Gearsen S.

Bastian, Gearsen S., second counselor to Willis E. Robison (president of the Wayne Stake of Zion), is the son of Jacob Bastian and Johanne Marie Sander, and was born July 1, 1860, at Moroni, Sanpete county, Utah. He was baptized Nov. 5, 1868, (at the age of eight years) by James Wilkanes, at Washington, Utah. In 1861 his father was called to help settle the Dixie country, and being a very industrious, hard working man, he overtaxed his physical strength, and by exposure, while building dams in the Rio Virgen river, he contracted a severe cold, which brought on a long and lingering sickness and made him a cripple for life. At this time he had a very large family, and it was necessary to make two trips every winter to Sanpete valley after breadstuff. Not being physically able to make these long and hazardous journeys alone, it fell to the lot of the subject of this sketch in his young and tender years, together with his elder brother Jacob S., to accompany him on these journeys, each of them driving a team. In the summer time he generally worked on the farm, and thus helped to provide for the wants of the family. Being endowed with much bodily strength and vigor, and of an enterprising disposition, he soon became recognized as an energetic worker in public affairs, among the youth of the town where he resided. As he approached manhood, he spent much of his time in the winter, working in the mining camps, taking contracts and furnishing supplies. Up to the age of twenty years he had attended school but a very few months, as his whole time and energies were directed in helping to provide the comforts of life for his father's family. However, in the years 1881 and 1882, he attended the B.Y. Academy at Provo. On entering the school he sought an interview with Dr. Karl G. Maeser, made known to him his condition and his ardent desire to get an education; and that great teacher took him under his especial care and gave him much personal attention and counsel; and today Elder Bastian declares that to the mercy of God and the faithful labors of Brother Karl G. Maeser, and the untiring interest he manifested in his behalf, he owes much of the success he has thus far attained in life. March 28, 1883, at Washington, Utah, he was ordained an Elder by Elder Marcus Funk. In 1884 he was elected a member of the city council of Washington, and served in that position for two years. April 3, 1885, he married Emily S. Paxman, in the St. George Temple. This has proved a happy union, for his wife has ever been to him a tower of strength in the performance of his varied labors in the Church. June 4, 1885, he was ordained a Seventy by Jacob Gates, at Washington, where he continued to reside until 1887, when, in the summer, he made a visit to Loa, now the county seat of Wayne, and while there he purchased what is known as the Horse valley ranch. On his return home, he commenced to sell out his interests at Washington and to make preparations to move to his ranch at Loa. In the fall of the year he was called on a mission to Scandinavia, and requested to leave for his new field of labor in the spring. As the time approached for his departure, he experienced much anxiety of mind. As he had sold out his property in Washington it became necessary for his family to move to Loa, and the thought of his wife and two small children, having to travel two hundred miles by team and locate in a new country, far removed from a town, and bereft of the association, counsel and help of a husband and father, was almost more than he could bear. But trusting in the Lord, he left his home at Washington May 7, 1888, and started for his field of labor. He arrived at Copenhagen, Denmark, June 6, 1888; and received an appointment to labor in the Aarhus conference, His missionary labors were successful and replete with many marvelous manifestations and gifts. He had much difficulty in acquiring the language, and after a few weeks he became discouraged, and thought it impossible for him to learn the language. But the Lord gave him a marvelous manifestation of His power. His missionary companion was released to return home, and Elder Bastian was left in charge of the Randers branch. Only once had he attempted to speak before the public and he was not able to say but a very few words. Sunday came, and at the appointed time for worship the meeting hall was well filled. After the opening exercises he called upon one of the native Elders to speak, but he had only occupied a few minutes, when a burning desire to speak filled the soul of Elder Bastian. He arose, and under the influence and power of God he preached the gospel with much plainness in the Danish language for an hour and twenty minutes. At the close of the meeting the native brethren and sisters all flocked around him to congratulate him; and they claimed that he had spoken the language with as much plainness as they could have spoken; and they rejoiced greatly. But as yet he could not converse with them; nevertheless the Lord had given to him a testimony that he should henceforth have freedom and power in preaching the gospel. Jan. 4, 1890, in company with his traveling companion, he visited a sister who expected shortly to emigrate to Zion, for the purpose of holding a meeting at her dwelling. But a strange feeling took possession of him and he was constrained to return to Randers. He started at once, and on his arrival there he received a telegram summoning him to attend on Elder Andrew K. Anderson, who was prostrated on a bed of sickness in the city of Aalborg. He at once proceeded to that place and found his brother in a very critical state. The next day, Jan. 5th, 1890, he experienced one of the most trying incidents of his life. To all appearances Elder Anderson was dying; all the persons in the room, consisting of Elder Anderson's wife, three Elders from Zion and two native Elders, were asleep; Elder Bastian roused them and requested that they should all kneel with him around the bed side of the afflicted Elder. Evil spirits entered the room and took possession of one of its inmates, who fell to the ground with a terrible force-like one that was dead. They at once administered the ordinances of the gospel and rebuked the powers of darkness in the name of the Lord. But no sooner had they done this than another of their number was afflicted in the same manner. For two hours they were thus tormented; the evil influence leaving the person to whom they administered and entering into and tormenting another. Finally Elder Bastian addressed the brethren in the power of God, and rebuked the disunion that existed and declared in the name of the Lord that if they should administer to the person then under the evil influences once more, and the parties present who were the cause of the disunion did not unite their faith in casting out the evil influences or leave the room, they would become subject to the power of the devil. This caused all the brethren to humble themselves before the Lord and perfect unity prevailed. They again rebuked the power of Satan and the evil spirits left the room and returned no more; all present rejoiced in the power of God. The next day one of the brethren present acknowledged with tears in his eyes that he was the cause of the experience the previous day, and had received a testimony from God that would remain with him forever. Shortly afterwards Elder Andrew K. Anderson passed peacefully away to his heavenly rest; and a few days later his body was interred by the side of his parents in a small country town near Randers, Denmark. Elder Bastian was released to return home and assigned to accompany Sister Anderson and have in charge the body of her husband, but satisfactory arrangements could not be made. He arrived at his home in Loa, Utah. May 29, 1890. For some time after his return home, he labored as a home missionary in the Sevier Stake of Zion. Sept. 23, 1892, he was chosen as first counselor to Willis E. Robison. Bishop of the Loa Ward, and ordained a High Priest by Pres. Wm. H. Seegmiller. He continued in this calling until the organization of the Wayne Stake of Zion, which occurred May 27, 1893, when he was chosen and set apart by Apostle Francis M. Lyman as second counselor to Willis E. Robison, president of the Wayne Stake of Zion, which position he still holds. It can be truthfully said of Elder Bastian, that his greatest ambition in life is to honor his calling in the Priesthood and be a blessing to mankind. By reason of his experience, he is a good and wise counselor, and a friend to the youth of Zion: industrious, energetic and zealous in all labors.-J.E.
