Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Eckersley, Joseph

Eckersley, Joseph, Stake clerk and recorder of the Wayne Stake of Zion, is the son of Abraham Eckersley and Ellen Cleworth, and was born at Eccles near Manchester, England, July 19, 1866. When three years old, his parents moved to an adjoining town named Patricroft. Here, in the summer of 1870, when but four years old, he fell a victim to that terrible malady, smallpox. Afflicted by this loathsome disease in its very worst stage and form, he became an intense sufferer. For several weeks he was totally blind, and when, in about eight months from the time he first contracted the disease, he was permitted to venture outdoors, his frame was reduced to a mere skeleton, and the ravisher had left its lasting imprints upon the body of its victim. For many years afterwards he suffered from a complication of physical weaknesses, which rendered life a burden, and often he was tempted to wish for a fulfilment of the physician's prophecy that "death would relieve him of suffering early in life." He was but thirteen years old when, accompanied by his mother, two brothers and two sisters, he followed the earthly remains of his father to the churchyard. This event was indeed a great bereavement to the family, and was followed by more hardships to our youthful subject and the family of which he was a member than his most gloomy thoughts had conceived. His father, when living, as well as being a kind and affectionate parent, was an industrious blacksmith and provided admirably for the wants of his family. Now the support of the household was gone, and prospects for the future of the family left behind were indeed gloomy. The Lord had not yet revealed the fullness of the everlasting gospel to Joseph; nevertheless he had sufficient faith in the Giver of All Good to believe that He would be a "husband to the widow, and a father to the fatherless," and provide a way for them to exist. He had already attained that degree of scholarship required by the law of his country in order for a person of his tender years to absent himself from school and engage all his time at manual labor. As he was one of the older members of the family, he immediately set out in search of employment; his efforts were rewarded, and he experienced no small degree of happiness, when, at the expiration of the first week's work, he wended his way homeward from the factory and ran to his mother with his first week's earnings. He continued working at the factory, ten hours a day, for two years, during which time he earned good wages and became a substantial help in providing for the wants of the family. Most of his evenings, during this period, and in later years, were spent at night schools, where he sought to improve his education and more fully prepare himself for the battle of life. At the age of sixteen he commenced work in the coal mines, but in a few months, being unable to continue on account of ill health, abandoned it, and took up his abode in the city of Manchester, where he engaged to work as an apprentice in a gas engine factory; at which work he continued until called to preach the gospel. Early in life he formed a habit of attending Sunday School and took unusual pleasure for a boy of his years in reading the Bible; and seldom on the Sabbath day did he absent himself from attendance at some church. He, however, was unsettled in his religious convictions and confused in his efforts to understand the dogmas of men. In the Methodist church he had many warm friends, some of whom desired him to study for the ministry; finally he became a member and an active worker in the Sunday school. As he grew older he was frequently brought in contact with ministers and leading men of the church; and being of an investigating turn of mind and unable to reconcile many of the teachings of the church with his understanding of the Scriptures, he would seek information at the hands of his spiritual advisers; they gave him no satisfaction, but warned him not to pry into the mysteries of God, for fear it should lead him to unbelief. About this time, through the influence of some friends who were investigating the doctrines of the "Mormon" Church, his attention was called to the necessity of investigating the claim of a new revelation from God. At first his mind was deeply prejudiced by reason of the scurrilous stories he had read concerning this unpopular Church and people, which he supposed were true; but after spending two weeks in reading the publications of the Church, the Spirit of God illuminated his soul and gave him correct understanding. He was convinced of the restoration of the gospel, and longed for baptism before he heard any preaching by the Elders. Feb. 15, 1886, in his nineteenth year, he was baptized at Manchester, England, by Elder Wm. C. B. Orrock, and on the 8th day of the same month was confirmed a member of the Church by Elder Thomas Slight, and received the witness of the Spirit and a marvelous manifestation from heaven that his sacrifice had been accepted of the Lord. We cannot here recount the apparent sacrifices he was called to make, the suffering and persecution through which he passed, the ridicule and abuse heaped upon him by his once most devoted friends, and his isolation from home and kindred; but the joy experienced in receiving an assurance that his sins were remitted and that he was a special recipient of God's favors more than compensated him for all the vicissitudes he endured, and the many and frequent manifestations of the gifts of the gospel promised to believers witnessed and enjoyed by him gave additional strength and a more longing desire to bear testimony of God's goodness and preach the gospel to all with whom he came in contact. Especially did he labor and plead with his kindred, and the many friends to whom he had become endeared in the various churches. But all rejected his testimony; some expressing sympathy for him being overcome as they supposed by a delusion, and others denouncing him as an impostor, treating him with bitter scorn and contempt. May 2, 1886, he was ordained a Priest by Elder John Holt, and whenever an opportunity presented itself he would assist the traveling Elders who were sent from Zion in conducting open air meetings. He was called to superintend the Manchester branch Sunday school, and to act as chorister and a Teacher in the branch, which duties occupied almost every night in the week for nearly two years. Oct. 5, 1887, he was ordained an Elder by Elder Wm. G. Phillips and set apart second counselor to George Clark, president of the Manchester branch, and called to labor as a home missionary in the Manchester conference, which duties he joyfully performed until Dec. 12, 1887, when he was called and set apart by Apostle George Teasdale to labor as a traveling Elder in the British mission. For eighteen months he labored successfully in the Leeds conference, often, when the weather was propitious holding open air meetings every night in the week, distributing tracts and visiting the Saints and investigators during the daytime, and preaching to the Saints on Sundays. He was next called to the Liverpool conference, where for eleven months he labored as a traveling Elder and superintendent of the Hindley Sunday school. He was released to gather to Zion May 24, 1890, having traveled thousands of miles preaching the gospel to tens of thousands of his countrymen. Shortly after his arrival in this country he became a member of the Springville Ward, and for a time worked at the factory and as a section hand on the railroad and such other labor as he could obtain to secure a livelihood. He was called to labor as a Ward Teacher and was active in Sunday school and mutual improvement work. Dec. 10, 1890 he was joined in matrimony to Sarah Ellen Wilkinson, in the Manti Temple, Elder Daniel H. Wells officiating. The Lord has since blessed them with five children, four of whom are now living. In the fall of 1891 he moved to Loa (then Piute county), at which place he had engaged to teach school, and was appointed a Ward Teacher. The next spring he engaged to teach school at Fremont, and during his sojourn there was called to labor as Ward Teacher, assistant superintendent of Sunday schools, secretary of quorum meetings, counselor of the Y. M. M. I. A. and instructor of religion classes. At the organization of the Wayne Stake of Zion, May 27, 1893, he was called to the office of Stake clerk and recorder, Bishop's clerk and clerk of the High Council, and requested to make his residence at Loa, the headquarters of the Stake. At the same time he was set apart as second assistant Stake superintendent of Sunday schools; and on Aug. 29, 1893, was set apart as first assistant to Jos. J. Anderson, Stake superintendent of Sunday schools. On Nov. 26, 1893, he was ordained a Seventy and set apart as one of the presidents of the 82nd quorum of Seventy, by Elder Brigham H. Roberts. Feb. 3, 1894, he was appointed religion class instructor in the Lyman Ward, which office he filled for three years. Aug. 26, 1894, he was called and set apart to labor as Stake superintendent of Sunday schools, which position he still retains. Industry, perseverance, humility, reverence for the Priesthood, and the faithful and prompt discharge of duty, in the opinion of the subject of our sketch, are essential elements to a life of usefulness and success in the great Latter-day work, and to his steadfast belief in and adherence to the principles of the gospel he owes whatever of success he may in this life thus far have attained.-J. E.
