Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Osmond, George

Osmond, George, president of the Star Valley Stake of Zion, is the eldest son of George Osmond and Nancy Canham, and was born May 23, 1836, in London, England. At a very early age he was greatly interested in the subject of religion, and was very anxious to learn which of the many sects of professing Christians was in possession of the true gospel. In comparing modern Christianity with that which was taught by Jesus and His Apostles, there were two differences which gave him great concern and thought, namely the absence in the modern church of immediate and direct revelation and of the divine power and authority of the Priesthood. In February, 1850, he was apprenticed to the ship-building trade in the government dock yard at Woolwich, near London. In the latter part of that year some of his fellow apprentices were converted to the "Mormon" faith, which was then making a great stir in that neighborhood. He was induced to attend their meetings and was surprised at finding satisfactory answers to his queries as to divine revelation and authority. He gladly embraced the faith of the Latter-day Saints and was baptized Nov. 27, 1850, by Elder Thomas Bottrell. Early the next spring he was ordained a Priest and called to assist in building up a branch of the Church in Elsham, a village in Kent, about four miles from Woolwich. He was soon after ordained an Elder and labored actively in distributing tracts and preaching the gospel in the surrounding villages, during such time as he could spare from his daily labor. To his surprise he failed to convert any of his relatives to the truth of the gospel; he still remains the only representative of his parents' families in the Church. In the fall of 1854 he emigrated to New Orleans in the ship "Clara Wheeler," and worked his way up to St. Louis, Mo., where he entered the employ of Captain James Eads, the famous engineer. In the summer of 1855 he married Georgina Huckvale and crossed the plains to Salt Lake City, driving an ox-team for Hooper and Williams, merchants, and arrived in Salt Lake City after a most tedious and arduous journey of four months from the Missouri river. He removed successively to Bountiful, Davis county, Willard, Box Elder county, and finally to Bear Lake valley, Idaho, in 1864. Here he remained until 1892, acting as Bishop of Bloomington for more than seven years, and in 1877, at the organization of Bear Lake Stake, he was appointed second counselor to President Wm. Budge. In 1884 he was called on a mission to England and labored for two years in Liverpool as assistant editor of the "Millennial Star." In 1890 he was again called on a mission to Great Britain, during which he was successively president of the Scottish conference and the London conference. In 1892, immediately after his return home, he was called to Star valley, Wyoming, to preside in that Stake which was organized Aug. 14, 1892. In civil life he has served for many years as a justice of the peace, probate judge, and finally as State senator in the Wyoming legislature during the sessions of 1898-99 and 1900-1901.
