Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Burton, William Watton

Burton, William Watton, first counselor to George Osmond, president of the Star Valley Stake of Zion, was born March 23, 1833, in Bradford, Yorkshire, England. He was baptized by Elder Elijah F. Sheets June 9, 1845. About the year 1849 he was ordained a Teacher, and with an elder brother visited the families of the Saints in the Bradford branch. Later he was ordained a Priest; and on Sabbath days with other brethren he visited the towns and villages within ten miles of Bradford, frequently walking twenty miles on the Sabbath day and holding from one to two meetings. He writes: "After being ordained a Priest, and before taking part in the missionary labors on Sabbath days, a request came from the president of the Wilsden branch to the Priesthood meeting held at Bradford, to send them some experienced Elders next Sabbath, as it was expected some Socialists were going to give them opposition. To my astonishment, I and two other brethren, with little more experience than myself, were selected to fill the appointment, and from that time until the appointment was filled I could eat and sleep but very little. I prayed very earnestly for the Lord to help us. At the time appointed I was there, but the other two failed to come. This made me feel very bad, but I concluded to go on without them and do the best I could, and trust in the Lord to help me. On account of the expected opposition a large congregation assembled and the house where the meeting was appointed not being large enough to hold the people, an open air meeting was held. After the opening services I was called upon to speak, and immediately my fear and timidity left me, and I don't know that I ever spoke with greater freedom. At the close of the meeting, no opposition was offered, and I went home rejoicing and feeling that it was not hard after all to fill those appointments. Next Sabbath, it fell to my lot to go with two other brethren to a town, about ten miles from Bradford, where I was also called upon to speak. I rose with confidence, thinking that I would do as well as on the previous Sabbath; but I had scarcely occupied two minutes of time when I sat down very much confused; and when I came to look over my conduct the week previous I saw that I had not been as humble as the week before. I had not fasted and prayed as much, but relied more on my own strength than on the Lord's help. This lesson impressed me with the feeling that without the Lord's help, which is only reached through humility and prayer, a man cannot preach the gospel of Jesus Christ. When eighteen years of age, I was ordained an Elder and appointed to travel in the Bradford conference. I started on this mission in April, 1851, and soon arrived at Knaresborough, where I expected to meet Elder Jonathan Midgley, who should direct me in my labors. But as he was prevented from meeting me I had to labor as best I could till the following June. For nearly a year I could see but little success attending my labors. In the meantime, a young man had been sent to labor with me, but he became discouraged, went home and left me alone again. Some of those who had been friendly, became prejudiced against me, through slanderous stories circulated by ministers, and almost every door that had been opened was now closed. While in this condition, I took shelter, one cold wet day (and I had the tooth ache at the time), under a tree, and offered a most earnest prayer, that the Lord would open my way before me, help me to live acceptably before him, and crown my efforts with success. The Lord answered my prayer, for it was not long before I had many friends and all the places opened to preach in that I could attend to. About this time ministers of six denominations in Knaresborough sent for one John Theobold, a lecturer and author of slanderous works against us, to come and help them put down "Mormonism." On his arrival, he gave five lectures and issued a challenge to meet any of the leaders of our Church in discussion. The president of the Bradford conference reported our condition to the presidency of the British mission, and asked counsel as to what would be best for us to do; word came to the effect that in our case it would be best to accept the challenge for discussion and that I was the one to meet Mr. Theobold. As other and more experienced Elders were within reach, I had not expected this; however, I resolved to obey, trust in the Lord and do my best. This was in 1852, and during the week that the discussion was pending the revelation on plural marriage was first published in the "Millennial Star." Five nights' discussion was held. The Lord was with us. Our friends increased every day, and soon after the debate was over, we had a branch at Knaresborough of thirty-eight members and another branch at Skelton, about eight miles from there, of eight members. One night, while trying to find my way through some fields, to a place where I expected to lodge, I lost my way, and having no overcoat I walked to keep warm. I was quite absorbed in thought, thinking how much the Elders were trying to do for the world and how little their efforts were appreciated. Suddenly I stopped, without knowing why. Having a cane in my hand, I instinctively put it before me and found no bottom. I then remembered that somewhere in the fields there was a deep stone quarry. I turned around, felt my way with my cane, and a few rods away found a road. I knew where I was and that this was the stone quarry. John Cummings, of Skelton, was my friend from the first time we met. He invited me to make my home with him, when in that neighborhood, and he also opened his house for me to hold meetings in. Notwithstanding all this, his wife was bitterly opposed to me and our people. Mr. Cummings and I were sitting up late one evening conversing on the principles of the gospel, after holding meetings there for some months, when Mrs. Cummings said: "I had a strange dream last night. I thought that I was walking along a road and that Mr. Burton was there. He ran after me, and caught me." I answered, "The interpretation of that dream is that I shall soon baptize you." Her response was: "No, never, you will never baptize me, for I shall never join your Church." She seemed so positive that I felt that perhaps I had said too much. About two weeks afterwards I had an appointment to hold meeting at Langthorpe, two or three miles away. It was rumored that a Baptist minster had said that he would be there and expose "Mormonism." Mrs. Cummings was induced to walk that distance to hear us exposed. The minister was not there, but that night Mrs. Cummings was convinced of the truth. I was invited to go home with them. Mrs. Cummings scarcely said a word all the way home. When we entered the house, it was nearly midnight. She sat down and seemed to be very thoughtful. Her husband turned to her and said, "Hannah, why don't you take your things off?" She responded "John, are you ready to be baptized tonight." He answered, "No, not quite ready tonight." But she said that she could not sleep, if not baptized that night; and, turning to me, she said, "Mr. Burton, will you baptize me tonight?" I answered, "Yes, if your husband will go with us." He assented, and though it was midnight, and the winds were whistling through the trees, we started off down to the river, about two miles away, and I baptized her, fulfilling the interpretation to her dream to the very letter. Feb. 22, 1854, I sailed on the ship "Windermere" from Liverpool for New Orleans. We were eight weeks and five days on the way, and we encountered heavy storms. On the 18th of March we were in the same latitude that we were in on the 8th. The weather was very rough, and the captain of the vessel came to Elder Daniel Garns, who presided over the Saints, and said, "Mr. Garns, I have done all I can for the vessel, and I am afraid that it cannot stand this sea. We are in great danger. I don't know, whether there is a God or not. Your people say there is, and if there is a God and He will hear you, you had better talk to Him." It was early in the morning; a fast was decided upon, and prayer meeting held at 10 a.m. The storm abated a little-enough, to make us feel out of danger-but continued in considerable force till the 18th. On the 14th (March) smallpox broke out. There were forty cases on board and thirteen funerals took place between Liverpool and New Orleans. On the 17th the ship caught fire under the cooking galley. Great excitement prevailed, until the fire was extinguished. On the 27th, the provisions and water supply failed and from that time till we reached New Orleans April 23, 1854, our ration was one sea biscuit a day. We had no new cases of small pox after leaving New Orleans, but were afflicted with cholera, which proved fatal to many from that time till June 19th, when we commenced our journey over the plains from our camping ground near Kansas City. We arrived at Salt Lake City Sept. 23, 1854. During the winter I taught school, and resided with my eldest Brother Robert. Soon after my arrival, I was ordained a Seventy and joined the 17th quorum. March 28, 1856, I married Rachel Fielding. During 1862, 1863 and 1864 I taught school in Kaysville, Davis county, and in the latter year I moved to Ogden, where I taught school for about ten years. I also served many years as superintendent of schools for Weber county, was bookkeeper for the Ogden Branch Z. C. M. I. for five years, served as first counselor to Joseph Parry, president of the 3rd Ward, and presided over said Ward during Elder Parry's absence on a mission. For many years, and up to 1882, I served as a member of the city council. In the latter year I resigned. I also served many years as a member of the High Council of Weber Stake and up to my leaving there for Star Valley in 1886. When the Star Valley Stake was organized Aug. 14, 1892, I was appointed first counselor to Elder Geo. Osmond, who was chosen Stake president."
