Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Hammond, Francis Asbury

Hammond, Francis Asbury, president of the San Juan Stake of Zion from 1884 to 1900, is the son of Samuel S. Hammond and Charity Edwards, and was born Nov. 1, 1822, at Patchogue, Suffolk county (Long Island), New York. In August, 1898, he wrote the following sketch of his life: "In my childhood and youth I had but very little schooling. My father was a practical boot and shoe maker, and also carried on the business of tanning and saddle and harness making. I learned enough from him to enable me in after years to establish all these branches of industry. When about fourteen years of age, I commenced going to sea in small coasting vessels, as cook and cabin boy, at $4 per month. This was during the summer months; the winter I spent in laboring with my father, and sometimes attended school part of the time. I soon became attached to a life on the sea, and chose that as a life vocation, with an ambition to become master of a ship. I continued in this coasting business till 1840, when I shipped as able seaman on a whaling expedition on board of the barque 'White Oak,' commanded by Capt. Daniel Fitch, and sailed from New London in company with the brig Sommerset,' commanded by Capt. Beck. The two captains were sole owners of the outfit. We whaled in a bay in latitude 40 degrees south and along the coast to the Straits of Magellan and Cape Horn, including the Falkland Islands. During the off season we engaged in sealing. At Falkland Islands, during a gale of wind, the crew refused to go on shore to pack freight from a shipwreck for the benefit of the captains. The result of this was that I and two other able seamen got into irons. I was confined for nine days and fed on bread and water. While the barque was moored in a South American bay, the second season out, the chief mate and the Portuguese steward, ran away, taking with them a new whale boat, all the spice on board, the chronometer, the arms and ammunition belonging to the ship and the chart of the Spanish coast. They were subsequently taken and brought back in irons, and I was chosen to be the steward and placed in charge of the prisoners till we arrived at Rio de Janeiro, where they were turned over to the American consul with witnesses to accompany them to the United States. I was chosen as one of the witnesses, and we were put on board a sloop, which landed us in Richmond, Virginia, where a trial was held May 5, 1842. They were charged with piracy on the high seas; but as the charge could not be proven, they were set free. June 23, 1843, I sailed from Sag Harbor, Long Island, on the good ship 'Thames,' Capt. Jeremiah Hedges, for a whaling voyage to the Arctic ocean. I shipped as boatswain, with the privilege of living aft and associating with the chief officers. We rounded the Cape of Good Hope, after a very pleasant voyage; took in water at the Cape and sent Capt. Hedges home sick, when Chiefmate Bishop became our captain. We pursued our way through the Indian and South Pacific oceans till March, 1844, when we landed in Hawaii, on the very spot where Capt. Cook was massacred by the natives on his last visit to the Sandwich Islands. While whaling in the Okhotsk Sea I was disabled by an accident which nearly cost me my life, a barrel of flour headed up in an empty 90 gallon cask fell down a distance of about fifteen feet and struck me in the small of my back, while I was bracing with all my might against a ten-barrel cask of oil. This accident led to a perfect change in my life's history. In the fall of 1844 I was put ashore at Lahaina, Maui, on the Sandwich Islands. The captain and my fellow-officers thought I was a first-rate candidate for the graveyard. But in two months I was sufficiently recovered to set up shoe making, and I carried on that business till the fall of 1847, when I set sail for San Francisco, with the intention of going to New York to marry a wife, and then return to the islands to make my home there. I landed in San Francisco in October, 1847, and commenced shoemaking as soon as I landed. Here I became acquainted with the 'Mormons,' or Latter-day Saints, who had recently arrived in the ship 'Brooklyn,' and also with some of the members of the Mormon Battalion. Dec. 31, 1847, I was baptized into the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and in May, 1848, I set out for the gold mines which had been discovered some time during the previous January. I dug gold on Mormon Island for about fifty days, and then returned to San Francisco, where I purchased an outfit and set out for Great Salt Lake valley in the Rocky Mountains. Sept. 6, 1848, in company with quite a number of others, I arrived at the Old Fort, where Salt Lake City now stands. Nov. 17, 1848, I married Miss Mary Jane Dilworth, Pres. Heber C. Kimball performing the ceremony. In March, 1851, I was called on a mission to the Sandwich Islands; my wife and one child about six months old accompanied me. We labored in that mission for several years, and after spending a winter in San Bernardino, we returned home to Big Cottonwood, Utah, arriving there June 6, 1857. That year the news came to us, while celebrating in Big Cottonwood canyon, that the U. S. army was coming against us. I joined the standing army and spent the winter in Echo canyon, standing guard. In the spring of 1858 I moved my family south and pitched my camp at Payson, Utah county. After the army had come in and pardon had been granted the 'rebellious Mormons,' I returned to my home in Salt Lake City. In March, 1859, I removed to Ogden, Weber county, where I, in company with General Chauncy W. West, commenced the business of manufacturing leather, boots and shoes, saddles and harnesses. During this period I acted as counselor to Bishop Chauncy W. West, and served as a member of the city council, and as justice of the peace. In 1865 I was called on a second mission to the Sandwich Islands, where I took an active part in purchasing the estate or plantation known as Laie. In company with Elder Geo. Nebeker, I took out quite a company of Elders and Saints, and located them on said estate. I returned to Utah in the fall and was called to take charge of the Saints who had settled at Huntsville, Ogden valley. Here I was afterwards ordained a Bishop and appointed to preside. During the railroad construction times I took a number of contracts on the Union Pacific and Central Pacific railroads. In the fall of 1869, in company with about five hundred Elders, I went on a mission to the United States, to visit friends and relatives and to do all we could to modify the intense feeling of bitterness and hatred which prevailed at that time in the hearts of the people and with the government against the Saints. We accomplished some good and returned to our homes in the spring. I served as a member of the Weber county court for six years. The winter of 1883-84, in company with my son, I spent in traveling through Colorado, New Mexico, Arizona and old Mexico, looking for places suitable for settlements. In December, 1884, I was called to go south and take charge of the San Juan Stake of Zion. I spent a part of the winter of 1884-85 traveling in that region of country. In the fall of 1885 I moved with my family and a few others into the San Juan Stake. The winter of 1888 I spent in Washington, D.C., in the interest of the settlers in that county, in connection with what was called the Southern Ute Indian Removal Bill. I shall be 76 years old on my next birthday and am still quite hale and hearty, I have built or bought twenty-five different homes since I married. I am the father of fifteen children, the husband of three wives, and grandfather to thirty-two children. Only one of my wives are now living. Life to me has indeed been worth living." President Hammond resided for a number of years in Bluff City, San Juan county; his last place of residence was Moab, Grand county, Utah. He died as the result of an accident, Nov. 27, 1900, at Bloomfield, New Mexico. Pres. Hammond was faithful and true to the last and proved to be one of God's noblemen. He was undoubtedly ordained before the foundation of the world to take a prominent part in the building up of God's kingdom. His wise counsel and fatherly kindness was much appreciated by all who had the pleasure of associating with him.
