Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Redd, Wayne Hardeson

Redd, Wayne Hardeson, second counselor to Francis A. Hammond, President of the San Juan Stake of Zion, from 1898 to 1900, is the son of Lemuel H. Redd and Sariah Louisa Chamberlain, and was born Feb. 27, 1870, at Harmony, Washington county, Utah, where he also received his early training. Following is a short sketch of his life written by himself: "I was baptized when eight years old, by Bishop Wilson D. Pace. My boyhood days were spent on the farm, helping to care for my father's large family. My education consisted of what I was able to learn, in the district school, during the winter months, as I was obliged to work on the farm during the summer season. At the age of eighteen, the responsibilities of caring for my father's two families and one of my brother's family, devolved upon me for a time, owing to the fact that my father was compelled to live in exile for the gospel's sake, and my brother was absent from home on a mission. When twenty years old, I moved, in company with my father and mother, to Bluff, San Juan county, Utah, at which place I have resided ever since, following as a business stock raising on the public domain. I was ordained an Elder under the hands of Pres. Francis A. Hammond in the fall of 1893. Until that time, I held the office of a Deacon. Nov. 15, 1893, I married Caroline Nielsen, in the Salt Lake Temple. She is a daughter of Bishop Jens Nielsen, of Bluff, Utah, and has blessed me with three children, two boys and one girl. Being called to take a mission to the Southern States, I was ordained a Seventy and set apart as a missionary, under the hands of Pres. Seymour B. Young, April 3, 1896. During the greater part of my mission (which lasted two years and a half) I laboring in the South Alabama conference, which comprised the southern part of Alabama and the northern part of Florida. While laboring in that conference I baptized about twenty converts, and preached the gospel without purse or scrip in the city of Montgomery; also in a number of other smaller cities and counties. Part of the time I acted as counselor to Daniel H. Thomas, president of the conference. In the spring of 1898, in obedience to a call from Pres. Elias S. Kimball, I went to Atlanta, Georgia, where I joined Elder Albert Mathison and assisted him and others in opening up anew the work in that city and State. For nine years prior to that time the Elders had not labored in Georgia on account of the martyrdom of Joseph Standing. We traveled without purse or scrip. While laboring in the city of Atlanta, and in the evening of April 29, 1898, just after the close of our services on the street, we were arrested and put in jail. Through the friendly effort of a news reporter, connected with the "Atlanta Constitution" we were liberated. From Georgia I went to South Carolina, where I presided over the conference until my release came. Returning home, I arrived in Salt Lake City Oct. 4, 1898. In November following, by request of Pres. Francis A. Hammond, of the San Juan Stake, I made a tour of that Stake in his company and in that of others. At a conference held at Monticello, Utah, on the 20th and 21st of November, 1898, I was chosen second counselor to Pres. Hammond, and was ordained a High Priest and set apart for that position by Apostle Brigham Young Nov. 21, 1898. Since that time I have labored in this calling, ministering among the Saints of San Juan Stake. I was with Pres. Hammond when he was accidentally thrown from his buggy by a runaway team, at Bloomfield, New Mexico, which caused his death Nov. 27, 1900.
