Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Woolley, Edward Dilworth

Woolley, Edward Dilworth, second President of the Kanab Stake of Zion, is the son of Edwin D. Woolley and Mary Wickersham, and was born April 30, 1845, in Nauvoo, Hancock county, Ill. As an infant he left Nauvoo with his parents during the exodus of 1846, and arrived in Great Salt Lake valley in September, 1848. He was raised in Salt Lake City, where his father acted as Bishop of the 13th Ward, and he was baptized by his father when he was about eight years old. In 1860 he went back to the Missouri river as a teamster. He was married in 1867, and moved to St. George, south ern Utah, that same year. Here he served as constable, alderman, police man, etc., and participated in a number of Indian expeditions, during which he exhibited that heroism and bravery which were characteristic of the "Mormon" boys of those early pioneer days. In 1866 he took an active part in recovering the bodies of James M. Whitmore and Robert McIntire, who were killed by Piede Indians near the Pipe Springs ranch, Kane county. During the Blackhawk war Bro. Woolley served in Sanpete county under Col. Kimball. Having been ordained a Seventy he filled a short mission to Great Britain in 1877. He removed to Upper Kanab, Kane county, in 1882. Two years later (1884) he was called to succeed L. John Nuttall as president of the Kanab Stake of Zion, and he changed his place of residence to Lower Kanab in 1889. Having yielded obedience to the law of plural marriage he was arrested on the charge of unlawful cohabitation in October, 1887, but after a preliminary examination before a U. S. commissioner, at Silver Reef, he was acquitted. He was arrested a second time on a similar charge in September, 1890, but the case was thrown out by the grand jury at Beaver for lack of evidence. President Woolley has exhibited noble characteristics as a presiding officer, and has won the love and confidence of the Saints generally in his field of labor. During the sixteen years he has presided over the Kanab Stake, many improvements have been made in that part of the country, and union and good will are predominant features of the condition among the Saints in the Kanab Stake of Zion. The settlements in the Kanab Stake being widely scattered, Pres. Woolley has to travel about three thousand miles annually to attend the different Ward conferences and other meetings in the Stake.
