Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Hatch, Abram

Hatch, Abram, president of the Wasatch Stake of Zion from 1877 to 1901, is the son of Hezekiah Hatch and Aldura Sumner, and was born Jan. 3, 1830, in Lincoln, Addison county, Vermont, in a pleasant farm house near the foot hill of the Green Mountains. He is the fourth son of a family of five sons and two daughters. His grandfather (Jeremiah Hatch) was a soldier of the Revolution and served under General Washington. Abram received a common school education in the rural district schools of Lincoln and Bristol, and had reached the age of ten years when Elder Peletiah Brown came to that section of country, preaching "Mormonism." The entire family, consisting of his grandfather and grandmother, father, mother and their children, joined the Church. His mother died in 1840, and in the fall of that year the family moved to Nauvoo, where his father bought property, opened up a farm on the prairie and built a brick house on Mulholland street, in the city, three blocks east of the Temple; he died in 1841. Abram became a member of the Nauvoo Legion and served with the posse under Col. Stephen Markham and Sheriff Jacob Backenstos in 1845. During the exodus of 1846 he rendered efficient service as captain of the numerous flat-bottomed ferry boats employed to cross the Mississippi river carrying the fleeing multitude. He was also in the first company that moved west in the main "Camp of Israel" which made its rendezvous on Sugar creek, and he drove a wagon for Joseph C. Kingsbury. He assisted to build the temporary settlement of Garden Grove, visited Missouri, and later made a trip to Pennsylvania to see some of his relatives who had identified themselves with the Rigdonite movement. He again joined the exiled Saints at Council Bluffs, Iowa, and assisted his brother Lorenzo to harvest a crop on "Brigham's Farm," near Winter Quarters, after which he went to the settlements of Missouri and there helped his brothers to earn a traveling outfit with which they with their families crossed the plains in 1850. Having spent the winter in Salt Lake City, Abram moved to Lehi, Utah county, in 1851, and assisted to build a grist mill at the mouth of American Fork canyon. Dec. 2, 1852, he married Miss Permelia Jane Lott, after which he made his home in Lehi till 1867 and assisted materially in the development of the place. He engaged in farming and stock-raising, and also kept a hotel. In 1861, in company with Captain John R. Murdock, he made a trip to the States for the purpose of bringing immigrants across the plains and buying and freighting merchandise for his store. They also freighted goods for others, and found it a profitable business. In 1863, he again went back to the Missouri river for the same purpose as in 1861. On both trips he drove a mule team in the train. Altogether he has made eleven trips between the Missouri river and Utah. In 1864-67 he filled a mission to Great Britain, where he labored as a traveling Elder in the Birmingham conference, later as president of the Manchester pastorate, and still later as president of the Birmingham pastorate. He also visited Switzerland, Germany and Holland. Returning to America, he crossed the Atlantic ocean in the steamship "Great Eastern." He arrived home in August, 1867, and a few weeks afterwards he was called by Pres. Brigham Young to go to Wasatch county to act as presiding Bishop. He was ordained and set apart to that office Dec. 2, 1867. Under his wise and practical management Wasatch county soon became a prosperous and desirable locality and Heber City especially grew to be a town of importance. When the settlements of the Saints in Provo valley, or Wasatch county, were organized into a Stake of Zion, in 1877, Abram Hatch was appointed its president, and in that capacity he served about a quarter of a century. His duties as president were necessarily various, active and continuous. "He took a leading part in all measures adopted for the development of the resources of the county, and utilized them for building up the Stake and promoting both the material, moral and spiritual welfare of the people, in improving Church property, superintending the erection of public edifices, building roads, bridges, irrigating canals, etc." He also established a ranch in Ashley valley, where settlements of the Saints, that have since grown into a Stake of Zion, were founded. Pres. Hatch has served several times in the Utah legislature, has acted as probate judge of Wasatch county and been elected to many other offices within the gifts of the people. (See also Tullidge's Histories, Vol. 2, Bio. p. 187.)
