Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Smart, William Henry

Smart, William Henry, president of the Wasatch Stake of Zion, is the son of Thomas S. Smart and Ann Hayter, and was born April 6, 1862, at Franklin, Oneida county, Idaho. His father was one of the founders of Franklin, having moved from Provo to Idaho in 1860; and it was here that the days of William's boyhood and early youth were passed, and his early school training received. He was baptized in 1872, ordained a Teacher Sept. 23, 1877, and acted as second and later as first counselor to the president of his quorum. When seventeen years of age he entered the Brigham Young College at Logan, then in its infancy. Here he spent two years, and then entered the normal department of the University of Utah, from which he graduated in the spring of 1883. Returning to Logan, he was engaged as an instructor in the B. Y. College, entering upon his duties Sept. 1, 1883. While here he was, for part of the time, assistant treasurer of the college and was the first teacher of theology in this institution. Eight years of his life as a teacher were spent in the college and two as the principal of the schools of his native town. July 20, 1886, he, in company with his father, was set apart to visit their relatives in England, and to obtain genealogies. He was given the genealogical labor by his father, and was remarkably successful in being permitted to examine, almost gratuitously, the records of some fourteen parishes, and of obtaining genealogies of many relatives, for whom, under his direction, vicarious work has since been done by the Smart family. Oct. 3, 1888, he was united in marriage to Miss Anna Haines in the Logan Temple, and the following spring he was called on a mission to Europe. The fore part of this mission was spent in Turkey. Being poorly in health, he was transferred to the London conference, England. After laboring here, tracting and preaching under great physical difficulties for about two months, his president, Jos. W. McMurrin, ordered his release, and he arrived home late in the spring of 1889. Both before this mission and following it he performed various spiritual labors in the communities in which he lived, such as Ward teacher, worker in the mutual improvement cause, religion class teacher, Ward clerk, Sunday school teacher, and home missionary, until April 11, 1898, when he was set apart as a missionary to the Eastern States. May 5, 1898, he was appointed by Pres. Alonso P. Kesler as the first president of the newly organized Brooklyn conference which comprised Greater New York. He continued in this position until March 11, 1899, when he was called to succeed Pres. Alonzo P. Kesler as president of the Eastern States mission; from this position he was released to return home in the fall of 1900. Feb. 10, 1901 he was called to preside over the Wasatch Stake of Zion, being ordained at the same time a High Priest. This position he is holding at the present time.
