Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Jensen, James C.

Jensen, James C., second counselor in the presidency of the Wasatch Stake of Zion, is the son of Soren Peter and Kirsten Marie Jensen, and was born at Glimsholt, Ugilt parish, Hjorring amt, Denmark, Sept. 9, 1863. His parents embraced the gospel in 1875, and he himself was baptized April 14, 1877, in which year the family emigrated with a company of Saints which arrived in Salt Lake City, July 14, 1877. His father, having, previous to coming to Utah, bought, from one of the missionaries, a home at Levan, Juab county, the family located there, and the children attended the district school the next winter. In 1881-82 James attended the Brigham Young Academy at Provo. Leaving school, he went to Milford, Utah, where for some time he was engaged by B. F. Grant in various clerical positions. Oct. 16, 1884, he married Miss Joannah E. Jennings, of Levan, by whom he has up to this time (1901) had four living children. In 1885 he became head book-keeper for the Co-operative Wagon and Machine Company, in Salt Lake City, which position he held until, 1888, when he resigned to enter into co-partnership with Hon. Charles C. Richards, Daniel and John Hamer of Ogden in the abstract business. He assisted in compiling a set of abstract records of Weber county, and later, as a member of the same company, he had charge of the compilation of the set of abstract records of Salt Lake county. The company was later incorporated as the Security Abstract Co. He followed the abstract business until 1896, when he was elected to the office of county recorder of Salt Lake county. In 1898 he was re-elected, leading his ticket by several hundred votes. At the expiration of his second term of office, having refused to permit his name to be again presented for renomination by his party, he engaged as instructor of penmanship and other business branches with the Latter-day Saints college. In this position he continued until released in 1901 to accept the ecclesiastical position which he now holds. While he has not had the privilege of a mission abroad, Elder Jensen has nevertheless been active in ecclesiastical work. He has been connected with Sunday school work in every Ward in which he has lived; has acted as Ward teacher in the 13th and 19th Wards in Salt Lake City; was called to the office of president of the Y. M. M. I. A. of the 13th Ward in 1887, but because of removal from the Ward did not act in this capacity. He has been an officer in several of the mutual improvement associations in Salt Lake City. At the time of the organization of the Granite Stake, he was chosen as Stake secretary of the Sunday schools, from which office, as well as from other work, in which he was at the time engaged, he was released to accept a call to act as second counselor to William H. Smart, president of the Wasatch Stake, to which office he was chosen and unanimously sustained by the conference at Heber City, May 12, 1901.
