Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Peterson, Canute

Peterson, Canute, president of the South Sanpete Stake of Zion, was born May 13, 1824, in Eidsfjord, Hardanger, Norway. He emigrated with his parents to America in 1837 and settled in La Salle county, Ill., where he received the gospel and was baptized Aug. 12, 1842. While on a visit to Nauvoo, in 1844, he was ordained a Seventy and called into the active ministry. His first mission was to Wisconsin in 1844-45, with Elder Gudmund Haugaas as a missionary companion. They preached the gospel successfully to the Norwegians and others in that part of the country, baptized quite a number and organized a branch of the Church. In 1849, in connection with his wife Sarah Ann, whom he married while on the journey, he emigrated to Utah and located temporarily in Salt Lake City. Together with others, he was called, in 1850, to settle Lehi, Utah county; and it was while living there that he was called to take a mission in Norway. In company with other missionaries, he left Utah for this mission, in September, 1852, and arrived at Risoer, Norway, together with Elders Erik G. M. Hogan and Carl C. N. Dorius (a native Elder of Denmark), May 10, 1853. He labored in Risoer, Brevig and Frederikstad branches and also in the surrounding country for a few months, and quite a number were added to the Church. He was then chosen by Pres. Hogan to go to Christiania, the capital in Norway, to open up the gospel door there. After a great deal of labor and hardships, and much opposition from both civil and ecclesiastical authorities, a branch of the Church was organized Dec. 8, 1853. Among the foremost to take a part with him in his missionary labors in Norway were Elders Carl C. A. Christensen, Carl C. N. Dorius and Johan F. F. Dorius. Although at first they met with great opposition and hardships, and were not even acknowledged as Christians among the Protestant dissenters, the Lord blessed their labors, and the Christiania branch soon became one of the most flourishing branches in Norway. After an absence of four years, Elder Peterson returned home with a large company of Scandinavian, English and American Saints. In 1867 he was called to go to Sanpete county to act as Bishop of Ephraim. At this time the Indians were very hostile, and carried on warfare with the white settlers, who had suffered much from their ravages. This war lasted for several years. In August, 1868, ten of the leading Indians came to Bishop Peterson's house, to talk over the condition of affairs, which resulted in an agreement of peace that has never been broken. Pres. Peterson is now known among the Indians as their "White Father." In 1871, he was called by Pres. Brigham Young to take another mission to Europe, to preside over the Scandinavian mission. With the assistance of the many good and faithful Elders, who labored under him, the mission prospered very much. He returned to Utah July 24, 1873, bringing with him a large company of Scandinavian emigrants. In 1877 he was chosen and set apart by Pres. Brigham Young to preside over the Sanpete Stake of Zion, which position he held till December, 1900, when Sanpete county was divided into two Stakes, and Canute Peterson was appointed to preside over South Sanpete Stake. Several years ago Pres. Peterson was ordained to the office of a Patriarch.
