Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Kimball, Andrew

Kimball, Andrew, president of the St. Joseph Stake of Zion, is a son of the late Heber C. Kimball and Ann A. Gheen, and was born Sept. 6, 1858, in a house which stood northeast of the Temple Block, Salt Lake City. At the time of his birth his mother added two to the family (Alice A. and Andrew), then known as Annie's bouncing twins. During Andrew's early life his mother changed place of residence a number of times, the last time he removed to the old Hendricks place in the Nineteenth Ward, where Andrew resided for many years. Sept. 20, 1866, Pres. Heber C. Kimball took a goodly number of his children to City creek, opposite the old mill, where the Patent Roller Mill stood later, and baptized one of them himself, showing the example, and then called upon David P. and Charles S., his oldest sons, to finish baptizing the group of ready children who were all over eight years of age. Andrew was among the number baptized. When Pres. Kimball died June 22, 1868, Andrew's mother was lying at the point of death, but recovered after a short time. Andrew attended school during the winter seasons and worked around home, looking after his mother, until he was about sixteen years of age, when he set out to earn means to support his mother and two sisters (Alice and Sarah), his two elder brothers (Samuel H. and Daniel H.) having left home to do for themselves. His employment consisted of railroading, ranching, farm work and finally tanning at the Co-op Tannery, where he was employed when his mother died, Oct. 12. 1879. In January, 1880, he commenced work as fireman on a locomotive for the Utah Central Ry. Co. In September, 1878, he was ordained a Deacon by Bishop Richard V. Morris. He was ordained an Elder April 9, 1880, by Thomas Slight and received his endowments the same day. In the fall of that year he was chosen first counselor to Joseph R. Matthews in the presidency of the 7th quorum of Elders. June 9, 1884, he was ordained a Seventy by Lewis Perkins, and chosen and set apart as one of the presidents of the 30th quorum by Wm. W. Taylor. In May, 1881, he was badly scalded while firing on Engine No. 3 between Salt Lake City and Juab; after his recovery he worked in the U. C. Ry, shops, learning the machinist's trade. In a Ward capacity he acted as a Block Teacher, as a Teacher in the Sunday School, as an officer in the young people's mutual improvement associations, and as trustee in the 19th school district. Feb. 2, 1882, he married Olive Woolley, a daughter of Bishop Edwin D. and Mary A. Woolley, of the Thirteenth Ward, Salt Lake City, by whom he has had seven children. Being called on a mission to the Indian Territory, he left home Jan. 28, 1885, in company with James G. West, leaving a wife and a three months old babe. He labored zealously among the Cherokee Indians, and the white people living in their country. In September Elder West was released and came home, leaving Elder Kimball alone, there being no other Elders in the Territory and but a few scattered Saints. Jan. 21, 1886, he was joined by Elders Ammon Green, jun., of West Weber, and Ammon Allen, of Huntsville, and on May 3, 1886, by Elder David Shand, of Manti, Sanpete county. The four missionaries then divided up in twos and traversed the greater portion of the country occupied by the Cherokee nation and also extended their travels into the Creek and Choctaw nations. They distributed tracts, circulated the Book of Mormon, pamphlets and copies of the "Deseret News" and preached in nearly all the settlements, but made only a few converts, though they gained many friends and were the instruments in the hands of the Lord in putting down prejudice and laying a foundation for a good work in the future. Elder Kimball suffered from the chills over three months, a part of which time he was alone, but was kindly treated by the Indians and also by many friends among the Whites. He baptized three persons and blessed several children. In the spring of 1887 he received his release, only temporary, however, as he was still kept in charge of the Indian Territory mission. He parted with the Elders and their kind friend, Mr. Wm. H. Hendricks, who had made a home for the Elders for three or four years. When Elder Kimball thanked him for this kindness, he said: "Not at all, Mr. Kimball, you have done more for me and my people than I ever did for you." Brother Kimball, accompanied by Elder Ammon Allen, who was released because of ill health, arrived home April 24, 1887, and a few days later commenced work at Woolley, Young and Hardy Co.'s store. May 11, 1887, he was set apart to labor as a home missionary in the Salt Lake Stake of Zion. Elder Kimball remained in charge of the Indian Territory mission until the spring of 1897. Under his presidency (for twelve years) the mission grew from one Elder (himself) to sixty-one Elders, and from one tribe of the Indian Territory to five States and Territories, which is now known as the Southwestern States mission. When the 22nd Ward in Salt Lake Stake was organized, Elder Kimball was chosen first counselor to Bishop Alfred Solomon, but afterwards released on account of his missionary labors. Elder Kimball was also active in local affairs; he served most of two terms as district school trustee, represented his people in county and city conventions, was a member of the city council of Brigham City, while residing a short time in Box Elder county, Utah, and was a member of one of the constitutional conventions. After returning from his first mission in 1887, he engaged in mercantile pursuits, working for different firms in Salt Lake and Brigham City: later he represented various home industries, traveling for several years throughout the intermountain west. While thus engaged, he was energetic in preaching the gospel and laboring in the interests of the Sunday Schools through the various Stakes of Zion. At the Sunday School conference held Oct. 3, 1897, Elder Kimball was sustained as a member of the Deseret Sunday School Union Board, and is still a member. In the president's office Salt Lake City. Utah. Jan. 22, 1898, he was set apart as president of the St. Joseph Stake by Pres. Joseph F. Smith, assisted by Apostle John Henry Smith, and at a special Priesthood meeting and conference held in Thatcher, Arizona, Jan. 29th and 30th, 1898, he was installed in his new office, Apostles John Henry Smith and John W. Taylor being in charge. The Stake was subsequently reorganized in considerable detail under Elder Kimball's management. The St. Joseph Stake Academy has grown under his supervision into the Latter-day Saints Academy, now the largest school in Arizona. In temporal matters Elder Kimball is very active. He is a member of the board of directors of three canal companies and president of two; operates with his partner, Bro. Edward C. Phillips, in the leading implement business in the Gila valley, and is secretary and store manager of the firm of Thatcher Implement and Mercantile Co. He also served as a member of the 21st Arizona legislature.
