Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Bent, Samuel

Bent, Samuel, presiding Elder at Garden Grove, Iowa, in 1846, was the son of Joel and Mary Bent, and was born July 19, 1778, at Barre, Worcester county, Mass. He joined the Congregationalists when quite young, was a deacon in that church, and a professor of religion for twenty-seven years previous to receiving the Latter-day work. He was a colonel in the Massachusetts militia; resided a few years in St. Lawrence county, New York, and was a distinguished member of the Presbyterian church in Hopkinton. His first knowledge of the latter-day work was obtained through a Book of Mormon, which was brought to Michigan by Elmira Scobie while visiting her mother. During a fit of sickness he saw a vision, in which he was shown that the fullness of the gospel would be revealed in connection with that book, and that he would be an instrument in proclaiming the same. He was baptized in Pontiac, Oakland county, Michigan, by Jared Carter, in January, 1833, ordained an Elder on the day of his baptism, and started on a mission the next day. He raised up the Huron branch and was increasing in his labors in spreading the gospel. He visited Kirtland in the fall of 1833, and in 1834 went up to Missouri in Zion's camp. In 1835 he went up to Kirtland and attended the school of the Prophets; he also attended the solemn assembly in 1836; and the same year removed with his family to Liberty, Clay county, Missouri. When twenty-seven years of age, he married Mary Hilbourne, daughter of the Rev. Joseph Hilbourne, by whom he had three sons, namely, William C., Joseph K., and Horatio G., and one daughter, Mary. He was tied to a tree and whipped by the mob, near Liberty, July 5, 1836. His wife, Mary, died, and he immediately removed to Far West and assisted in establishing that location. In September, 1837, he married Lettuce Palmer, relict of Elder Ambrose Palmer. In 1838, he was taken a prisoner to Richmond jail by Gen. Lucas, and confined about three weeks, when he was released on bail and returned to Goose creek, about one mile from Far West, where he resided. He was warned by a vision to leave, which he did before morning, and went through the woods, and by the wilderness, on foot, to the Missouri river. He had been gone about two hours, when his persecutors came to his house after him. He went to Illinois and aided in establishing Nauvoo. Here he acted as colonel of a regiment in the Nauvoo Legion, a member of the High Council, and senior member of the council of fifty. In 1844 he performed a mission through Illinois, Michigan and Indiana; and he was captain of a hundred in the exodus from Nauvoo. While the Saints were on their journey westward, the council deemed it prudent to make a settlement and station at Garden Grove, Iowa, where Elder Bent was appointed to preside with Daniel Fullmer and Aaron Johnson for his counselors. Here he died Aug. 16, 1846. After his decease Elders Fullmer and Johnson wrote to the council of the Twelve; the following is extracted from their letter:-"Garden Grove is left without a president, and a large circle of relatives and friends are bereft of an affectionate companion and friend, and the Church has sustained the loss of an undeviating friend to truth and righteousness. The glory of his death is, that he died in the full triumphs of faith and knowledge of the truth of our holy religion, exhorting his friends to be faithful; having three days previous received intimations of his approaching end by three holy messengers from on high."
