Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Wells, Daniel Hanmer

Wells, Daniel Hanmer, second counselor to President Brigham Young from 1857 to 1877, was the son of Daniel Wells and Catherine Chapin, and was born at Trenton, Oneida county, New York, Oct. 27, 1814. His father served in the war of 1812 and was a descendant of the celebrated Thomas Wells, the fourth governor of Connecticut, who was several times elected alternately as governor and lieutenant-governor of that colony. Daniel H. Wells' mother was the daughter of David Chapin, a revolutionary soldier and connected with one of the oldest and most distinguished New England families. He served under the immediate command of Washington during the greater part of the War of Independence. In 1826, when he was but twelve years of age, Daniel H. lost his father, and six years later, together with his mother and sister, he moved to Ohio and the following spring to Illinois. He took up his abode at Commerce, then a small village, but afterwards noted as the "Mormon" city of Nauvoo. Here he was elected constable and later justice of the peace; he was also an officer in the first militia organization of the district. In politics he was a Whig and figured prominently in the political conventions of the period. As an ardent champion of universal liberty and a foe to oppression in every form, he was highly esteemed by people of all parties and creeds, and frequently acted as arbitrator in difficulties between neighbors and families. "Squire Wells" was noted, in that early day, as a man of strict integrity, with a high sense of justice and impartiality. In 1839, when the Saints, fleeing from Missouri, settled at Commerce, he aided in securing for them a cordial welcome. Among other pieces of property, he owned eighty acres of land on the bluff. This he platted into city lots, which he let the poor and persecuted refugees have at very low figures and on long time for payment. This endeared him to the people and determined the location of the chief part of the city, and of the Temple which was built on land that had belonged to him. On making the acquaintance of the Prophet Joseph Smith he became strongly attached to him, though then unconnected with the Church. When the charter was granted by the Illinois legislature to the City of Nauvoo, he was elected an alderman and a member of the city council; also a regent of the University and a brigadier-general in the Nauvoo Legion. He was prominent in the city affairs and supported every public measure for the progress and welfare of the citizens. When the opposition to the "Mormons" reached its height, General Wells remained on the side of the assailed people and would not join in any of the movements for their injury. The murder of the Prophet and Patriarch (Joseph and Hyrum) aroused his deepest indignation, and he strongly protested against the demand of the governor of the State for the arms of the Legion, which was made under the pretext that the people of Nauvoo might attempt to avenge the slaughter of their leaders. But it was not until the exodus of the main body of the Church, and the people who remained in the city were in their direst extremity, being attacked by their enemies in violation of a solemn compact, that this sterling champion of the oppressed cast in his lot for life with the Latter-day Saints. After his baptism on Aug. 9, 1846, he gave the Church his full faith and support. In the battle of Nauvoo, General Wells was practically the leading spirit. Col. Johnson was taken sick and Lieutenant-Colonel Cutler assumed the command. Brother Wells was his aide, and on his white charger was a prominent target for the enemy's bullets. His house also was fired upon repeatedly. He escaped unharmed, and during the three days' siege was a tower of strength to the men who were fighting for home and family. When the city was evacuated, he was one of the last to leave, and being fired upon by the enemy's cannon after crossing the river into Iowa, he sent one of the balls with his compliments to the governor of that State, as a specimen of Illinois' respect for its obligations. One of the terms of the treaty between the Saints and the mob was that the former should cross into Iowa unmolested and have their arms returned to them. Brother Wells rode day and night in a one horse buggy to reach the main body of the exiled "Mormons," that teams might be immediately sent back for the remnant that had been expelled from Nauvoo. After settling up his affairs in Illinois, he started for the West and came to Utah in 1848, acting as aide-de-camp to President Brigham Young on the second journey of the pioneers. When Great Salt Lake City was laid out, Brother Wells drew a lot in the Eighth Ward, but as President Young desired his near presence, he moved to the east side of the Eagle Gate, and subsequently to the land east of the "Deseret News" office, where he occupied the small adobie houses which stood there until a recent date, and where most of his children were born. Brother Wells took an active part in the organization of the provisional State of Deseret, and was elected to the first legislative council and appointed as State attorney, and was also elected major-general of the Nauvoo Legion (the State militia), by the General Assembly May 26, 1849. He received the rank of lieutenant-general of the Legion March 27, 1852, and was commissioned to that office by Governor Brigham Young March 7, 1855. On the passage of the Territorial militia law providing for the election of general officers, he was re-elected lieutenant-general April 6, 1857. In the Indian troubles that arose in Utah county and afterwards in Sanpete county, General Wells took the field in person, routing the savages at Provo, and other places, and saving the Sanpete and Sevier settlements from the disasters that subsequently threatened them. These Indian campaigns were conducted with great military skill and success, and cost a great deal of money, men, munitions and provisions having to be largely furnished from Salt Lake City and the north. A claim for over a million dollars against the United States remains to this day unpaid, though made out in due and detailed form, in the same manner as the Oregon claim, which was settled long ago. General Wells was in command of the Echo Canyon expedition in 1857-58, and conducted it with signal skill, under the direction of Governor Brigham Young, without shedding "one drop of blood." His fearless character, cool head and executive talent were here exhibited in a manner that won for him unfading renown among the "Mormon" people. Hon. Daniel H. Wells was a member of the legislative council in the Territorial assembly for many terms, and of most of the conventions that framed constitutions for Utah's Statehood. His clear perception of legal points and strong regard for constitutional principles rendered him a valuable adviser and able legislator. He was appointed second counselor to President Brigham Young, Jan. 4, 1857, filling the vacancy occasioned by the death of President Jedediah M. Grant. Brother Wells had previously been ordained an Apostle, and with Presidents Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball he visited the Saints throughout the Territory, aided in locating and organizing many settlements, and gave counsel in relation to the affairs of the Church. He was also the superintendent of public works, occupying that position until 1864. In the absence of President Young he was frequently left in charge of affairs, and was looked to for advice in important matters. Oct. 28, 1871, President Wells was arrested on a trumped up charge of being accessory to the murder of Richard Yates at the mouth of Echo canyon in 1857. The notorious "Bill" Hickman confessed to having done the deed, but was induced to implicate General Wells, alleging that the occurrence took place while he was in charge of the Echo canyon expedition. He was sent to Fort Douglas for safe keeping, where he received the most courteous treatment from Gen. Morrow, who regarded the whole proceeding as an outrage. However, on Monday, the 31st, being brought before Judge McKean, application was made that he be admitted to bail. His attorneys advised him that such an application would be in vain, but his confidence was complete that he would be successful, and he insisted that the attempt should be made. In spite of the claim of the prosecution that this was a charge of murder in the first degree, Judge McKean took into consideration all the circumstances, including the fact that the defendant was mayor of the city, and to the surprise of the entire community he accepted bail in the sum of $50,000-the prosecution demanding half a million-and the prisoner was released. The whole charge, of course, fell to the ground, as there was not the slightest foundation for it in fact. In the summer of 1876 he was placed in charge of a company to visit and encourage the newly started settlements in Arizona. While crossing the Colorado river at Lee's Ferry, the boat, containing his traveling wagon and outfit and a number of the party, was capsized and thrown into the rushing and turbulent stream. He was only an indifferent swimmer, but though weighed down with his boots and clothing he calmly struck out for the shore, reaching it without wetting his necktie. He always regarded his escape as miraculous, feeling as though unseen hands were supporting him. Bishop Lorenzo W. Roundy, who was regarded as an expert swimmer, was drowned, and the whole outfit was swept away and lost. His position as one of the First Presidency he occupied until the decease of President Young, Aug. 29, 1877. When the Twelve Apostles succeeded to the presidency, Brother Wells was appointed a counselor to that quorum, which position he held until his death. In 1864 he went on a mission to Great Britain, and, with Elder Brigham Young, jun., presided over all the missions in Europe, visiting various countries, ministering to the people and superintending the emigration. He returned to Utah in the fall of 1865, and in 1868 took charge of the Endowment House, where he ministered in the sacred ordinances for the living and the dead for many years. In February, 1866, he was elected Mayor of Salt Lake City. He was re-elected successively until 1876. The first occasion on which women exercised the elective franchise in Utah was on Feb. 14, 1870, when they cast their ballots for Daniel H. Wells for mayor and for the other members of the city council. In 1872 he was one of the prime movers in starting the gas works in Salt Lake City, in which he largely invested and which proved a successful enterprise. At the general election, held August 3, 1874, when a delegate to Congress was to be elected, Robert N. Baskin had been nominated as the "Liberal" candidate, in opposition to Hon. George Q. Cannon; and the U. S. marshal, General Maxwell, attempted to take control of the election. No trouble occurred except at the Fifth precinct, the polling place for which was at the City Hall. Here a large number of armed deputy marshals with a mob of "Liberals" interfered with the police in their efforts to preserve the peace. Some arrests being made by the police, they were in turn arrested by deputy marshals, and excitement ran high. Mayor Wells was on the spot and endeavored to keep down the tumult. He was set upon by the mob, brutally struck and his coat nearly torn from his back. The police came to his rescue, the mob was forced back, and the mayor appeared on the balcony, and, amid cries of "shoot him, shoot him," he read the riot act and commanded the police to disperse the crowd. This was done at the expense of some broken heads, but was effectual, and the mayor and police held their places and vindicated the law. The next morning Mayor Wells was arrested and put under $4,000 bonds. The chief of police and several of his officers were also arrested; but the whole matter was dropped, and it was everywhere acknowledged that the city officials simply did their duty, and that Mayor Wells had exhibited fearless determination, maintained the dignity of his office and prevented the serious conflict desired by those who provoked the disturbance, to be used for political purposes. When President Young was sent to the Penitentiary for contempt of court March 11, 1875, for not complying with an absurd order by Judge McKean, President Wells accompanied him and stayed with him until his release; his imprisonment, however, lasted but one day. Judge McKean lost his official head for this act of tyrannical folly. In 1879 Brother Wells again saw the inside of the Utah penitentiary, this time being imprisoned himself for contempt of court, in refusing to disclose the secret and sacred rites of the Endowment House. As a witness in the Miles polygamy case on May 2, 1879, he was interrogated by the prosecuting attorney in relation to clothing worn in those ceremonies. He declined to answer, for which he was remanded to the custody of the Marshal, and next day, being cited to appear and questioned again, he replied, "I declined to answer that question yesterday, and do so today, because I am under moral and sacred obligations to not answer; and it is interwoven in my character never to betray a friend, a brother, my country, my God or my religion." This was a clear exhibition of the character of the man. Not for worlds would he swerve from that position. He was sentenced to a fine of a hundred dollars and imprisonment for two days. He paid the penalty, and on May 6th he was escorted from the penitentiary by a Procession, hastily but thoroughly organized, consisting of about ten thousand people with banners, mottoes, flags and signs of rejoicing, one of the most remarkable gatherings and demonstrations of respect, ever witnessed in the United States of America. An immense but peaceful meeting was subsequently held in the Tabernacle, where appropriate speeches were made. In December, 1884, Counselor Wells crossed the ocean again and presided over the European Mission, visiting the branches and conferences throughout the British Isles and also in Scandinavia, Germany and Switzerland. His health was feeble, but he labored energetically until his release in January, 1887, when he returned to the United States, and after visiting relatives in the East, reached his home again in July of that year, and was joyfully welcomed by his family and friends. When the Manti Temple was completed and dedicated he was appointed to take charge as president, May 21, 1888. Here he was in congenial element. The salvation of the dead was the chief attraction to him in the doctrines expounded to him by Joseph Smith the Prophet, and led to his investigation and acceptance of the gospel. He officiated in the Temple and performed his duties as counselor to the Twelve until stricken with the illness which culminated in his death. He came to Salt Lake City, March 14, 1891, and received every attention that loving hearts and hands could bestow. He had suffered for many years with a painful physical ailment, but his heroic nature and strong will enabled him to surmount the difficulties it occasioned. Pleuro-pneumonia supervened, and at 1 o'clock, March 24, 1891, he peacefully departed, being without pain and conscious to the last. Brother Wells would have been a leading character in any community. Standing six feet in height, with prominent features and organs of perception, his appearance was striking while his manner was unassuming. Apparently stern in his demeanor he was really one of the kindest of men, full of sympathy and affection, ready to aid the distressed and with a heart so big that he would welcome the world to partake of his hospitality and share with him whatever he had. His house was always open to his friends, and while acting as mayor of Salt Lake City he entertained many distinguished visitors, both Americans and foreigners, who respected him for his virtues, while disagreeing with his views on religion. He was a firm friend and supporter of education, was for many years chancellor and regent of the University of Deseret and considered that a good education was the best legacy he could bequeath to his children. He was also a great reader, an ardent admirer of the drama, which was his chief amusement, and a promoter of music, science and art. In politics he was a Republican from the time of the organization of the party. He took earnest interest in national politics, in which he was thoroughly versed, and was ever ready to maintain his views though never a bitter or contentious partizan. He was engaged in many business enterprises, but, placing his public duties first, his own affairs became somewhat complicated and at one time he was heavily involved. But of late years he was gradually extricated from embarrassment and was able to leave his family the possessors of unencumbered yet modest homes. Brother Wells had seven wives (six of whom survived him), by whom he had thirty-seven children. Of these twenty-four, namely thirteen sons and eleven daughters, were living at the time of his demise. He left twenty-five living grandchildren. His faith in God and in the system called "Mormonism" was unbounded, and his integrity to the principles of the gospel was unwavering. His testimony to the divine mission of Joseph Smith was powerful, and from the time he received it by the manifestation of the Holy Spirit, he never doubted it or feared to face the opposition of its enemies. His was a noble spirit and he performed a noble work on the earth.
