Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Christensen, George

Christensen, George, second counselor to Pres. Christian N. Lund, of the North Sanpete Stake of Zion, is the son of Emanuel Christensen and Rasmine Rasmussen, and was born Feb. 24, 1866 in Aarhus, Denmark, being the youngest of eight children. He emigrated with his parents to Utah in June, 1873, located in Brigham City, but removed to Mt. Pleasant in November, 1874. Here George attended school a few winters, and also assisted his father in the work of tanning. At the age of sixteen years he entered the employ of George Farnsworth as clerk in his store, and has been more or less connected with business pursuits ever since. He was a student at the B. Y. Academy for two years, graduating from that institution in June, 1889, as No. 1 in his class; was principal of the L. D. S. Seminary at Mt. Pleasant for three years; principal of the Sanpete Stake Academy at Ephraim for one year, and principal of the public school at Mt. Pleasant for several years. He has held the following business positions: Secretary and treasurer of Mt. Pleasant Co-op; secretary and treasurer of the Union Wool and Live Stock Commission, and of the Union Mercantile Co.; manager of George Christensen and Co.'s business, and at present secretary and treasurer of the Wasatch Mercantile Co. He has held a number of civil offices, viz: City councilman, treasurer of Sanpete county, justice of the peace, and is at present referee in bankruptcy for Sanpete county, and county superintendent of schools. He was elected mayor of Mt. Pleasant Nov. 5, 1901. His ecclesiastical positions have been as follows: He was baptized at Brigham City, Box Elder county, in June, 1874, ordained a Deacon when about fourteen years of age; was secretary of the primary association of Mt. Pleasant for several years; secretary of the Y. M. M. I. A. for two years, and president of the Y. M. M. I. A. for two and a half years. He served successively as superintendent of the South Ward Sunday school, superintendent of Mt. Pleasant Sunday school, united, and Stake superintendent of the Sunday schools of Sanpete Stake; was ordained a Seventy, Aug. 6, 1884, by Jens Hansen; and ordained a High Priest, Nov. 13, 1893, by Apostle John Henry Smith. May 8, 1896, he was set apart by Apostle John Henry Smith for a mission to Scandinavia, where he labored as a traveling Elder in the Copenhagen branch until Aug. 15, 1896, when he was called to preside over the Copenhagen conference. In June, 1897, he was appointed translator for "Scandinaviens Stjerne," and on May 10, 1898, he succeeded Pres. Christian N. Lund as president of the Scandinavian mission. Upon his return home in October, 1898, he was appointed Stake superintendent of Y. M. M. I. A. in Sanpete Stake, which position he held until Dec. 9, 1900, when, at the organization of the North Sanpete Stake of Zion, he was called as second counselor to Stake President Christian N. Lund, for which position he was set apart by Apostle John Henry Smith. Dec. 31, 1890, Elder Christensen married Miss Dorthea M. Mogensen in the Manti Temple. Three children blessed this union, namely: Ethelinda, George Q. and Mine Dorthea. His wife died Sept. 1, 1899, followed shortly after by her babe, Mine Dorthea, for whose existence she gave her own life. Being the only surviving child of his parents in America, Elder Christensen was early in life thrown upon his own resources and at the age of sixteen the care of his aged parents devolved upon him; he has had to make his own way in the world.
