Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Cluff, Harvey Harris

Cluff, Harvey Harris, president of the Iosepa colony of Hawaiian Saints from 1889 to March 1901, is the son of David Cluff, senior, and Betsy Hall, and was born January 9, 1836, at Kirtland, Geauga county, Ohio. He is the seventh child of a family of twelve children, eleven sons and one daughter, and descends from illustrious ancestry, which came to America with the early colonists and settled in the States of Massachusetts and New Hampshire. The family of Cluffs moved from New Hampshire to Kirtland, Ohio, where they became identified as members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints: thence they removed to Nauvoo, in 1840, where they remained until the expulsion of the Saints in 1846. Leaving Nauvoo as exiles in 1846, the family reached Mt. Pisgah, in Iowa. Two years recuperating prepared the family for the journey to Council Bluffs, thence to Utah in the spring of 1850, arriving at Salt Lake on the 3rd day of October. Provo, Utah county, was selected for a permanent home and here the family joined the few settlers who preceded them in building a log fort, of four angles, the houses all facing a square. October 6, 1856, at a semi-annual conference held in Salt Lake City Harvey H. offered his services at the call of President Brigham Young to go back on the plains and assist the belated hand-cart companies. He started the following day, with other volunteers, and 22 four-mule teams loaded with supplies, and was gone three months. Arriving home he wooed and won Miss Margaret Ann Foster; their marriage took place in Provo, Jan. 24, 1857. In May he was ordained a Seventy of the 45th quorum and afterwards he became one of the presidents of that quorum. He served in the "Echo canyon" war and became one of the "Standing army." He served three terms as a member of the city council of Provo city and in 1860 joined four of his brothers in the erection of a large two-story furniture, dancing and theatrical building, in which Harvey distinguished himself in personating the character of Claud Melnot, John Mildmay, Don Caesar de Bazan and the Yankee in Cuba. He went to England on a mission in the spring of 1865, leaving his wife with the only surviving child, a daughter, Margaret, three years old; their three sons, Harvey H., Seth M. and George H. had died a few years previously. After laboring six months in the Manchester conference, he was appointed president of the Glasgow conference and Scottish district, which positions he held when released to return home in 1868. He was appointed captain of the company of Saints which sailed from Liverpool, England, in the ship "Constitution," and after his arrival home, he was admitted into the "School of the Prophets." In 1869 he was called to go on a mission to the Sandwich islands, accompanied by his wife, who had lost her last child just previous to his return from Europe. He labored Gn the Laie sugar works during the five years, except six weeks, when he went to the island of Hawaii, returning home in 1874. After his return he clerked in the Provo co-op, became business manager of the "Utah County Times Publishing Co.," a director in the "United Order" organization, and assessor and collector of Utah county and Provo city. Thus he was employed until 1879. In August, 1875, he was ordained a Bishop by President Young and called to preside over the Fourth Ward of Provo, and on June 2, 1877, he was chosen second counselor to the president of Utah Stake. He entered into celestial marriage July 6, 1877. In 1879, while in the presidency of Utah Stake, he went, agreeable to call, to the Sandwich islands to preside over that mission, accompanied by his wife, Margaret. While visiting in Honolulu, Queen Kapiolani desired the presence of Pres. Cluff and wife at the palace, ostensibly for the purpose of receiving a blessing under his hands, which was granted. A new meeting house was commenced at Laie, the chief corner stone of which was laid by King David Kalakaua and Pres. Cluff, the latter ; offering the dedicatory prayer. Church records were deposited in the southeast corner. Mr. Nagasaki, the envoy of Japan, was also present. Returning home with eight natives in. 1882. Pres. Cluff resumed his duties in the presidency of Utah Stake and became manager of the Provo Lumber and Building Co., and superintendent of the erection of the Stake tabernacle. September 20, 1883, Margaret A. Cluff died in Provo, which was the saddest blow in all the trials of his life. He was elected a director of the First National bank of Provo, and of the Provo Co-op Institution and director and treasurer of the Church association of Utah Stake. April 30, 1887, he was arrested on the charge of unlawful cohabitation with his wives and on the 14th of April of the following year he was sentenced to six months imprisonment in the penitentiary, and to pay $300 fine and costs. After serving five months, he was honorably released. He acted as superintendent of the erection of the Brigham Young academy new building, which received the school Jan. 1, 1889. In August of this year, Pres. Wilford Woodruff sent a message to Pres. Cluff that it was the mind and will of the Lord that he should "colonize the Hawaiian Saints in Skull valley and preside over them." His wife, Emily, was set apart to the same mission. On the 28th of the same month, the colony was, under Pres. Cluff, located in Skull valley and the place was named Iosepa. A townsite was surveyed, lots drawn and Church organizations effected. In 1890, Presidents Woodruff, Cannon and Smith visited the colony and dedicated the valley for a gathering place for the Saints from the Islands of the Sea. A new meeting house was commenced in 1900, and the beginning of the new century found Pres. Cluff, presiding over the Hawaiian colony. He is now over sixty-five years of age, the father of sixteen children, having spent nearly twenty-one years of his life among the islanders and four years in the European mission.
