Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Foote, Warren

Foote, Warren, a Patriarch in the Church, is the eleventh child and third son of David Foote and Irene Lane, and was born Aug. 10, 1817, in the town of Dryden, Tompkins county, N. Y. The following is an autobiographical sketch of his life: "I was educated in all the branches of learning as taught in the common schools in the State of New York. I delighted in reading history, but as books were scarce at that time, I read the Bible and became so interested in it, that I read it from Genesis to Revelations three times before I was sixteen years old. My mother was a member of the Presbyterian church at that time and I was sent to the Sunday school of that denomination. We were required to commit to memory ten verses in the New Testament every week, and recite them in school. After becoming familiar with the New Testament, I began to wonder why there was no Apostles, Prophets or spiritual gifts in the churches now, as well as in ancient days. I was a firm believer in the Bible and often wished that I lived in the days of Jesus, and been one of His disciples. I had no faith in the religious teachings of the various sects, and their revivals and shouting meetings, made no serious impressions on my mind. I could not believe that the Church of Christ was divided into creeds and sects, and I resolved that I would not have anything to do with any of them, but frequently prayed to the Lord in secret to guide me in the right way. In the spring of 1830, my father borrowed a Book of Mormon from a neighbor; I read it and believed it to be a true record, but I knew nothing regarding the purposes for which it was revealed, as no Elder came to Dryden to preach. In March 1832, my father removed to Greenwood, Steuben county, N.Y. In the fall of 1833, two Elders came to Greenwood; they preached mostly on the subject of the gathering of Israel in the last days, This was the first sermon I ever heard on 'Mormonism,' and I believed it. In November, 1833, father went to Geneseo to investigate the new religion. He became convinced that it was the true church of Christ and was baptized by Elder John Murdock. He brought a Book of Mormon home with him, which I read carefully, comparing it with the Bible. A branch of the Church was raised up in Greenwood, through the preaching of Elders who came from Kirtland. Two of my sisters were baptized, and the branch now consisted of about twenty members. I attended all their meetings, and fully believed the gospel as it was taught by them. In May, 1837, I went with my father to Kirtland, Ohio. On the 13th we went to Joseph Smith's house, and had a short interview with him. This was the first time I ever saw the Prophet. (Father had become acquainted with him the year previously.) Father Joseph Smith, sen., went with us, and others, to the Temple, and showed us the four Egyptian mummies and the record that was found with one of them. I gazed upon those writings with intense interest. I stayed in Kirtland ten days, and then returned to Greenwood. The following October (1837), we removed to Kirtland, and obtained a house from Stephen Markham, in Chester, to live in through the winter. This place was seven miles from Kirtland. I taught a school this winter in the western part of Kirtland township. May 26, 1838, we started on our journey to Missouri, in company with Stephen Markham and family and eight other families. On arriving six miles east of Jacksonville, Ill., the funds being exhausted, they stopped to work at harvesting to recruit. A dissatisfaction arose in the company here, and the company was broken up. From this place father, my brother-in-law (Geo. Gates) and myself pursued our journey alone with an ox team. We arrived safely at our destination Aug. 30, 1888, just in time to pass through the mobbings. We spent the winter eight miles east of Far West on Shoal creek. In April, 1839, we started for Quincy, Ill., in company with Mr. Markham's family and two others. After wading through mudholes and muddy roads, we arrived in Quincy April 14, 1839. We located at a point 12 miles east of that place in Adams county. I attended the first conference held after Joseph Smith escaped from Missouri, in the old Presbyterian meeting house, near Quincy, and also attended a conference held in Nauvoo in October. 1841, I saw Joseph Smith deposit the manuscript of the Book of Mormon in the corner stone of the Nauvoo House. March 24, 1842, I was baptized into the Church by Daniel A. Miller, who presided over the Freedom branch in Adams county, Ill. June 4, 1842, I was ordained an Elder under the hands of Jacob Myers, president of the Freedom branch, and Heman Hyde, at a conference held at Elder Hyde's house. June 8, 1843, I was united in marriage to Miss Artemisia S. Myers by Elder Amos Jackson, at her father's house in Adam's county, Ill. Miss Myers was a daughter of Jacob Myers and Sarah Coleman, and was born Jan. 24, 1829. Her parents joined the Church about the year of 1833 in Richland county, Ohio. They passed through the persecutions in Missouri in 1838-39. At a conference of Seventies held in the Seventies' Hall in Nauvoo Oct. 27, 1844, I was ordained a Seventy under the hands of Joseph Young and Henry Jacobs, and was admitted into the 9th quorum. In the spring of 1845, in company with my father and mother, I removed into Hancock county, 12 miles south of Nauvoo, at a place called Montebello. At this place my father and mother died. All that prevented the mobbers from burning our houses after burning all the houses of the Saints south of us, was the timely interference of Sheriff Backenstos with a posse from Nauvoo under Col. Markham. I attended the general conference held in the Temple at Nauvoo in October, 1845, at which conference it was voted unanimously to move en masse from the United States to some place where we could live in peace. I spent the following winter getting wagon timber, and making a wagon, and preparing for the exodus in the spring. Jan. 28, 1846, my wife and I received our endowments in the Nauvoo Temple. May 4, 1846, I started in company with eight families (my wife's father, Jacob Myers and family being one of them) for some place in the west,-we knew not where, neither did we much care, so that we could get out of the reach of the mobbers. After a wearisome journey through storms and mud, much of the way, we arrived at John Taylor's camp, near the Missouri river. Father Myers and I located at a little Indian village, which was afterwards named Kanesville. Father Myers, being a millwright by trade, got a job of building a saw-mill for a Mr. Hildreth, who was living with the Indians and had a respectable Indian woman for a wife. I worked some on the mill with him, by which means we obtained provisions for the winter. I was wonderfully blest of the Lord during the four years of my stay in Kanesville. In the spring of 1850 I had very poor health, and I began to think seriously about going to the Valley. I made it a subject of earnest prayer to the Lord, and it was made known to me that it was the will of the Lord that I should go that season, and that I, and my family, should be preserved to reach that place in safety. After receiving this assurance, I set about preparing for the journey, and in three weeks from that time I was ready to start. June 11, 1850, in company with three other families, I started for the place appointed for the organization of the company which was eighteen miles below Kanesville, where we arrived on the 12th, and Elder Orson Hyde proceeded to organize the company of one hundred. He nominated me for captain of the hundred, and Otis L. Terry and Wm. Wall captains of fifty. The company started from the Missouri river June 17, 1850, and after a wearisome journey of 101 days we arrived in Salt Lake City Sept. 26, 1850. There was about twenty deaths in the company (nearly all from the cholera) in the forepart of the journey. I eventually located in Little Cottonwood Ward, 12 miles south of Salt Lake City, in the summer of 1853, this Ward was ordered to gather into a fort on account of Indian Chief Walker's enmity. Accordingly, a fort was located, containing ten acres, and surrounded by a mud wall, which was called Union, and all moved into it. I lived in this Ward until the fall of 1863, During this time I was elected justice of the peace for three terms, and in a military capacity I served in the Cottonwood and Willow Creek Military District as first sergeant, second lieutenant and major. And in the new organization of the Nauvoo Legion, I was elected major's adjutant, and afterwards major of fifth battalion, second regiment, second brigade, Nauvoo Legion. Bishop Silas Richards chose me for his first counselor to fill the vacancy caused by Jehu Cox, who had removed to Sanpete county. I also served as postmaster of Union for about four years. In the fall of 1863 I prepared to move to Round valley, Millard county, and the following winter I moved all my family. Together with four other families I was one of the first to locate on the town-site of Scipio. In the winter of 1864-65, the First Presidency called for volunteers to settle the Muddy valley, Arizona (now Nevada), I responded to the call and arrived with several other families at the crossing of the Muddy creek, on the old California road, May 22, 1865. Thomas S. Smith, president of the mission, met with us here for the purpose of organizing and locating the people. In the afternoon of May 28, 1865 (about thirty families having arrived), Pres. Smith proceeded to organize. He nominated me for president of the branch, which was unanimously sustained. But instead of locating at the Upper Muddy, he thought it would be best to locate nearer to St. Thomas. Accordingly we all moved down to within nine miles above that place and surveyed about sixty town lots and named the place St. Joseph. In July I returned to Scipio, and in November I moved my family to the Muddy. In June, 1866, Apostle Erastus Snow came down from St. George, together with others, and counseled the Saints to gather to one place on account of the Black Hawk war. St. Joseph was broken up, and I moved to St. Thomas. Pres. Smith chose me for his second counselor. When he was released from the mission and James Leithead was made Bishop of the mission, he called me to continue to act as second counselor; Andrew S. Gibbons being first counselor. When the Muddy mission was broken up in the winter of 1870-71, the St. Thomas Ward removed en masse to Long valley, Kane county, Utah, with the same Ward organization, and named their town Glendale. Aug. 5, 1877, I was ordained a High Priest and set apart to be a High Councilor in the Kanab Stake of Zion, under the hands of Apostle Erastus Snow, L. J. Nuttall and Howard O. Spencer. I was released from this position and ordained a Patriarch by Apostle Moses Thatcher, March 24, 1889, at Kanab. My labors in the ministry have been with the Saints in the settlements where I have resided. Sixty three years of my life have been spent with the Church. I have never been called to go on foreign missions to preach the gospel, but I have done considerable preaching by letters to my relatives and friends. I entered into the order of plural marriage with Miss Eliza Maria Ivie, who was sealed to me by Pres. Brigham Young March 2, 1858, I have endeavored to respond to every duty required of me, whether ecclesiastical, civil or military, to the best of my ability. I have done quite an amount of work in the Temples for my dead relatives. As regards my family, I have at the present time five sons and five daughters living, and seven sons and one daughter dead. I have sixty-one grandchildren living, and eight dead, also, thirteen great-grandchildren living, and three dead."
