Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Christensen, Carl Christian Anthon

Christensen, Carl Christian Anthon, a Patriarch in the Church, was born in Copenhagen, Denmark, Nov. 28, 1831, of poor, but respectable and honest parents. His father's name was Mads Christensen, born in the neighborhood of Skive, in Jutland, 1798; and his mother, Dorthea Christiane Christensen, was born in Copenhagen Nov. 16, 1806. On account of losing both her parents when a child, she was early in life thrown among strangers, and sometimes suffered much unkind treatment; but this misfortune turned her mind to God and religion, and had subsequently much to do with moulding the temperament of her children, as she trained them in the fear of the Lord to the best of her understanding. About the year 1848, she joined the Baptist denomination, but this only made her four sons more uncertain as to which of the religious denominations was the right one. When Apostle Erastus Snow and the other Elders came with the true gospel, she was among the first to embrace it and join the Church; she was baptized by Elder Geo. P. Dykes, Aug. 17, 1850, and on the 26th of September of the same year her oldest son, the subject of this sketch, was also baptized by the same Elder; her other three sons joined the Church soon afterwards and finally emigrated to Zion. She left Denmark in December, 1853, taking her son Frederik with her. Her youngest son, William, had preceded her to Utah, but her husband, who would not embrace the gospel, remained behind and died in Copenhagen in 1864; the mother died in Salt Lake City in 1855. In January, 1853, Carl C. A. Christensen, who had been ordained a Priest, was sent on his first mission, in the district of West Zealand, where he labored with much success together with Elder Knud H. Bruun, from January till July of that year. At a conference held in Copenhagen in October, 1853, he was called to labor as a missionary in Norway, having previously been ordained an Elder. He left his native land, Oct. 19, 1853, and arrived in the city of Frederikstad, Norway, on the 21st. There he met Pres. Erik G. M. Hougan and many of the Saints. At a meeting held that same evening, he was appointed to go to Christiania, the capital of Norway, to assist Elder Canute Peterson, who had gone to that city a few days before. He journeyed thither on foot, a distance of about sixty miles, accompanied by Elder Carl C. N. Dorius who was appointed to commence a mission in the city of Drammen; they arrived in Christiania Oct. 30, 1853. Elder Peterson had already formed the acquaintance of some men, who worked in an iron foundry, and one of these had been baptized; still, Elder Peterson felt rather discouraged with the prospects of successful missionary work in the capital, and as his means of subsistence were getting very low, he did not feel very happy over any new arrival at that time under the circumstances; but when Elder Christensen succeeded in obtaining some money by selling his watch, he became more reconciled. From that time they labored together with success, and a branch of the Church was finally organized in Christiania Dec. 8, 1853, consisting of nine members. Being appointed to assist Elder Carl C. N. Dorius in Drammen, Elder Christensen went to that town in January, 1854. These two Elders, who were very intimate friends, labored in Drammen with success till they both were arrested and imprisoned for preaching. This was on March 3, 1854, and they remained in prison till March 22nd following, when they were liberated on bail, awaiting final sentence. April 21st, Elder Christensen re-entered his former prison-room to atone for his offense, by living on dry bread and cold water during five days, instead of paying a fine of ten specie-daler (about ten dollars). As soon as this little deviation from the regular diet was over, the Elders went to Christiania, where the Saints received them with great joy. Elder Christensen was then appointed to go to the city of Frederikshald, where some brethren had made visits during the winter from the neighboring city, Frederikstad, and where they had found some people friendly disposed to the gospel; one man had been baptized. Elder Christensen arrived there May 19, 1854, and as it was necessary to have the means to subsist on, he obtained employment as a painter and was thus able to pay for his board and lodgings. This, however, hindered him from doing as much missionary work as he would like to have done. Nevertheless, he used his spare time to as good advantage as possible, holding meetings on Sundays and at other times, as the opportunity presented itself; but although he made some converts, only one person was baptized during his stay in that city. In September he was called back to Christiania, where he now labored during the fall and winter of 1854-55. In December, 1854, a company of Latter-day Saint emigrants were forced to seek shelter in a haven near Mandal, on the South coast of Norway, where they remained about a week; many of the emigrants went on shore, preaching "Mormonism" to the people, but at the same time they indulged in a great deal of dancing and other frivolities, and, besides, they spent a good deal of money for extra provisions. The people liked "Mormon" money very well and seemed on the very edge of being converted, when the company went away. On account of an erroneous report, that a splendid opening had been made for introducing the gospel in that city, it was decided that Elder Christensen should go there at once, although it was then mid-winter and about three hundred miles had to be traveled on foot through snow and ice. He went to the police office to obtain his passport, but instead of obtaining what he asked for, he was put in prison for having preached and baptized again. The next day, when the regular trial took place, he was given his liberty within the city limits, by giving security for his appearance in court when wanted. The police authorities having obtained a better understanding of the personal character of the missionaries and their converts, by what had been brought out at the examination of the missionary prisoner and some witnesses, a new mode of prosecution was adopted by the police, and some learned men were sent to oppose the Elders in their meetings by scriptural arguments and common reason; this lead to some public debates being held in a large public school room, where Elders Canute Peterson and Christensen successfully vindicated "Mormonism," and opened the understanding of many people, of whom several afterwards joined the Church. By this means, also, the authorities became very friendly and have continued thus in many instances, even to the present time. Towards the close of March, Elder Christensen had once more gained unrestricted liberty to travel, after again being imprisoned for five days on bread and water diet. It was still winter, and he had to start with his luggage in a carpet bag tied to a small sleigh, given him by a boy. The nights were very cold, but the sun in the daytime having some power would melt the ice and snow in the roads, which made traveling in that way very hard and dangerous. When he reached Osterrisor, some 165 miles from Christiania, the Saints there urged him to rest a few days, which he did, after which he took the first steamer bound for his destination, Mandal, where he arrived in May, 1855. But he found no opening for the gospel. Nevertheless, he left his missionary companion, a brother Lars Petersen, there because he could find employment at his trade as a wheel-maker. Elder Christensen then returned to the larger city of Christiansand, which was also included in his missionary field, and there he found employment as a painter, spending all his spare time in trying to promulgate the gospel; but he only succeeded in bringing one family into the Church after spending four months there and in Mandal. A son of this family, Anthon Andersen, has since been honored with the mayorship of Logan, Utah, while branches of the same family are numerous in other parts of the State of Utah. In September, 1855, Elder Christensen was again called to Christiania, this time to succeed Elder Canute Peterson as president of the conference, which included all of Norway. This position he filled till April, 1857, when he left Norway to emigrate to Utah. On the way (in Liverpool) he married Miss Elise Haarby, the first woman baptized in Frederikshald. He acted as stewart while crossing the sea, and as a division captain while crossing the plains and mountains with a hand-cart, his young bride helping him to pull the hand-cart about thirteen hundred miles, from Iowa City to Salt Lake City, where they arrived Sept. 13, 1857, destitute of everything except faith in God and the hope for better days. Although Elder Christensen had studied to become an artist-painter, he now commenced to labor as a hod-carrier; later he advanced to become a charcoal-burner, a farmer, a house painter and a scene painter, working several winters as such in the Salt Lake City Theatre; he also became recognized as an artist and was awarded premiums at two of the annual fairs in earlier days. In 1865 to 1868 he performed a mission to Scandinavia and presided over the conference in Norway. After his return he was chosen one of the presidents of the 47th quorum of Seventy, which position he filled for many years. In 1887-89 he filled another mission to Scandinavia; this time he labored as writer and translator at the mission office in Copenhagen, Denmark, and in 1896 he was called, together with other Elders, to take a mission to Chicago, Illinois, but this call was rescinded after he had made all preparations to go, because it was thought that his age and health was not favorable. In March, 1900, he was ordained a High Priest and Patriarch by Apostle Francis M. Lyman, and since September, 1901, he has been employed in the Historian's Office, assisting in compiling material for a history of the Scandinavian mission. As a writer of both prose and poetry he is universally known among the Scandinavians, both at home and abroad. The Danish Latter-day Saint hymn book abounds with sacred poetical productions from his pen, and for twenty-six years he has been a constant contributor to "Bikuben," the Church organ in the Danish-Norwegian language in America. As the originator of the Church panorama, which has been exhibited in most of the settlements of the Saints in Utah and some in Idaho, and also as the originator of the first set of Sunday School Book of Mormon charts, his name has become generally and favorably known throughout the entire Church.
