Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Musser, Amos Milton

Musser, Amos Milton, traveling Bishop in the Church from 1858 to 1876, is the son of Samuel Musser and Ann Barr, and was born in Donegal township, Lancaster county, Pennsylvania, May 20, 1830. He was only about two years old when his father died, leaving a widow with four children. As soon as he was old enough he went to work to help support the family, and was thus prevented from attending school as much as he desired. He had a bright mind, however, and at every opportunity picked up useful knowledge and stored it away in his retentive memory. About the year 1837, the mother having married Abraham Bitner, the family removed to Illinois and settled near Quincy. A few years later they were again found in Pennsylvania, having returned on account of Father Bitner's sickness, which soon resulted in his death. During her second widowhood, "Mormon" Elders preached in Mrs. Bitner's neighborhood and converted her to their faith, and in 1846 she and her family moved to Nauvoo, only to find the city deserted by the main body of the Saints, who had begun their western exodus. With the remnant, who were too poor to move, the widow and her children were driven across the Mississippi river into Iowa by the mob. Mr. Musser was one of the youthful defenders of Nauvoo and was within a few feet of Capt. William Anderson and his son, Augustus, at the moment (on September 12, 1846) when they were shot down by the mob. Young Musser, on reaching Eddyville, Iowa, found employment as clerk in a store, and remained there until the spring of 1851, when he started for Utah. While on the way, at Kanesville, Iowa, May 24, 1851, he became a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, being baptized by Elder James Allred and confirmed by Apostle Orson Hyde. He had been nominally a member for some years previous to baptism. He reached Salt Lake City in the fall. A few days after his arrival here he accepted a position offered him by Pres. Brigham Young, as clerk and scribe in the general tithing office. The following year he was appointed upon a mission to Hindoostan, being blessed and set apart for it by Joseph Young, Lorenzo Snow and Wilford Woodruff, October 16, 1852. He was soon on his way with other Elders to Calcutta, arriving there in the spring of 1853. He labored in Calcutta about eight months and then with Elder Truman Leonard joined Elder Hugh Findlay in Bombay. Thence he was sent to Kurrachee, Scinde, where he remained until summoned home by Pres. Young. Sailing from India early in 1856, he reached London too late to accompany the season's emigration to Utah. He labored in England and Wales until the spring of 1857, when he again set out for home, reaching here in the fall. He had been absent five years and had circumscribed the earth; traveling at the outset from Salt Lake City via southern Utah by team to San Pedro, thence to San Francisco by water, thence over the Pacific ocean sighting Hawaii and Luzon, through the China sea and the Straits of Malacca, into the Indian ocean and Sea of Bengal, to Calcutta, thence around Ceylon to Bombay, and over the Arabian Sea to Kurrachee, Scinde, where he labored nineteen months. From there he returned to Calcutta via Bombay; thence over the Indian Ocean, around the Cape of Good Hope and over the South and North Atlantic Oceans to London; thence via Liverpool to Boston; and from there via New York, Iowa City, St. Louis and Omaha to Salt Lake City. The long mission was performed, literally, "without purse or scrip," this being the manner in which "Mormon" Elders were directed to travel. Elder Musser says that at no time during this journey around the world and his sojourn abroad, had he occasion to beg for food, clothing, lodging or means of transportation, all of which were seasonably furnished by friends raised up by Providence. He again entered the General Tithing Office where he remained until the following year, when he was given by the First Presidency an appointment as Traveling Bishop of the Church, which position he held without intermission from 1858 to 1876. His duty was to visit the various Stakes and Wards, with instructions to attend to all matters pertaining to the collecting, forwarding and reporting of the tithes and offerings of the Saints; to collect moneys due the Church and the Perpetual Emigrating fund, and attend to other Church business under the general direction of the First Presidency and the Presiding Bishopric. His labors extended to all the Wards of the Church in Utah and neighboring Territories, then numbering over three hundred. On Dec. 1, 1866, the Deseret telegraph line was opened between Salt Lake City and Ogden, and on Jan. 18, 1867, the Deseret Telegraph Company was incorporated. Bishop Musser was one of the ten incorporators. About a month later he was placed in charge of the company's affairs as general superintendent. This position with that of director, he held for over nine years, and under his superintendency the company's lines were greatly improved and extended in many directions. In 1868 the gross receipts from tolls amounted to $8,462.23. In 1873 they were $75,620.62; the Pioche, Nevada, office receipts alone being $33,478.83 for that year. Some years after retiring from the management of the Deseret Telegraph Company, Bishop Musser introduced the telephone into Salt Lake City and established several short circuits; still later he introduced the phonograph. In April, 1873, he was appointed an assistant trustee-in-trust for the Church. Three and a half years later he was assigned a mission to the Eastern States, his labors being confined to his native State Pennsylvania, where he visited the scenes of his boyhood, preached wherever opportunity offered and published several gospel pamphlets, concerning one of which Apostle Orson Hyde wrote from Spring City, Utah, to Elder Musser in Pennsylvania: "I read with intense interest your circular embodying our faith in clear and graphic style; also your arguments in favor of plural marriage, and must say that I feel thankful to the giver of all good that we are blessed with such a production. After I read it, I said, multum in parvo. Without any design to flatter, I pronounced it one of the most able arguments on the subject that I ever read, and could wish that every member of our government could have it laid before him. Ignorance cannot answer it and intelligence will not try." After his return from the East, Bishop Musser was employed in the President's office for a time; after which he was given an appointment in the Church Historian's office, with a special commission from the First Presidency to keep a record of all persecutive acts, and the names of the perpetrators of those acts, against the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. That he has well and faithfully performed this duty, the well kept records of his office testify. He has written much for the public press on practical subjects and is the author of several valuable works, mostly issued in pamphlet form. His "Fruits of Mormonism," published in 1878, had wide circulation and in the hands of the missionaries it has done great good; while yet in manuscript it received the following endorsement from Apostles Orson Pratt and Joseph F. Smith: "We are anxious that a copy of your pamphlet entitled, "Fruits of Mormonism, by Non-Mormon Witnesses,' be placed in the hands of every officer of the Government, member of Congress, governor, and ruler in Christendom. In the possession of our missionaries it will be a valuable work, and it should be circulated as widely as possible." In November, 1879, Elder Musser launched the initial number of the "Utah Farmer," which received the hearty endorsement of the presiding Bishopric of the Church and the president and board of the Deseret Agricultural and Manufacturing Society. The most unique of Elder Musser's literary ventures was "The Palantic," a monthly serial on miscellaneous subjects, making the defense of the Saints and their faith the paramount issue. Of the first number of this paper, which appeared in October, 1887, Apostle Lorenzo Snow wrote: "I read your paper with great interest. I like the forcible way you show up the enemy. I wish you success." Apostle Joseph F. Smith, in writing to Bishop Musser from Washington, D.C., says: "I have received two numbers of the 'Palantic' and find them multum in parvo-the kernel without the husk or very much shell." A host of other friends also heartily endorsed it. His style is terse, sententious and caustic, particularly when provoked in defense of his religion and friends. For a number of years and until he entered the High Priests' quorum, April 25, 1874, he was one of the seven presidents of the 57th quorum of Seventy. Elder Musser has ever been a staunch defender of the principle of plural marriage. He had four wives sealed to him in the following order: Ann Leaver, by Pres. Brigham Young, Jan. 9 1858; Mary Elizabeth White, by Pres. Heber C. Kimball, Oct. 1, 1864; Belinda Pratt, by Pres. Brigham Young, Sept. 4, 1872; Annie Seegmiller, by Pres. Daniel H. Wells, Jan. 30, 1874. These ladies, who are the peers of their sex in all the virtues and graces that adorn true womanhood, are the mothers of twenty sons and fifteen daughters, who in mental, physical and moral qualities reflect credit upon their parentage. Bishop Musser is an earnest advocate of the science of stirpiculture. He believes that the status of manhood, physically, mentally and morally, is deplorably low; and that by the rigid observance of the laws of life it can be raised until a more perfect type is attained. Living, as he says, in the center of the intellectual and progressive zone of the world, surrounded by lofty mountains, with the purest of air and water, and the best religion under the sun, the Latter-day Saints, in the true spirit of regeneration, are capable of producing the brightest, best and noblest types of manhood and womanhood. After the passage by Congress of the anti-polygamy law of 1862, when a case was needed to test the constitutionality of that statute, Elder Musser volunteered for the purpose, it being his intention to furnish evidence for his own conviction; but instead the case of Elder George Reynolds was taken. At the outbreak of the anti-polygamy crusade under the Edmunds law, Elder Musser's case was one of the earliest that found its way into court. He was arrested April 1, 1885, charged with unlawful cohabitation, that is, living with his plural wives. His case came to trial on April 30th. A verdict of guilty was rendered and on the 9th of May the defendant was sentenced by Chief Justice Charles S. Zane to pay a fine of $300 and to be imprisoned in the penitentiary for a period of six months. This, for holding out to the world more than one woman as his wives, or rather for acknowledging and supporting his wives and children, for nothing else had been proved against him. He served his full time in prison, minus the time remitted by law on account of good behavior. At the time of his sentence Elder Musser submitted the following letter:-"Salt Lake City, May 9, 1885. To his Honor, Chief Justice Charles S. Zane, Third Judicial Court, Utah Territory. Dear Sir:-In view of my having done in the past, according to my best understanding all that I thought was required of me as a law-abiding citizen by conveying to my wives and their heirs and assigns, respectively, their separate homes and homesteads, and now finding that my conduct in this and other regards has not had the warrant of your honor's endorsement, I feel that I am justified in asking the court for the personal peace and safety of myself and my dear family, to definitely and specifically define what line of conduct it will be the correct one for me to follow when I am released from the penitentiary, where I cheerfully go for the inestimable privilege I have heretofore enjoyed in "holding out" my several wives before the public, without the least attempt to conceal the holy relations. I would also call your honor's attention to the noonday fact that my wives and children, individually and collectively, are as dear to me as your honor's wife and children can possibly be to you, and that they have equal claims upon me, under the holy covenant I have made, to love, cherish, honor and tenderly care for them; all of which I have done to the best of my ability, and, as far as I know, to their entire satisfaction; also that my obligations to each and all of them are of the most sacred, binding, and, as they and I firmly believe, eternal character. I now desire to have it clearly defined what course will be the safe and proper one for me to pursue to keep my contracts honorably with them, and yet live within the law as interpreted by your honor during my trial, which rulings seem to me to be very oppressive and cruel, not to say subversive to good morals and law. Having used my very best judgment all through life respecting these vital matters, and it now being deemed unsound by your honor, as witnessed by my position before the court today as a criminal, I most anxiously desire to obtain an expression from the chief justice of Utah, at this juncture of the court's proceedings in my case, respecting my definite and specific duties, as to what I am to do as a husband, father and good citizen, after I emerge from the Bastile, where I suppose the court will send me for having openly and affectionately 'held out' and cared for my lovable wives and children, who in all the mental and physical graces and endowments, natural and acquired, are the peers of their sisters elsewhere; for I cannot persuade myself to believe that this mighty and magnanimous republic, which your honor represents in such a dignified, distinguished and obviously impartial manner, would wittingly punish its citizens who in every other respect are law-abiding and upright. Very respectfully submitted by your humble servant, A. Milton Musser." During a somewhat protracted colloquy that followed this communication between Judge Zane and Bishop Musser, and in answer to queries by the latter, the following are a few of the instructions the judge tendered the Bishop as to what his conduct should be to avoid future troubles: "It is necessary for you to live with but one wife. The law does not forbid you to support your other wives, but the law wont allow you to live with them ostensibly as your wives. The law permits you to bring up your children the best you can, but it will not permit you to live with but one of these women as your wife, and to live with more than one as a wife is a crime, no matter what your religious belief may be about it. You may live with either one; it would not be a violation of law if you were to live with one, even though she might not be your lawful wife." Elder Musser closed his side of the conference in these words: "Well, you can see, Judge Zane, from my communication, that I cannot make such concessions. My family is too dear to me to accept any terms of the character your suggestions impose. With all due respect to your honor's judgment, it will be impossible for me to comply with such demands. It would be utterly impossible. If a gentleman should meet me on the street and ask me to make the concessions you ask, I would regard it as a personal insult. If he should propose that I abandon my wives-divorce them by implication or by direct act, legal or otherwise-I would feel grossly insulted, and should tell him that he might as well ask me how much money I would take for my mother, or at what price I would sell one of my sons or daughters, or for how much money I would sell one of my wives. I cannot consent to anything of the kind, and am willing to meet any consequences the court feels to impose." Bishop Musser maintains that these anti-polygamy prosecutions were instituted in malice and hypocrisy, or were based upon a gross misconception of the facts. Says he: "The makers and enforcers of the law decided without investigation that the polygamous practices of the Mormons were base and immoral, whereas the very reverse of this is the truth. If licentiousness had been the underlying motive, how foolish of the Mormons to assume the perplexing and costly responsibilities of rearing large families of children (for which they are noted); of educating, training and providing homes for them and their mothers, in face of the intense odium and hatred thereby engendered; to say nothing of fines, imprisonments, mobbings, drivings, etc.; and all this simply to pander to a depraved appetite, which could easily be sated by adopting the diabolical arts and practices of a very large per centum of the anti-Mormon crusaders, who, assuming no responsibility, and at trifling expense, practice all manner of abominations, such as flourish in every community throughout Christendom. The average anti-Mormon, judging the Saints by his own standard, cannot grasp the sublime idea that with us the basic aim and divine purpose of marriage, either plural or single, is children; next to eternal salvation the most precious of all the blessings our Heavenly Father has to bestow upon His sons and daughters. The successful husband and father, wife and mother, will be esteemed by the final Judge pre-eminently the greatest of all the benefactors of the human race." Bishop Musser is a thorough-going "Mormon," proud of his religion and church membership and of the sacred authority which he holds in connection therewith. That authority he thus traces to its primal source. Elder A. Milton Musser was ordained a Seventy and was blessed and set apart for the Hindoostan mission, Oct. 16, 1852, by the laying on of the hands of Joseph Young (senior president of the Seventies) and by the Apostle Lorenzo Snow and Wilford Woodruff. Joseph Young had been ordained a Seventy by the Prophet Joseph Smith, who received his authority from angelic messengers, namely the Aaronic Priesthood from John the Baptist, and the Melchizedek Priesthood from Peter, James and John; these three Apostles being commissioned by the Son of God, as noted in the 10th chapter of Matthew. Again, Lorenzo Snow was ordained an Apostle by Heber C. Kimball; Wilford Woodruff an Apostle by Brigham Young; Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball were ordained Apostles by Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer and Martin Harris, the three witnesses to the Book of Mormon; Oliver Cowdery having received the two Priesthoods, with Joseph Smith, under the hands of the heavenly messengers. Elder Musser's name will live in the history of Utah for its connection with some of the most important enterprises that have built up the Territory and the State. As an advocate and promoter of such enterprises he has ever stood in the front rank, laboring with his might and means for their advancement. He was one of the incorporators of Zion's Savings Bank and Trust Company and of the State Bank of Utah; a first subscriber to and promoter of the Great Western Iron company and the Utah Eastern, Salt Lake & Fort Douglas, and Juab, Sanpete and Sevier Valley railroads; also one of the incorporators of the Deseret Telegraph company, and for a period of nine years a director and the general superintendent of that company. He introduced the telephone and subsequently the phonograph into Salt Lake City. For years he was prominently connected with the Deseret Agricultural and Manufacturing Society, being a director, the secretary, treasurer and general traveling agent of the same; he was also director, secretary and treasurer of the Utah Silk Association and president of the Deseret Bee Association. For nearly two decades prior and up to Statehood he held the office of Fish and Game Commissioner, and planted in the public waters of Utah many millions of choice fish and fish fry. He is a very practical man and has rendered valuable and substantial aid in emigration matters, in Temple, fort, and telegraph building, in colonization, co-operation, irrigation, in the placation of savage tribes, in foreign and home missions, in the organization of new Wards and the promotion of numerous home industries. He is an able speaker and writer, and has employed both tongue and pen, at home and abroad, in behalf of the spiritual and material interests of the community with which he has been so long and prominently identified.-Orson F. Whitney.
