Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Pilling, Richard

Pilling, Richard, Bishop of the Ãtna Ward, Alberta, Canada, from 1893 to 1899, was the fourth son of John Pilling and Peggy Banks, and was born Nov. 28, 1833, in Waddington, Yorkshire, England. His parents were among the first who embraced the gospel in Great Britain. Richard was baptized about 1849 by Elder Isaac Garner and emigrated with his parents to America in 1850. The family remained in St. Louis, Mo., about six months, after which they went to Kanesville (now Council Bluffs), where Richard assisted in building a printing office under the direction of Apostle Orson Hyde. Subsequently he, together with others, went up the Buyer river to build houses for the poor Saints who were coming in from the East and from Europe. They built sixty houses under the direction of Bishops Lane, Bigler and Burbanks. Richard then worked at various occupations for three years, by which time he and his father had accumulated enough means to fit themselves out for the journey across the plains. They secured two yoke of oxen, some cows, a wagon, and such other things as were necessary for the trip and started for the Valley in the spring of 1853. The water was very high that season; the Missouri river was overflowing its banks, and the low places between Kanesville and the river were filled with water, which made traveling very difficult. The pilgrims had to make rafts, on which they placed their wagons, one at a time, and then the men had to wade and push the raft through the water, which in some places was neck deep. Often they had to double teams, as the wagons would sometimes sink very deep in the mud. The Pillings had met with the misfortune of breaking their wagon before reaching the river and had to take a wheel back to Kanesville for repair. Stopping to help quite a number of people to land on the river bank, they were left themselves; but fortunately they fell in with a family by the name of Atchison, which had three wagons with them. The two families joined, but when they arrived on the west bank of the river, the company that they had intended to travel with had gone; so the two families decided to go by themselves, and they crossed the plains in a company; of four wagons. This was considered very dangerous in those days; but they got through in safety, and their cattle also did well by being only a few in number; but it brought the young men of the company almost constantly on guard, and they had to contend with high water nearly all the way, often building rafts on which to cross the wagons, while the cattle would swim across the streams. Richard was now in his twentieth year; he had been of great service to his parents, and was at this time their only son in America, his younger brother (Joseph) having died in Kanesville with the cholera. Two of the older brothers had died in England, and another son was still there. Richard shouldered a large share of the responsibilities of the journey, going out with the cattle at night, driving teams and sometimes hunting game in the day, and attending to such other duties as were required in crossing the plains in those days of ox-teams. After eight weeks of this kind of labor the little company arrived in Salt Lake City, Sept. 13, 1853. After staying in the city for a short time, Richard went with his father to Kaysward (now called Kaysville), in Davis county, where he assisted in building a new home, and in fencing and making a farm: he also shared in all the hardships incident to pioneer life, such as fighting grasshoppers, crickets and the dry climate. In the year 1857, he married Miss Catharine Adams, daughter of Elias Adams, sen., of Kaysville, one of the veterans of the war of 1812. In the fall of this year Richard was called to take part in the military operations in the defense of the people, who were then threatened with destruction by Johnston's army. He did military duty in Echo canyon, on Lost creek, and at other places, during this campaign, being a member of the standing army which was called out to defend the lives of the people. He went south at the time of the "move," taking with him his wife and the rest of his earthly possessions in a cart. His team consisted of a horse, a cow, and an ox. Having gone as far south as Springville, he there put in some grain, and then returned north to irrigate the crops he had planted before leaving home. He also worked on the Provo canyon road which was being made through Provo canyon at that time. In the fall of 1858, he returned to his former home in Kaysville, where he resided until May, 1889, when he moved to Alberta, Canada taking most of his large family with him. He was ordained a Seventy in 1858 by Samuel Henderson and became a member of the 55th quorum of Seventy. In 1893 he was ordained a High Priest and Bishop over the Ãtna Ward (now part of the Alberta Stake). He served in that capacity until 1899, when he was called to act as a High Councilor in the Stake, which position he still holds. Elder Pilling is now occupying a comfortable home near the beautiful St. Mary's river, about eight miles southeast of Cardston. All his children, except one, are living in the same neighborhood. He has five sons and three daughters, who are married, and one unmarried son who lives with his parents. The Pilling family is much honored and beloved by all who know them, and many take pleasure in testifying to the great kindness and hospitality of Richard Pilling and his most affable and faithful wife.
