Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Smith, Joseph Fielding

Smith, Joseph Fielding, second counselor to Presidents John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff and Lorenzo Snow, successively, is the son of Hyrum Smith and Mary Fielding, and was born Nov. 13, 1838, at Far West, Caldwell county, Missouri. His father, Hyrum Smith, was all and perhaps more to the Prophet Joseph Smith, his younger brother, than Jonathan anciently was to David. Mary Fielding, the mother of Joseph F. Smith, was a native of England, and for energy, faith and determination, coupled with good business abilities, was a most worthy and suitable companion for her noble husband. The period of Joseph F. Smith's advent into this world was a stormy and memorable one in the history of the Church. A few days previous to his birth, his father, together with Joseph Smith, the Prophet, and other leading men of the Church, were betrayed into the hands of armed mobocrats, through the cruel treachery of George M. Hinkle, who was a "Mormon" and at the same time an officer in the Missouri militia. The prisoners were court-martialed and sentenced to be shot, but were saved through the interference of Gen. Alexander W. Doniphan. They were then hustled off to prison, but before starting were allowed a few minutes to bid farewell to their families. While such scenes were being enacted and while mobs, plunderings, drivings, imprisonments without trial, or conviction, poverty and distress held full sway, Joseph F. Smith was born. His childhood days were spent amid scenes of persecution and hardship which resulted in the martyrdom of his father and his uncle, Joseph, June 27, 1844. His widowed mother left Nauvoo in 1846 as an exile from her home and country for no other cause than that of worshiping God according to the dictates of her own conscience. Although Joseph F. at that time was but a lad eight years of age, he drove an ox team for his mother across the State of Iowa. During the sojourn of the family at Winter Quarters (now Florence, in the State of Nebraska), Joseph F. was occupied as a herd boy, in which he took special pride, feeling that his mother's cattle were the only means by which they would be able to make their exodus across the great plains of the "far West." Even after reaching Great Salt Lake valley, he was engaged in herding, and so close and conscientious was his attention to duty that he never lost a "hoof" through neglect or carelessness; this attention and devotion to responsibilities placed upon him has always marked his character, and is seen in all the labors of his life. During his trials at Winter Quarters, while herding cattle, he passed through a thrilling experience with Indians, who suddenly came upon him and his companions for the purpose of driving off their cattle. In the exciting chase, two Indians rode up to Joseph F., one on either side of him, and taking hold of his arms lifted him from the saddle. They would probably have scalped him, but for the unexpected appearance of a number of men who were going to the hay field. The Indians suddenly dropped him to the ground, and thus by the aid of Providence his life was saved; his bravery and fidelity to trust saved the cattle. Joseph F. was taught by the example and precept of his noble mother that in the performance of all duties and labors, he should go to the Lord in prayer. As a striking illustration of the faith with which he became imbued in his early boyhood, by the example of his mother, we present the following incident, related by Joseph F., in his own language: "In the spring of 1847 a portion of our family crossed the plains, following the pioneers to the valley of the Great Salt Lake, the remainder of the family intending to proceed on their journey to the west in the following spring. In the fall of 1847 my mother and her brother. Joseph Fielding, made a trip down the Missouri river to St. Joseph, Mo., about fifty miles, for the purpose of obtaining provisions and clothing for the family for the coming winter, and for the journey across the plains the following spring. They took two wagons with two yokes of oxen on each. I was almost nine years of age at this time, and accompanied my mother and uncle on this journey as a teamster. The weather was unpropitious, the roads were bad, and it rained a great deal during the journey, so that the trip was a very hard, trying and unpleasant one. At St. Joseph we purchased our groceries and dry goods, and at Savannah we laid in our store of flour, meal, corn, bacon and other provisions. Returning to Winter Quarters, we camped one evening in an open prairie on the Missouri river bottoms, by the side of a small spring creek, which emptied into the river about three-quarters of a mile from us. We were in plain sight of the river, and could apparently see over every foot of the little open prairie where we were camped, to the river on the southwest, to the bluffs on the northeast, and to the timber which skirted the prairie on the right and left. Camping near by, on the other side of the creek, were some men with a herd of beef cattle, which they were driving to Savannah and St. Joseph for market. We usually unyoked our oxen and turned them loose to feed during our encampments at night, but this time, on account of the proximity of this herd of cattle, fearing that they might get mixed up and driven off with them, we turned our oxen out to feed in their yokes. Next morning when we came to look them up, to our great disappointment our best yoke of oxen was not to be found. Uncle Fielding and I spent all the morning, well nigh until noon, hunting for them but without avail. The grass was tall, and in the morning was wet with heavy dew. Tramping through this grass and through the woods and over the bluffs, we were soaked to the skin, fatigued, disheartened and almost exhausted. In this pitiable plight I was the first to return to our wagons, and as I approached I saw my mother kneeling down in prayer. I halted for a moment and then drew gently near enough to hear her pleading with the Lord not to suffer us to be left in this helpless condition, but to lead us to recover our lost team, that we might continue our travels in safety. When she arose from her knees I was standing near by. The first expression I caught upon her precious face was a lovely smile, which, discouraged as I was, gave me renewed hope and an assurance I had not felt before. A few moments later Uncle Fielding came to the camp, wet with the dews, faint, fatigued and thoroughly disheartened. His first words were: 'Well, Mary, the cattle are gone!' Mother replied in a voice which fairly rang with cheerfulness, 'Never mind, your breakfast has been waiting for hours, and now, while you and Joseph are eating, I will just take a walk out and see if I can find the cattle.' My uncle held up his hands in blank astonishment, and if the Missouri river had suddenly turned to run up stream, neither of us could have been much more surprised. 'Why, Mary,' he exclaimed, 'what do you mean? We have been all over this country, all through the timber and through the herd of cattle, and our oxen are gone-they are not to be found. I believe they have been driven off, and it is useless for you to attempt to do such a thing as to hunt for them.' 'Never mind me,' said mother, 'get your breakfast and I will see,' and she started toward the river, following down out of speaking distance, the man in charge of the herd of beef cattle rode up from the opposite side of the creek and called out: 'Madam, I saw your oxen over in that direction this morning about daybreak,' pointing in the opposite direction from that in which mother was going. We heard plainly what he said, but mother went right on, paid no attention to his remark and did not even turn her head to look at him. A moment later the man rode off rapidly toward his herd, which had been gathered in the opening near the edge of the woods, and they were soon under full drive for the road leading toward Savannah, and soon disappeared from view. My mother continued straight down the little stream of water, until she stood almost on the bank of the river, and then she beckoned to us. (I was watching her every moment and was determined that she should not get out of my sight.) instantly we rose from the 'mess-chest,' on which our breakfast had been spread, and started toward her, and, like John, who outran the other disciple to the sepulchre, I outran my uncle and came first to the spot where my mother stood. There I saw our oxen fastened to a clump of willows growing in the bottom of a deep gulch which had been washed out of the sandy banks of the river by the little spring creek, perfectly concealed from view. We were not long in releasing them from bondage and getting back to our camp, where the other cattle had been fastened to the wagon wheels all the morning, and we were soon on our way homeward bound, rejoicing. This circumstance was one of the first practical and positive demonstrations of the efficacy of prayer I had ever witnessed. It made an indelible impression upon my mind, and has been a source of comfort, assurance and guidance to me throughout all my life." The impression made upon Joseph's mind by this striking answer to his mother's prayer, has never left him, but has done much to encourage him in meeting every responsibility; causing him to realize that no matter how arduous the task the Lord will not fail those who put their trust in Him. Crossing the plains from Missouri river, to the Great Salt Lake valley, Brother Smith (though less than ten years of age at that time) drove two yoke of oxen attached to a heavily laden wagon, the entire distance of more than one thousand miles. Reaching the valley of Salt Lake with his mother, Sept. 23, 1848, he continued in charge of the cattle as herd boy for several years, and never lost an animal, notwithstanding the great number of large wolves in the valley. This work of herding was interchanged with plowing, harvesting, canyon work, etc., idleness taking no part in the life of this noble man. The opportunities for education in those early days of trying experiences of the Church, were limited. Such learning as Brother Joseph F. possessed he acquired chiefly from his mother. She taught him to read the Bible during their pilgrimage across the plains, in the tent, and by the camp fire. Such facilities as have been afforded him have not passed by unimproved. Being fond of books, he reads extensively the best of them, always for the purpose of learning lessons of worth for practical use in life, and it is safe to say that no man living applies them better to himself and family than does president Joseph F. Smith. His mother died Sept. 21, 1852, leaving him an orphan at the age of fourteen, when fifteen years of age he was called on a mission to the Sandwich Islands. He received his endowments in the Old Council House, and was set apart in the same building by Apostles Parley P. Pratt and Orson Hyde. Brother Pratt, who was spokesman in setting him apart, declared that he should receive the knowledge of the Hawaiian language "by the gift of God as well as by study." This prophecy was literally fulfilled, for in less than four months from his arrival he was able to make a tour of the island of Maul, to preach, baptize and administer the Sacrament, etc., all in the native language. He left his mountain home to fulfill this mission, May 27, 1854, in company with other missionaries. The southern route was taken, accompanying as far as Cedar City president Brigham Young and party, who were on their tour to the southern settlements. This little band of missionaries was headed by Parley P. Pratt. In crossing the desert country, from southern Utah to California, they were followed a long distance by numbers of the Pah-Ute Indians, who were almost furnishing for food. The only alternative was to share food with them, which they did to keep on friendly terms. As a result the missionaries were compelled to subsist on very short rations, consuming the last of their supplies the day they reached Cajon Pass. During the sojourn of Brother Joseph F. in California, he worked hard to earn means sufficient to pay his passage across the Pacific to Honolulu; much of his time being spent in the manufacture of cut shingles. He and his fellow missionaries embarked upon the "Vaquero," and after a somewhat disagreeable voyage they landed at Honolulu, Sept. 27, 1854. Joseph F. was assigned to the Island of Maul, to labor in company with his cousin, Silos Smith, Smith B. Thurston and Washington B. Rogers. He was assigned to Kula, the place where President Geo. Q. Cannon first introduced the gospel to the Hawaiian race. He pursued the study of the language with much diligence and faith, soon being able to bear witness that "by the gift of God, as well as by study," were the words of Brother Pratt concerning his acquisition of the language verified; his experiences brought him near to the Lord. Relative to the manifestations of the Spirit to him he says: "Of the many gifts of the Spirit which were manifest through my administration, next to my acquirement of the language, the most prominent was perhaps the gift of healing, and by the power of God, the casting out of evil spirits which frequently occurred." One instance occurred at Wailuku, where he sojourned with a native family, being engaged in the study of the language. One night the woman was suddenly seized with evil spirits. She went through all manner of hideous contortions. Her husband was overcome with such fear that he trembled as a leaf in the wind. Brother Joseph F. was seized with fear at this new and unexpected demonstration, but suddenly all fright left him, the power of the Holy Ghost rested upon him, and he stood upon his feet, facing the woman possessed of demons. "In the name of the Lord Jesus Christ I rebuke you," he said, when suddenly the woman fell limp to the floor and became as one dead. The husband pronounced her dead, and then set up a hideous howl, which Joseph F. promptly rebuked, after which quiet and peace was restored and the young missionary proceeded with his studies. Joseph F. labored upon the island of Maul over eighteen months with great success. The readiness by which he acquired and used the language astonished his brethren and the natives. After president Hammond took his departure for his home in Utah, Joseph F. presided over the Maui conference; later he presided over the Kohala conference for six months, and still later over the Hilo conference; the two latter conferences were on the island of Hawaii. He was laboring upon this island at the time of the great volcanic eruption of 1855, about which he writes: "I experienced the tremendous shocks of earthquake which immediately preceded the eruptions, and subsequently visited the great lava flow which issued from the crater. It was said that this eruption, in the quantity of lava thrown out, has probably never been surpassed during the residence of foreigners on the islands. The flow continued for about thirteen months, reaching to within six or seven miles of the city of Hilo, more than sixty miles from the crater. The city and bay of Hilo were in imminent danger of destruction for months. I have seen it stated since that the area covered by lava from this eruption exceeded three hundred square miles, or about one-thirteenth of the area of the island of Hawaii." After laboring a year upon the island of Hawaii, Joseph F. was transferred to the presidency of the Molokai conference with Elder Thos. A. Dowell as an assistant. On this island they found many of the Saints on the background and most of the people afflicted with a scarcity of food. In making a journey from the east to the west end of the island, they were compelled to journey nearly thirty miles on foot in the hot sun, without either food or water to drink the whole distance, until Brother Dowell flagged and finally declared his inability to go further; but Joseph stood by him, urged and helped him along until they reached the home of Mr. R. W. Meyers, a German, who kindly received them and administered to their necessities, and with whom, by his request, they spent several days. Mr. Meyers, from this time forward, became their warm and faithful friend, and ever made them welcome at his home. He furnished Joseph F. with a good riding horse to visit the branches of the Church, from time to time. During Joseph F.'s sojourn on the island of Molokai he passed through a very trying and prolonged spell of sickness, in consequence of which he returned to Lanai, which for some time had been the headquarters of the mission. Previous to this, the conference house of Palawai, Lanai, was burned down and Bro. Joseph F.'s trunk with its contents, together with effects belonging to other Elders, were destroyed, leaving them almost destitute of clothing. Joseph F. remained on Lanai till the fall of 1857, and having in the meantime regained his health, he went to Honolulu and there met with the Elders of the mission in conference. About this time instructions came from the First Presidency to release the foreign Elders to return home to Utah, in consequence of the movement of the U. S. army towards the Territory. Accordingly, on the 6th day of October, 1857, Joseph F. embarked on board the bark "Yankee" for San Francisco, in company with other returning Elders. On landing at San Francisco in the latter part of October, 1857, they at once reported themselves at the office of the "Western Standard," to Pres. Geo. Q. Cannon, who was then editing that paper. He perceived the destitute condition that Elders Joseph F. and Edward Partridge were in and took them to a clothing store, where he fitted them out with a good, warm overcoat each and a pair of blankets between them. With this outfit the two Elders started down the coast to Santa Cruz county, Cal., where they joined a company of Saints under the captaincy of Charles W. Wandell, with whom they traveled through the country southward as far as the Mojave river, where Joseph F. and others left the company and made a visit to San Bernardino. Here he found a number of his old friends, who were very kind to him and provided him with means to clothe himself very comfortably for the remainder of the journey home. Being under no obligations to continue traveling with Charles W. Wandell's company any further, he engaged to drive team for George Crismon, and accordingly crossed the desert as teamster. He arrived in Great Salt Lake City Feb. 24, 1858, having been absent from home about three years and nine months. Immediately upon his return home he joined the militia, and started with an expedition to intercept the hostile army, which had been sent to Utah. He served under Col. Thomas Callister, and later was chaplain of the regiment under Col. Heber C. Kimball. He says, in speaking of his enlistment and experiences in the Utah army: "The day following my arrival home I reported myself to President Young and immediately enlisted in the Legion to defend ourselves against the encroachment of a hostile and menacing army. From that time until the proclamation of peace, and a free and full pardon, by President Buchanan, came, I was Constantly in my saddle, prospecting and exploring the country between Great Salt Lake City and Fort Bridger, under the command of Col. Thos. Callister and others. I was on picket guard with a party of men under Orrin P. Rockwell, when Commissioners Powell and McCollough met us near the Weber river with the president's proclamation. Subsequently I was on detail in the deserted city of Great Salt Lake, until after the army passed through the city, and thence to Camp Floyd. After this I assisted my relatives to return to their homes, from which they had fled, going to the south some time previous." At the session of the legislature held in the winter of 1858-59, Joseph F. Smith officiated as sergeant-at-arms in the council, and on March 29, 1858, he was ordained into the Thirty-second Quorum of Seventy. He was married April 5, 1859, and on Oct. 16th, of the same year, was ordained a High Priest, also being made a member of the High Council of Salt Lake Stake of Zion. At the April conference, 1860, he was called on a mission to Great Britain. He was in straightened circumstances financially and was almost obliged to discontinue housekeeping, and allow his wife to return to her mother's home for the time being. He was soon on his way, in company with his cousin, Samuel H. B. Smith, each driving a four-mule team, to pay their way across the plains. They had an interesting trip to the Missouri river: from that point to New York they went by way of Nauvoo and viewed the homes of their childhood days, calling upon the wife and children of the Prophet Joseph Smith. They sailed for Liverpool July 14, 1860, arriving in that port on the 27th of that month. During his mission in England, Elder Smith traveled in various conferences, and in all his ministrations among the Saints and strangers left an impression for good that can never be effaced. President George Q. Cannon was also in Great Britain on a mission at the same time, and it was while there, perhaps, more than any other place, they learned to love and esteem each other, and where a friendship was established which grew stronger as the years went by. During his mission in Europe, Joseph F., with President George Q. Cannon, visited several of the conferences in Denmark, and with Elder Brigham Young jr. and others, visited Paris, France. He was released after filling a most honorable and efficient mission, returning home in 1863. Crossing the plains, he was chaplain in Capt. John W. Woolley's company. Arriving home, he found his wife in a very poor state of health, which for some time grew worse; but he waited upon her day and night with little or no rest for many weeks, when she gradually recovered her health. It was not in the providences of the Lord that Joseph F. should remain long at that period of his life to enjoy the quiet and peace of home, for in March, 1864, he started on his second mission to Hawaii. He went in company with Apostles Ezra T. Benson and Lorenzo Snow and other Elders. The purpose of their mission was to regulate the affairs of the Church on the Islands, which had been greatly interfered with by Walter M. Gibson, who had presumptuously established himself as leader of the Church in Hawaii. They labored faithfully to convert Mr. Gibson from his wrong doing, but to no avail. The man was not honest at heart, and they were obliged, for the protection of the native Saints, to excommunicate Gibson from the Church. The trouble being settled, the Apostles soon returned to America, leaving Joseph F. in charge of the mission. He returned home in the winter of 1864-65. While upon this mission an incident occurred which is worthy of note. The ship upon which the brethren arrived was anchored in the channel off Lahaina, where the sea was usually very rough. A breakwater had been constructed, and by the protection of it the natives successfully ran their boats ashore. However, in approaching it, there was always danger of disaster. It was proposed to land the passengers in the ship's freight boat, which was unwieldy and not easily managed. Joseph F. at once apprehended the danger and stoutly protested against the proposition, warning the brethren of the great danger of capsizing the boat at the breakwater. He refused to accompany them in the boat, and tried to persuade his co-laborers not to go. They were persistent, however, and made the attempt, while Joseph F. offered even to go alone for a better boat. When they were determined to go he persuaded them to let him remain on the anchored ship in charge of their satchels, their clothing and valuable articles. They consented to this reluctantly, and as they moved away from the ship, Joseph F. stood upon the latter, gazing at his brethren with awful anxiety, apparently knowing their fate. His fears were not ungrounded, for as their unwieldy freight boat struck the breakwater a heavy wave dashed against it and instantly capsized it, emptying its human cargo into the surging billows. A boat from the shore manned by natives came to the rescue and recovered all but Apostle Snow, when they started for shore. Brother Wm. W. Cluff demanded the return of the boat, that they might secure Brother Snow, which was done, and when he was recovered, to all appearances he was dead. Through the mercies of the Lord, however, he was restored to life. All this time Brother Joseph F. stood in awful suspense, a helpless spectator upon the deck of the anchored ship. This action on the part of Joseph F. on that occasion indicates that fearless trait of his character which has been manifest throughout his life, showing that he has the courage of his convictions, and is most vigorous and earnest in expressing them. When he returned home from this mission, he was employed as a clerk in the Historian's Office, and later in the Endowment House, frequently performing home missionary work in the Territory. He was also an active and efficient member of the Salt Lake City municipal council for several terms; the effects of his influence in that body are today monuments of worth to the city of Salt Lake. The possession of Liberty Park today by Salt Lake City is due to his influence and determined convictions, more than to the labors of any other man. Pioneer Square was also purchased by the city owing to his manly and persistent efforts. The mayor and many of the members of the council were strongly opposed to the purchase, as they considered the monetary outlay connected with it unnecessary and uncalled for; but Joseph F.'s arguments prevailed at last, and the square became city property. Also as a lawmaker in the legislative assembly of the Territory of Utah did Joseph F. Smith exhibit unusual ability and tact. He served as a member of the Territorial House of Representatives seven consecutive terms, namely in the 15th (1865-66), 16th (1866-67), 17th (1868), 18th (1869), 19th (1870), 20th (1872), and 21st (1874) sessions. And after his return from his last mission to Europe he served two terms (1880 and 1882) in the council branch of the Utah legislature; during the last of these terms he acted as president of the council. He presided over the Constitutional Convention held in 1882. His labors as a legislator would undoubtedly have been continued much longer, had he not been declared disqualified through the passage of the infamous Edmunds' anti-polygamy bill. Joseph F. was ordained an Apostle July 1, 1866, by President Brigham Young, and at the October conference, 1867, he was called to fill a vacancy in the Council of the Twelve. When President Young chose to have more than two counselors Joseph F. was one of the number selected. In 1868, in connection with Apostle Wilford Woodruff, Elder Abraham A. Smoot and others, he was called to go to Provo and labor for the upbuilding of that city and Utah county. He served one term in the Provo city council. By permission of President Young he in 1868-69 removed his family back to Salt Lake City and resumed his labors in the Endowment House and Historian's Office. Feb. 28, 1874, Apostle Joseph F. started on his second mission to Great Britain, this time to preside over the European mission. During his labors in Europe, he visited Scandinavia, Germany, Switzerland and France as well as the several conferences of the British Isles, and he proved himself to be one of the very choicest presidents that has ever presided over any mission, not only for his prompt and wise methods of conducting affairs, but also his humbleness in obeying the whisperings of the Spirit, for which he constantly lives. His personal love and tenderhearted kindness to every Elder in the mission has endeared him to the hearts of hundreds of Elders and Saints who have lived and labored directly under his personal ministrations. Soon after the decease of President Geo. A. Smith, in the fall of 1875, Joseph F. was released to return home; and upon returning from his labor of love he was appointed to preside over the Saints in Davis county, the county at that time not being organized into a Stake of Zion. He held this position until the spring of 1877, when he was called on his third mission to Great Britain. Before leaving he witnessed the dedication of the St. George Temple, the first Temple completed in the Rocky Mountain country. During his labors on this mission Elder Orson Pratt came to Liverpool to publish new editions of the Book of Mormon and Doctrine and Covenants. Later they appeared with copious marginal references and foot notes prepared by Elder Pratt. Upon receiving the sad news of the death of President Brigham Young they were requested by the council of the Apostles to immediately return home. They reached Salt Lake City Sept. 27, 1877, and the following year Brother Joseph F. and Orson Pratt went on a short mission to the East. They visited noted places associated with Church history, in Missouri, Illinois, Ohio and New York, and called upon David Whitmer, one of the three witnesses to the Book of Mormon. When the Endowment House was re-opened in Salt Lake City, subsequent to the death of President Young, Joseph F. was placed in charge. In October, 1880, when the presidency of the Church was organized, with John Taylor at the head, Joseph F. Smith was chosen to be his second counselor. He was chosen to the same position in 1889 under president Woodruff, and now occupies that honored station under the presidency of Lorenzo Snow. During the presidency of John Taylor, and under the trying scenes of the anti-Mormon crusade. Brother Smith performed another faithful mission in the Sandwich Islands, by direction of President Taylor. While there he obtained an exact copy of the old Spaulding story, and by evidence incontrovertible showed that not the slightest resemblance existed between the Book of Mormon and the story named. President Smith has filled every position of trust assigned him with such unblemished honesty and fidelity, that no man can justly say aught against him. One of the grandest traits of his character is impartial justice. The great system of patriarchal marriage, so well designed to prove the hearts of men and women, and to develop in them the principles of pure love, charity, justice and impartiality, has no better examples among God's noblemen than Joseph F. Smith. Whatever obligation he is under to that sacred principle for his existence, and for the possession of his own posterity, he is meeting that obligation manfully, with the record that his example shall exemplify the truth of celestial marriage as revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith. During his counselorship in the First Presidency he has traveled extensively in the Stakes of Zion, in Utah, Arizona, Colorado, Idaho, Canada and Mexico, and continues active, whether at home or abroad. The following pen sketch of President Joseph F. Smith is written by Elder Edward H. Anderson: "President Smith has been constantly in the service of the public, and by his straightforward course has won the love, confidence and esteem of the whole community. He is a friend of the people, is easily approached, a wise counselor, a man of broad views, and, contrary to first impressions, is a man whose sympathies are easily aroused. He is a reflex of the best character of the Mormon people-inured to hardships, patient in trial, God-fearing, self-sacrificing, full of love for the human race, powerful in moral, mental and physical strength. President Smith has an imposing physical appearance. He is tall, erect, well-knit and symmetrical in build. He has a prominent nose and features. When speaking, he throws his full, clear, brown eyes wide open on the listener, who may readily perceive from their penetrating glimpse the wonderful mental power of the tall forehead above. His large head is crowned with an abundant growth of hair, in his early years dark, but now, like his full beard, tinged with a liberal sprinkling of gray. In conversation, one is forcibly impressed with the sudden changes in appearance of his countenance, under the different influences of his mind; now intensely pleasant, with an enthusiastic and childlike interest in immediate subjects and surroundings; now absent, the mobility of his features set in that earnest, almost stern, majesty of expression so characteristic of his portraits-so indicative of the severity of the conditions and environments of his early life. As a public speaker, his leading trait is an intense earnestness. He impresses the hearer with his message more from the sincerity of its delivery, and the honest earnestness of his manner, than from any learned exhibition of oratory or studied display of logic. He touches the hearts of the people with the simple eloquence of one who is himself convinced of the truths presented. He is a pillar of strength in the Church, thoroughly imbued with the truths of the gospel and the divine origin of this work. His whole life and testimony are an inspiration to the young. I said to him: 'You knew Joseph, the Prophet; you are old in the work of the Church; what is your testimony to the youth of Zion concerning these things?' And he replied slowly and deliberately: 'I was acquainted with the Prophet Joseph in my youth. I was familiar in his home, with his boys and with his family. I have sat on his knee, I have heard him preach, distinctly remember being present in the council with my father and the Prophet Joseph Smith and others. From my childhood to youth I believed him to be a Prophet of God. From my youth until the present I have not believed that he was a Prophet, for I have known that he was. In other words, my knowledge has superseded my belief. I remember seeing him dressed in military uniform at the head of the Nauvoo Legion. I saw him when he crossed the river, returning from his intended western trip into the Rocky Mountains to go to his martyrdom, and I saw his lifeless body, together with that of my father, after they were murdered in Carthage jail; and still have the most palpable remembrance of the gloom and sorrow of those dreadful days. I believe in the divine mission of the Prophets of the nineteenth century with all my heart, and in the authenticity of the Book of Mormon and the inspiration of the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, and hope to be faithful to God and man and not false to myself, to the end of my days.'" (For further details, see "Historical Record," by Andrew Jenson, Vol. 6, p. 183; sketch by Matthias F. Cowley in "Southern Star," Vol. 2, p. 209: sketch by Edward H. Anderson in "Juvenile Instructor," Vol. 35, p. 65, etc.)
