Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Brandley, Theodore

Brandley, Theodore, Bishop of the Stirling Ward, Alberta, Canada, was born Dec. 7, 1851, at Stafa, Canton Zurich, Switzerland, the son of Henry Brandley and Anna Meier. When six years of age he commenced his education in the public school and graduated from the same when sixteen years old. The parents of Brother Brandley were well respected, good and honest people, who had joined the Latter-day Saints in the year 1867. Aug. 1, 1868, Theodore also joined the Church, being baptized in the River Limat at Zurich by Elder Karl G. Maeser. April 14, 1869, he was ordained an Elder by Elder Maeser, and on April 17th he left his parental home for the first time in his life to fill a mission as traveling Elder in the Swiss and German mission, from which he received an honorable release in May, 1872. June 4, 1872, he emigrated from Zurich, with his parents, two brothers and one sister, all members of the Church, and arrived in Salt Lake City, July 4, 1872. Here he married Sister Marie E. Nagely, formerly from Altnau, Thurgau, Switzerland. They remained in Salt Lake City until October, 1874, during which time there was born to them a daughter (who died when eight months old), and a son. Here also Brother Brandley lost his mother by death. In October, 1874, Bro. Brandley removed with his little family to Richfield, Sevier county, where they joined the United Order. On April 9, 1875, he was called on a mission to Switzerland and Germany, and he was ordained a Seventy and set apart for his mission by Apostle Orson Pratt, May 21, 1875. He started on this mission in May following, and arrived at Berne, Switzerland, June 6, 1875. He was appointed to preside over the German conference and at the same time assistant editor of the "Stern." Thus he labored for about a year, and was then appointed president over the Berne conference and secretary of the mission. June 8, 1878, he received an honorable release from this mission and was appointed leader of a company of emigrating Saints which reached Salt Lake City on July 4, 1878, Jan. 14, 1879, Elder Brandley was ordained a High Priest and set apart to act as second counselor to Jos. S. Horne, Bishop of the Second Ward, of Richfield, by Apostle Wilford Woodruff. In the spring of 1884, Elder Brandley received a call to fill a mission among a people called Mennonites, who were scattered over the States of Kansas, Minnesota and the Dakotas, as well as in Manitoba, Canada. He left his home again May 5, 1884, and traveled in company with Elder Samuel Witmore through the places named, preaching the gospel to that peculiar people, as well as to many others, with out any apparent success (as far as the Mennonites were concerned). He received an honorable release and returned to his home in Richfield Oct. 22, 1885. Soon afterwards he was appointed president of the High Priests' quorum, and clerk of the Sevier Stake of Zion. In October, 1888, Elder Brandley was again called to fill a mission in his native land. His father was called at the same time, and together they joined a company of many other Elders called to Europe on missions. Elder Brandley was appointed to labor as secretary of the mission and editor of the "Stern." In September, 1889, he was called to succeed Elder J. W. Stucky as president over the Swiss and German mission, which position he filled until he was honorably released Sept. 26, 1890. He reached his home and family in Richfield late in October. In February, 1892, Elder Brandley lost his father through death. In March, 1892, he was appointed superintendent of the Sunday schools in Sevier Stake. Dec. 29, 1892, he was called to part with his beloved wife Mary, who died on that day in full faith, leaving him with six children to mourn the sad loss. Aug. 21, 1893. Elder Brandley was ordained a Patriarch, under the hands of Apostle John Henry Smith, and when the two Wards of Richfield were united into one, Elder Brandley was called to be Bishop. To that office he was ordained by Apostle Francis M. Lyman. The people of the city of Richfield elected Elder Brandley assessor and collector, also mayor of Richfield, which position he occupied for three successive terms. Jan. 14, 1894, he was called to mourn the loss of his second oldest son, Rulon, who died while spending his vacation from the B. Y. A. at his home. He died at the age of 18. In November, 1894, Elder Brandley was elected a member of the Constitutional Convention, which commenced and drafted the constitution for the State of Utah. In August, 1898, he was called to assist in colonizing in the Alberta Stake of Zion, in the northwestern territories of Canada. In May, 1899, he removed with a portion of his family to Alberta, where he at once commenced the building of what is now known as the Stirling Ward, over which he was called to preside as Bishop. This position he still occupies.
