Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Stohl, Ole Nilson

Stohl, Ole Nilson, president of Scandinavian meetings in the Box Elder Stake of Zion, was born Nov. 9, 1835, in Malmohus lan, Sweden. In December, 1853, he first heard the gospel preached by his brother, Nils Nilson, in the home of his father, and was baptized in Malmo, Jan. 15, 1854. In the early spring of 1854 he left his home and the land of his birth and went to Copenhagen, Denmark, where he united himself with the members of the Church to which he belonged. There, also, he was ordained a Deacon March 5, 1855, and a Priest Sept. 21, 1855. That year he was sent on a mission to the southeastern part of Zealand. In the latter part of April, 1856, he received a call from Pres. Hector C. Haight to take a mission to Stockholm, Sweden. A few days later he arrived in Copenhagen, and on May 1, 1856, he was ordained an Elder by Ola N. Liljenquist. The same day he and Elder Gustaf Olson took steamer for Stockholm. On their arrival in that city they learned that Elder Chr. A. Madsen, president of the Stockholm conference, had been banished from Sweden. In May, 1856, Bro. Stohl was sent to labor in Westmanland. Though opposed by priests and officials, and subjected to the annoyance of arrest by the officials, he and his missionary companion succeeded in baptizing a number of people and organizing a branch of the Church in Westmanland. On his return to Stockholm he had the pleasure of meeting Apostle Ezra T. Benson, John Kay, Pres. Carl Widerborg and Lars Nilson, his brother, who had been appointed to preside over the Stockholm conference. In the fall of 1856, Elder Stohl was called to preside over the Norrkoping branch, which at that time belonged to the Stockholm conference. He found in this branch, on his arrival, only four members of the Church. In May. 1858, the Stockholm conference was divided, and a new conference known as the Norrkoping conference was organized with Elder Stohl as president. He presided in that capacity until the spring of 1862, when he was released from a mission of more than six years, with the privilege of going to Zion. At the time he emigrated, the Norrkoping conference consisted of several branches and the membership had increased from four souls to hundreds. Together with many other Saints Elder Stohl left Copenhagen April 14, 1862, and crossed the Atlantic on the ship "Electric." The company was nine weeks Crossing the ocean, and after a dreary journey across the plains, the emigrants arrived in Salt Lake City, Sept. 22, 1862. Two months later (Nov. 19, 1862), Bro. Stohl was ordained a Seventy and became a member of the 65th quorum of Seventy. April 16, 1864, he married Christina Johnson, who embraced the gospel in Malmo, Sweden, in 1854. In October, 1866, he and family moved from Salt Lake City to Brigham City, where he has resided ever since. From 1874 to 1879 he was actively engaged in the United Order, which was then carried on at Brigham City, under the supervision of Pres. Lorenzo Snow. In October, 1879, he left his home on a mission to Scandinavia. On his arrival in Copenhagen, he was sent to his old field of labor, the Gothenburg conference, and during the last year of his labors in that conference acted as president of the same. In August, 1881, he was released from his labors as a missionary and returned to his family and friends in September of that year. Since his return from this mission, he has been honored with positions of trust and responsibility of both a political and religious nature; but above all he feels to rejoice in the fact that he early in life was permitted to hear the sound of the everlasting gospel, and was honored by being one of the first who carried the tidings of joy and salvation to many of his fellow-men in the land of his nativity. Nothing gives Brother Stohl greater pleasure than to testify of the goodness of the Lord towards him since he received a knowledge of the gospel of Jesus Christ.
