Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Jeppson, Jeppe

Jeppson, Jeppe, a High Councilor, and first counselor to Ola N. Stohl in the presidency of the Scandinavian meetings, in the Box Elder Stake of Zion, is the son of Hans Jeppson and Martha Hanson, and was born Nov. 13, 1832, in Trelleborg, Malmohus lan, Sweden; he went to Copenhagen, Denmark, in 1848, and there learned the trade of a cabinetmaker, and embraced the gospel, being baptized April 21, 1853, by O. C. Olsen, and confirmed the following day by Christian J. Larsen. Soon afterwards he was ordained a Teacher and appointed to labor among the Saints in Copenhagen. Oct. 6, 1853, he was ordained a Priest and called on a mission to Sweden. At a conference held in Malmo, Sweden, he was sent to labor in Gothenburg and vicinity, being the first Latter-day Saint missionary to labor in that part of Sweden. Traveling on foot all alone to and from Gothenburg, he did missionary work along the road. Returning to Copenhagen toward the close of 1853, he was released from further missionary labors and permitted to emigrate to Zion, as his services were needed as an interpreter with a company of Saints which left Copenhagen in December, 1853, under the direction of Hans Peter Olsen. On the road he acted as Teacher among the Saints, and arrived in Salt Lake City, Oct. 5. 1854. Having married Gunild Marie Hansen, a Norwegian girl, he located at Brigham City, being one of the fifty families called to settle at that place under the direction of Lorenzo Snow. This has been his home ever since, and here he has from that time until the present labored faithfully and true for the upbuilding of the kingdom of God. Among the many local positions which he has filled with credit and honor to himself and all concerned, it may be mentioned that he has labored as Ward teacher, counselor in the presidency of the Priests' quorum, water master, janitor, and police of public buildings, etc. He was ordained an Elder in 1855, and a High Priest Nov. 25, 1856, by Lorenzo Snow, and for many years he acted as a counselor to Charles Kelley in the presidency of the High Priests' quorum in the Box Elder Stake. In 1884-86 he filled a mission to Scandinavia, his field of labor being his native land, Sweden. After his return home he was chosen and set apart as a High Councilor in the Box Elder Stake, which position he still holds. In April, 1899, he was set apart as first counselor to Elder Ola N. Stohl in the presidency of the Scandinavian meetings in Brigham City. In regard to his family affairs Elder Jeppson writes: "I married Gunild Marie Hansen Oct. 11, 1854, and Christina Persson, in January, 1865. They are both still living. By my first wife I have had ten children, of whom seven are now alive; by my second wife I have had fourteen children, of whom eleven are alive. Thus I have 18 living children; also 61 grandchildren and three great-grandchildren. During the late raid on polygamists, I was hounded and driven from pillar to post by U. S. deputy marshals for about three years and finally lodged in prison. I served a term in the Utah Penitentiary from Oct. 13, 1888, to Feb. 26. 1889." Elder Jeppson is indeed a veteran in the Church, being numbered among the most faithful of its Elders. He has trained his large posterity in the fear of the Lord, and has already seen four of his sons fill foreign missions.
