Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Campbell, Jonathan

Campbell, Jonathan, one of the presidents of the 5th quorum of Seventy, is the son of Jonathan Campbell and Lucinda Shipman, and was born Nov. 14, 1853, in North Ogden. Weber county, Utah. His father was acquainted with the Prophet Joseph Smith, worked on the Nauvoo Temple, and was a member of the famous Mormon Battalion. Jonathan was baptized when about eight years old, received a limited education and was raised a farmer. After an unsuccessful attempt at farming in Malad valley, he went to Park Valley, Box Elder county, in 1871, and became the first settler in what is now called Rosette, in the west end of the valley; he also engaged in freighting, between Kelton station and Boise City, Idaho, and other northern points; but though he was constantly thrown into the company of wicked men, he kept himself pure and led a virtuous life. April 27, 1879, he married Miss Sariah J. Raleigh, daughter of Bishop Alonzo H. Raleigh, having previously been ordained an Elder, Dec. 21, 1884, he was ordained a Seventy by Lorenzo Hunsaker and became identified with the 5th quorum; subsequently he became a president of said quorum. For many years he labored as a Ward Teacher in the Park Valley Ward, became an officer in the Y. M. M. I. A., and superintendent of the Park Valley Sunday school. In 1899 he was called on a mission to the Eastern States, from which he has not yet returned. Elder Campbell writes: "I have a nice family, consisting of a wife and ten children, of whom I feel justly proud. My children have all been taught the true gospel, and they have faith in God. They are all healthy and strong, and I have never had a doctor in my house since I became the head of a family." Besides his positions in the Church, Elder Campbell has filled a number of secular offices. Thus he was the first postmaster in Rosette, and had the honor of naming the office. He has also served as precinct constable and road supervisor.
