Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Patten, David Wyman

Patten, David Wyman, a member of the Council of Twelve Apostles from 1835 to 1838, and one of the early martyrs of the Church, was the son of Benenio Patton and Abigail Cole, and was born about the year 1800, at Theresa, near Indian River Falls, New York. He left home when a boy and went to Michigan, where he married Phoebe Ann Babcock in 1828. From his early youth he exhibited religious characteristics, and when twenty-one years old, the Holy Spirit called upon him to repent of his sins, which he did. During the three succeeding years many future events were made known unto him, by dreams and visions. He also looked for the Church of Christ to arise in its purity and expected to live to see it. In the year 1830 he first heard of and saw the Book of Mormon, and from that time he began to cry to God for more faith. In May, 1832, he received a letter from his brother in Indiana, telling him of the rise of the Church of Christ, the reception of the Holy Ghost and its gifts, etc. Soon after he was convinced that the work was true and was baptized by his brother John Patten, in Green county, Indiana, June 15, 1832. He was ordained an Elder on the 17th by Elisha H. Groves and appointed with a Bro. Wood to preach in the Territory of Michigan. During this his first mission, many remarkable cases of healing occurred under his administration. In many instances he went to the sick, who said they had faith and promised to obey the gospel when they got better, and commanded them in the name of the Lord to arise and be made whole, and they were instantly restored. Sixteen persons were baptized by him and his companion near the Maumee river. In October he went to Kirtland, Ohio, where he spent two or three weeks, after which he started out on his second mission, this time going east into Pennsylvania. He traveled sometimes in company with John Murdock and sometimes with Reynolds Cahoon, baptizing several on the way. When he found any sick, he preached to them faith in the ordinances of the gospel, and where the truth found a place in their hearts, he commanded them in the name of Jesus Christ to arise from their beds of sickness and be made whole. In many instances the people came to him from afar to have him lay hands on their sick, because of this gift, which the Lord had bestowed upon him, and almost daily the sick were healed under his administration. Among others a woman who had suffered from an infirmity for nearly twenty years was instantly healed. From this mission he returned to Kirtland Feb. 25, 1833. In the following March the Elders were sent out from Kirtland to preach the gospel and counsel the Saints to gather to Ohio. Elder Patten started with Reynolds Cahoon east, and on reaching Avon he preached at father Bosley's, where a man was present who had disturbed several meetings and would not be civil or quiet. He had defied any man to put him out of the house, or make him be still. Bro Patten felt stirred up in spirit and told the man to be quiet, or he certainly would put him out. The fellow said: "You can't do it." Elder Patten replied: "In the name of the Lord I will do it," after which he walked up to him, and, seizing him with both hands, carried him to the door and threw him out about ten feet on to a pile of wood, which quieted him for the time being. From this circumstance the saying went out that David Patten had cast out one devil, soul and body. In Orleans, Jefferson county, N.Y., Elder Patten raised up a branch of eighteen members, through much persecution and affliction and all manner of evil speaking. Also in Henderson he found a noble people who received his testimony, and he baptized eight persons. When hands were laid upon them, the Holy Ghost fell on them, and they spake with tongues and prophesied. During the summer Elder Patten raised up several other branches, containing in all eighty members. He writes: "The Lord did work with me wonderfully, in signs and wonders following them that believed in the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ; insomuch that the deaf were made to hear, the blind to see, and the lame were made whole. Fevers, palsies, crooked and withered limbs, and in fact all manner of diseases, common to the country, were healed by the power of God, that was manifested through his servants." In the fall of 1833 Elder Patten returned to Kirtland, Ohio, where he worked on the House of the Lord one month. He then made a trip to Michigan Territory to his former place of residence, after which he moved to Florence, Ohio. After remaining there about seven weeks, being sick most of the time, he commended himself into the hands of God and went out to preach again until the Spirit of the Lord came upon him, saying: "Depart from your field of labor and go unto Kirtland, for behold I will send thee up to the land of Zion, and thou shalt serve thy brethren there." He obeyed the word of the Lord, and was sent in company with Wm. D. Pratt to hear dispatches to the brethren in Missouri, arriving in Clay county March 4, 1834, after much suffering from cold and fatigue. Much good, however, was accomplished by his mission. He tarried in Missouri until the arrival of Zion's Camp in June, 1834, when the people of Clay county pleaded with the Saints not to go over to Jackson county, as they would use their utmost endeavors to give them their rights, according to the laws of the land. A violent persecutor stepped up to Elder Patten and, drawing his bowie knife, said, "You, damned Mormon, I will cut your damned throat." Bro. Patten looked him full in the face, at the same time putting his hand in his left breast pocket, and said, "My friend, do nothing rashly." "For God's sake, don't shoot," exclaimed the mobocrat, and put up his knife and left Patten, who, by the way, was unarmed. In company with Warren Parish, Elder Patten started on another preaching mission Sept. 12, 1834. They went to Paris, Henry county, Tenn., where they remained about three months, preaching the gospel in that vicinity and the regions round about. Twenty were baptized, and several instances of the healing power of God were made manifest. Among these the wife of Mr. Johnston F. Lane deserves special mention. She had been sick for eight years, and for the last year was unable to walk. Hearing of the Elders and the faith they preached, she prevailed on her husband to send for them. Elder Patten went with him immediately and taught him the gospel, showing what power was exercised by the Lord upon those who had faith. The woman believed the testimony of Bro. Patten, who laid his hands upon her, saying, "in the name of Jesus Christ I rebuke the disorder, and command it to depart." He then took her by the hand and commanded her to arise in the name of Jesus Christ, and be made whole. She arose and was perfectly healed. He then commanded her to go to the water and be baptized, which she did the same hour. After he had baptized and confirmed her, he told her that she should amend and gain strength, and in less than one year she should have a son. Although she had been married some twelve years and had no children, this prophecy was fulfilled. She bore a child, whom the parents called David Patten, and she afterwards had several children. Elder Patten returned from Tennessee to Kirtland some time during the following winter, and on Feb. 15, 1835, he was ordained one of the Twelve Apostles under the hands of Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer and Martin Harris. Shortly after, when the Twelve left Kirtland on their first mission, he traveled eastward, through New York, Canada, Vermont, Maine and other States, holding meetings, attending conferences and setting the branches in order, returning to Kirtland in September. After receiving his blessings and endowments in the Temple, Elder Patten took his wife and started on another mission to Tennessee. There he met Wilford Woodruff April 15, 1835, in whose company he then traveled and preached for some time. May 17, 1835, Elders Patten and Woodruff laid hands on a woman by the name of Margaret Tittle, who was laying at the point of death, and she was instantly healed through the power of God. Bro. Patten had preached faith, repentance and baptism to her, and she covenanted to be baptized. But after she was healed, she refused to attend to that ordinance. Elder Patten told her that she was acting a dangerous part, and she would again be afflicted, if she did not repent. The brethren pursued their journey, and on their return found her very low with the same fever. She begged them to lay hands upon her and heal her, and she would obey the gospel. They complied with her request, and she was healed, after which Wilford Woodruff baptized her. Elder Patten preached three times at the house of father Fry in Benton county, Tenn., May 22, 1835. Many hardened their hearts, and a Mr. Rose, who rejected his testimony, asked him to raise the dead. Bro. Patten rebuked him for his wickedness, when he and others came with arms and threatened to mob the brethren. At the close of the meeting Elder Patten walked out into the door yard and told the mob to shoot him, if they wished. He had nothing but a walking stick in his hand, but the mob fled and left him. A few days later Warren Parrish arrived from Kirtland and joined Elders Patten and Woodruff. These three brethren then traveled together from town to town, through Kentucky and Tennessee, preaching the gospel, and healing the sick. The Spirit of God was with them and attended their administrations. While Elders Patten and Parrish were staying at Seth Utley's house in Benton county, Tenn., on June 19, 1835, about forty men, armed with deadly weapons, led by Sheriff Robert C. Petty, a colonel, a major and other officers, besides a Methodist priest with a gun on his shoulder, surrounded the house. The sheriff informed the brethren that he had a States' warrant for David W. Patten, Warren Parrish and Wilford Woodruff, issued on complaint of Matthew Williams, the Methodist priest, who swore that those brethren had put forth the following false and pretended prophecy: "That Christ would come the second time, before this generation passed away, and that four individuals should receive the Holy Ghost within twenty-four hours." After examination Elders Patten and Parrish were bound over to appear on June 22nd, under $2,000 bonds. "Early on the 22nd," writes Wilford Woodruff, Patten and Parrish had their trial. The mob gathered to the number of one hundred, all fully armed. They took from Elder Patten his walking stick and a penknife, and went through with a mock trial; but would not let the defendants produce any witnesses; and without suffering them to say a word in defense, the judge pronounced them guilty of the charge preferred. Brother Patten, being filled with the Holy Ghost, arose to his feet, and by the power of God bound them fast to their seats while he addressed them. He rebuked them sharply for their wicked and unjust proceedings. Bro. Parrish afterwards said, 'My hair stood up straight on my head, for I expected to be killed.' When Patten closed, the Judge addressed him, saying, 'You must be armed with concealed weapons, or you would not treat an armed court as you have this.' Patten replied, 'I am armed with weapons you know not of, and my weapons are the Holy Priesthood and the power of God. God is my friend, and he permits you to exercise all the power you have, and he bestows on me all the power I have.' The court finally concluded to let the brethren go, if they would pay the cost of court and leave the country in ten days. The sheriff advised the brethren to accept these propositions, as it was the only means of escaping the violence of the mob. The Saints in that vicinity paid the cost. Elders Patten and Parrish left and went to Bro. Seth Utley's. They had not been gone long when the mob began to quarrel among themselves and were mad because they had let the prisoners go. They soon mounted their horses and started after them with all possible speed. The news of this movement reached the brethren and they immediately mounted their mules and went into the woods. By a circuitous route they reached the house of Albert Petty, put up their mules, went to bed and slept. They had not been long asleep when some heavenly messenger came to Bro. Patten and told him to arise and leave that place, for the mob was after them and would soon be at that house. Elder Patten awoke Parrish and told him to arise and dress himself, as the mob would soon be upon them. They arose, saddled their animals and started for Henry county in the night. They had not been gone long before the house was surrounded by a mob, who demanded Patten and Parrish. Bro. Petty informed them that they were not there, but the mob searched the house and remained till daybreak, when they found the tracks of the brethren's animals, which they followed to the line of the next county, when they gave up the chase." After attending a conference on Damon's creek, Calloway county, Kentucky, Sept. 2, 1836, Thos. B. Marsh presiding, Elder Patten left the Saints in Kentucky and Tennessee, accompanied by his wife, and started for Far West, Mo., where they arrived in peace and safety. Elder Patten remained in Missouri until the spring of 1837, when he performed a mission through several States, preaching by the way until he arrived in Kirtland. It was a time of great apostasy in the Church. Warren Parrish, his brother-in-law and fond associate, apostatized and labored diligently to draw away Elder Patten from the Church. Those things troubled Bro. Patten very much and caused him great sorrow. He soon afterwards returned to Missouri, where he (Feb. 10, 1838), together with Thos. B. Marsh, was appointed to take the presidency in Far West until Pres. Joseph Smith arrived. Elder Patten wrote an epistle and delivered what proved to be his last testimony to the world and Church, which was published in the "Elders' Journal," No. 3. He continued to labor in the Church in Missouri through the summer of 1838, and when the persecution and mobbing commenced, he was foremost in defending the Saints. News came to Far West Oct. 24, 1838, that Rev. Samuel Bogart, with a mob of seventy-five men, were committing depredations on Log creek, destroying property and taking prisoners. Elder Patten with about seventy-five others were sent out to meet the mobbers, with whom they had an encounter early the next morning (Oct. 25th), when Bro. Patten was mortally wounded, receiving a large ball in the bowels. When the battle was over, the brethren started towards Far West with their dead and wounded. After traveling a few miles in a wagon the sufferings of Apostle Patten became so great that he begged to be left. He and Bro. Seeley, another of the wounded, were then placed upon litters and carried by the brethren. When they arrived near Log creek, they were met by Joseph Smith, Hyrum Smith, Heber C. Kimball and others. At this place Bro. Patten became so ill that he could not stand to be borne any further. He was therefore conveyed into the house of Bro. Stephen Winchester, about three miles from Far West. During his removal his sufferings were so excruciating, that he frequently asked the brethren to lay him down that he might die. He lived about an hour after his arrival at Winchester's house and was perfectly sensible and collected until he breathed his last at ten o'clock at night. Although he had medical assistance, his wound was such that there was no hope entertained of his recovery; of this he was fully aware. "In this situation," writes Heber C. Kimball, "when the shades of time were lowering, and eternity with all its realities were opening to his view, he bore a strong testimony to the truth of the work of the Lord, and the religion he had espoused. The principles of the gospel, which were so precious to him before, were honorably maintained in nature's final hour, and afforded him that support and consolation at the time of his departure, which deprived death of its sting and horror. Speaking of those who had apostatized, he exclaimed, 'O, that they were in my situation; for I feel I have kept the faith; I have finished my course; henceforth there is laid up for me a crown, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give to me.' Speaking to his beloved wife, who was present and who attended him in his dying moments, he said, 'Whatever you do else, do not deny the faith!'" The brethren, who felt very much attached to their beloved brother, beseeched the Lord to spare his life, and endeavored to exercise faith for his recovery. Being aware of this he expressed a desire that they should let him go, as he wished to be with Christ, which was far better. A few minutes before he died, he prayed as follows: "Father, I ask thee in the name of Jesus Christ that thou wouldst release my spirit and receive it unto thyself." He then said to those who surrounded his dying bed, "Brethren, you have held me by your faith, but do give me up and let me go, I beseech you." The brethren then committed him to God, and he soon breathed his last without a groan. Elder Patton was buried at Far West Saturday Oct. 27, 1838. In pointing to the lifeless body the Prophet Joseph said, "There lies a man who has done just as he said he would: he has laid down his life for his friends." "Brother David W. Patton." writes Joseph Smith, "was a very worthy man, beloved by all good men who knew him. He....died as he had lived, a man of God, and strong in the faith of a glorious resurrection, in a world where mobs will have no power or place." (For further details see Life of David W. Patton, by Lycurgus A. Wilson; "Millennial Star," Vol. 26, p. 406; "Historical Record," Vol. 5, p. 54.)
