Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Skidmore, William Lobark

Skidmore, William Lobark, Bishop of Richmond, Cache county, Utah, from 1879 to 1900, is the son of Charles Skidmore and Harriet H. Shrieder, and was born Sept. 22, 1844, in Philadelphia, Penn., where he spent his early childhood and between the ages of six and ten attended the free schools of the city. He was baptized when about eight years old, by his brother, Henry Skidmore, in the Delaware river, and, together with his mother, two brothers, a sister, a sister-in-law and a niece, he emigrated to Utah in 1855. They traveled by rail to Pittsburg; thence by steamboats on the rivers to Atchison, Kansas, whence they traveled with an ox team across the plains, in Captain John Hendry's train of 46 wagons, arriving in Salt Lake City Sept. 3, 1855. The following winter was spent in the city, and the family passed through the experience of living on short rations; a little corn bread, molasses, Potatoes and meat were enjoyed till the spring of 1856, after which they subsisted mainly on greens and roots for several weeks. In May, 1856, William became a member of the household of Beason Lewis, who promised to care for him as if he were his own child. William was then only eleven years old, and though he found it hard to separate from his father and mother, he enjoyed, on the other hand, the change from starvation diet to plenty of food. His time was spent in the service of his benefactor on a ranch situated at the point of the mountain, about twelve miles west of Salt Lake City. In May, 1858, he removed with the Lewis family to Spanish Fork, Utah county, where he herded cattle until they moved back to the ranch in the latter part of the summer. William's time at the ranch was employed in caring for cattle and horses; among others the animals used in carrying the Eastern mail were committed to his care, when they needed recruiting. In April, 1860, he removed with the family to Cache valley, and thus became one of the first settlers of Richmond. In the spring of 1861 he was sent to take charge of a farm on Three Mile creek, Box Elder county, owned by Beason Lewis, but returned to Richmond the following spring. Dec. 20, 1862, he was ordained a Seventy by Wm. F. Rigby. In 1863, together with other young men from Richmond, he made a trip to the Missouri river as a Church teamster in Capt. Wm. B. Preston's company. After his return he became a member of the Richmond Dramatic company, and for ten years, in the winter season he took an active part in the plays. March 28, 1868, he married Sarah Armina Knapp, and then left the paternal roof of Beason Lewis. In 1876 he was elected justice of the peace and served two years in that capacity. About the same time he was appointed superintendent of the Richmond Sunday school. In 1877 he became an officer in the local Y. M. M. I. A. In the winter of 1878 he hauled lumber from the Temple mill in Logan canyon, for the Temple, and in the winter of 1879 he hauled rock for the Temple. Aside from the appointments here mentioned, he filled many Ward positions in obedience to the call of Bishop Marriner W. Merrill. May 4, 1879, he was ordained a High Priest and Bishop and set apart to preside over the Richmond Ward, by Apostle F. D. Richard. Christian Hyer and Wallace K. Burnham, respectively, were set apart as his counselors. Feb. 19, 1885, he married Charlotte W. Pearson; his wife Sarah A. died Nov. 14, 1891, having borne to him eight sons and four daughters. In 1900, having with his counselors carried the burden of presidency with its cares and its joys for nearly twenty-one years, he was honorably released from the Bishopric, and on Aug. 4, 1901, set apart as senior High Councilor in the Benson Stake of Zion, by Apostle Rudger Clawson.
