Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Molen, Simpson Montgomery

Molen, Simpson Montgomery, first counselor in the presidency of the Cache Stake of Zion, was the second son of Jesse Molen and Lieurany Huffaker, and was born Sept. 14, 1832, in Jacksonville, Morgan county, Ill. When Simpson was but a mere child his parents left Jacksonville, and moved to Bureau county, in the same State, and which at that time was the frontiers. Here they purchased a large tract of land, and at once commenced to fence and put it under cultivation and arrange for making it their permanent home. By dint of steady industry they, in the course of a short time, made that wilderness a lovely and desirable place. But they had heard the Elders preach and expound the doctrines of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, which, to them, at first seemed strange and new. However, the Elders spoke with great power, and the spirit that accompanied their utterances carried conviction to the hearts of the Molen family, and every member thereof embraced their doctrines. As soon as it was known that the Molens had accepted the principles of "Mormonism," their names were "cast out as evil;" and, in common with all the Latter-day Saints, they were persecuted for the gospel's sake; but hitherto they had suffered no particular violence. They were somewhat sequestered, and felt a great desire to gather with the body of their own people, who were then located in the city of Nauvoo, Ill. Young Simpson was foremost, and very persistent, in urging his parents to sell the homestead and move to Nauvoo. They sold their property in the spring of 1845 at a considerable sacrifice, as real estate was held at a low price at that period, and moved to a place called Camp Creek, in Hancock county, thirteen miles north of Nauvoo. Here they purchased a new home and made many improvements. But they were not destined to rest in peace in their new location. The anti-Mormons were active and very vindictive, and in the fall of that year they committed many depredations on the "Mormon" people in and around Camp Creek. The mob assembled from time to time in the settlement and burned dwelling houses, barns, hay and grain stacks, forcing the people from their homes, or killing those who were unwilling to leave or deny their faith. This latter the Molen family could not do; they were convinced that the gospel which they had embraced was true-that it was revealed from heaven by the Almighty God. Hence, they were willing to take joyfully the "spoiling of their goods," and suffer all that was needful for them to suffer for Christ's sake. The family fled to Nauvoo, where they remained until they, in common with thousands of other Latter-day Saints, were expelled by the ruthless mob from their peaceful homes to find shelter in the winter season among the red men in the wilderness. Their property at Camp Creek was worth $2,000, but all they could obtain for it was two yoke of cattle and an old wagon. At this time of the exodus, Simpson and several other members of the family were prostrated with fever and ague. With their outfit they commenced their journey westward. They traveled on until they reached the vicinity of Oskaloosa, Iowa. Here they went into winter quarters. In the spring of 1847, they resumed their dreary march and, on reaching what was then called Winter Quarters, they joined the main body of the "Mormon" emigrants, with whom they traveled to Great Salt Lake valley. On arriving in the Valley they pitched their tents on what is now the western part of Salt Lake City. This was in the fall of the year 1847. Young Simpson and his parents may therefore be numbered among the pioneers and founders of Utah. Shortly after reaching this haven of rest-finding that bread and flour were very scarce, they, by the advice of the authorities of the Church, weighed up their supplies and put themselves on rations, that there might be sufficient food to last them until a harvest replenished their stores. To this end the number of days were calculated, when they discovered to their great surprise, if not alarm, that they had only about one ounce of flour per day for each member of their family, and they had no milk, no meat, fruits or vegetables to help out this scanty allowance. The children were hale and hearty, and to be suddenly reduced to such short rations was the source of much suffering to them; indeed, it seemed almost like starvation. Fortunately, the winter was mild and open, and the family sought for and dug thistle roots, which were substituted as an article of food to save the bread. The roots, however, while they appeased the cravings of hunger, furnished but little nutriment. When the next spring opened, other roots were found which were more nutritious. These roots, with "greens" and the milk from a few cows, enabled them to "keep body and soul together," until a kind Providence blessed them with a harvest of wheat and vegetables. But a long time elapsed, even after food became plentiful, ere the cravings of hunger could be satisfied by eating a hearty meal. In 1848, young Molen's elder brother Alexander was sent out to drive a team to meet and assist in the emigration; but when he met them, he continued his journey to the States. In consequence of this course of the elder brother, as Father Molen's health was failing, much of the responsibility of providing for this large family fell upon young Simpson. On account of the unsettled condition of the family, Simpson hitherto had but little opportunity of acquiring an education. He attended school about three months in the winter of each year, and the remainder he worked to earn means to assist in supporting the family. In the spring of 1852 the father died, which sad event very much increased the care and responsibility of the young man. With the assistance of his younger brothers, he built a comfortable house for the family. Labor was their only capital, and with it they paid for all the materials necessary for the erection of the dwelling. At the general conference held in Salt Lake City in April, 1854, he was called to go on a mission to the Sandwich Islands; and on the 4th of May he left his mountain home, in company with other missionaries, for his field of labor. They traveled by team from Utah to San Pedro, California, and thence up the coast by steamship to San Francisco. At the last named place they embarked for the Islands on board a sailing vessel, and were on the sea nineteen days before they reached their destination. While on this mission Simpson M. Molen, who was now an Elder, acquired a knowledge of the Hawaiian language. He traveled a great deal and preached to the natives in their own language. He suffered many hardships during his ministry on the Islands, enduring hunger and fatigue. In the spring of 1858 he returned to Utah, and for some time made his home at Lehi, in Utah county. While there he became acquainted with Miss Jane E. Hyde, daughter of the late Hon. William Hyde, probate judge of Cache county, and married her Aug. 7, 1859. In the spring of 1860 he moved with his father-in-law to Cache valley, and settled on a plain five miles north of Logan. This place was afterwards named Hyde Park, in honor of the man (William Hyde) who first settled there. Elder Molen was therefore one of the founders of Hyde Park. He was also first counselor to Bishop William Hyde of the same place. In 1860 the militia was organized in Cache county, with which Elder Molen became identified. He was earnest and energetic in discharging his duties as a citizen soldier. Aug. 5, 1860, he was elected lieutenant-colonel of the first regiment of infantry, first brigade of the Nauvoo Legion. He was commissioned by Governor Charles Durkee in 1868. Col. Molen was an efficient officer, and held that military position until September, 1870, when Governor Shaeffer issued a proclamation forbidding any further military exercises by the officers and members of the Nauvoo Legion. In 1864 Elder Molen went to Illinois to settle some business pertaining to the family estate. While in the east at the time he purchased, on commission, a large amount of merchandise which he freighted through to Salt Lake City. In 1868 he was chosen to take charge of a large emigration train, consisting of ox-teams and sixty wagons sent from Utah to the terminus of the Union Pacific railroad. This mission he performed to the entire satisfaction of the authorities of the Church, the owners of the teams and five hundred emigrants, whom he brought in on his return to Utah. At the October conference, in 1874, he was called on another mission to the States. He traveled in Iowa, Illinois and Kentucky, held many meetings and preached the gospel to all who would listen to him. He also visited many of his relatives in the East, from whom he gathered much information of the genealogy of his ancestors. He returned home in 1875, but in the spring of 1876 he was appointed to take another mission to the Sandwich Islands. He took with him a part of his family, and remained in the ministry, on the Islands, this time three years and three months. The latter part of the time he presided over the mission and superintended the works on the Church farm and sugar plantation. He also became acquainted with a number of the leading men of the Hawaiian nation and with some of the members of the royal family. Among the latter were their Majesties Queen Kapiolani and ex-Queen Emma, whom he had the honor to entertain at the plantation. In 1879 Elder Molen returned to Hyde Park, Utah, and shortly afterwards was set apart as first counselor to Bishop Daines of that place. He had not been long at home before he met with a serious accident in jumping from the cars in the dark while the train was in motion. He broke one arm and was otherwise severely bruised in several parts of his body. At the election held in August, 1879, he was elected assessor and collector for Cache county, which office he filled to the satisfaction of the people. Sept. 10, 1882, he was ordained Bishop and appointed to succeed Bishop O. N. Liljenquist, of Hyrum, in the Cache Stake of Zion. This position he held until 1890, when he was called and set apart as first counselor to Orson Smith, in the presidency of the Cache Valley Stake of Zion. After an eventful and useful career, he died at his home in Hyrum, Cache county, Nov. 29, 1900, highly respected by all who knew him. President Molen may be described as a type of the American citizen of olden times, and was decidedly a progressive man. He lead out in all public enterprises and invited the people to follow him. In building bridges, making new roads, building meeting houses and other public buildings he always did his full share of the work, and was throughout a public-spirited man.
