Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Smith, Isaac

Smith, Isaac, counselor in the presidency of the Cache Stake of Zion since 1890, is the son of Samuel Smith and Sarah Jane Ingraham, and was born Dec 31, 1858, in Brigham City, Box Elder county, Utah. His father was a native of London, and his mother of Worcester, England. August 14, 1869, Isaac was baptized in Brigham City, and he was ordained a Priest by Wm. Box, Feb. 13, 1876. At the age of fourteen he had pretty well mastered the cabinetmaker's trade, when he went out with a surveying party as peg boy. He soon rose, however, to rodman. Next he went with Jos. A. West as rodman, when the U. & N. R. R. made its survey through Bear river canyon to Soda Springs. When about sixteen years of age he had charge of the level party under Jos. A. West, in making the preliminary survey of the railroad to Black Rock and E. T. City, west of Salt Lake City. On his return to Brigham City, Isaac Smith was given charge of the B. C. Co-op lumber yard, which position he held until the fall of 1876, when he went to Salt Lake City to attend the University. During his labors in the lumber yard, being anxious to get an education, he completed Ray's higher arithmetic and the elementary algebra; this latter was accomplished by going to school during his noon hour and many times missing his dinner. He also attended night school, where he studied grammar, spelling and book-keeping; the latter he also studied at home, and in this way he obtained a good knowledge of the principles of book-keeping. At the University he attended the first and last quarter, teaching school the two winter quarters, in order to get means to pay his expenses, and he studied at home to keep up with his classes; in this way he passed in the studies he commenced the first year; but the strain was too much, and in the spring of the second year he had to abandon his school and also his studies and seek outdoor work to regain his health. During that summer he worked at the B. C. Co-op steam mill, shipping lumber and keeping books. Aug. 11, 1877, the Box Elder Stake was organized with Oliver G. Snow as president and Elder Box as first and Isaac Smith as second counselor. At that time Bro. Smith was ordained a High Priest and set apart to the position named by Apostle Lorenzo Snow. Before this time Elder Smith had held several Church positions, such as assistant superintendent in the Ward Sunday school, assistant superintendent in the Stake superintendency of Y. M. M. I. A., and president of the Ward Y. M. M. I. A. The remainder of the fall of 1877 he spent in the canyon, at the mill, and in the winter entered the school room again as assistant to E. A. Box. Dec. 28, 1877, he married Harriet Camilla Ensign, daughter of M. L. Ensign and Mary Dunn. At the April conference, 1878, he was called on a mission to Great Britain, and departed on the same May 5th. On his arrival in England he was assigned to the Hertfordshire and Bedfordshire districts. Here he labored until the spring of 1879, when he was sent to the Channel Islands. He spent about three months on the island of Jersey, but owing to the extremes of climate, caused by the ocean currents, his health failed, and he was released to come home. But after arriving in London, he wrote to the president, stating that his health was much improved, and that if sickness was the cause of his release, he was ready to renew his labors. Accordingly, he was assigned to his old field and made one circuit, and when he returned to the conference house, he was informed of his appointment as president of the Leeds conference. Here he remained until his release came to sail with the company leaving England April 10, 1880. In the spring of 1881 he removed from Brigham City to Logan, to clerk in the wholesale department of Z. C. M. I. June 5, 1884, when the Logan First Ward was divided into three Wards, Isaac Smith was appointed Bishop of the Seventh Ward, with Nils P. Lindelof and Ephraim Mikkelsen as his counselors. The Ward then numbered 35 families; the people commenced the erection of a meeting house and had it completed in about four months at a cost of $600. The membership of the Ward increasing, this house was found too small; hence, a new concrete building was erected at a cost of $1,600. The Ward had increased to 75 families. During his labors with the Z. C. M. I. Elder Smith was invoice clerk, had charge of the grocery, hardware and crockery departments and later the clothing department. He was on the road as general salesman for about five years, after which he ran a branch store for the institution on Main Street, Logan. Aug. 3, 1890, he was sustained as second counselor to Orson Smith, president of the Cache Stake, and was set apart by Apostle Franklin D. Richards. In February, 1891, he was given the management of the Logan branch of Z. C. M. I., which position he held until the institution closed out its business in 1897. Owing to absence from home, Pres. Orson Smith was released in 1899 from the presidency of Cache Stake, and Apostle Merrill was sustained and set apart Aug. 30, 1899. Isaac Smith was sustained as his second counselor and set apart by Apostle John H. Smith. Owing to the many other duties of Apostle Merrill he was relieved from his duties as president in Cache Valley, at the quarterly conference held in Logan May 3, 1901; Bro. Jos. Morrell, his first counselor, was chosen president, and Isaac Smith and Wm. W. Maughan were chosen as counselors. Elder Smith was set apart to this position by Apostle Mathias F. Cowley.
