Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Wilson, Joseph Ellis

Wilson, Joseph Ellis, clerk of the Cache Stake of' Zion, is the tenth and youngest child of Wellington Paul Wilson and Elizabeth Boardsman Smith, and was born May 2, 1858, on Soap creek, Monroe county, Iowa. His parents both came of old Massachusetts stock and were numbered among the early converts to the Church in Kirtland, Ohio. They came to Utah in 1864, and soon after separated. Joseph went with his mother and two brothers to Harrisville, Weber county, where he lived for several years. From this time forward he was destined to have but little of a mother's care and scarcely a father's acquaintance, yet to be fortunate in having his lot cast among people who were good and kind. In the summer of 1868 he received an injury to his right ankle, which caused him much suffering, but probably led to his getting an education and changing his whole course of life. Being partly crippled, Pres. George A. Smith, to whom his mother had been sealed, gave him a home and sent him to school. Joseph resided with Mrs. Bathsheba W. Smith, her home being the present Historian's Office building, in Salt Lake City. Early in 1871 he entered the school of Mrs. Randall in Pres. Young's school house, and later Miss Cook's school at the Social Hall. In due course of time he was advanced to the University proper under Dr. John R. Park, at the Council House. He was studious and usually stood well in his classes. In the spring of 1875 he was taken from school with a view of giving him an apprenticeship in printing at the "Deseret News" office. The opening did not occur at said office as soon as expected. His benefactor died in the following August and left him on his own resources to battle with the world at the age of seventeen. In casting about for employment, Bishop Hunter advised him to teach school and he made the attempt. Passing examination under Dr. Park, he obtained a first grade teacher's certificate and taught that winter at Taylorsville, Salt Lake county. The following winter found him teaching school at Clifton, Idaho, where he had a number of relatives who had moved there from Harrisville. In June, 1877, when the Clifton Ward was organized, he was chosen second counselor to Bishop Harvey Dixon, having been ordained a High Priest and set apart to that office by Moses Thatcher, then president of Cache Stake. July 22, 1877, he married Lerona A. Monroe, daughter of Major Marcellus Monroe-Martin. From this union has sprung twelve children, all living, the oldest, Joseph E. Jr., having filled an honorable mission to the Northern States. In the winter of 1878-79 Elder Wilson taught school at Richmond, being assigned to the highest of three grades. The summer of 1879 he spent working on the Logan Temple; then, for one year, he assisted in starting the first newspaper of Cache county, the "Logan Leader," and established his home in Logan. Early in 1881 he was engaged as bookkeeper at the Temple, where he remained three years, and was then called to be Stake tithing clerk. He was for two years president of the Logan First Ward Y. M. M. I. A., and in May, 1884, was set apart to be second counselor to Bishop B. M. Lewis, of the same Ward, which position he held for about seven years. After that he filled the position of first counselor seven years longer. In 1887 through failure of his eyesight, he was released from his position as tithing clerk, and casting about for some outdoor occupation, he engaged in the nursery business. He started in 1888 what has developed into the Logan nurseries, but financial reverses prevented him from continuing in the business. He served two terms as city recorder of Logan, and one term as school trustee. During the troublous anti-polygamy times he took to wife Esther A. Ricks, youngest child of Patriarch Joel Ricks, who has borne him five children, all living. After he had resided a short time in Logan, he was called to be clerk of the High Council, which place he has filled, except at intervals, until the present time. In January, 1894, he was called to the position of Stake clerk, which place he continues to fill. On removing to the Fifth Ward (Logan) and being released as counselor to Bishop Lewis, he was chosen an alternate member of the High Council in February, 1898 He served as bookkeeper in Z. C. M. I., Logan, from 1895 to the time the branch closed, and in July, 1897, accepted a position at the Agricultural College as secretary and instructor in penmanship. This position he filled until March, 1900, when the anti-polygamy agitation made it necessary for him to resign. Just at this juncture he was called again to be Stake tithing clerk, he being the unanimous choice of the twenty-six Bishops of the Stake and the Stake presidency. Elder Wilson has been temperate in all his habits, keeping the Word of Wisdom from his youth up, has been a Sunday school worker almost constantly from the days he attended the Thirteenth Ward (Salt Lake City) Sunday school under the superintendency of George Goddard in the early 70's. Patriarch John Smith promised him in his youth that through the prayer of faith he should be mighty in healing the sick. This has been fulfilled, as many can testify. While slow in physical and mental action, he is possessed of devotion to duty and tenacity of purpose, and very seldom yields to discouragement. Among his boyhood associations in school and otherwise he remembers with pleasure six who have since become Apostles, viz. John Henry Smith, Heber J. Grant, Abraham H. Cannon, Rudger Clawson, Mathias F. Cowley and John W. Taylor, all but the first being near his own age. The wise counsels and correct example given by Pres. George A. Smith have been a source of strength and encouragement to the boy and the man. For those associations and many others he feels to thank a kind Providence that has guided him.
