Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Needham, John

Needham, John, a prominent Elder in the Church, was the son of James Needham and Mary Armitage, and was born April 1, 1819, in Leeds, Yorkshire, England. Following is a life sketch from his own pen, which was read at the eightieth anniversary of his birthday: "When I was very young, my father and mother, with four children, moved to Warrington, in Lancashire. When a little over three years old, a drunken man on a horse run me down and nearly killed me. For years, I went to a select school, kept by Rev. Doctor Symson. When fourteen years old, I was apprenticed for seven years in a large drapery emporium, kept by Cross & Pierpont. After serving them for nearly three years, they sold out and gave me my free papers, and I moved to Liverpool and Preston, working as a journeyman. I was engaged as clerk in a store at Preston, when Pres. Heber C. Kimball, Orson Hyde and other Elders came there to preach the gospel. I heard the first gospel sermon in Preston from Apostle Orson Hyde, in the year 1837, and I believed it with all my soul. My father came and took me to my home in Warrington and was very bitter against the Church. In a few weeks, he obtained a situation for me in Manchester, but in a short time I was with the Saints again and preaching the gospel, though only a boy in my teens. Again my father took me home, and in a few weeks placed me in a situation in Staffordshire, but wherever I went, the gospel seemed to come also. This time Apostle George A. Smith came to Staffordshire, and I labored under his direction and traveled a great deal with him. At last my father left me severely alone and forbid me visiting my mother, brothers and sisters. I labored 9 few months in Dudley, near Birmingham, and in a small place called Great Green. I was very poor and destitute, not having enough money to buy ink and paper; the few Saints in the Church were also very poor. One morning, when I answered a knock at the door where I was staying, a young woman asked if a minister of the gospel was staying there, named the Reverend John Needham. I told her that Elder John Needham was my name. She then gave me some silver money, and told me that her lady had a dream, in which she was told to give me some cash, and that I was a servant of God and needed help. This is only one case out of a hundred similar blessings which I received from our Heavenly Father during a five years' mission, and while I traveled practically without money. All the means I obtained was given me by those I baptized and organized into branches of the Church. In 1840 I went to Monmouthshire and Wales, and with God's blessing was enabled to do a great work there, for the people were quite ready to receive the gospel, and I had a blessed, happy time with them. At that time I was called to preside over a conference. The Elders being scarce during the first few years in England, we generally traveled alone, and not in pairs. I will give a sample of how I introduced the gospel in several towns and cities, by referring to my first visit in Abergavenny, in Monmouthshire. I stood up in the Market place, sang a hymn, prayed and then preached the gospel of Jesus Christ in my own simple way, but with great zeal and confidence in my Savior's help. After I had finished speaking, I remarked that I was preaching the gospel without purse or scrip, had no salary, but put my trust in God. This moved the hearts of my hearers to feed me and give me a night's entertainment. In a few moments a very young woman came to me and said that I could go home with her. As she looked so very young, I remarked that perhaps her parents would not like it. She told me that she was married and had two children, and therefore had a right to ask me. Of course, I went, and in a very short time I baptized her and her husband, and in a few weeks I had a flourishing branch of the Church started. Making that my headquarters, I organized many branches of the Church in Monmouthshire and Wales, getting help from other Elders and many that I ordained and sent out to preach. In the winter of 1842-43 I left my native land. My father gave me a very good outfit to cross the sea and to go to Nauvoo, as he now felt more kind toward the Saints. A few years later I baptized my father and others of my family, in fulfilment of prophecy, in which it was promised me that I should be a Joseph to my father's house. I sailed from Liverpool on the ship "Yorkshire," Elder Thomas Bullock being president of the company. We had a nine weeks' very stormy voyage and were, on one occasion, told by the sailors that in a few days we should all be either in heaven or hell. We got into New Orleans without a mast on the vessel, except a short one which was made when we were in distress. Not one Saint, however, had any fear, for we had been promised that we should get over safe and well, but that we should have a very rough voyage. The "Yorkshire" was lost in the return voyage. On my arrival in Nauvoo I was introduced to Joseph the Prophet, his brother Hyrum (the Patriarch), and many of the leading men of the city. I enjoyed their counsel and preaching for years. In the fail of 1843, Sarah Ann Booth was sealed to me for time and all eternity by Patriarch Hyrum Smith. God gave me a jewel, for she was one of God's noble women and was filled with goodness and love to God; her life was spent in doing good, and thousands can bear that testimony; my three wives will say that she was a mother and sister to us all. I know that the Prophet Joseph Smith expected the Saints to go to the Rocky Mountains. I never can forget the burning words of those men filled with the Holy Ghost and the revelations of God given unto them. I knew them well and loved them. I knew them to be the Prophets of God clothed with almighty power, and I know it by the power of God and the revelations of Jesus Christ unto me, and this is my testimony to my children, relations and dear friends. After the death of Joseph and Hyrum, I had a stock of goods for sale at Nauvoo. I succeeded in moving them two days before the mob got into the city, and thereby saved them from destruction. I fought with the mob in defense of Nauvoo. When I left the city in 1846, I made my home for a time in St. Louis, Mo., where I kept a store at the corner of Third and Pine streets. Later, I opened a store in Kanesville, Iowa, and another at Council Point. At that time my father wrote to me that his circumstances were very bad and reduced. As I had means I sent my brother James to England with the necessary funds to bring the family to Zion. He did so and it was at that time that I baptized my father. In 1851 I sold out my business and came to Great Salt Lake City, bringing my father and sister Eliza with me; the rest of the family came afterwards. A few years later my father went to St. Louis, Mo., on a visit, and died in that city. My dear mother died, in coming up the Mississippi river, bound for Nauvoo. In the fall of 1860, I was called on a mission to England and left my business in the care of my brother James and Mr. Whitmore. Elder Staines, my partner in business, was called on a mission at the same time. When we returned, all our goods were sold, and we had no business. I was released to return home in 1863 and was given the charge of a large company of Saints on the ship "Antarctic." I saw them safe in Salt Lake City, but on our arrival I was very sick, being nearly tired out with the constant care of so many people on the sea and on the plains. I was called to assist in organizing Z. C. M. I. in Salt Lake City and in buying out all stores of business that would sell. For several years I had charge of the Z. C. M. I. clothing department. In 1890, together with my wife Rose and our three children, I moved to Logan, Cache county, in order to improve my health and improve my circumstances. In a few years I had lost by death my wife Sarah Ann and Martha, my son Charles Albert, my brother James and several near relatives. I felt the burdens and trials were almost more than I could bear and therefore left the city, believing it to be the best for me. In July, 1890, while in Logan, I was taken very sick with la grippe and was confined to my bed for over two months. In 1896, I was taken sick again with the greatest and most fearful of maladies, a large swelling on the body, being covered with cancers. The doctors insisted that my only chance for life was in going through an operation, and that might be death, but all the medicine and operations I had was consecrated oil and the laying on of hands, and by the power of God I was restored to health. When I married my first wife, Sarah Ann Both, we were both very poor as regards this world's goods. We had no house and no furniture. My wife worked out in a family as help and I worked on a steamboat, in the foundry and with whatever I could find to do. I have worked many, many days for 50 cents a day. In time we saved a little money and went to housekeeping, and the first furniture we had I made with an augur and hatchet. We had boxes for chairs, had no stove but a bake-kettle and a spider (a kind of frying pan). We had one small room for kitchen, bedroom and parlor, and was never happier in my life, because we had to be contented, and always paid for what we got. In a short time I obtained a situation as clerk in a store, and in less than a year I rented the same store and went into business for myself. My wife was my first clerk, and in a year's time I had three stores, all doing well, and did considerable building. I look back with pleasure upon many of my good deeds and repent of all my shortcomings and sins of omission. I do not remember the time in my life, young or old, that I did not have the fear of God before me; yet like all others, I feel the weakness of humanity old as I am, and expect I always shall. During my stay in Kanesville, I became acquainted with Oliver Cowdery. I heard him preach several times, and listened to his powerful testimony with regard to the work of God, Joseph Smith the Prophet, and the great events he took part in." Elder Needham died at Logan June 14, 1901; his remains were taken to Salt Lake City for burial.
