Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Stewart, James Z.

Stewart, James Z., a member of the High Council in the Cache Stake of Zion, was born in Adams county, Ill., Oct. 31, 1844, son of Isaac M. Stewart and Matilda J. Downs, and grandson of Bickley Stewart, who served under George Washington in the war of the Revolution. His parents shared with the Saints in their persecutions and mobbings in the States, emigrated to Utah in 1852 and located in South Willow creek, afterwards called Draper, in Salt Lake county. His early education was acquired in the schools of that county, principally at Draper, under the instruction of Dr. John R. Park; and when Dr. Park was called to take charge of the University, on his recommendation, James Z. Stewart was engaged to take his place at the head of the Draper schools. Later he took a two years' course in the higher branches at the University of Deseret, at the conclusion of which he was offered a position as teacher in that institution. This offer he declined, however, and returned to Draper, where he taught school until the fall of 1873, when he accepted the principalship of the Cache Seminary at Logan. In the summer of 1875 he was called by Pres. Brigham Young to take a mission to Mexico, in company with Elders Daniel W. Jones. Helaman Pratt, Robert H. Smith, Anthony W. Ivins, Ammon M. Tenney and Wiley C. Jones. He was set apart Sept. 14, 1875, by Apostle Wilford Woodruff, and left home Sept. 16, 1875. This was an exploring mission, as well as a mission to preach the gospel to the Mexicans and Indians, and it was necessary that the journey should be made on horseback and with pack animals. At the expiration of about ten months' traveling through Arizona. New Mexico, Texas and Chihuahua (old Mexico), the Elders were all released to return to Utah, and Elder Stewart reached his home July 3, 1876. A few days later Pres. Brigham Young called Elder Stewart to take another mission to Mexico, and on Oct. 18, 1876, in company with Helaman Pratt. Isaac J. Stewart, Meliton G. Trejo, Louis Garff and George Terry, he started again for Mexico, but this time with horse teams. Elder Stewart labored principally in southern Arizona. Texas and in the State of Sonora (old Mexico), and was released to return home in the fall of 1877. A few weeks later Elder Stewart was called on another mission, for which he was set apart March 20, 1878, by Apostle Orson Pratt and started next day. While on this mission he selected the sites of Ephraim and Manassa, in the southern parr of Colorado, and located some of the Saints from the Southern States in that locality. Oct. 3, 1879, Elder Stewart was called to accompany Apostle Moses Thatcher and Elder Meliton G. Trejo on a mission to Old Mexico. He was set apart by Apostle Erastus Snow and left home Oct. 27, 1879, for the city of Mexico, where he arrived with the other brethren Nov. 15, 1879. Elder Stewart labored in the city of Mexico, the States of Hidalgo, Morelus, Queretaro and adjoining States for about two years, during which time he assisted in translating and publishing the "Voice of Warning" and several pamphlets in the Spanish language and wrote many articles regarding the Latter-day Saints and their faith, which were published in the leading papers in the city of Mexico. Apostle Thatcher was anxious to know the condition of the country between the city of Mexico and Acapulco, to determine whether it would be practicable for the Elders of the Church to come and return by that route, during the seasons of the year when it would be dangerous to travel by way of Vera Cruz on account of yellow fever and other contagious diseases, and he requested. Elder Stewart to cross the country on horseback, a distance of 350 miles from the city of Mexico to the coast, which he did on his return home, making the trip in about thirteen days. Upon returning home he went to Logan and accepted a position as assistant teacher in the Brigham Young College for two years. In the fall of 1883 Apostle Moses Thatcher was instructed to have the Book of Mormon translated into the Spanish language: the responsibility of this work was placed upon Elder Stewart, and he was told by Apostle Thatcher that he would hold him personally responsible for the accuracy and general character of the translation. The translation was made during the winter by him and Elder Meliton G. Trejo and it was afterwards printed at the "Deseret News" office under his watchcare. Elder Stewart was counselor to Bishop Benjamin M. Lewis of the First Ward of Logan, until he was called to be a member of the High Council of Cache Stake, to which office he was set apart by Apostle Moses Thatcher May 19, 1884, which position he now holds. Elder Stewart has also filled several prominent political positions in Cache county. He was a member of the city council for six years, and was probate judge of the county several terms, and for a number of years was president of the faculty of the Brigham Young College. In all the positions of trust which he has filled he has acquitted himself with credit and to the satisfaction of those whom he was called to serve.
