Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Crockett, Alvin

Crockett, Alvin, a member of the High Council of the Cache Stake of Zion, was born Oct. 19, 1831, on Fox Islands, Maine, eldest child of David Crockett and Lydia Young. At the age of eight years he was baptized into the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, in emulation of the example his parents had set some years previously. In the year 1841, actuated by a strong desire for association with the main body of the Saints, the entire family, with team and wagon, started for Nauvoo, at which place they arrived in October of the same year. In Nauvoo they were eye witnesses to and sharers of the manifold hardships that obtained from the year mentioned until the great exodus in 1846. During their stay in Nauvoo, for one entire winter, Alvin, though but a mere lad of twelve years, was brought face to face with the great responsibility of caring for the remainder of the family. They were all confined to their beds with the fever excepting him, and while he was not in the woods with ax and wagon getting fuel to keep them warm, he was at their bedsides administering to their various wants. This duty was discharged manfully. Subsequent to the banishment from Nauvoo, the family settled in Davis county, Iowa, where they made their living by farming on shares until the spring of 1849. In April of that year they traveled to the Missouri river, where they remained in camp until July 4, 1849, when they bid farewell to the unsympathetic States and took their departure for Great Salt Lake valley where they arrived Oct. 19, 1849. Singular enough, that day was Alvin's birthday. His father located in the First Ward, and after a great struggle he was successful in building up a comparatively comfortable home. The tendency among some of the Saints at this time to explore the gold fields in California had its effect upon the subject of this sketch. Accordingly, shortly after his arrival in Salt Lake City, he set out in company with several other men for the fields of gold. It proved a very valuable experience to him, although he returned two years later with but very little of the object of his visit. June 26, 1851, he married Sophia Reed and settled in Payson, Utah county, where for several years he was known as a useful and a prominent citizen, both from a social and a religious standpoint. He distinguished himself in the military organization of that day, which organization was effected to protect the whiles from the ravages and fierce attacks of the red man. He had held the position of colonel for twelve years before circumstances ceased to require his military services. In 1861 he moved to Cache valley and became one of its early settlers of Logan. In 1863 he was sustained as a member of the High Council, which position he occupies with honor at the time of this writing. Nov. 29, 1867, he took unto himself a second wife in the person of Annie Naomi Peel. The Lord blessed him with two noble women, who bore him eighteen children, Sophia twelve and Naomi six, all of whom, excepting two, are alive today, and honor him with upwards of sixty grandchildren. Two of his sons (Ozro and Fred, the former of the first and the latter of the second wife) have performed foreign missions. In 1872 he left for a mission to preach the gospel to his relatives and friends on the Fox Islands. And while he was received very coldly and was not successful in bringing many to a knowledge of the gospel, yet, it is not infrequent that the islanders will tell the missionaries of later dates of the little Crockett boy who left them, and later on, when a grown man, returned, and with what assiduousness and diligence he proclaimed the doctrines of Joseph Smith. He was the first mayor of Logan city, in which capacity he served the second term: was also sheriff of Cache county for upwards of fifteen years. In all these varied vocations not one evidence can be successfully adduced wherein he was unfaithful to his duty, or disloyal to the people of whom he was the representative. In 1888 he was arrested on the charge of unlawful cohabitation. Boldly and prayerfully he faced his sentence to six months' incarceration in the penitentiary, believing in his very heart, even as he believes to this day, that this persecution, in connection with that of many of his brethren, was simply a repetition of the old tale, a worldly effort to prevent the execution of a divine command. In 1898, however, commenced the real and most painful period of his life, leaving on his heart a weight which will be more or less felt as long as his heart beats. Marking the commencement of this period was the death of his second wife, Annie Naomi, after a protracted illness of several years. She died March 24, 1898, and one year later the hand of fate was laid upon the first wife; thus leaving him on the brink of his three score and ten years alone, at least as far as the care and company of a loving wife was concerned. Though now in his seventieth year he is, comparatively speaking, a monument of physical strength and preservation. He is still a counselor to his children and grandchildren, all of whom have grown to love and revere him, and who should hold, even dearer than they hold their own lives, the example his life teaches-a life devoid of ostentation, inoffensive and harmless, yet useful in the highest degree a life devoted principally to the development of the kingdom of God.-Fred W. Crockett.
