Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Cardon, Louis Samuel

Cardon, Louis Samuel, a prominent Elder of the Second Ward, Logan, Cache county, Utah, was born June 23, 1869, in Logan, third son of John Paul Cardon and Susannah Goudin. His childhood was spent at home; and at the proper age he began attending the public schools. He was baptized at the age of eight years, and was ordained a Deacon when fourteen years old. When he was seventeen years of age he accompanied his father (who was obliged to leave home on account of his religious convictions) to Montana, where they worked on the railroad. In the winter of 1887, Louis returned home with the intention of entering school, but circumstances ruled otherwise. In March, 1888, in company with his father, three brothers and sister, he left home once more, for Oregon, where they had taken a contract for railroad work. Louis labored there and in Washington until the fall of 1889, when he returned to Cache county, Utah. In the fall of 1891 he entered the Brigham Young College, at Logan, this being the first school he attended since he was thirteen years of age; he found it very difficult to keep up in the work with his companions, who had enjoyed better advantages; but by hard labor and untiring application to the work, he succeeded in completing a four years' normal course. He taught school in Greenville during the school year of 1895-96, with much credit to himself and his patrons. Jan. 8, 1894, he was ordained an Elder by Thomas Morgan, and during that winter he acted as secretary of the Y. M. M. I. A. of the Fourth Ward Logan. In March, 1896, he was appointed assistant postmaster in Logan, which position he filled to the entire satisfaction of all concerned. June 17. 1896, he married Rebecca, daughter of Bishop Henry and Margaret Ballard, of the Second Ward, Logan. In 1896 he was chosen first counselor in the Y. M. M. I. A. of the Second Ward, Logan, and during 1897 and 1898 he was president of said association. Having received a call to take a foreign mission, he left Logan June 7, 1898, to fulfill the same. He was set apart and ordained a Seventy the following day in Salt Lake City, by Christian D. Fjeldsted, and arrived in Bern, Switzerland, July 3, 1898. Having studied French to some extent at home, he expected to be sent to labor in the French part of the Swiss mission; but the president of the mission (Henry E. Bowman) desired him to labor in the German part, and he was accordingly sent to labor in (Bale) Basel. He entered at once into the spirit of the work, and, through the blessings of the Lord, soon acquired the German language. Three months later he was placed in charge of the Basel branch. He labored earnestly in that place for thirteen and a half months, when he was called to preside over the Zurich branch, which was the largest branch in the Swiss mission. Under these several appointments he labored earnestly for the cause of truth, and his whole soul was in the work before him, as witnessed by the improvement of the branches over which he presided. Nov. 23, 1899, he received word from Liverpool that he had been selected to preside over the Swiss mission. This was a great surprise to him, and he keenly sensed the great responsibility; but he went forth humbly, putting his trust in God, and was enabled to perform a good work and bring many honest souls to the light of the gospel. Nov. 28, 1899, he left Zurich for Bern, and after visiting all the branches in the mission with Pres. Bowman, he took charge of the mission. During his term of presidency, the mission made wonderful advancement in all respects. Baptisms were frequent, tithing was greatly increased, great improvement was made in the keeping of the Word of Wisdom, and missionary labors were extended into new fields. Elders were sent into Italy, where they tried hard to establish the work once more. Elder Cardon traveled very extensively in his efforts to visit all the Saints in the mission; he also visited a number of the branches in Germany, visited Italy and had the pleasure of seeing Paris. France, during the exposition. Dec. 20, 1900, he and other Elders came down with the smallpox and were compelled to go to the pest house, here they were confined until Jan. 12. 1901. Feb. 22, 1901. Elder Cardon received an honorable release to return home. He sailed from Liverpool Feb. 28, 1901, and reached Logan March 15, 1901. Soon after his return home he was set apart as assistant superintendent of the Second Ward Sunday school, Logan. He also has charge of the lesser Priesthood of the Ward and holds several other positions.
