Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

McLellin, William E.

McLellin, William E., a member of the Council of Twelve Apostles from 1835 to 1838, was born in Tennessee, probably in the year 1806. He heard the gospel preached by Elders Samuel H. Smith and Reynolds Cahoon, while they were on their mission to Jackson county, Missouri, in the summer of 1831; he wound up his business and followed them to Jackson county. While on the way, he was baptized, and ordained an Elder. He visited Kirtland, Ohio, in the fall. At his request, Joseph Smith inquired of the Lord concerning him, and received a revelation. (See Doc. & Cov., Sec. 66.) Soon after he and other members began to criticise the language used in some of the revelations, "and Wm. E. McLellin," writes Joseph Smith, "as the wisest man in his own estimation, having more learning than sense, endeavored to write a commandment like unto one of the least of the Lord's, but failed; it was an awful responsibility to write in the name of the Lord. The Elders and all present that witnessed this vain attempt of a man to imitate the language of Jesus Christ, renewed their faith in the fulness of the gospel, and in the truth of the commandments and revelations which the Lord had given to the Church through my instrumentality; and the Elders signified a willingness to bear testimony of their truth to all the world." In the winter of 1832-33, Elder McLellin performed a mission, in company with Elder Parley P. Pratt, through Missouri and into Green county, Illinois, where they preached with much success. In a revelation given March 8, 1833, the Lord said, "I am not well pleased with my servant William E. McLellin." He was one of the corresponding committee in behalf of the Saints, to confer with the Jackson and Clay county committee, in trying to settle the Missouri difficulties. He was chosen one of the High Council in Clay county, Mo., July 3, 1834, and on the 9th started in company with the Prophet Joseph from Missouri to Kirtland, Ohio. He was chosen an assistant teacher in the school of the Elders in Kirtland during the winter of 1834-35. He was chosen one of the Twelve Apostles, at the organization of that quorum, and ordained Feb. 15, 1835, under the hands of Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer and Martin Harris. With the quorum of the Twelve, in the spring and summer of 1835, he went on a mission to the East, and baptized five. While upon this mission, he wrote a letter to Kirtland, casting censure upon the presidency, for which he was suspended from fellowship, but meeting with the council of the First Presidency after his return to Kirtland, Sept. 25th, he confessed, was forgiven and restored to fellowship. He attended the Hebrew school in Kirtland during the winter of 1835-36, and officiated as clerk for the Twelve. On Friday, May 11, 1838, he came before a Bishop's court, in Far West, Mo., where he said he had no confidence in the presidency of the Church; consequently, he had quit praying and keeping the commandments of the Lord, and indulged himself in his sinful lusts. It was from what he had heard, that he believed the presidency had got out of the way, and not from anything that he had seen himself. He was cut off from the Church for unbelief and apostasy. After his excommunication he tried to establish a church of his own, that he might be the head thereof, but without success. He took an active part with the mob in Missouri, in robbing and driving the Saints. At the time Joseph Smith was in prison, he and others robbed Joseph's house and stable of considerable property. While Joseph was in prison at Richmond, Mo., Mr. McLellin, who was a large and active man, went to the Sheriff and asked for the privilege of flogging the Prophet; permission was granted, on condition that Joseph would fight. The sheriff made McLellin's earnest request known to Joseph, who consented to fight, if his irons were taken off. McLellin then refused to fight, unless he could have a club, to which Joseph was perfectly willing; but the sheriff would not allow them to fight on such unequal terms. Bro. McLellin was a man of superficial education, though he had a good flow of language. He adopted the profession of medicine. He finally died in obscurity at Independence, Jackson county, Mo., April 24, 1883. (See also "Millennial Star," Vol. 26, p. 807.)
