Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Skanchy, Anthon Lorentzen

Skanchy, Anthon Lorentzen, Bishop of the Sixth Ward. Logan, Cache county, Utah, is the son of Elling L. Skanchy and Mine Ansjon, and was born Sept. 17, 1839, in Trondhjem, Norway. He was baptized Jan. 16, 1861, by Elder T. Tonnesen, and soon afterwards ordained an Elder by John F. F. Dorius, and called to assist Elder M. A. Hansen in the ministry. In the spring of 1863 he traveled nearly three hundred miles to Christiania, where he was called and set apart for a mission to Nordland, which included Namsos, Bodo, Vesteraalen, Tromso, Hammerfest and Vardo-the extreme northern part of Norway, or the part of the country known as the land of the midnight sun. He traveled from island to island, preached a great deal and baptized quite a number. He was arrested seven times and sentenced three times to imprisonment on water and bread for administering the ordinances of the gospel, which was contrary to the laws of Norway. In the fall of 1865 he was called south, and on his travels he journeyed through Guldbrandsdalen, Romsdalen, Moldo, Aalesund, Christiansund and Trondhjem. In the spring of 1866, he was called to take charge of Christiania branch under the direction of Elder Carl C. A. Christensen, president of the conference in Norway. In due course of time he visited Kragero, Langesund, Brevig, Laurvig, Drammen, Svelvig, Kongsberg, Bergen, Stavanger, Arendal, Nummedal, Lillehammer, Hedemarken, Odalen, Kongsvinger and many other places. In the spring of 1868 he was released from his missionary labors and permitted to emigrate to Zion. He crossed the ocean in the ship "John Bright," and after his arrival in Utah he located in Logan, Cache county, where he has resided ever since. In 1877, he was ordained a High Priest and set apart as a High Councilor in the Cache Stake. In 1879-81 he filled a mission to Norway, laboring principally in Frederikstad, Frederikshald, Trondhjem and Namsos. After his return to Utah in the fall of 1881, he was called to take charge of a district of Logan as presiding Priest, and when that district was organized as a Ward. June 6, 1884, he was ordained a Bishop and set apart to preside over the same. In 1886 he was called on another mission to Norway, where he first labored as a traveling Elder in and afterwards as president of Christiania conference. On this mission he visited Drammen, Roken, Halmestrand, Svelvig, Roros, Trondhjem, Namsos, Tromso, Christiansund, Bergen, Kragero, Laurvig and many other places. In returning to Utah in the fall of 1889 he had charge of a company of emigrating Saints. On his arrival home he resumed his duties as Bishop of the Sixth Ward, Logan, and continued thus until 1901, when he was called on a third mission to Scandinavia, this time to preside over the mission. He is still laboring in that capacity.
