Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Mouritzen, Mouritz

Mouritzen, Mouritz, second counselor to Bishop Christian J. Larsen, of the Seventh Ward, Logan, Cache county, Utah, was born in Svendstrup, Aalborg amt, Denmark, April 2, 1857, the son of Peter Christian Mouritzen and Inger Jorgensen. He spent his early life in that neighborhood, working for farmers. In the fall of 1876 he heard the first gospel sermon preached in Anders Jensen's house in Norretranders and was immediately impressed with the gospel truth; and after prayer and farther searching for the truth, he was converted, and was baptized in Aalborg Jan. 3, 1877, by Elder Anders Frederiksen; confirmed by Elder Soren Poulsen. He was ordained a Teacher by Knud H. Bruun March 3, 1877, and .in the fall called to labor as a missionary. He was ordained an Elder by Jens Andersen Nov. 12, 1877, and labored the first six months in Aalborg and Sæby branches. At a conference held in the spring of 1878 he was called to preside over the Thisted branch. While laboring in that capacity he baptized and confirmed a number of people and also administered to many sick people who were healed under his administration and rejoiced in the power of God. While laboring in Thyland, in company with N. C. Larsen, he was arrested and placed in jail at Westervig, but was released the next day, after having answered many questions propounded by the judge, who decided that there was no cause for action. In July, 1880, he was released from his missionary labors, with the privilege of emigrating to Zion. He left Copenhagen July 5, 1880, and arrived in Salt Lake City July 29, 1880. After residing one year in Manti, Sanpete county, he removed to Logan, Cache county, where he has resided ever since. He was married in Salt Lake City, Oct. 27, 1881, to Jensine Jensen; labored in a Church capacity as a Teacher and a Priest, and was ordained a Seventy by Paul Cardon Jan. 22. 1884. In the fall of 1890 he was chosen to act as second counselor to Bishop Christian J. Larsen of the Seventh Ward of Logan. He was ordained a High Priest and set apart to that position by Simpson M. Molen Nov. 3, 1890. In the summer of 1891, he received a call to fill a mission to Scandinavia. On his arrival in Copenhagen, he was appointed to labor in Aalborg conference. While attending to missionary work in the Frederikshavn branch, he was accosted by a school teacher, who sent a complaint against him to the police in Frederikshavn for having preached "Mormonism." Elder Mouritzen was notified to appear in court, which, however, he decided not to do, as he knew the result would be banishment from the country. He left the city to labor elsewhere, and his next field of operation was the Aalborg branch. After ten months' labor there he was called to Copenhagen for a short time, but was returned to Aalborg, where he now labored (part of the time as president of the conference), until he was released to return home. On this mission he had the privilege of bearing his testimony to thousands; he also baptized two of his own sisters and about twenty others, and rejoiced greatly in his labor as a minister of the gospel. Since his return home, in September, 1893, he has attended faithfully to his duties in the Bishopric of the Seventh Ward, Logan.
