Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Hendrickson, John Anthon

Hendrickson, John Anthon, a prominent Elder in the Seventh Ward, Logan, Utah, was born in Frederikstad, Norway, Aug. 19, 1860. His father, who died in 1862, never embraced the gospel; but his mother joined the Church shortly before her husband's death. In May. 1862, when the subject of this sketch was about one and a half years old, she emigrated to Zion with her two sons. Her other son was ten years old at the time. Her eldest child, a daughter, refused to come to Zion, and was left in Norway. After six weeks on the Atlantic and about six months' traveling altogether, the family reached Salt Lake City. Shortly afterwards they moved to Richmond, Cache county, and later to Plain City, Weber county, where the mother married Gunder Anderson. Shortly afterwards they moved to Logan, where John A. has since resided. He was baptized Aug. 19, 1869; was ordained an Elder and chosen as first counselor to Andreas Peterson in the Elders' quorum. While Brother Peterson filled a foreign mission, it fell to his lot to preside until he returned. In 1885, he was chosen superintendent of the Seventh Ward Sabbath school, which position he held until he was called to go on a foreign mission. In 1885, he married Mary D. Lloyd, of Wellsville, with whom he has had one daughter, ten years old. In 1886, he was ordained a Seventy by Joseph Quinney, and in 1887 he was called on a mission to Norway. He left home in October, 1887, and, after arriving in Christiania, he remained in that city one month, studying the language, after which he was appointed to labor in Bergen, where he spent six months. He returned to Christiania to attend conference, after which he was appointed to labor in Fredrikshald; later, he was appointed to return to Bergen. After laboring in Norway eighteen months, he was sent to England, to complete his missionary work there. While in Norway, he had the pleasure of baptizing sixteen souls. He also enjoyed the pleasure of seeing his sister, Matilda Hansen, whom they had left twenty-five years previously, taken down into the waters of baptism. He labored in England, mostly in Birmingham conference, until November, 1889, when he returned home. Since then he has taught the theological classes in his Ward, presided over the Y. M. M. I. A. and been one of the Stake board of the Y. M. M. I. A., which position he still holds. In 1889, he began the industry known as the Cache Knitting Works, at Logan. Though he commenced on a very small and humble scale, this institution has grown until it has revolutionized the manufacturing of underwear and hosiery throughout the State. It was the first factory which began to manufacture union suits in the West, and the first to conceive the idea of the "knitted garment." It has given employment directly and indirectly to hundreds of people. Elder Hendrickson is now the president of said institution and holds the greatest part of the stock. In July, 1900, he purchased the Ogden Woolen Mills, and shortly afterward turned it into a stock company, of which he is now the president. He has just completed a new factory on Washington avenue, Ogden, termed the Ogden Knitting Works, where he expects to do general manufacturing and thus aid in giving employment to the people in that part of the State. Elder Hendrickson says: "The Lord has blessed me in every undertaking, for which I am extremely grateful."
