Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Pratt, Parley Parker

Pratt, Parley Parker, a member of the Council of Twelve Apostles from 1835 to 1857, was born April 12, 1807, in Burlington, Otsego county, New York. He was the third son of Jared and Charity Pratt; Jared was the son of Obadiah and Jemima Pratt, Obadiah was the son of Christopher and Sarah Pratt; Christopher was the son of William and Hannah Pratt; William was the son of Joseph Pratt; Joseph was the son of Lieutenant William and Elizabeth Pratt, who were found among the first settlers of Hartford, Conn., in the year 1639. They are supposed to have accompanied the Rev. Thomas Hooker and his congregation, about one hundred in number, from Newtown, now called Cambridge, Mass., through a dense wilderness, inhabited only by savages and wild beasts, and became the first founders of the colony at Hartford, in June, 1636. This ancient pilgrim, William Pratt, was a member of the legislature for some twenty-five or thirty sessions; and the general court gave him one hundred acres of land in Saybrook, Conn., for service performed as lieutenant in the Pequot war; he was one or the judges of the first court in New London county. Parley P. Pratt was a lineal descendant, of the seventh generation, from that distinguished pilgrim and humble pioneer of the new world. The youthful days of Parley P. Pratt were characterized by the soberness and thoughtfulness of manhood. Though from adverse circumstances his education was extremely limited, yet he displayed, even in youth, an originality of mind seldom exhibited. In September, 1830, he, being led by the Spirit of the Lord from his home in the State of Ohio, came several hundred miles eastward, where he fortunately obtained a copy of one of the most remarkable works of modern times-the Book of Mormon. He read the same, was convinced of its divine authenticity, and traveled in search of the highly favored men of God who had seen angels and heard the voice of the Almighty. He soon succeeded in finding some of them, from whom he learned that about five months previous the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints had been organized. He requested baptism, and was immediately after ordained an Elder. The same month he visited Canaan, Columbia county, N. Y.-the county where he had spent many of his youthful days-and after preaching a few times in different neighborhoods, and baptizing Orson Pratt, his brother, he returned to Seneca county. Receiving a revelation through Joseph the Prophet, he, in company with three or four others, performed a mission, some fifteen hundred miles, to the western boundaries of the State of Missouri, and was among the first of the Saints to stand upon that choice land where the city of Zion is hereafter to be built, preparatory to the second advent of our Savior. In the spring of 1831 he returned to the northern part of Ohio, where he met Joseph the Prophet, by whom he was ordained a High Priest June 6, 1831. In the summer he again performed a mission through Ohio, Indiana, Illinois and Missouri, preaching, baptizing and building up the Church. In the autumn of 1833 he and about twelve hundred men, women and children were driven by a murderous, furious mob from their own houses and lands in Jackson county, Missouri. Two hundred houses were burned, cattle shot, hay stacks and grain burned, many whipped until their bowels gushed out; others killed, and the afflicted remnant driven across the river into Clay county. Soon after this Elder Pratt performed a long journey of about fifteen hundred miles east, preaching repentance and strengthening the Saints. In 1834 he again returned to Clay county, Missouri, officiating in his holy calling wherever he went. Having returned to the northern part of Ohio, he was chosen and ordained one of the Twelve Apostles of this last dispensation, Feb. 21, 1835, by Joseph Smith. The same year he performed a lengthy missionary journey through Pennsylvania, New York, and several of the New England States, and returned again to Ohio. In 1836 he visited Canada, and established a large branch of the Church in Toronto, and other branches in adjoining towns. In 1837 he visited New York city, where he founded a large branch of the Church. In 1838 he removed to Caldwell county-near the western boundaries of Missouri, and in the same year another dreadful persecution commenced against the Saints, and they were again driven from their own houses and inheritances, and their property to the amount of millions was destroyed; some scores of defenseless men, women and children were murdered; scores of others incarcerated in dungeons, among whom was Parley P. Pratt; the balance, about fifteen thousand, were exterminated from the State, and found refuge in Illinois. Elder Pratt was kept in prison, without trial, about eight months, when, by the kind providence of God, he made his escape on July 4, 1839. Immediately after gaining his liberty he published a history of the Missouri persecutions, written while in prison. The first edition appeared in Detroit in 1839. In company with others of the Twelve he went to England in 1840, and in the city of Manchester commenced the publication of a periodical entitled the "Millennial Star," which has continued until the present time-the current volume being the sixty-third. In 1841 he was appointed the president over all the British conferences, and remained in this high and honorable station until the autumn of 1842, during which he edited the "Millennial Star," superintended the Saints' emigration, and published several small but interesting works. The following winter he returned to Illinois, where he continued laboring in the ministry for one or two years. About the beginning of the year 1845 he was appointed president over all the branches in the New England and Middle States, his headquarters being at New York City, where he published a periodical entitled "The Prophet." In the summer he returned to Nauvoo. In February, 1846, he was again driven from his home by a ruthless mob. Some fifteen or twenty thousand Saints were also driven from the United States about the same time, with the loss of houses and lands, and an immense amount of property, which the mob are in the unmolested possession of until the present day. After wading through unparalleled sufferings with his family, he and the persecuted Saints succeeded in reaching the Indian country at Council Bluffs, and being called by the Holy Ghost, through the Prophet Brigham Young, to go to England, he left his family upon the broad prairies, without house or scarcely any food, to comply with the word of the Lord. He arrived in England, assisting in setting the Church in order, and in strengthening the Saints throughout the British Isles. In the spring of 1847 he returned to his family and brethren; and in the summer and autumn of that year he removed to Great Salt Lake valley, and suffered incredible hardships until the harvest of 1848. He assisted in forming a constitution for the provisional government of Deseret, and was elected a member of the senate in the general assembly; and was afterwards elected to the legislative council when Utah became a Territory of the United States. In 1851 he was sent on a mission to the Pacific Islands and to South America. In the summer of 1855 he returned over the Sierra Nevada Mountains to his home, and occupied a part of his time in preaching in the various settlements of Utah, and at other times laboring with his own hands in the cultivation of his farm. The following winter he officiated as chaplain in the legislative council at the State House in Fillmore City. In the autumn of 1856 he accompanied about twenty missionaries across the plains to the States. During the winter and part of the following spring he visited the Saints at St. Louis, Philadelphia, New York and other places, preaching, writing and publishing the glad tidings of the kingdom of God. And finally, on the 13th of May, 1857, he fell a noble martyr for the cause of the truth, which he had advocated with such untiring perseverance for nearly twenty-seven years. He was assassinated near the boundary line between Arkansas and Indian Territory while on a mission to the States; his body was buried near the place where he was killed. Among the numerous writings of this martyred Apostle may be mentioned first, the "Voice of Warning," printed in New York in 1838, and which has since passed through many editions, and then translated into several foreign languages; second, his "History of the Missouri persecutions;" third, his "Poems;" fourth, his "Key to Theology," a masterly production. The history of his life, up to near the time of his martyrdom, was written by himself, and was published in the year 1874 by his son, the late Parley P. Pratt. To this work the "Autobiography of Parley Parker Pratt," the reader is referred for a full history of the life of this great and illustrious Apostle.
