Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Thoresen, Ingwald Conrad

Thoresen, Ingwald Conrad, counselor to Wm. C. Parkinson (president of the Hyrum Stake of Zion), was born in Christiania, Norway, May 2, 1852, second son and fourth child of Hans Thoresen (Johnson) and Karen Andersen. His father was a first-class cabinet-maker and followed that trade. Both his parents were religiously inclined and were members of the Lutheran church, and Ingwald was also initiated into said church by being sprinkled when a few days old. In the spring of 1855 his parents first heard, and immediately received, the gospel, and they became enthusiastic workers for the cause, against strong opposition and persecution in Christiania. Hans Thoresen became the "baptist" of this branch of the Church and baptized into the Church of Christ between two and three hundred souls, in the nighttime (as this and other ordinances of the gospel were prohibited in Norway by law and had to be performed in secret); still he was caught, arrested and imprisoned several times for officiating in this ordinance, getting from six to ten days' confinement on "bread and water." Under these periods his family suffered want, and Ingwald and the other children would anxiously wait for his release and the bread he had saved while "behind the bars." Before he was eight years old, Ingwald understood and had faith in the gospel and asked for baptism; but his parents objected until he thoroughly understood the gospel. He was finally permitted to join the Church, being baptized Aug. 14, 1861. He attended the common schools of his native city and had nearly completed the common school course, when, in April, 1863, he emigrated with his parents to Zion. They crossed the plains in Capt. Peter Nebeker's Church train, Ingwald walking the entire distance from Florence, Neb., to Salt Lake City, where they arrived Sept. 25, 1863. Shortly afterward they moved to Hyrum, Cache county, where he and his parents have resided ever since. Ingwald soon graduated from the district schools of that city, and in 1868, when sixteen years old, he started out "on his own hook," to earn means to get an education. He worked at railroading, farming and mining during the summers and attended the High School at Logan, Cache county, during the winters, until the spring of 1873, when he began teaching school, which avocation he followed with success for about twelve years, in Cache and adjoining counties. April 14, 1873, he married Margaret Christina Nielsen, daughter of Niels B. and Margaret D. Nielsen, with whom he has had fourteen children, six of which have died in their youth, and two are married and reside in Hyrum. In the fall of 1876 he was called on a mission to Scandinavia, where he labored for two years in Denmark and Sweden, doing excellent work, Ingwald was ordained an Elder into the Church about 1870, a Seventy by Pres. George Q. Cannon Sept. 2, 1876, and a High Priest, Aug. 26, 1901, under the hands of Apostle Marriner W. Merrill, when he was also set apart as a counselor to Pres. Wm. C. Parkinson, of the Hyrum Stake of Zion. He has served the Church as secretary, president and counselor in the Stake presidency of Y. M. M. I. A.; principal of the theological department of the Hyrum Sunday schools, home missionary. Ward teacher, Priest, etc. Politically, Elder Thoresen has reached the front ranks in his city, county, and State. Under the People's Party rule he served his city as mayor, justice, surveyor, attorney and school trustee; and Cache county as prosecuting attorney, county surveyor and deputy assessor and collector; and the territory of Utah as a member of the constitutional conventions of 1882 and 1887. He has always been a staunch Democrat and taken an active and leading part in defending the principles and policies of his party throughout the State of Utah, and also aiding his colleagues in Idaho. Democracy has honored him by electing him one of its first county commissioners in Cache county; a member of the constitutional convention of 1895, and of the second State legislature in 1898; also nominating him as one of its presidential electors, in 1900. He has been a member of the State executive committee of his party for many years, and as a party worker, has been very energetic, fearless, and almost radical; but always open, above-board and fair with colleagues and opponents. Since he retired from school teaching, he has been engaged, principally, in the practice of law, but has also supervised his farm work. He owns one of the best farms near Hyrum, and has built a good home in Hyrum city. Elder Thoresen is a characteristic Norwegian, with determination of purpose and force that cannot be swayed by trifles, and whatever he undertakes to do, he does with all his might; and consequently, has been very successful in his undertakings generally. He has a strong testimony of the divinity of the gospel as restored to the earth in our day, and great faith in the promises of the Lord to His Saints.
