Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Wright, John Fish

Wright, John Fish, Bishop of Hyrum Ward, Cache county, Utah, from 1891 to 1901, was born in Goole, Yorkshire, England, Oct. 3, 1841, son of John P. Wright and Mary Fish. He emigrated from England, together with his parents, in December, 1848, and landed in New Orleans the same winter; came up the great rivers to Council Point, Iowa, in May, 1849, on the steamer "Eliza Stewart:" remained on the frontiers till the spring of 1852, when he left for Utah, in Captain Tidwell's company, and arrived in Salt Lake City in September, 1852. He located at Draper, Salt Lake county, where he, together with his father, took up land, and fenced, broke and farmed the same. He passed through the grasshopper famine, without a murmur; participated in Indian troubles, although but a boy; took his gun and blankets and went to meet the Johnston army in 1857, and was one of the guard detailed to remain while the people moved south in 1858. Together with his parents, he went to Cache valley in the spring of 1859, where they found only seven log cabins standing at Maughan's Fort (now called Wellsville). They arrived at this place on the last day of April. The following night the muddy river had risen and overflowed its banks, so that the travelers the next day had to bridge the stream before they could cross. Bishop Peter Maughan, with some of his brethren, came down to the camp, consisting of about twenty-five families, called a meeting and organized them, setting apart John P. Wright as president of the company, with John Nelson and Israel J. Clark as his counselors. After building the bridge, they proceeded on their journey, and after much tell and hardships, on account of bad roads and an abundance of mud and water, the company arrived at Summit creek (now called Smithfield). Here land was laid off in five and ten acre lots and divided among the people, who at once commenced to plow and put in crops. They took the first water out to irrigate their last sown grain, June 15, 1859. On the 18th of June a messenger came from Maughan's Fort, with instructions for the settlers on Summit creek to start as soon as it was dusk that evening for the fort and to get there, if possible, before the following morning. The instructions were obeyed; but, at the last moment, when they were ready to start, two yoke of oxen were missing. The next day the subject of this sketch and another brother were sent back to find the missing cattle. This was considered a very dangerous and responsible task, as Peter Maughan had received word that the Indians were on the war path and were likely to make a raid upon the colony at any moment; but with much caution the two brethren succeeded in finding the cattle, and returned with them to the fort the same evening. The new colony remained at Maughan's Fort about two weeks, when a council was held, in which it was decided, as the wisest plan, to abandon Summit creek for the time being and locate at what is now called Logan. Accordingly, they pitched their camp on the banks of the Logan river at and near where the Thatcher grist mills and the old B. Y. College building now stand. Here, again land was surveyed and a townsite staked off. Pioneer work now began in earnest, and at the same time the grain on Summit creek was taken care of. The settlers often carried their guns in one hand and their shovels in the other. They succeeded in raising good crops, wheat yielding as high as forty bushels to the acre. Brother Wright left his tracks in the snow while cutting the last of the grain. After taking an active part in establishing the city of Logan, he moved to a place called Paradise (old Paradise), in the spring of 1861, and, while living there, he took an active part in defending the lives and property of those isolated people, until it was considered unsafe to remain any longer in so dangerous a position. The site was consequently abandoned, and the settlers moved four miles north to a more open and safe location, where the town of Paradise now stands. Feb. 23, 1864, Bro. Wright married Martha D. Gibbs, daughter of George D. Gibbs and Ellen Phillips, with whom he has had ten children who are all alive and strong in the faith. In 1891 he was called to take a mission to England and was preparing to fill the same, when he received a letter from Pres. Woodruff releasing him from the mission and calling him to be Bishop of Hyrum. He was ordained and set apart to that position, Feb. 15, 1891, under the hands of Apostle Marriner W. Merrill, and officiated in that calling until August, 1901, when he was honorably released, and, on the same day, set apart as a member of the High Council in the Hyrum Stake of Zion. The Cache Valley Stake had been divided into three Stakes, and Hyrum divided into three Wards. Elder Wright has filled a number of secular positions in the community. Thus he held the office of constable in his precinct for several terms, and has acted as school trustee and county commissioner. In 1892 he served as a member of the Territorial legislature. As a business man Elder Wright has figured prominently in the community. He commenced work for Coe and Carter of Omaha. Neb. (railway tie contractors), in the spring of 1876, and continued in their employ for several years, having full charge of their work the latter part of the time. He was engaged by them to inspect, pay for, and turn the ties over to the railroad company, until the summer of 1888, when he resigned. While in the employ of that company, he was intrusted with the handling of tens of thousands of dollars, and always gave entire satisfaction. After this he was engaged by Studebaker Brothers to manage their branch house at Logan and attended to this business until 1891, when he resigned, in order to discharge his duties as Bishop of Hyrum. Elder Wright, who has been a resident of Hyrum since he was called to act as Bishop there, says that the greatest joy of his life is derived from the thought that in all that he has passed through for the benefit of future generations, as well as the present one, he can truthfully say that he has never directly nor indirectly lifted his hand nor his voice against the Priesthood of God. He has always exhibited a merciful and charitable spirit, and no one was ever turned away from his door who sought shelter or food.
