Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Rouche, John E.

Rouche, John E., Bishop of Millville (Cache county, Utah) since 1896, was born July 11, 1861, son of Thos. F. Rouche and Margaret Comish. His occupation as a boy was farming, and selling and delivering coal. He attended the district school and took an interest in the different young people's associations of the Ward. In 1881 and 1882 he attended the B. Y. Academy in Provo; took special interest in the business course and graduated in bookkeeping. In December, 1882, he commenced working for Barton & Co., in the general mercantile business, and continued in that labor until November, 1883. In October, 1883, he was ordained a Seventy by Apostle Albert Carrington. About this time he was called on a mission to the Southern States. Before starting on this mission he received a patriarchal blessing from Patriarch John Smith. The most prominent item in that blessing was a statement to the effect, that he should be a leader among his brethren, and that many should seek him for counsel. In company with about twenty other Elders he met to organize for the journey. Although he was the youngest in the party, he was chosen to take charge of the company. On arriving at Chattanooga, Tennessee, he was assigned to labor in the North Carolina conference. In the summer of 1884 he was appointed president of said conference, which position he held till he was released in February, 1886, to return home. At this time the hostile feelings against the "Mormon" Elders in the Southern States mission seemed to be worse than at any time in the history of the mission. Elders Gibbs and Berry were killed in Tennessee, and Elder Rouche was exposed to much persecution, being stoned, shot at and mobbed in various ways; but, through the blessings of the Lord, he received no harm. He returned to Salt Lake City Feb. 22, 1886, and married Annie M. Christensen in the Logan Temple. April 1, 1886. The young couple located at Layton, Davis county, and Elder Rouche resumed his former occupation, working for Barton and Co. at Layton. In the spring of 1888 he sold out his interest in Layton and moved to Richmond. Cache county, where he engaged in the mercantile business in partnership with A. U. Hobson. In the fall of 1899 he sold out again and moved to Logan, Cache county, where he once more engaged in business. In the spring of 1891 he was called to labor as a missionary in the Logan Temple, where he continued for two years. May 3, 1896, he was ordained and set apart by Pres. Joseph F. Smith, as Bishop of Millville, to which place he moved the following month. His marriage so far has been blessed with four children.
