Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Oldham, Samuel

Oldham, Samuel, Bishop of Paradise, Cache county, Utah, since 1884, was born March 3, 1852, in Bury, Lancashire, England, son of John Oldham and Maria Heap. He was baptized in March, 1863, and in 1864 he emigrated to America, crossing the Atlantic in the ship "General McClellan," and the plains in Capt. Wm. S. Warren's train, which arrived in Salt Lake City Oct. 4, 1864. Together with his parents he soon afterwards moved to the town of Paradise, in Cache county, Utah, which has been his home ever since. Feb. 26, 1872, he married Mary Jane Price, daughter of Edward Price and Mary Bishop, at the Endowment House in Salt Lake City, by whom he had ten children; and on Sept. 15, 1884, he married Mary E. Brown, daughter of Ebenezer Brown and Mary Wright, by whom he has had seven children. He has successfully filled the offices of Teacher, Priest, Elder, Seventy and High Priest; was at one time a member of the presidency of an Elders' quorum, and later one of the presidents of the 62nd quorum of Seventy. June 8, 1884, he was ordained Bishop and set apart to take charge of the Paradise Ward, which position he still holds. In 1880-81 he filled a mission to the Southern States, laboring principally in Virginia. He returned home, suffering from a severe attack of typhoid-pneumonia. In April, 1889, he was sentenced by Judge Henderson at Ogden to six months' imprisonment and to pay a $100 fine, for the offense of unlawful cohabitation, so-called. He served his term of imprisonment and returned home, receiving on his return the congratulation of his friends and neighbors, the whole town having assembled en masse to welcome him back to liberty. In 1876 he attended the B. Y. College, at Logan, and in 1877 he graduated from the normal department of the Deseret University, now known as the University of Utah. For twenty-four years he followed the teaching profession, being teacher, principal, and finally county superintendent of schools for Cache county, Utah, for nearly five years. Four of his children have entered the teaching profession, and his two older sons have performed missions abroad.
