Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Lemon, Alexander Abraham

Lemon, Alexander Abraham, a prominent Elder of Paradise, Cache county, Utah, was born March 1, 1831, in Tippecanoe county, Indiana, son of Wm. McClure Lemon and Catharine Mayer. When about seven years old he removed with his parents to Cass county, Indiana, where his father opened up a nice farm near Logansport in a thickly timbered country; afterwards his father, who was a surveyor and school teacher, laid out a town on the Tippecanoe river called Winnamuck, which is now the county seat of Pulaski county, Indiana, near which he opened up another farm and where the family lived in the year 1846, when George Mayer, a relative, came to that part of the country preaching "Mormonism." In order to learn more of the gospel, the father went to Nauvoo on horseback, a distance of 250 miles, and while there he was baptized. He then returned to Indiana, sold out his possessions, bought five yoke of oxen and two wagons and started for the West by way of Nauvoo, where they arrived in July, 1846. After crossing the Mississippi river, the journey was continued across Iowa to Winter Quarters, where they spent the following winter, and in 1847 they came to the Valley, crossing the plains in Perregrine Session's company of fifty. Young Alexander drove one team, while is father drove the other, and his sister Elizabeth drove sixteen head of loose cattle. Alexander was baptized in City creek, July, 1848, by John Young, and confirmed by Jedediah M. Grant. He was ordained a Seventy Jan. 18, 1851, by Albert P. Rockwood. In August following he received his endowments together with his mother. His father died March 10, 1851. Alexander passed through all the hard experiences of pioneer life in Utah's earlier days, and remembers all about the crickets and grasshoppers and Indian raids. In the winter of 1849-50 he participated in an exploring expedition sent to southern Utah in charge of Apostle Parley P. Pratt. In 1856-57, he was called, together with many others, on a special mission to Los Vegas springs (now in Nevada); he returned the following year, when the temporary settlement made by the missionaries at Los Vegas was broken up. In 1862 he married Ann Eabry and removed to Paradise, Cache county, where he has resided ever since. His wife has borne him three sons and six daughters. After being a member of the 62nd quorum of Seventy for many years, he was ordained a High Priest in September, 1890, by Joseph Morrell. Locally he has filled a number of positions in the Church. He has acted as a Ward teacher for many years, and labored among the Saints in the capacity of a priest. In an early day he also served his people in a military capacity, and as a minute man he assisted to guard the mountain passes during the Johnston army troubles in 1857 and 1858.
