Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Davis, George William

Davis, George William, Bishop of Avon Ward (Cache county, Utah), was born in Brigham City, Box Elder county, July 15, 1861, son of William Davis and Christine Erikke Forsgren. His father was the first settler and also the first Bishop of Brigham City. George took an active part, while young, in the different Ward organizations, and was called, March 11, 1885, to be superintendent of the Fourth Ward (Brigham City) Sabbath school. He married Eliza Watkins, daughter of William L. and Mary A. Watkins, Nov. 11, 1885. In 1887 he was called on a mission to New Zealand and was set apart for the same by Apostle Franklin D. Richards, May 31, 1887. He left Salt Lake City the same day, in company with Elders Alma Hayes, Alonzo L. and Boyd Stewart, and arrived in San Francisco, Cal., June 2nd. Here they were joined by Elders Ezra Stevenson and John A. Sutton, jun., and all were passengers together on the steamer "Zealandia," which arrived at Auckland, New Zealand, June 23, 1887. Elder Davis was appointed to labor in the Waiapu district, where he spent about nine months, devoting most of his time to acquiring the Maori language. In February, 1888, he was called to the Bay of Islands district, to labor with Elder George Romney, jun. He arrived at Mangapai Feb. 25, 1888, where he met Elders Romney and Elias Johnson, the last named being released to return home. He labored with Elder Romney till April 19, 1889, when the latter was released to return home. The Bay of Islands district being divided into three, Elder Davis was called to preside over the Whangarei district. He filled that position until he was released April 8, 1890, to return home. On his mission he took part in baptizing 138 souls and blessing 56 children. After his return to Brigham City he continued active in the service of the Church, laboring in the Sabbath schools and the mutual improvement associations. Some time after the return from his mission, he removed to Cache valley. Feb. 24. 1895, he was ordained to the office of a Bishop and appointed to preside over the Avon Ward, in place of Henry C. Jackson, who had removed to Idaho.
