Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Johnson, Luke S.

Johnson, Luke S., a member of the Council of Twelve Apostles from 1835 to 1838, was the son of John Johnson and was born Nov. 3, 1807, in Pomfret, Windsor county, Vermont. In early life he assisted his father in farming, and remained with him until he received the gospel and was baptized by Joseph Smith May 10, 1831. In the meantime the family had removed from Pomfret, Vermont, to Hiram, Portage county, Ohio. Soon after his baptism Luke S. Johnson was ordained a Priest by Christian Whitmer and performed a mission to southern Ohio, in company with Robert Rathburn, where they baptized several and organized a branch in Chippewa. Shortly after, together with Sidney Rigdon, he baptized fifty or sixty in New Portage, Ohio, and organized a branch. From there they went to Pittsburg, Penn., where Johnson baptized Rigdon's mother and eldest brother and several others; they also organized a branch. At a conference held in Orange, Cuyahoga county, Ohio, Oct. 25, 1831, Bro. Johnson was ordained a High Priest by Joseph Smith, and in 1832-33, in company with Seymour Brunson and Hazen Aldrich, traveled as a missionary through Ohio, Virginia and Kentucky. They baptized over a hundred persons and organized branches of the Church in Lawrence county, Ohio, and Cabell county, Virginia. Nov. 1, 1833, Elder Johnson married Susan H. Poteet, in Cabell county, Virginia. At the organization of the first High Council of the Church, Feb. 17, 1834, he was chosen one of its members. In the following summer he went as a member of Zion's Camp to Missouri and back. Feb. 14, 1835, he was chosen, and on the 15th ordained one of the Twelve Apostles under the hands of Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer and Martin Harris, at Kirtland, Ohio; and during the summer of 1835 he traveled through the Eastern States, holding conferences, preaching the gospel and regulating the branches. He returned to Kirtland in September. The following winter he attended the Hebrew school, and received his blessings in the House of the Lord in the spring of 1836, after which he performed a mission to the State of New York and Canada. After having baptized quite a number and organized a branch in Canada, he returned to Kirtland in the fall, where he upon two different occasions rendered the Prophet Joseph efficient aid in protecting him from his enemies. On another occasion he heard that a vexatious writ had been sworn out against Joseph Smith, sen., it being supposed that he was liable to a prosecution in consequence of his manner of solemnizing marriages. Bro. Johnson got the privilege of serving the writ and after arresting Smith, he took him to the magistrate's office. The court not being ready to attend to the case, Elder Johnson put the prisoner in a small room adjoining the entrance from the office and allowed his son Hyrum to accompany him. He then took a nail out from over the window-sash, left the room, locked the door and commenced telling stories in the court room, to raise a laugh. When finally the court called for the prisoner, Elder Johnson walked into the room in the dark, put the nail into its place in the window, and went back and told the court that the prisoner had escaped. The officers rushed to the door and examined the fastenings which they found all secure. This created much surprise, and they swore that it was another "Mormon" miracle. Elder Johnson had arranged with John F. Boynton to help Bro. Smith out of the window. Having partaken of the spirit of speculation, which at that time was possessed by many of the Elders and Saints in Kirtland, Elder Johnson's mind became darkened, and he neglected his duties as an Apostle and Saint. At a conference held at Kirtland, Sept. 3, 1837, he was disfellowshipped together with his brother Lyman and John F. Boynton. On the following Sunday, however, he confessed his faults, and was received back into fellowship, but was finally cut off for apostasy in Far West, Mo., April 13, 1838. After this he taught school in Cabell county, Virginia, for about a year, devoting his leisure time in studying medicine. He then returned to Kirtland, where he practiced as a physician and also engaged in various other occupations in order to obtain a living. He continued friendly to the Church and his former associates in the Priesthood, and in 1846 he was rebaptized in Nauvoo and came to Great Salt Lake valley in 1847 as one of the 143 Pioneers. in the year 1858 he settled St. John, Tooele county, Utah, and was appointed Bishop when that Ward was first organized. On the 9th of December. 1861, he died in the house of his brother-in-law, Orson Hyde, in Salt Lake City. Since his return to the Church he lived to the truth to the best of his ability and died in the faith. (See also "Millennial Star," Vol. 26, p. 834.)
