Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Maughan, William Harrison

Maughan, William Harrison, Bishop of Wellsville Ward, Cache county, Utah, from 1859 to 1900, was born at Alston, Cumberland, England, May 7, 1834, son of Peter Maughan and Ruth Harrison. His mother died when he was in his sixth year. In 1841 he emigrated to America with his father, who had embraced "Mormonism," and after visiting Kirtland, Ohio, they arrived in Nauvoo, Ill., where William was baptized, in the Mississippi river, when about eight years old. Afterwards he accompanied his father to Rock river, where coal mines were being opened. While laboring there they first heard of the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith. They then returned to Nauvoo, where they remained until the general exodus in 1846, when they went to Wisconsin to obtain the necessary means to purchase an outfit for traveling west. In March, 1850, they left Nauvoo for the wilderness. Young William drove a four-yoke ox team from New Diggings, Wisconsin, to Salt Lake City, where they arrived Sept. 17, 1850. They were sent by Pres. Brigham Young to locate in Tooele Fort (now Tooele City), and thus they were numbered among the pioneers of that place. There they remained till 1854, when they moved to E. T. City. In July, 1856, Pres. Brigham Young called them to go to Cache valley and explore that valley with a view of making settlements there; and in the fall of 1856 they located the settlement now known as Wellsville. This was the first settlement made in Cache valley. Here William has resided ever since. He was ordained a Deacon by Bishop John Rowberry in 1851, and an Elder by Doctor Sprague in June, 1854. He was ordained to the office of a High Priest and Bishop and set apart to preside over the Wellsville Ward by Apostles Orson Hyde and Ezra T. Benson Nov. 12, 1859. In 1875, he responded to a call to perform a mission to Great Britain, where he labored successfully in the Sheffield and Birmingham conferences, being called by Pres. Jos. F. Smith to preside over the latter conference, which position he filled till July, 1876, when he was honorably released to return home. After his return to Utah he resumed his labors as Bishop of Wellsville. Since the opening of the Logan Temple, in 1884, he has served as a member of the board of directors of said Temple. In civil affairs Bishop Maughan has taken an active part. Thus he served as county selectman for many years, was the first mayor of Wellsville city (serving from 1866 to 1875, being re-elected every two years). He served again as mayor from 1878 to 1882, and was re-elected in 1896 and 1901. He has also served as a member of three constitutional conventions. In military life he has made the following excellent record: In 1852 he served as volunteer in subduing the Goshute Indians, under Gen. Jas. Ferguson; in 1877 he was elected captain of company F, of Col. Frank Cummings' command, Nauvoo Legion. In 1861, or 1862, he was elected major under Gen. West's command, and when the Cache county military district was organized, he was elected colonel of the 2nd infantry, under Gen. Ezra T. Benson, holding a colonel's commission from Gov. Doty for that position. Bishop Maughan has always been a successful and thrifty citizen, having done much to develop the resources of the country. At present he is extensively engaged in farming and stock-raising. He organized the first co-operative store in Cache valley (the Wellsville Co-op), and was elected its first president, a position which he still holds. The institution has steadily increased its business and now represents a paid-up capital of $30,000. Bishop Maughan married his first wife in 1853, and later he yielded obedience to the principle of plural marriage by taking to wives Mary Lloyd, Rachel Woodward and Euphania Nibley. He is the father of 53 children, 40 of whom are now living, namely 21 sons and 19 daughters, all Church members in good standing. He can already count one hundred grandchildren.
