Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Parkinson, George Chandler

Parkinson, George Chandler, president of the Oneida Stake of Zion, is the son of Samuel Rose Parkinson and Arabella Ann Chandler, and was born July 18, 1857, in Kaysville, Davis county, Utah. Removing with his parents to Franklin, Idaho, in 1860, he became one of the first settlers of that town and of Idaho. He was educated at the Brigham Young College, Logan, Utah, graduating with honor in the class of 1880. He began teaching school in Logan in 1877, continuing in that calling till 1881, when he was called on a mission to the Southern States, where he remained for a year, doing successful work. He then went to England, where he labored about fifteen months as a missionary. He returned home in 1883, and again resumed teaching. About this time he was called to be second counselor in the Oneida Stake presidency, being ordained a High Priest and set apart to this office by Pres. Geo. Q. Cannon. He moved to Oxford in July, 1883, where he resumed teaching and was elected superintendent of schools in Oneida county. While at Oxford, he also acted as superintendent of the co-operative store. During that time a very unpleasant and unjust occurrence came into his life. An alleged polygamist hid in the cellar of his store, without his knowledge, but the officer arrested Elder Parkinson for concealing a criminal. He was tried, James H. Hawley defending him, but the jury disagreed on the verdict. A new trial was then set for six months later, and Mr. Hawley, who had then become prosecuting attorney, succeeded in getting Elder Parkinson convicted and sentenced to one year's imprisonment in the State prison and to pay a fine of three hundred dollars. Elder Parkinson paid his fine and served eleven months in the penitentiary, being given one month of his time for good behavior. He had no knowledge of the man who had concealed himself in the cellar, but the jury were all anti-Mormon, and the officer who subpoenaed the jury was heard to remark: "I have secured a jury that would convict Jesus Christ." Such was the justice he received in the name of the law! On his release from prison Bro. Parkinson removed to Franklin and engaged in the produce business. He also became interested in the sheep and cattle industry. Aug. 28, 1887, he was chosen president of the Oneida Stake of Zion, being set apart to this position under the hands of Apostle Moses Thatcher. His counselors were Solomon H. Hale and Matthias F. Cowley. President Parkinson has served in that position with great diligence and efficiency and is at the present time beloved by all the Saints. He is also a thrifty and energetic business man. While in Franklin, President Parkinson, in connection with others, purchased all the stores in Franklin and consolidated the business under the name of "The Oneida Mercantile Union," with a capital stock of $50,000. Bro. Parkinson became a stockholder and director in that concern, and also in the Idaho Milling, Grain & Power company. He was also a stockholder in and the manager of the W. C. Parkinson Mercantile company, of Preston. He is the manager of the Studebaker Brothers Manufacturing company of Preston, and is also much interested in the sheep and cattle business. He is a man of excellent executive force, of sound judgment, and indefatigable energy, and carries forward to successful completion whatever he undertakes. In 1894 he was elected to the State senate of Idaho, representing with credit a district of five counties which contain one-fourth of the population of the State. In 1895 he was appointed, by Gov. McConnell, a member of the board of regents of the State University; he was reappointed in 1896. He has always been a warm friend of education. Under his superintendency the magnificent Oneida Stake Academy, at Preston, was erected at a cost of $50,000. He is now president of the Oneida Stake board of education. In 1896 he was one of the presidential electors on the Republican ticket. President Parkinson married Lucy M. Doney, of Franklin, Idaho, in 1881. The issue of this union is eight children, three sons and five daughters. He owns one of the most beautiful residences in the State of Idaho, located in Preston, where he has resided since 1894.
