Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Geddes, Joseph Stewart

Geddes, Joseph Stewart, second counselor to President Geo. C. Parkinson of the Oneida Stake of Zion, is the son of William Geddes and Elizabeth Stewart, and was born Dec. 18, 1857, in Glasgow, Scotland. His parents embraced the gospel and emigrated to Utah in an early day. After living in Salt Lake City for some time, they moved north, together with a small company of Saints, and located at a place which was afterwards called Plain City, which is situated about ten miles northwest of Ogden, Weber county. The little company of pioneers, consisting of about twenty souls, at once began the constructing and building of a canal, nine miles in length, which was a very great undertaking for such a small company. And besides, the settlers had not sufficient teams and farming implements. Those who had no tools would often work at night, thus keeping the spade and shovel almost in constant use. Neither was there much time taken in the preparation of food, as it consisted chiefly of bread and water. Thus they toiled on until they succeeded in bringing out a small stream of water, which has since been increased from year to year until Plain City has been converted into a veritable garden of Eden, as was observed on a certain occasion when it was visited by the First Presidency in the days of Pres. John Taylor. Elder Geddes writes: "Father's attention was turned to agricultural pursuits, stock and sheep raising. And, of course, the boys learned to plow, to sow, to reap and to mow, as we grew to manhood. A number of the boys, and some of the girls, followed school teaching for a livelihood. While engaged at teaching school at Franklin, Idaho, I became acquainted with a Miss Dora, eldest daughter of Annimus and Susan Nelley, who afterwards became my wife. We were married Dec. 29, 1882, in the Endowment House, Salt Lake City. My chief occupation of more recent years has been that of contracting and building. I did some quarry and stone cutting work for the Salt Lake Temple in connection with my brother, Wm. S., who spent a number of years thus employed. Father also spent a year or two quarrying foundation rock for said Temple. I was baptized when about eight years old, was ordained to the lesser Priesthood at an early age and was set apart to preside over the Teachers' quorum under the hands of Bishop Lewis W. Shurtliff; later I was ordained an Elder, and I was ordained a Seventy Jan. 27, 1884, by John Ellis. I acted as clerk for the 87th quorum of Seventy until Jan. 10, 1892, when I was set apart by Brigham H. Roberts to fill a vacancy in the council of the 87th quorum, caused by the demise of my brother Wm. S, who died Aug. 23, 1891, in the State of Oregon while in exile. Nov. 10, 1894, I bade my wife and family farewell and started for Chattanooga, Tenn., to fill a mission to the Southern States. I was assigned to labor in the South Alabama conference, which then comprised northwestern Florida and southern Alabama. After laboring for about two months in the city of Pensacola, Florida, I received a letter from Pres. Elias S. Kimball, calling me to the presidency of the South Alabama conference. While upon this mission I enjoyed myself exceedingly well. I had the pleasure of baptizing and assisting in baptizing a great many of the honest in heart of the sunny South, and witnessed the growth of the work and the spread of truth with exceeding great joy. Obtaining a leave of absence, I returned home in June, 1895, to comfort my wife and mourn the loss of our daughter Ira, a sweet little girl of five years, whom the Lord had taken from us. We have since buried another little daughter, Hazel, who was born while I was absent on my mission. We have laid to rest four children altogether. I remained at home a short time with my family, after which I returned with a company of Elders to resume my work in the vineyard of the Lord, where I continued to labor with the Elders and Saints until Jan. 20, 1897, when I was released to return home. As a token of respect and esteem the Elders presented me with a 17-jeweled gold-filled watch and my railroad fare home. After my return I labored as a home missionary in the Weber Stake of Zion. Before going on my mission my experience was varied in the Ward in which I resided. I served two terms as constable and one as justice of the peace. A portion of my time, while young, was given to the study of music, and I was a lover of the drama, having belonged to and managed a musical and dramatical association for a number of years. I have also conducted Sunday schools and Ward choirs. My father obeyed the gospel at fourteen years of age and was turned from his father's door for so doing. He found employment in the coal mines, came back home and was taken down with cholera. When given up to die by doctors he was instantly healed through the administration of "Mormon" Elders. He went out to preach at sixteen years of age, and since his first arrival in Utah he has made a complete circle of the earth's surface, preaching the gospel. He served one term in the Utah penitentiary for unlawful cohabitation, was a president of the 18th quorum and later senior president of the 87th quorum of Seventy. My mother, not being able to endure the hardships of early pioneer life, died at the age of thirty-six, leaving five small children, who received every attention from Aunt Martha, mother's sister, who had also become father's wife. Though but ten years of age, when mother died, many of her teachings have never been forgotten. I am forty-three years of age, and the indelible impress of mother's good counsel has thus far caused me to refrain from taking the name of Deity in vain, and from partaking in any degree of alcohol stimulants, including tobacco in all its forms. My home is now at Preston, Idaho, Shortly after my arrival here, I was set apart as one of the presidents of the 18th quorum of Seventy. I labored as a teacher in the theological department of the Ward Sabbath school and also in the missionary department of religion class work. As a member of the Stake choir I assisted in singing. I was ordained a High Priest and set apart as second counselor to Pres. George C. Parkinson, of the Oneida Stake of Zion. July 25, 1898, by Apostle Matthias F. Cowley.
