Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Larsen, John

Larsen, John, Bishop of Preston Ward, Oneida county, Idaho, was born May 1, 1845, in Guddomlund, Aalborg amt, Denmark, and is the son of Andrew Larsen and Mary Nissen. Together with his parents he accepted the gospel, and was baptized April 14, 1861, by John P. Johnson. He emigrated to Utah with his parents in 1861, crossing the plains with ox-teams. John was but a lad of sixteen years and had never had any experience in driving oxen; yet he drove four yoke of oxen across the plains, walking himself all the way. The family arrived in Salt Lake City in September, 1861. Soon after his arrival he moved to Cache valley with his father's family and located in Logan Nov. 25, 1866. He married Annie Jensen, who had arrived from Sweden in 1862. In August, 1874, he left home to perform a three months' mission in southern Utah, to work on the St. George Temple. In April, 1877, he was called to go on a mission to the Northern States. He was appointed to labor in Minnesota, where he was successful in making many friends for the cause of truth. He returned home in January of the following year. Jan. 13, 1884, he was ordained to the office of a High Priest by Samuel Roskelley. He was called to Preston, Idaho, July 27, 1884, where he acted as first counselor to Bishop Wm. C. Parkinson for fourteen years. When Bro. Parkinson was appointed to preside over the Pocatello Stake of Zion, John Larson was called to be Bishop of the Preston Ward, and was ordained and set apart to that office by Apostle Matthias F. Cowley, Oct. 2, 1898, which position he holds at the present time. His family consists of ten children, six of whom are living. They are John Andrew (who has performed a mission in Sweden), Nephi (who is in England on a mission), Willard (who has returned from a mission to the Northwestern States), Alma, Marinda and Blanche. Bishop Larsen is a successful business man, and gives God the credit for the blessings he enjoys.
