Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Geddes, Hugh Stewart

Geddes, Hugh Stewart, second counselor to Bishop John Larson, of Preston, Oneida county, Idaho, is the son of William Geddes and Martha Stewart, and was born July 25, 1859, in Plain City, Weber county, Utah. He was baptized when about eight years old. At 14 he was ordained a Teacher, and labored in that capacity till he was about twenty years of age, when he was ordained to the office of a Seventy. July 12, 1883, he married Martine Peterson, a daughter of Hans Peterson and Annie M. Hansen. In 1884 he moved from Plain City, Utah, to Preston, Oneida county, Idaho. At this time there were but a few families at that place, and Elder Geddes writes as follows: "I worked on the canal the first two seasons, with no crop at all, and in the fall I would go off to earn a little wheat and means, upon which to live during the winter. In the midst of the hardships and trials incident to making a home in a new country, a call came from the Prophet of God, for me to go on a mission to far-off New Zealand. I answered that I was ready to go, although I did not know where the means were to come from. I sold my team, harness and wagon and left my wife with two little children, with but little to subsist upon. I left for New Zealand Oct. 15, 1888 and arrived there safely. I labored with good success among the Maoris until the spring of 1891, when I was released to return home. About two months after my return home, I was called to labor as superintendent of the Preston Sunday school; and when the 116th quorum of Seventy was organized, I was chosen one of its presidents. I labored in these two callings till the spring of 1901, when I was called to act as second counselor to Bishop John Larson of Preston Ward. I was ordained a High Priest and set apart for that position, which I still hold. I have always been interested in the public affairs of Preston. We have two canals, and for a number of years I served as a director and secretary of both companies. When Preston was incorporated as a town I was elected one of its trustees."
