Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Hansen, Hans Christian

Hansen, Hans Christian, a prominent Elder and president of the Scandinavian meetings in Mink Creek, Idaho, was born in Lunde, Odense amt, Fyen, Denmark, and is the son of Hans Hansen and Abelone Christensen. When he first heard a "Mormon" Elder preach, he was deeply impressed with the truths presented. He was baptized June 10, 1879, by Elder Geo. Frandsen, and emigrated to Utah the same year. He located in Bear River City, Box Elder county, where he resided till 1882, when he moved to Cache county, and lived there till 1885, when he changed his residence to Mink Creek, Idaho, his present home. In 1891 he was called to go on a mission to Scandinavia. He was ordained a Seventy and set apart for the mission by Christian D. Fjeldsted, Aug. 28, 1891, and left the same day for Denmark. He performed successful work in the Odense and Esbjerg branches, in the Aarhus conference, and was also sent into northern Germany, to labor in Haderslev, Schleswig, but he was banished from that province by the government, and consequently returned to Denmark. While on this mission Bro. Hansen labored much among his own relatives and those of his wife. He also gathered considerable genealogy. After his return home he was called to labor as a home missionary in the Oneida Stake of Zion, which duty he diligently performed for several years. He presided over the Y. M. M. I. A. in Mink Creek, and acted faithfully as a Ward teacher for many years. As president of the Scandinavian meetings in Mink Creek he has been very zealous in his labors, and he is throughout an energetic and respected citizen of the community, which he has served as supervisor of roads for several years, and as a school trustee for three successive terms. He is yet serving in the latter capacity, and is also in the employe of the government, having charge of the transportation of the U. S. mail from Mink Creek to Preston. Brother Hansen is a prosperous farmer, horticulturist and stock-raiser. In 1879 he married Gjertrud Marie Hansen, the only daughter of Hans Knudsen, a wealthy farmer of the island of Fyen, Denmark. She left her comfortable home for the gospel's sake, sacrificing the prospects of a bright future from a worldly standpoint, and cast her lot with her husband among the "Mormons" in the new world. The issue of their union is nine children, seven of whom are now living.
