Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Cannon, Carl John

Cannon, Carl John, Bishop of Pocatello, Bannock county, Idaho, is the son of Anders Johan Cannon and Charlotte Carlson, and was born Aug. 25, 1841, in Ostra Harg, Linkoping lan, Sweden. He attended the public school of his native place, until he was fourteen years of age, at the same time devoting himself to the learning of his father's trade-that of a tailor. In 1857, two Mormon Elders, viz. Ola N. Stohl and Carl P. Carlson, visited his father's house, when for the first time he heard the gospel. Together with his parents, he was converted, and was baptized Dec. 6, 1858, by Elder Andrew Goranson; he was confirmed by Elder Ola N. Stohl, Dec. 12th, following, in Norrkoping. In the fall of 1860 he was ordained an Elder by Ola N. Stohl and immediately sent out as a local missionary in the Norrkoping district. He labored in that capacity for a number of years, during which time he presided over various branches and districts, and traveled considerably. In 1868 he married Hulda Wilhelmina Stopendahl, and by that union he became the father of nine children-four sons and five daughters. With his family he left Sweden in 1870 and came to America, remaining in New York city four years, where he worked at his trade. He then moved to Salt Lake City, Utah, and lived there until 1880, when he moved to Logan, Cache county, where he remained for eight years. His next move was to Pocatello, Idaho, in 1888. Soon after arriving there, he was chosen counselor to Wm. Willison, presiding Elder of the branch. July 13, 1890, when the Pocatello Ward was organized, he was appointed its Bishop, and has been acting in that capacity until the present time. He has presided with signal ability, and has gained the love and esteem of all the members of his ward. His first ordination to the Priesthood was to the office of a Teacher. Later he became an Elder, while yet in Sweden. After locating in Logan, Utah, he was ordained a Seventy in 1886, and was ordained a High Priest and Bishop July 13, 1890, by Apostle Moses Thatcher. His labors as a missionary in his native land were always attended with success, many being added to the Church under his administration.
