Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Pratt, Orson

Pratt, Orson, a member of the Council of Twelve Apostles from 1835 to 1881, was born Sept. 19, 1811, in Hartford, Washington county, New York. He was the son of Jared Pratt and Charity Dickinson and a younger brother of Apostle Parley P. Pratt. His parents were hardworking and poor people, and he was accustomed to labor from his boyhood, during which time the family removed to New Lebanon, Columbia county, where he attended school part of the time each year until 1825, acquiring a common school education, and becoming familiar with arithmetic and bookkeeping. He also studied the Bible. From the time he was eleven years old, he worked at farming in different places, attending school in the winter, going to Lorain county, Ohio, in the fall of 1827, and in the fall of 1828 performed a journey of nearly seven hundred miles to Connecticut; went thence to Long Island, and in the winter of 1829-30 studied geography, grammar and surveying, at a boarding academy. He was a prayerful as well as studious youth, although neither he nor his parents connected themselves with any of the religious denominations. In September, 1830, his brother Parley P. Pratt, who had embraced the gospel as taught by Joseph Smith the Prophet, came with another Elder to Canaan, Columbia county, N.Y., where Orson was residing. He then received their testimony and was baptized Sept. 19, 1830, his birthday, being then nineteen years old. In the following month he traveled two hundred miles to see Joseph Smith in Fayette, Seneca county, N.Y., and on the 4th of November received through the Prophet the revelation found in the Doctrine and Covenants, Section 34, in which he was called of God to preach the gospel, to lift up his voice both long and loud, to cry repentance, and prepare the way before the coming of the Lord. He was confirmed and ordained an Elder Dec. 1, 1830, by Joseph Smith, and went on his first mission to Colesville, Broome county, N.Y., and in the early part of 1831, went on foot to Kirtland, Ohio, where the Prophet had removed, a distance of about three hundred miles. He then performed several missions in Ohio, Illinois and Missouri, baptizing many converts. At a conference held at Amherst, Ohio, June 25, 1832, he was set apart to preside over the Elders, and was sent on a mission to the Eastern States. Feb. 2, 1832, he was ordained a High Priest by Sidney Rigdon, after which he traveled and preached without purse or scrip, through Ohio, Pennsylvania, New Jersey and New York City to Long Island, thence northeast through part of Vermont into New Hampshire, preaching and baptizing by the way and making many converts in Bath, N. H., and Charleston, Vt. Next he proceeded to the southern part of Connecticut, and had continued success. After laboring in these parts till the fall of 1832, he started west, traveling some three or four hundred miles, preaching, baptizing, ordaining men to the ministry, and laboring in many parts of New York. He returned to Kirtland, Ohio, Feb. 17, 1833, having traveled on foot about four thousand miles, baptized 104 persons and organized several new branches. In Kirtland he attended the School of the Prophets during the winter, boarding with the Prophet Joseph, and in the following spring he again went East, performing another successful mission, traveling 2,000 miles in six months, and baptizing over fifty persons. After this he remained in Kirtland about two months, laboring on the House of the Lord, and on Nov. 27th started on another mission to the eastern branches. He returned to Kirtland Feb. 13, 1834, having traveled about one thousand miles. Thirteen days later he was started out again, with Elder Orson Hyde, on a special mission, on which he was absent about two months, traveling 800 miles. He next traveled with Zion's Camp to Missouri, being captain of a company. July 7, 1834, he was ordained one of the standing High Council in Missouri, where he also visited the scattered branches in Clay county, and in August was sent eastward, traveling through Illinois and Indiana to Ohio, suffering severely through fatigue and ague, arriving in Kirtland April 26, 1835, on which day he was ordained one of the Twelve Apostles, under the hands of David Whitmer and Oliver Cowdery. May 4, 1835, he went on another mission to the Eastern States, and was absent a little over six months. During the winter and early spring he taught a grammar school in Kirtland, and also studied Hebrew, and then received his endowments in the Kirtland Temple. His next mission was to Canada West, on which he left April 6, 1836. While absent he baptized many persons and raised up several branches of the Church. July 4, 1836, he was married to Sarah M. Bates, whom he had baptized in Sackett's Harbor, June 18, 1835. In the fall, having returned to Kirtland, he studied algebra, and after providing a home for his wife, went to the State of New York and labored in the ministry during the winter of 1837-38. In April, 1839, the Saints having been driven from Far West, he went there to fulfill a revelation, and with several of the Twelve, met at the corner stone of the Temple, whence they parted to preach the gospel to foreign nations. He was the means of delivering his brother Parley from prison in Columbia, Mo., July 4. 1839. In the fall of 1839 he preached through the eastern branches, and in the spring of 1840 embarked for England. He preached nine months in Edinburgh, Scotland, raised up a branch of over 200 persons, and in the spring of 1841 returned to America. After this mission he took charge of a mathematical school at Nauvoo, then took a mission through the Eastern States in the summer of 1843, and on his return in the fall was elected a member of the city council, helped to draw up a memorial to Congress and went to Washington, D.C., to present it in the spring of 1844. He labored among the churches east till the news of the martyrdom of the Prophet was received, when he returned to Nauvoo. During the difficulties that succeeded the death of the Prophet and Patriarch, he labored with the Twelve, which was the presiding quorum of the Church, in the management of its affairs, shared in the expulsion from Nauvoo, crossed the plains with the Pioneers in 1847, and on the way, when weather would permit, took astronomical and other scientific observations, determining, by the aid of the sextant and circle of reflection, the latitude and longitude of the most prominent places, the changes of elevation above sea level, etc., in anticipation of the great highway which even then it was expected by the Saints would span this vast continent. He was the first man of the Pioneers to enter Salt Lake valley, having preceded the main body of the company three days. In 1848 he was appointed president over all the branches of the Church in England, Scotland, Wales, Ireland and adjacent countries, starting from Winter Quarters on the 11th of May, The number of Church members in Great Britain then were about eighteen thousand, which during his presidency of two years were increased to about thirty-one thousand. In this short period he chartered and fitted out about twenty ships loaded with Saints for Utah. In the midst of this press of business, he wrote some fifteen pamphlets, and published and circulated several hundred thousand of them in different languages. At the same time he edited the "Millennial Star," and increased its circulation from less than four thousand to nearly twenty-three thousand. He lectured, at different times, to large audiences in the principal cities of England and Scotland. In 1851 he returned to Great Salt Lake valley, and in the winter of 1851-52 delivered a series of twelve astronomical lectures to crowded audiences in the old Tabernacle, which were published in the "Deseret News." He was elected a member of the legislative assembly during its first session, and at each successive session when he was in the Territory, and seven times was chosen speaker of the House. In 1852, he was appointed on a mission to Washington, D.C., to take the presidential charge of all the branches in the United States and British provinces east of the Rocky Mountains, and there published "The Seer." In the spring and summer of 1853 he again went on a mission to Europe, returning the following year. April 22, 1856, he again started for England and presided over the European Mission, publishing more pamphlets, and returned by way of California, while the army was en route to Utah, arriving home in January, 1858. Sept. 23, 1860, he was called on another mission to the United States, being gone about one year. April 24, 1864, he was set apart for a mission to Austria. He went to that land in 1865, accompanied by Elder Wm. W. Riter; but in consequence of the stringent laws he was unable to open the gospel door to that nation. He bore his testimony to the authorities and left, going over to England, where he visited the conferences and labored assiduously, returning Aug. 4, 1867. In 1869 he went to New York City and transcribed and published the Book of Mormon in phonetic characters called the Deseret Alphabet. In August, 1870, he held the famous three days' discussion with Dr. John P. Newman on the subject of polygamy, totally routing that debater, for which he never forgave the "Mormons." At the adjourned general conference in 1874, he was appointed and sustained as Historian and General Church Recorder, which position he retained till his decease. July 18, 1878, he once more left his home to cross the ocean, this time to transcribe and publish an edition of the Book of Mormon in the Pitman phonetic characters. He was, however, soon called home and returned Sept. 27th. In September, 1878, he started east with Apostle Joseph F. Smith, visiting the Whitmers in Missouri, the Hill Cumorah and other places figuring in the history of the Church, and returned in October. Dec. 3rd, of the same year, he started again for England to stereotype the Book of Mormon and Doctrine and Covenants, which he arranged in verses, with foot notes and references. From this important and laborious mission he returned Sept. 2, 1879. After his arrival home he attended a number of Stake conferences, and was again elected a member of the legislature, acting in his usual capacity as speaker of the House. After this his health was poor, and finally he finished his long and useful career, Oct. 3, 1881, when he died at his residence in Salt Lake City. For a little over a year he had suffered severely from diabetes, and was much of the time unable to leave his room. On Sunday Sept. 18, 1881, he delivered his last public address in a clear and forcible manner, speaking to a large congregation in the Tabernacle about twenty minutes. Orson Pratt was the last of the original Council of the Twelve Apostles of the Church. He crossed the Atlantic ocean sixteen times on missions of salvation. He found time to study the higher mathematics, and in addition to his published scientific books left an elaborate work in manuscript on the Differential Calculus, containing original principles. He was the father of forty-five children, of whom sixteen sons and sixteen daughters, and forty-three grandchildren were alive at the time of his death. Following is a list of some of the works which he has published: Divine Authority; Kingdom of God, in four parts; Remarkable Visions; Divine Authenticity of the Book of Mormon, in six parts; Reply to "Remarks on Mormonism;" Great First Cause; New Jerusalem; Absurdities of Immaterialism; "The Seer," in eighteen numbers; eight Tracts on the first principles of the gospel; Cubic and Biquadratic Equations; Key to the Universe, or a New Theory of its Mechanism; etc., etc. By way of finishing his obituary, the editor of the "Deseret News" wrote at the time of his death: "Orson Pratt was truly an Apostle of the Lord. Full of integrity, firm as a rock to his convictions, true to his brethren and to his God, earnest and zealous in defense and proclamation of the truth, ever ready to bear testimony to the latter-day work, he had a mind stored with scripture, ancient and modern, was an eloquent speaker, a powerful minister, a logical and convincing writer, an honest man and a great soul who reached out after eternal things, grasped them with the gift of inspiration, and brought them down to the level and comprehension of the common mind. Thousands have been brought into the Church through his preaching in many lands, thousands more by his writings. He set but little store on the wealth of this world, but he has laid up treasures in heaven which will make him eternally rich." (See also "Millennial Star," Vol. 27, p. 23; "Southern Star," Vol. 2, p. 297.)

Orson Pratt in 1880.
