Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Rockwood, Charles Welcome

Rockwood, Charles Welcome, Bishop of the Iona Ward, Bingham county, Idaho, is the son of Albert P. Rockwood and Elvira T. Wheeler, and was born in the "Old Fort," Salt Lake City, Utah, March 2, 1850. Elder Rockwood writes: "I was born in a wagon box, as my mother, who six months previously had separated from father, had no house to live in. I lived with mother till the spring of 1858, when, by an order of court, my sister Mary Ann and I were given to my father. While I lived with mother, we passed through the famine of 1856 and 1857, when we were reduced to subsisting on bran bread, and after the bran was all consumed we were three weeks without bread, meat or milk, and had to sustain life from what could be gathered from the fields, such as cattail roots, thistles and pigweed. In the spring of 1858, which is known as the time of the "move," my father and his family went to Provo and remained there till the following July, when we returned to Salt Lake City. At the age of fourteen I joined the Utah militia, Company C. In the spring of 1867 I was called to Sanpete county, to assist in quelling the Blackhawk war. While camped at Gunnison in the latter part of June, 1867, I was detailed, together with Nathan Tanner, to go as an escort to Manti with some of the officers. But on attempting to catch my horse from the herd, he proved refractory and Sergeant Heber Houtz volunteered to take my place. I owe my life to that incident, for, while returning from the trip, Major John W. Vance, Capt. O. P. Miles, Sergeant Houtz and Private Nathan Tanner were ambushed by Indians on Twelve Mile creek, and Major Vance and Sergeant Houtz were killed. Early in August, a treaty of peace having been effected, we were released to return home. Nov. 27, 1872, I married Anna B. Starr. In the spring of 1874, I was called to go and help build a settlement on the Muddy, in Nevada; but I was subsequently released, and in April 1873, I was given employment as a guard at the penitentiary, under my father who was warden at the time. In 1880 I was called to labor as a teacher in the Ward, and also labored as a teacher in the North District Sunday school of Centerville. Subsequently I was set apart as second counselor in the superintendency of that school. I also acted as president of the theological class and was a counselor in the Y. M. M. I. A. of Centerville. I served two years as a home missionary in the Davis Stake. In the fall of 1889 I was called to take a mission to the Northern States. I left home Jan. 14, 1890, and was assigned to labor in Green county, Indiana. In May, 1890, I was set apart to preside over the Indiana conference, which position I held till I was released in October, 1891, to return home. While laboring in Indiana I assisted in baptizing fifteen persons and organized the first Sunday school in that conference, at Robinson, Green county, Indiana. After returning home I was elected and set apart as president of the Y. M. M. I. A. of Centerville, and held that position till I moved to Iona. In the fall of 1897, I was called to labor as a mutual improvement missionary and was assigned to labor in Sanpete county. In this capacity I worked for three months. Having a desire to go to the Snake River valley to make a new home, I finally located at Iona, Bingham county. I was chosen and set apart by Pres. Rulon S. Wells as one of the presidents of the 106th quorum of Seventy. I was also chosen as president of the religion class of Iona, and became one of the Stake aids in the same labor. Feb. 11, 1901, I was chosen by direct revelation to Pres. James E. Steele of this Stake, in answer to prayer as to who should fill the vacancy in the presidency of the Stake. After asking of the Lord as to the filling of the vacancy, and on retiring to rest, a personage appeared to Pres. Steele and told him that Bishop A. J. Stranger was the man to fill the vacancy in the Stake presidency, and that Charles W. Rockwood was to be the Bishop of Iona Ward, with George P. Ward as first and Isaac Goodmanson as second counselor. To accept this labor was one of the greatest trials of my life, being almost a stranger in the Ward, and not knowing the circumstances under which I was called; but after being made acquainted with the circumstances connected with the call, I was reconciled and cheerfully began to labor. I am the father of eight children, four sons and four daughters, seven of whom are living, all of them faithful in the Church."
