Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Ricks, Thomas Edwin

Ricks, Thomas Edwin, president of the Fremont Stake of Zion, was born July 21, 1828, in Trigg (now Christian) county, Kentucky, son of Joel Ricks and Elenor Martin. When but two years old his parents moved to Madison county, Illinois, at which place he was baptized Feb. 14, 1845, and in the following October he was ordained an Elder. In September he moved with his parents to Nauvoo, Illinois. He worked on the Nauvoo Temple from the time he arrived there until work was stopped, and preparations commenced to move west. He crossed the Mississippi river for the west Feb. 8, 1846, with part of Charles C. Rich's family, acting as teamster for them as far as Council Bluffs, where he remained with his parents until April, 1848, when he continued westward in Heber C. Kimball's company. When the company arrived near Elkhorn river the Indians stole four of their oxen, and Bro. Ricks with three others were sent in pursuit of them. They came upon the Indians about six miles from camp. The Indians at once commenced firing at them and Bro. Ricks was shot three times. It was not until the following July that he was able to leave his bed, but from that time on he continued to gain strength. He arrived in Salt Lake valley Sept. 24, 1848, locating at North Mill Creek, about twelve miles north of Salt Lake City. The following spring he moved into Centerville. In the fall of 1849 he was called to go with an eight-ox team to meet a company of emigrants in charge of Ezra T. Benson and Geo. A. Smith, whom he met near Independence Rock on the Sweetwater, and returning with the company he arrived in Salt Lake City Oct. 23, 1849. On the 20th of November of the same year he was called to go on an exploring expedition under the charge of Parley P. Pratt-to southern Utah. He accompanied this expedition as far south as where St. George is now located, and returned March 27, 1850. He was married to Tobitha Hendricks Aug. 28, 1852. At the April conference, 1856, he was called to go south on an Indian mission with William Bringhurst and others. They went to Los Vegas (now Nevada), and there, with the others of the mission, he assisted in building a fort, and opening up farms. At the October conference, 1856, he was called to go and assist the hand-cart company through, and started out on this mission the same day he was called. He met Capt. Martin's company at Independence Rock, and arrived at Salt Lake City with them Nov. 30th. March 10, 1858, he, with others, was called to Salmon river, Idaho, to rescue Thomas S. Smith's company from the Indians, returning to Salt Lake City one month later-with the rescued-when they found the Saints all moving south on account of the approach of Johnston's army, in which move he participated and went as far south as Strawberry creek, a little north of where the town of Nephi is now located. In the fall of 1859 he moved to Cache valley and located at Logan, in said valley. He was for many years a member of the High Council of Cache Stake of Zion. In 1863 he crossed the plains as captain of a company of teams who went to meet the emigrants at Council Bluffs, and again in 1866 he was called to fill a similar mission, both of which he filled successfully. In 1869 he filled a mission to the States of Ohio, Illinois and Kentucky. Soon after his return from this mission he was found busy in the construction of the railroad from Ogden to Franklin, being one of the principal contractors in the building of this grade. In 1877, he, in company with Wm. D. Hendricks, contracted for the laying of the track from Franklin, Idaho, to Butte, Montana, which work he completed by Christmas, 1880. In 1881 he was busy as a contractor of grades for the Northern Pacific railroad. In December, 1882, he was called to lead a colony in the settlement of the upper Snake River valley, Idaho, where he arrived the following February and at once went to work and laid out the city of Rexburg, and afterwards assisted in laying out nearly every settlement in what is now Fremont and Bingham counties. He built the first grist mill in the upper Snake river valley; built the first ferry across the north fork of Snake river; built the first saw mill; opened up the first mercantile store, and was ever first and foremost in every enterprise that tended to build a commonwealth. He was appointed the first Bishop in the Snake River country, then known as the Bannock Ward. When the Stake was organized Feb. 4, 1884, he was appointed its president, which position he creditably filled till his death. In 1885 he was called on a mission to England, which he filled for a period of over two years. Soon after his return from this mission, while in Logan, he was placed under arrest on the charge of unlawful cohabitation, but at his preliminary hearing on May 28, 1888, he was discharged. In 1890 he was again arrested for his religion's sake, and this time appealed his case to the higher court from the decision of the trial court, which resulted in the case being again dismissed. From 1861 to 1863 he served Cache county as their sheriff, and again in the '70s he was serving the same county as their assessor and collector. He was a colonel of the Utah militia for a great number of years. Twice he was appointed by the governor of Idaho a delegate to represent the State in the National Irrigation congress, both of which he filled with honor. In 1898 he was appointed by the governor of Idaho as a member of the board of directors of the Insane Asylum of Idaho. He was chosen chairman of the board and held that position at the time of his death. During the time he was railroad-building he accumulated considerable means, all of which he spent in building up and developing the Snake river country, and in assisting the poor and needy who had come to settle there. The savings and accumulations of a great many years of industrious toil were all spent through his kindness and liberality. President Ricks died at his home in Rexburg, Bingham county, Idaho, Sept. 28, 1901, surrounded by his numerous and sorrowing family. Those who, knew him best assert that a more courageous man never lived than Thos. E. Ricks; for fear to him was unknown. While at times he appeared a little rough and stern in his manner and conversation, yet beneath that roughness and sternness there always beat a kindly and forgiving heart. To the kingdom of God, and the Priesthood, he was loyal to the core, ever ready and willing to go where he was called and when he was called, unflinchingly braving every danger and hardship without a murmur. His was a cheerful disposition, and he always had words of encouragement to those who were laboring to build up the new country in which he took so much interest. He had five wives, four of whom survived him. He was the father of 42 children, 36 of whom he left to mourn his loss. At the time of his death he had 154 grandchildren and 2 great-grandchildren living.
