Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Boynton, John Farnham

Boynton, John Farnham, a member of the Council of Twelve Apostles from 1835 to 1837, was born Sept. 20. 1811, in Bradford, Essex county, Mass., baptized in September, 1832, by Joseph Smith, in Kirtland, Ohio, and ordained an Elder by Sidney Rigdon. He performed a mission together with Zebedee Coltrin, to Pennsylvania in 1832 and another one to Maine in 1833 and 1834. Feb. 15, 1835, he was ordained an Apostle in Kirtland, Ohio, under the hands of Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer and Martin Harris, after which he accompanied the Twelve on their mission to the Eastern States and Canada. He was married to Susan Lowell by Joseph Smith, Jan. 20, 1836. During his last mission he borrowed all the money he could among the brethren, with which he entered into the mercantile business with Lyman E. Johnson, and followed it until he apostatized and was disfellowshipped from the quorum of Apostles Sept. 3, 1837, in Kirtland, Ohio. On the following Sunday he made confessions and was forgiven, but as he did not repent of his evils, he was finally excommunicated from the Church. About Boynton's subsequent life A. H. Hale, of Grantsville, wrote a few years ago: "Since the days of Nauvoo Boynton has resided in Syracuse, N.Y., where he still lives. He has always been considerate to his former friends and co-laborers in the ministry, and never said or done anything against the Church. When he visited Utah in 1872, he called on Pres. Brigham Young twice, in my company. The President was then a prisoner in his own house, guarded by U. S. marshals, and Boynton denounced in strong terms the persecutions then being carried on against the Saints. He also met Erastus Snow, who, when only sixteen years of age, was ordained a Teacher by Bro. Boynton. Elder Snow told him that he had been preaching the same gospel ever since. Bro. Boynton remarked, "Stick to it, for it is good." He also called on Orson Pratt and others, with whom he was very friendly, and they all called him Brother John. Since leaving the Church Mr. Boynton has never joined himself to any other denomination and does not believe in any religion whatever. He says, however, that if anything is right, 'Mormonism' is. For twenty years he traveled throughout the United States lecturing on natural history, geology and other sciences. In 1853 or 1854 he was appointed by the government to make a trip to California on a geological surveying expedition, and during the war of the rebellion he was employed in the invention of torpedoes and other destructive implements of war." Up to 1886 John F. Boynton had his name in the national patent office for 36 patents on different inventions. He spent much of the latter part of his life gathering genealogy of the Boynton family. He was married three times. His first wife died, the second left him, and he was living with his third wife at the time of his death, which occurred at Syracuse N.Y., Oct. 20, 1890. (See also "Millennial Star," Vol. 27, p. 102.)
