Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Larsen, Lauritz Edward

Larsen, Lauritz Edward, a prominent Elder in the Salem Ward, Fremont county, Idaho, is the son of Lars Emanuelsen and was born Dec. 29, 1832, in Frederikshald, Smaalenenes amt, Norway. He first heard the gospel in 1856, and was at once convinced of its truth. He was baptized Oct. 19, 1856, by John F. F. Dorius and confirmed a member of the Church by Carl C. A. Christensen. Soon afterwards he was ordained a Teacher and sent out to preach the gospel as a local missionary. Because he would not renounce "Mormonism" he was discharged from a good position which he held at the time in a woolen factory in Tistedalen. He then went to Christiania, where he remained for some time. Here he was ordained an Elder and sent out to do missionary work in Hadeland, where he labored successfully for about three months. In the summer of 1858 he was sent to Drammen to labor. He also visited his relatives that year and had the pleasure of baptizing his father, mother, brother and sister. In 1859 he was appointed to labor in Christiania. While on a visit to his first missionary field, Hadeland, he baptized a number of people and organized a branch of the Church. For this he was arrested and imprisoned on bread and water diet. Immediately on being released, he baptized seven persons. In 1863 he was called to labor in Trondhjem and while operating in that field he walked the entire distance, 400 miles, from Trondhjem to Christiania, and back again, to attend a conference meeting. In 1864 he was released from his mission, with permission to emigrate to Zion. He crossed the ocean in a sailing vessel, and the plains with an ox-team, being six months on the journey. He married and lived for twenty years in Hyrum, Cache county, Utah. April 2, 1897, he left Salt Lake City, in response to a call to go on a mission to Scandinavia. While on this mission he labored in Christiania nearly the whole time. Bro. Larsen writes: "There is no comparison between the missionary experiences today and that of twenty-five years ago. Now all is peaceful and quiet, then there were disturbance and persecution on every side." Elder Larsen is the head of a large family; all his children are members of the Church. He is now 70 years of age and in possession of excellent health.
