Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Ward, Moroni

Ward, Moroni, Bishop of the Washakie Ward, Malad county, Idaho, is the son of Geo. W. Ward and Ann Trulock, and was born June 8, 1851, at Harris' Grove, Iowa, while his parents were moving westward. Elder Ward writes: "After arriving in Utah in 1852, we wintered in North Ogden, Weber county. In the spring of 1853 we moved to Willard, Box Elder county, where I lived till I was 21 years of age, working on the farm, herding cattle and sheep, and attending school during the winter. I married Eliza Voss Nov. 18, 1872, and moved to Muddy Creek (now Woodruff), Oneida county, Idaho, where I was busy making a new home till Feb. 26, 1878, when I was called by Pres. John. Taylor to aid in the work of teaching and directing the labors of the Lamanites on the Malad farm. I was set apart for this mission by Pres. Lorenzo Snow, and left for my field of labor March 17, 1878. I was ordained a High Priest by Oliver G. Snow, Aug. 29, 1881, and set apart to serve as second counselor to Bishop Isaac E. D. Zundell, of the Washakie Ward, which position I held till November, 1888, when I was released to return home, after an absence of eleven years. I built a house, and moved my family to Woodruff April 6, 1889. In June, 1889, I was set apart as first counselor to Bishop T. A. Davis. I labored in that capacity till April, 1890, when I was called to take my family and live and labor among the Indians again, at Washakie. This was a very hard trial for my family, as they would be the only white people in the place, and my family consisted largely of girls, making it doubly hard. However, we left our home April 7, 1890, and took up our abode once more among the Indians at Washakie. At the June (1890) conference of Malad Stake I was ordained a Bishop and set apart to preside over the Washakie Ward, by Pres. Lorenzo Snow, and I have continued to hold this position ever since. I have spent 22 of the best years of my life in trying to educate the Lamanites to be industrious, to be honest, truthful and virtuous, and have also taught them the glorious principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ. I have had great joy and satisfaction in my labors, having been assisted by the Lord at all times. I have seen many grand manifestations of His power and might."
