Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Shurtliff, Lewis Warren

Shurtliff, Lewis Warren, resident of the Weber Stake of Zion, is the son of Luman Andrus Shurtliff and Eunice Baggs Gaylord, and was born July 24, 1835, at Sullivan, Lorain (now Ashland) county, Ohio. His ancestors were of old Puritan stock, the first of the name in America being William Shurtliff, who came from England to the Plymouth colony in 1634. Some late branches of the family moved westward in 1811, and Brother Shurtliff's progenitors settled about that time in Ohio on the Western Reserve. While an infant, his parents became members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The family went to Kirtland, Ohio, in 1838; from there they moved to Far West, Mo., and thence to Nauvoo, Ill., and thence to Council Bluffs, Iowa, following with patience the buffetings and viscissitudes of the people of their chosen faith. Lewis' father, Luman A. Shurtliff, took an active part in the early day of the Church; and, being a mason by trade, was privileged to work on many of the historic buildings erected in the days of the Prophet, In the spring of 1851 the family began their long journey to Utah with ox teams, arriving in Salt Lake City, Sept. 23rd, of the same year. Shortly afterwards they settled in Weber county, in what is now called Harrisville; but when the Indian trouble came on, they went to live in Bingham's Fort, near Ogden. During this trouble Lewis W. Shurtliff was a lieutenant in the militia organized for self-defense. When a young boy he was ordained a Deacon at Council Bluffs and was subsequently ordained to the various grades of the Priesthood, in their order, after coming to Utah. In the fall of 1855, he was called on a mission to Salmon river, Idaho (then eastern Oregon), where several small companies had been sent as colonists and missionaries to the Indians. They were the first white men who plowed a furrow and broke the soil of that territory. He was only twenty-one years of age when called on this most dangerous colonization expedition. While there he married Louisa C. Smith Jan. 4, 1858. He remained there until 1858; during this time the Indians caused them much annoyance and some trouble. Finally, they had a severe encounter, in which two Elders were killed and several wounded, and all their cattle and horses were stolen by the Indians. After being imprisoned for thirty days, they were rescued by a company of about two hundred men from Utah. When Elder Shurtliff returned to Ogden in 1858, he found that the community had gone south because of the Johnston army trouble, and on the return of the Saints to their homes, he settled in Ogden, where he purchased property. In 1863, he went to Florence, on the Missouri river, in a company under Captain Thomas E. Ricks, for the purpose of meeting and bringing the emigrating Saints and their freight to Utah. His wife died in the fall of 1866, and in the spring of 1867 he was called on a mission to Great Britain. Responding to the call, he, together with other missionaries, went by mule-teams to Julesburg, Neb., which was then the western terminus of the Union Pacific railroad. While in England he presided successively over the Nottingham and the London conferences and traveled extensively through England, Scotland and Wales. He also visited Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Germany, France and Italy, and attended meetings with the Saints in most of those countries. On returning home, he was appointed Bishop of Plain City, which office he held until 1883, when he was called back to Ogden and appointed president of the Weber Stake of Zion. This was done at a conference held in Ogden, Jan. 21, 1883. From 1866 to 1872 his time was mostly spent in the missionary field. April 10, 1872, he married Emily M. Wainwright. In 1883 he was elected county commissioner of Weber county and remained in that office until 1886. During that time he was a member of the constitutional convention and was elected to the council of the Territorial legislature in 1886. The same year he was elected probate judge of Weber county, and re-elected to both these offices in 1888. In 1889, he was elected county commissioner and served in that capacity until 1894. In 1896 and 1898 he served in the upper house of the State legislature. For a number of years he has been closely connected with the Trans-Mississippi Commercial Congress and also the National Irrigation Congress, which organizations are working for the development and advancement of the western arid and semi-arid lands.
