Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Flygare, Nils Christian

Flygare, Nils Christian, second counselor to Pres. Lewis W. Shurtliff of the Weber Stake of Zion, was born Feb. 3, 1841, at Ruthsbo, Bjerreso parish, near Ystad, Malmohus lan, Sweden. He was baptized by C. Nielsen, Sept. 5, 1858, in the city of Lund, Sweden, and was soon afterwards ordained Deacon and called to labor as a local missionary, and in the spring of 1859 he was ordained an Elder. He labored over three years as a missionary in the Scone conference, filling the following positions in the order named: missionary in Ystad branch, president of Svedala branch, missionary in the province of Blekinge, missionary in Neflinge and Wiggarum branches, president of Wiggarum branch, president of Horby branch, president of Landskrona branch and traveling Elder in Landskrona and Svaluf branches. In September, 1861, he was called to preside over the Stockholm conference, which position he occupied until the spring of 1864, when he was honorably released to emigrate to Utah. During all these years of missionary labor, while a very young man, he showed much energy and perseverance and did much traveling and preaching. The membership of the Church in Sweden was considerably increased through his faithful labors. He left his native land in the spring of 1864 and, in company with a large company of emigrants, landed in America in June. He crossed the plains in Capt. Wm. B. Preston's company and arrived in Salt Lake City Sept. 15, 1864. Shortly after arriving in Utah, he located in Ogden, where his home has been ever since. His early occupation in Utah was that of a builder, which later led him to become one of the principal contractors and builders in Utah. In 1874 he was called by Pres. Brigham Young to perform a mission to Scandinavia. On arriving in Copenhagen, Denmark, he was appointed to preside over the Stockholm conference, which position he occupied till June, 1875, when he was called by Pres. Jos. F. Smith to preside over the Scandinavian mission. He was released to return home in June, 1876, and was appointed leader of a large company of emigrants from Liverpool to Utah. In the fall of 1877 he was called to take another mission to Scandinavia, and presided for two years over the mission. While on this mission, he, in connection with Elder August W. Carlson, published the first edition of the Book of Mormon in the Swedish language. Returning home in the fall of 1879, he was again appointed leader of a company of Saints from Liverpool to Utah. He was very successful in handling the emigration matters on these long and tiresome journeys over water and land. In the fall of 1885, Elder Flygare was, for the third time, called to take a mission to Scandinavia; this time he presided over the mission about three years, and returned to his home in Ogden in October, 1888. Up to this time he had spent over twelve years as a missionary in Scandinavia, and he is, no doubt, as to length of time spent in the missionary field, at the head of the list of those who have labored in Scandinavia. At home Elder Flygare has held many positions of trust and responsibility, both in Church and State. After serving as Bishop of the Fourth Ward of Ogden from 1877 to 1883, he was chosen second counselor in the Stake presidency of Weber Stake of Zion, which position he still holds. He is also a member of the Stake Board of Education. Elder Flygare has served Ogden city as building inspector, city councilor and fire and police commissioner. He has served the State as superintendent of the erection of the Agricultural College buildings at Logan, and is at present one of the trustees of the State Industrial School and treasurer of that school. He has been very active in business affairs and was one of the originators of the following named enterprises: First National Bank of Ogden, of which he was a director for many years; Eccles Lumber Co., of which he is vice-president: Ogden Street Railway Co., of which he was a director: Ogden Electric Railway Co., of which he was secretary, treasurer and manager for a long time, and Ogden Standard Publishing Co., of which he was president for several years. He is at present engaged by the Ogden Sugar company as manager of that enterprise.
