Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

McKinnon, Peter

McKinnon, Peter, Bishop of Woodruff Ward, Rich county, Utah, is the son of Archibald and Mary McKinnon, and was born Feb. 7, 1868, in Salt Lake City, Utah. When three years old he moved with his parents to Randolph, Rich county His childhood days were spent on the farm, and in attendance at the public schools. When twenty years old he attended the Latter-day Saint Seminary at Randolph, and was appointed musical director in that institution. He was a student of the Latter-day Saint College at Salt Lake City in 1889-90 and was also a member of the Tabernacle choir during that time. On returning home from school he was appointed conductor of the Randolph Ward choir and was also made leader of the brass band and orchestra, as well as other musical organizations, much of his time and energy being devoted to the advancement of the divine art, both in the Ward and county. During the fall of 1891 he was called as a special missionary to labor among the mutual improvement associations. He took a special missionary course in the B. Y. Academy at Provo, after which he traveled among the mutual improvement associations in the Bannock. Oneida and Cassia Stakes, in company with Peter Beck, of Paris, Idaho. In the spring of 1892 he engaged in the mercantile business and has been successful in establishing an extensive trade throughout Rich county. Oct. 10, 1894, he married Charlotte L. Call, in the Salt Lake Temple. At the organization of the Woodruff Stake of Zion in 1898, he was called from Randolph to preside as Bishop of the Woodruff Ward, and was ordained and set apart to that position June 9, 1898, under the hands of Apostle Heber J. Grant. He was appointed by Gov. Heber M. Wells in 1899 and 1901 to supervise the expenditure of appropriations made by the Utah legislature for Rich county. In November, 1900, he was elected county commissioner for Rich county, and was appointed chairman of that board.
