Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Quibell, Joseph Aminadab

Quibell, Joseph Aminadab, a Patriarch in the Woodruff Stake, was born of humble parents at Waverly, Lincolnshire, England. Brother Quibell writes: "My father had a large family, consisting of ten children, four boys and six girls; my father was never identified with any church, but mother at one time belonged to the Wesleyan persuasion. My childhood days were spent in the village school, and I commenced to labor at farm work when I was nine years of age. By the time I was fourteen I hired out by the year for very low wages. At the age of twenty I thought to improve my condition, by leaving the farm and going to work on a new railroad which was being built. I followed that kind of employment for about eighteen months, after which I went to Sheffield, Yorkshire, where I married Rebecca Bingham Newton. When twenty-three years of age I heard the gospel preached and eagerly received it. I was baptized by Samuel Hartle, June 22, 1869, and confirmed on the following Sunday by Charles Parkin. I was ordained a Priest Aug. 14, 1870, by Charles Parkin, and ordained an Elder Dec. 31, 1871, by Charles Parkin. With my wife I emigrated to America in the fall of 1873, and landed in New York Oct. 27, 1873, where my parents had preceded me by two years. I preached the gospel to them and baptized my mother, one sister and my youngest brother as well as other relatives. We arrived in Ogden in the fall of 1875. I have labored as a Sabbath school teacher for several years, and as a Ward teacher and Priest for a number of years. I served as first counselor in the 3rd quorum of Elders under two presidents. I was ordained a High Priest Feb. 16, 1899, by Apostle John Henry Smith and set apart as a member of the High Council of the Woodruff Stake of Zion. Nov. 19, 1900, I was set apart to take a special mission through the Woodruff Stake under the hands of Pres. John M. Baxter, and I was ordained a Patriarch May 5, 1901, by Apostle Abraham O. Woodruff."
