Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Smith, William John

Smith, William John, a High Councilor in the Woodruff Stake of Zion, is the son of Hugh Smith and Agnes McDonald, and was born Sept. 28, 1842, in the county of Down, Ireland. He moved with his parents to Liverpool, England, when two years old. The following is a short life sketch from his own pen: "My parents joined the Church on the 3rd of April, 1850, and I was baptized the following October, being then eight years of age. My father left the Church, but my mother kept all the children in the faith. She urged upon me the necessity of my taking father's place, and emigrating her and the children. From that time I commenced to save my money for that purpose, and the Lord blessed me, so that I soon obtained money enough to pay for our emigration to the frontiers. May 1, 1866, we set sail on board the ship "John Bright." We were five weeks and three days on the water. Before we sailed, however, my father, who was opposed to our leaving, discovered our hiding place, and had me arrested, placed in jail and taken before the magistrate. But I was soon set free, and father repented of what he had done and promised to follow in the next ship. This, however, he never did. We crossed the plains in Thomas E. Ricks mule-train which arrived in Salt Lake City, Sept. 4, 1866. I worked at my trade as a carpenter in Salt Lake City till July, 1873, when I moved to Randolph, Rich county, Utah. In the winter of 1892-93, I worked at the finishing of the Salt Lake Temple. I was ordained a Teacher by Septimus W. Sears in Liverpool in April, 1864, an Elder by Pres. Joseph F. Smith in 1867, a Seventy by Abraham H. Cannon May 11, 1884, and a High Priest by Rudger Clawson May 6, 1900. On that occasion, also, I was set apart as a member of the High Council, of the Woodruff Stake of Zion. I have married three wives, namely, Jane Lorimer, March 18, 1866, in Liverpool; Annie Maria Batty, Nov. 7, 1881, and Mary Ann Batty, April 7, 1884. I have had twenty children born to me, 14 of whom are alive. I have been a Sunday school worker nearly all my life or until within the last three years. I have labored as a Teacher and Priest in nearly all the Wards where I have resided."
