Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Smith, William Gilbert

Smith, William Gilbert, first president of the Morgan Stake of Zion, is the oldest child of Warren Smith and Amanda Barnes, and was born at Amherst, Lorain county, Ohio, May 9, 1827. His parents were among the first to hear and accept the gospel as revealed to Joseph Smith and were baptized early in the year 1831. The next year the family moved to Kirtland. Ohio, where the father worked at his trade, blacksmithing. Willard was baptized on his eighth birthday at Kirtland by Simeon Carter. While the Kirtland Temple was being constructed, he acted as water carrier for the workmen. Although young at the time of the dedication of that building, he still remembers many incidents connected with the memorable event. Together with his parents he left Kirtland in 1838 in the "Kirtland Camp," composed of families of Saints who were driven from their homes by the threats of an organized mob. His father lost one of his horses and was delayed for some time; the main camp moving on. Then, together with ten or twelve other belated families, the Smiths journeyed on behind the camp. The day before reaching Haun's mill, in Caldwell county, Mo., the little band were relieved of all their firearms by a mob. They traveled all night, reaching Haun's mill the following day. Here they spent the night. The next day, while the entire company, men, women and children, were assembled in front of an old blacksmith shop to listen to the reading of a letter just received from the Prophet Joseph, an infuriated mob of men, numbering about two hundred and fifty, suddenly appeared and put the little band to flight. Willard's father and two brothers, and about sixteen others ran into the shop, but when he attempted to go through the door, his arms flew outward and it was impossible for him to pass the threshold. Several times he made the attempt, but some unseen power held him back, and he sought safety in another direction, hiding first in a pile of lumber near the shop. He was finally driven from this place of refuge by the bullets of the mob and fled to a small frame house a short distance from the shop. When the mob finally retired, and all was quiet, the frightened women and children crept from their hiding places, but Willard Smith was the first one to enter the fatal shop, where so much innocent blood was spilled and from whence those noble spirits took their kind and merciful flight back to the Father. What a sight for a child only eleven years old, to behold! His beloved father and one dear little brother were lying dead, murdered; another brother, Alma, with his hip shot away, was lying near the bellows in a dying condition. Tenderly, Willard lifted his wounded brother and carried him from the shop, meeting his mother just outside. Little Alma was taken to their tent and, in answer to their earnest prayer, God gave simple directions to Sister Smith for the dressing and treatment of the terrible wound. Although the entire hip joint was blown away, the boy recovered, and he never suffered any pain or inconvenience as the result of the injury in after life. The next day Willard assisted his mother and Bro. Joseph Young to place bodies of the martyred Saints into a dry well, the only available grave under the circumstances. As soon as possible the survivors left the vicinity of the tragedy, and Sister Smith journeyed to Quincy, Ill. While here, she married again. By a strange coincidence, her second husband's name was Warren Smith, and he, also, was a blacksmith. After staying at Quincy for a year, the family moved to Nauvoo, where Willard learned the trade of a stonecutter and assisted in the construction of the Nauvoo Temple. He was present at its dedication and received his endowments in that Temple. He left his mother in Nauvoo and started west with the pioneers in 1846. When, at Council Bluffs, the call was made for five hundred volunteers from the "Mormons," he was one of the first to offer his services, and was taken as a drummer under Captain Allen. He endured all the hardships of that perilous journey over an uninhabited country, suffering-with the rest of the battalion-untold misery from hunger, fatigue and thirst. They at length arrived at Los Angeles, Cal., and here, after a time, they were honorably discharged from service. Willard re-enlisted for six months and was retained as one of the "Pacific Guard." In the spring of 1848 he joined Orrin P. Rockwell's company and returned to Salt Lake City. In October of the same year, in company with John W. Hess, Jacob Earle and others, he started back to the States to meet some Saints en route for Utah. In 1849 he joined a company and proceeded to the new gold fields of California. He spent several years at the gold fields and then went to Oregon, where he rented a farm. At this time his brother Alma returned from a mission to the Sandwich Islands and, calling on Willard at his farm, he induced him to settle his business in Oregon and return to Utah He did so, and after reaching Salt Lake City, he lived quietly with his mother until 1860, when he was called on a mission to England. Here he labored until 1863, when he was released and returned home with a large company of emigrating Saints, which arrived in Salt Lake City early in October, 1863. In 1865 he was ordained a Bishop and sent to preside over the Saints in Morgan county, where he still resides. He presided as Bishop until the Morgan Stake of Zion was organized in 1877, when he was chosen as president of the same. This position he held until 1893, when he was honorably released. For many years he held the position of probate judge in Morgan county, and served four terms in the Utah legislature as a representative from Morgan county. He has held many other offices of public trust and in many ways has endeared himself to the entire people with whom he has lived and labored. In 1865 he married Miss Huldah Cordelia Thurston, daughter of Thomas Jefferson Thurston, the pioneer settler of Morgan county. He is the father of twelve children, nine of whom are living and are faithful workers in the Church. Although in the 75th year of his age, he is still erect and active. His eyesight and hearing are good, and he is very fond of the society of the young, and enjoys music and singing, but above all, he loves to relate instances of Church history. His memory is remarkable, for one of his years, and he will often relate the most minute details of his association with the Prophet Joseph, the Haun's Mill massacre, the battalion march, and other striking incidents of the early days of his life. His has indeed been an eventful life, and he will surely be greatly rewarded for his faithful work. He now lives on his farm at Littleton, Morgan county, Utah, and never loses an opportunity of bearing a strong testimony to the truthfulness of the gospel as revealed through the Prophet Joseph Smith.
