Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Fry, Richard

Fry, Richard, president of the Morgan Stake of Zion from 1893 to 1900, is the Son of William and Mary Fry and was born at East Down, Devonshire, England, April 15, 1831. He obtained a common school education in England and made good use of it. In 1852 he made a trip to America, as a companion to his employer's son, visiting the most important cities and places of note in the East. On his return from America he heard the gospel as preached by Latter-day Saint Elders, and accepted it. He was baptized and confirmed a member of the Church Jan. 27, 1857, by Elder W. H. Barnett. March 25, 1860, he married Ann Blackmore Rowle, and two days later he sailed from Liverpool on board the ship "Underwriter," arriving in New York May 1, 1860. He crossed the plains in James D. Ross' ox-train, as captain over ten wagons, and arrived in Salt Lake City Sept. 3, 1860. After stopping two weeks in that city, he went to Weber valley, where he located, and thus became one of the first five pioneer families who settled South Morgan. When Thomas J. Thurston was called to be presiding Bishop in Morgan county. Richard Fry was chosen as his first counselor, which position he held till he succeeded Bishop Thurston as Bishop. At the organization of the Morgan Stake he was chosen as first counselor to Willard G. Smith, president of the Morgan Stake. He held this position till April 15, 1893, when he was appointed president of said Stake. He performed the duties of this high and responsible calling the remaining years of his life. Pres. Fry was ordained an Elder by James D. Ross July 15, 1860, and a High Priest Sept. 5, 1873. In civil life he held such offices as mayor of Morgan city and treasurer of Morgan county. He was a successful and thrifty business man and served for years as superintendent and manager of Z. C. M. I. at Morgan. Later, be engaged in the mercantile business for himself. He entered the order of plural marriage April 11, 1876, by taking to wife Susan Lerville. For obeying this commandment of God he was arrested, tried and sentenced to five months' imprisonment in the Utah penitentiary, and fined $300. He was incarcerated from Nov. 19, 1887, to April 19, 1888. Pres. Fry was the father of fourteen children, twelve of whom are now living. The last public duty he performed was to attend the general conference of the Church held in Salt Lake City in April, 1900. On his return home from that conference, he took sick with a severe cold and passed peacefully away April 15, 1900-the sixty-ninth anniversary of his birth. Bro. Fry was one who ever played the part of a man; one who, though content to follow, possessed the ability to lead; one, whose wise management reared two families in love and harmony and won for him a host of friends. He passed away in the hope of a glorious resurrection, and his name will ever be mentioned among those of the good and righteous.
