Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Cluff, Benjamin

Cluff, Benjamin, first Bishop of Center Ward, Wasatch county, Utah, is the third son of David Cluff and Betsy Hall, and was born March 20, 1830, in the town of Durham, Strafford county, New Hampshire. He was but an infant when his parents moved from his birthplace to Kirtland, Ohio, where the family became converts to "Mormonism." Benjamin distinctly remembers the dedication of the Kirtland Temple and the subsequent persecutions in Ohio. While the family stopped temporarily at Springfield, Ill., in the spring of 1839, Benjamin was baptized in the Illinois river, and the following year the family moved to Nauvoo, instead of going to Missouri, for which State they had started from Ohio. As a young man Benjamin took an active part in the upbuilding of Nauvoo, and remained there until the general exodus of the Saints in 1846. In journeying to the great west the family made halts at Bonaparte and Mt. Pisgah, Iowa, the winter of 1846-47 being spent at the latter place. After that two years were spent at Council Bluffs and vicinity, and in June, 1850, the family started on the long and tedious journey to Great Salt Lake valley, where they arrived in the fail of that year. They settled in Provo, Utah county. In the spring of 1853 Benjamin was ordained a Seventy by Joseph Young, and in the fall of that year he was called, together with many others, to go south to Little Salt Lake valley, to strengthen the settlement there, and guard them against the Indians. He lived in Parowan two years, and while there he married Mary Ellen Foster; returned to Provo in 1855. In the spring of that year he was sent on a mission to the Los Vegas Indians, in Nevada, where he labored two years, part of the time in the lead mines. He returned home at the time of the Johnston army invasion, and performed military duty in Echo canyon. Later, he located at Logan, Cache valley from whence he was called on a mission to the Sandwich Islands in 1864. He remained there six years, and took temporary charge of the mission for six months during the absence of Geo. Nebeker, to whom he acted as first counselor in the presidency of the mission. His wife was with him part of the time. He returned to Logan, Utah, in 1870; soon afterwards he removed to Coalville, Summit county, where he resided three years, after which he settled on Centre creek, Wasatch county, where he took up a farm. July 15, 1877, at the organization of the Wasatch Stake of Zion, he was ordained a High Priest and Bishop and set apart to preside over Center Ward, which was organized at the time. This position he held for sixteen years, after which he was honorably released. He then moved to Arizona, where he presided over the High Priests' quorum of the St. Joseph Stake; later he became the senior member of the High Council of the Stake, which duty he performed till he moved back to Utah. He is at the present time residing in Provo, and though nearly 72 years old, he enjoys good health, being strong in body and mind. Benjamin Cluff is the father of fifteen children, namely seven by his first wife, and eight by his second wife, Eliza A. Foster, whom he married in 1856; he died Sept. 5, 1990. Bro. Cluff's children are all members of the Church; some of them are highly educated and occupy prominent positions in both Church and State. (For further details see "The Cluff Family Journal," Vol. 1, p. 75, etc.)
