Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Lambert, Ephraim

Lambert, Ephraim, Bishop of Woodland, Wasatch county, Utah, is the son of John and Eline Hansine Lambert, and was born Nov. 4, 1858, in Salt Lake City, Utah. Bishop Lambert writes: "My father was born in England. He came to Nauvoo with the first company of Saints that sailed from Liverpool, England. My mother was born in Copenhagen, Denmark. She was the first girl that was baptized in that country. When I was two years old my parents moved from Salt Lake City to Kamas, Summit county, and were among the first settlers in Rhoads' valley. I received but very little schooling, most of my time being spent in farming and in herding sheep and cattle. We passed through many hard times incident to settling a new country. When my brother and I were about eight years of age, and were herding sheep, we lost a lamb on a certain occasion. We searched and hunted, but failed to find it, and we were afraid to go home without it, as our father was quite strict with his children. Having been taught the principle of prayer, we made up our mind to pray to the Lord, and ask Him to direct us, so that we could find the lost animal. Consequently, we knelt down and prayed, each in turn, and when we arose to our feet, we saw the lost lamb standing close by and in plain view. This may appear like a trifling affair to some, but it was the means of creating a faith in me through which the Lord has subsequently blessed me abundantly and preserved my life. Often, when I have been alone on the tops of high mountains, have I knelt down and lifted up my voice in thanksgiving to the Lord for the many manifestations of His goodness towards me. The Lord has often blessed me with dreams and visions. March 9, 1880, I married Agnes Michie, who has been a good, dutiful and affectionate wife to me ever since. Dec. 8, 1883, I was chosen and set apart as president of the first Y. M. M. I. A. organized in Woodland Ward, and in August, 1885, I was chosen to fill a vacancy in the council in the 20th quorum of Seventy; but before I was placed in that position I was chosen to be second counselor to Bishop Moon, which position I held until he moved to Old Mexico, in 1890, when I was ordained and set apart by Apostle John W. Taylor to act as Bishop of Woodland, which position I hold at the present time. I have been extensively engaged in the saw mill and timber business. I am also a farmer on a small scale."
