Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Glines, James Harvey

Glines, James Harvey, a prominent Elder in the Uintah Stake of Zion, is the son of James P. Glines and Ruth Brown, and was born April 17, 1822, at Franklin, Merrimack county, New Hampshire. Becoming converted to "Mormonism," he was baptized by Erastus Snow March 10, 1843, in Petersboro, N. H., and was soon afterward ordained a Deacon in the Church. He was ordained an Elder by Orson Hyde, at Boston, Mass., June 2, 1844, and spent some time electioneering for Joseph Smith, who at that time was a candidate for the presidency of the United States. He then emigrated to Nauvoo, arriving there July 31, 1844, about a month after the martyrdom of the Prophet and Patriarch, Here he served as a police officer on the old police force and took an active part in public affairs generally; he was present at the memorable meeting held at Nauvoo, Aug. 8, 1844, when Sidney Rigdon's claim to the guardianship of the Church was rejected and the Twelve Apostles were acknowledged as the highest authority. He was ordained a Seventy by Joseph Young and became a member of the 8th quorum of that organization. He was one of the number who brought a cannon that belonged to the "Carthage Greys" to Nauvoo, to celebrate the 4th of July. There it was stolen and taken across the river and subsequently sent to Council Bluffs. Elder Glines, as a member of the Nauvoo Legion (in which he served as adjutant in a regiment), was often on duty as guard during the troublous times of mobocracy. As an exile for the sake of his religion he left Nauvoo in February, 1846, crossing the Mississippi river on the ice, and made his way to Council Bluffs. He was subsequently sent back to Nauvoo after goods, and on his return he brought with him the cannon previously mentioned. Soon after his return to Council Bluffs, he enlisted in the Mormon Battalion, being one of the first to enter his name as a volunteer; he enlisted as sergeant-major in that battalion at its organization. He also accompanied Pres. Brigham Young on a visit back to Garden Grove, in Iowa, to obtain volunteers. He marched with the main body of the battalion as far as Santa Fe, New Mexico, when he became a member of the detachment which wintered at Pueblo, from which place he went back to Winter Quarters in 1847. At Winter Quarters he served as a special guard, and was a member of Hosea Stout's expedition, which went out to meet the Pioneers, as they returned from the Valley in the autumn of 1847. Early in 1848 he was sent on a mission to Iowa, Illinois and Wisconsin, to hunt up Saints who had become scattered during the exodus from Nauvoo. In 1852 he migrated to the Valley, crossing the plains in Robert Wimmer's company. He settled in Cedar Valley, Utah county, being one of the first settlers of Cedar Fort. Here he followed the avocation of a school teacher. Upon the approach of Johnston's army in 1858, the Saints vacated Cedar Fort, and Elder Glines lived for three years in American Fork, where he taught school and served as alderman and as a military officer. He then moved back to Cedar valley, where he resided until 1883 when he removed to Ashley valley, Uintah county, where he has resided ever since. Elder Glines has been a very active man, both in ecclesiastical and temporal affairs. In Cedar valley he served as tithing clerk, ward clerk, president of teachers, justice of the peace and president of a water company. He originated the first water company in Utah county. In Ashley valley he has organized two water companies and the different ecclesiastical associations of the Stake; he also served as probate judge from 1884 to 1888, and as justice of the peace. For three years he was the acting Bishop of the 4th Ward (or Glines Ward), in Ashley valley, and superintended the building of the school house in Glines Ward, which Ward was named in his honor. He was ordained a High Priest by James Hacking, May 9, 1887; later he became a High Councilor in the Uintah Stake of Zion. In 1899 he performed a mission to Massachusetts and New Hampshire, where he labored mostly among his kindred. While on this mission he preached on the Boston Commons, and was also able to allay considerable prejudice by newspaper interviews. In December, 1845, Elder Glines married Elizabeth Ann Myers in the Nauvoo Temple. While he served in the Mormon Battalion his wife lived in the so-called Ponca camp, which was in charge of Bishop Geo. Miller. His first wife died Nov. 3, 1873; his second wife, who is still alive, is a native of Sweden.
