Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Lybbert, Christian Frederik Bernhard

Lybbert, Christian Frederik Bernhard, senior president of the 97th quorum of Seventy, is a son of Joachim Frederik and Margrethe Elizabeth Wilhelmine Evart, and was born Nov. 6, 1834, at Flade, Horns herred, Hjorring amt, Denmark. He received a fair education in the common schools of Denmark. Bible reading was one of the studies taught in the schools, and he, being of a naturally religious mind, soon began to think about what he should do to save his soul. When he first heard of the "Mormons" he became interested and prayed to his Heavenly Father to enlighten his mind, that he might know who had the truth. His prayer was answered; he became a convert to "Mormonism," and he was baptized by Jacob Julander March 28, 1854. He followed the trade of a blacksmith, till June, 1854, when he was ordained a Teacher and sent out to labor as a missionary in the Aalborg conference. He did successful missionary work in different places for over two years. He was ordained a Priest, and later (Feb. 11, 1855) he was ordained an Elder by E.G. Eriksen. He had the pleasure of teaching his mother and father the gospel, the former he also baptized. In the spring of 1859 he enlisted as a soldier and served his country four years, during which time he also worked actively in Church affairs. He married Mary Andersen in Copenhagen June 15, 1862. In 1865 he emigrated to Utah, crossing the plains with ox-teams. He married Antonette M. Olsen March 10, 1866, and located in Ogden the same year. Here he followed his trade and also took an active interest in Church work, laboring as a Ward Teacher. Subsequently he moved to Spring City, Sanpete county, and later (in 1870) he located at Levan, Juab county, where he labored as Ward and Sunday school teacher, Ward clerk, superintendent of Sunday school, etc. In 1882 he moved to Ashley valley, locating at what is now Merrill Ward. Here he also held a number of ecclesiastical positions. May 5, 1892, he was set apart by Pres. Joseph F. Smith for a mission to Europe. From May, 1892, to June, 1894, he labored diligently as a missionary in Holland and also in Denmark, and was successful in making many friends and converts, as also in getting much valuable genealogy. Since his return home he has served as Ward clerk and teacher and discharged the duties pertaining to his calling as senior president of the 97th quorum of Seventy.
