Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Miller, William

Miller, William, president of the Utah Stake of Zion from July, 1860, to 1868, was the son of Seth Miller and Martha Tilden and was born Feb. 8, 1814, at Avon, Livingston county, N. Y. His parents emigrated to the State of New York soon after their marriage, and were among the early settlers in northwestern New York. Pres. Miller had nine brothers and sisters who lived to raise families. The Millers were among the most prominent members of society, and were quite wealthy for those times. William's father belonged to no religious denomination, but was strictly moral and honest in his dealings with his fellowmen. His mother was a Presbyterian; her husband never interfering in her religious practices. When William Miller was in his seventeenth year, quite a religious wave passed over their part of the country, and all were anxious to experience its influenced-experience of change of heart. He attended the revivals, and after repeated solicitations had his name put down on six months' trial-it being the rule to take persons on a short trial to prove their sincerity, before admitting them to membership. Just after taking this step he heard an Elder preach the new and strange doctrines then advocated by the "Mormons," which set him to read the Scriptures, to ascertain for himself as to the truth. He also obtained a Book of Mormon and carefully read its contents, scarcely resting to eat and drink, and found it consistent with the Bible. He attended all the Latter-day Saint meetings in the vicinity for a year, which resulted in his ultimately joining the Latter-day Saints. In the fall of the year, on his 18th birthday, his father gave him $1,000 and his liberty to commence life for himself. May 1, 1834, he was married to Phebe Scott, of the town of Avon, and they at once commended housekeeping on their own account. Not getting his money as early in the spring as desired, he turned his attention to farming, and during this season he again became interested in the doctrines taught by the Latter-day Saints. He started for Kirtland, Oct. 12, 1834, where he remained for some three weeks, conversing with the Prophet Joseph and other Elders, with whom he became acquainted. Being now fully convinced he went into the waters of baptism Oct. 28, 1834, and on the following Sunday was confirmed a member of the Church by Sylvester Smith. He started home next day rejoicing in the truth of the gospel. The next Sabbath he attended a meeting of the Saints, seven miles from where he resided, in company with his wife. She also being a believer, was baptized in June, 1834. In June, 1835, he took his wife to Kirtland, where they remained one month, and made arrangements to move and make his home at Kirtland, which he did in the following autumn. He purchased seventy acres of land and rented a house in town, expecting to make a permanent home there. He was at the dedication of the Temple at Kirtland, and received the ordinances of the gospel conferred on the Elders at that time, he having been previously ordained an Elder by Elder Beman. At Kirtland he was ordained a Seventy in the 2nd quorum of Seventy, and was sent on a mission to his native State, where he preached and organized several branches of the Church. Returning to Kirtland in the spring of 1838, Elder Miller moved with the Saints to Far West, Missouri, where he arrived on the 7th of May, in time to raise some corn. In the August election of that year the anti-Mormons tried to prevent the Saints from voting, which caused a hot physical conflict between the parties, in which William Miller took a prominent part, assisting and protecting all legal voters in depositing their ballots. During the dark times which followed in Missouri, William Miller was on constant duty, traveling from Adam-Ondi-Ahman, carrying messages to and from his brethren whose lives were in danger. He helped to save the printing press and valuable papers by digging a hole in the ground, putting the valuables in, covering them with poles and stacking hay on top. This was a day that "tried men's souls." The City of the Saints (Far West) fell before the mob-army which Governor Boggs sent to exterminate the Saints, the Prophet and many of the leaderswere marched to prison, while the defenders, among whom was William Miller, were forced to lay down their arms and at the point of the bayonet to deed away their land to defray the expenses of the war which their enemies had forced upon them. During all these perilous times he was indefatigable in saving the families of the exterminated Saints. Feb. 1, 1839. left Far West, and arrived at Quincy, Illinois, where he saw Sidney Rigdon, who counseled the Saints to scatter for the time being. Thus counseled he went to Sangamon county, where he rented a farm of thirty acres; but after harvesting his crops he removed to Booneville, where he rented a farm and remained two years. Here he baptized over twenty persons and raised up a branch of the Church. In 1841 he removed to Nauvoo, where he remained five years, assisting in all the public works, and was present when the corner and cap stones of the Temple were laid. Having been taught by the Prophet that it was both his privilege and duty to take a plurality of wives, he accordingly, on Dec. 2, 1844, took, as his second wife, Marilla, eldest daughter of Squire Aaron Johnson, in the presence and with the free and full consent of his first wife. The following noble and quite heroic episode of "Mormon" history is told in the "Life of Brigham Young:" "By the time we were at work in the Temple," says Pres. Young, officiating in the ordinances, the mob learned that 'Mormonism' was not dead, as they supposed. We had completed the walls of the Temple, and the attic story from about half-way up of the first windows, in about fifteen months. It went up like magic, and we then commenced officiating in the ordinances. Then the mob commenced to hunt for other victims; they had already killed the Prophet Joseph and his brother Hyrum in Carthage jail, while under the pledge of the State for safety, and now they wanted Brigham, the president of the Twelve Apostles, who were then acting as the presidency of the Church. I was in my room in the Temple; it was the southeast corner of the upper story. I learned that a posse was lurking around the Temple, and that the United States marshal was waiting for me to come down, whereupon I knelt down and asked my Father in Heaven, in the name of Jesus, to guide and protect me, that I might live to prove advantageous to the Saints; I arose from my knees, and sat down in my chair. There came a rap at my door. 'Come in.' I said; and Brother George D. Grant, who was then engaged driving my carriage and doing chores for me, entered the room. Said he, Brother Brigham, do you know that a posse and the United States marshal are here?' I told him that I had heard so. On entering the room, Brother Grant left the door open. Nothing came into my mind as what to do until, looking across the hall, I saw Brother William Miller leaning against the wall. As I stepped towards the door I beckoned to him: he came. 'Brother William,' I said, 'the marshal is here for me: will you go and do just as I tell you? If you will, I will serve them a trick.' I knew that Brother Miller was an excellent man, perfectly reliable, and capable of carrying out my project. 'Here, take my cloak,' said I; but it happened to be Brother Heber C. Kimball's; our cloaks were alike in color, fashion and size. I threw it around his shoulders, and told him to wear my hat and accompany Brother George D. Grant. He did so. 'George, you step in the carriage,' said I to Brother Grant, 'and look towards Brother Miller, and say to him as though you were addressing me, 'are you ready to ride?' You can do this, and they will suppose Brother Miller to be me, and proceed accordingly;' which they did. Just as Brother Miller was entering the carriage, the marshal stepped up to him, and, placing his hand upon his shoulder, said, You are my prisoner.' Brother William entered the carriage, and said to the marshal, 'I am going to the Mansion House, won't you ride with me?' They both went to the Mansion House. There were my sons Joseph A., Brigham jun., and Brother Heber C. Kimball's boys and others, who were looking on, and all seemed at once to understand and participate in the joke. They followed the carriage to the Mansion House, slid gathered around Brother Miller with tears in their eyes, saying, 'Father,' or, 'President Young, where are you going?' Brother Miller looked at them kindly, but made no reply; and the marshal really thought that he had got 'Brother Brigham.' Lawyer Edmonds, who was then staying at the Mansion House, appreciating the joke, volunteered to Brother Miller to go to Carthage with him, and see him safe through. When they arrived within two or three miles of Carthage, the marshal, with his posse, stopped. They arose in their carriages, buggies and wagons, and, like a tribe of Indians going to battle, or as if they were a pack of demons, yelling and shouting, exclaimed: 'We've got him, we've got him, we've got him!' When they reached Carthage, the marshal took the supposed Brigham into an upper room of the hotel, and placed a guard over him, at the same time telling those around that he had got him. Brother Miller remained in the room until they bid him come to supper. While there, parties came in, and asked for Brigham. Brother Miller was pointed out to them. So it continued, until an apostate 'Mormon,' by the name of Thatcher, who had lived in Nauvoo, came in, sat down and asked the landlord where Brigham was. 'That is Mr. Young,' said the landlord, pointing across the table to Brother Miller. 'Where? I can't see any one that looks like Brigham,' Thatcher replied. The landlord told him it was that fleshy man, eating. 'Oh,-,' exclaimed Thatcher, 'that's not Brigham: that's William Miller, one of my old neighbors.' Upon hearing this the landlord went, and, tapping the sheriff on the shoulder, took him a few steps to one side, and said: 'You have made a mistake. That is not Brigham Young. It is William Miller, of Nauvoo.' The marshal, very much astonished, exclaimed: 'Good heavens! And he passed for Brigham.' He then took Brother Miller into a room, and turning to him, said: 'What in h-l is the reason you did not tell me your name?' 'You have not asked me my name,' Brother Miller replied. 'Well, what is your name?' said the sheriff, with another oath. 'My name is William Miller.' 'I thought your name was Brigham Young. Do you say this for a fact?' 'Certainly I do,' returned Brother Miller. 'Then,' said the marshal, 'why did you not tell me that before?' 'I was under no obligations to tell you.' replied Miller. The marshal, in a rage, walked out of the room, followed by Brother Miller, who walked off in company with Lawyer Edmonds, Sheriff Backenstos and others, who took him across lots to a place of safety; and this is the real birth of the story of 'Bogus Brigham' as far as I can recollect." There is Brigham Young's touch of irrepressible humor in the telling, but no man better than he understood the value of the service which William Miller had rendered him. By this noble and heroic act, of giving himself into custody and jeopardizing his own life, if he did not save the life of Pres. Young, he most likely saved him from a long imprisonment and vexatious lawsuits. Truly is the man, who in times of danger offers himself for his fellow man, one of the noblest of his race. Grave threats were uttered against Miller, for imposing upon the officers in Brigham Young's stead, and Sheriff Backenstos, fearing the anti-Mormons would kill him, hurried him off and took him safely back to Nauvoo that night by a circuitous route, arriving at five o'clock the next morning. Being sick at the time of the exodus, Elder Miller did not leave Nauvoo till May, 1846. He stopped at Garden Grove, where his wife's father, Aaron Johnson, was presiding, and put in crops, which, however, he left for others to harvest, and continued to Council Bluffs that season, in time to cut hay and make winter quarters. But after cutting his house logs for his winter cabin, he was taken down with a severe sickness. On his recovery, he found that some one had appropriated his house logs, and, as winter was on him, he sold his only coat for a dugout in the side of the bluff, where he and his family passed the winter of 1846-47. In March, 1849, he took a contract from Livingston & Kinkade to haul 4,000 pounds of merchandise, at $10 per hundred, from the Missouri river to Utah, getting part of his pay in advance; and on the 25th day of April, he loaded and started across the river, and left Winter Quarters May 4, 1849, for Utah. He was placed in charge of sixty wagons. At Loup Fork the company remained one week, in consequence of high water. While camped there, several cases of cholera developed, and a number persons died with this same disease. He arrived at Salt Lake City, Sept. 20, 1849, purchased a house and lot in the Sixteenth Ward, fenced in a farm of thirty acres the next spring on the west side of Jordan, and built an adobe house on his lot. Early in February, 1850, he came up to Provo, and took hand in the Indian difficulties. At the legislative session of 1849, he was appointed one of the judges of Utah county, which necessitated his removal to that county, where he went, in company with Bishop Aaron Johnson, Sept. 18, 1850, having previously visited the county and selected the site of Springville. In the spring of 1851 he organized a cavalry company and was appointed captain, for the protection of the citizens against the predatory red man. At the August election, he was elected a member of the legislature for the session of 1851-2. In the spring of 1851, he did his portion of fencing sixty acres of land, raised 400 bushels of wheat and built the first adobe house in Springville. In the fall of 1852, he went to Iron county, where he remained over winter, built a house anti located a farm, expecting to remain there having been sent there to strengthen the new settlements, in consequence of the Indian difficulties; but a treaty being made with the Indians, he returned to Springville in the spring of 1853. In 1853 he was appointed first counselor to Bishop Aaron Johnson. From 1853 to 1856, his time was occupied in farming, making roads into the canyons, and the duties of his various offices. In 1856 he was called to fill a mission to England. Before going on his mission, this year being the famous grasshopper year, Brother Miller weighed out just enough flour to supply his family until an early harvest, and disposed of his surplus to his needy neighbors. The family divided this scanty allowance among the needy, never turning an applicant away hungry; and yet the supply held out until harvest, like the widow's loaf. April 17, 1856, William Miller started to Europe to perform a mission, in company with Orson Pratt, Phinehas H. Young and others. They endured great hardships in getting through the mountains at this early season of the year, encountering the fearful mountain storms, the deep snow, the cold, chill sleet and sweeping avalanche; camping by night under the overhanging rock, warmed by the huge bonfire kindled from the mountain pine; and so on wearily from day to day, part of the time having to unload their wagons and pack their scanty supplies upon their horses, trudging along on foot by their sides, frequently encountering the savage Indian warriors who at this time were very biter in their feelings toward the white emigrants, and who never missed an opportunity of levying a tribute in the shape of "biscuit," from the overland traveler. They reached Atchison June 9th, and on the same day took passage on the steamboat "Peter Starr," for St. Louis, Mo., at which place they arrived June 12th and took the railroad the same evening for the East. Elder Miller arrived in New York July 3rd, and sailed for Liverpool July 5, 1856, on the steamer "Atlantic." After a prosperous voyage they arrived at Liverpool July 16, 1856. Elder Miller was assigned to the Birmingham conference, and afterwards labored in Wales, presiding in connection with Elders Daniels and Evans over the Welsh mission. In consequence of the Utah troubles of 1857, most of the Elders were called home, Elder Miller among the rest, leaving Liverpool Oct. 14, 1857, in the steamer "Baltic," in company with Orson Pratt, Ezra T. Benson, Alexander McRae and others, who were compelled to travel incognito, not desiring to be known as "Morman" Elders, in consequence of the bitter feeling then manifest against them. They arrived in New York, Oct. 25th. In consequence of Johnston's army being then on the plains en route for Utah, the Elders were ordered home, via the Isthmus of Panama. They arrived at San Francisco, Sept. 30, 1857, and thence traveled overland to Utah, arriving about New Year's day. 1858. Being among those notables of Utah county that Judge Cradlebaugh desired to imprison, Bishop Miller was compelled to leave home in the spring of 1859, and was with General Aaron Johnson in the mountains all the season until late in the autumn, and was one of the famous "Kolob" boys; but there was never any indictment of any kind against him during Cradlebaugh's administration. He was called to preside over Utah Stake, and also to be the Bishop of Provo, July 17, 1860. On the 24th of July following, a company of cavalry with the Provo brass band came to Springville, under the direction of L. John Nuttall, marshal of the day, and escorted Bishop Miller and family to Provo, where they participated in the celebration of the day. He immediately entered into the performance of the duties of his office. During the administration of Bishop Miller, the meeting house in Provo was completed, furnished and dedicated under great disadvantages, in consequence of Indian depredations and the general hard times. He paid into the meeting house fund over $1,000, and donated liberally to build and establish the Deseret Telegraph line, which was completed during his administration. He built the first house of any note on the bench of Provo, and afterwards built what is now known as the Excelsior House in Provo. Elder Miller died at Provo Aug. 7, 1875, aged sixty-one years and seven months. (See also Tullidge's Quarterly Magazine, Vol. 3, p. 420.)
