Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Partridge, Edward

Partridge, Edward, president of the Utah Stake of Zion from 1895 to 1900, was born June 25, 1833, at Independence, Jackson county, Missouri. His parents were Edward Partridge and Lydia Clisbee, his father being the first Bishop in the Church. The earliest recollections of President Partridge were of the mobbings of the Saints in Missouri. When eight years and two days of age he was baptized in the Mississippi river at Nauvoo, Ill. He came to Utah with his mother and other members of the family in 1848, his father having died in 1840. In 1854 he was called to fill a mission to the Sandwich Islands, where he labored three years. Feb. 4, 1858, he married Miss Sarah Lucretia Clayton, a daughter of the late Wm. Clayton, and moved south at the time of the "move" in 1858. Shortly after returning he was set apart as a member of the High Council of Salt Lake Stake, and lived for several years in Farmington, Davis county, where he had charge of Apostle Amass M. Lyman's farm. Feb. 15, 1862, he married Miss Elizabeth Buxton. In 1864 he moved to Fillmore, Millard county. May 9, 1864, he was set apart as Bishop of Fillmore, which position he filled for a number of years. In 1877 he was called to the office of counselor to President Hinckley, of the Millard Stake. May 1, 1882, he left on a second mission to the Sandwich Islands, taking a part of his family with him. He was president of the mission for nearly three years, returning to Utah in March, 1885. Some years after his return he located in Provo, in order to take advantage of the educational facilities offered by the Brigham Young Academy, for the benefit of his children. He was soon after called to labor as a home missionary in the Utah Stake of Zion, and to the offices of alternate to the High Council, High Councilor, and in 1892 became second counselor to Pres. Abraham O. Smoot in the Stake presidency; at the death of the latter, in 1895, Edward Partridge was called to preside over the Stake, which position he occupied for upwards of five years, or until the time of his death, which occurred in Provo, Nov. 17, 1900. In an obituary published in the "Deseret News" on the day of his demise the following eulogy is given: "President Partridge was a quiet, unobtrusive, sensitive man, whose whole life has been devoted to the furtherance of the work of God. He was earnest and sincere in all his undertakings, and merited and enjoyed the respect of the community. He had many friends in various parts of the State where he has lived. His life has been busy and well spent, and he leaves a record without blemish to be cherished and honored by his posterity through coming generations. He was an example of unselfish devotion to the gospel, his course in life being worthy of emulation by all Latter-day Saints. Elder Partridge has filled many other offices of honor and trust in the Church and State. He served in the Territorial legislature and was a member of the State constitutional convention of 1895. He has filled every position with honor and integrity. He was the father of seventeen children, twelve of whom are living, and are men and women of high standing in the community in which they reside. He has twenty-four grandchildren and one great-grandchild living. He has been very diligent during his life in keeping his journal and genealogy, and much valuable historical data and reminiscences of prominent men and events connected with the Church are recorded in the former."
