Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Lyman, Amasa Mason

Lyman, Amasa Mason, a member of the Council of Twelve Apostles from 1842 to 1867, was the third son of Boswell Lyman and Martha Mason, and was born March 30, 1813, in Lyman township, Grafton county, New Hampshire. When about two years old, his father left home for the western country, from which he never returned, as he is supposed to have died some six years afterwards in New Orleans. Amasa, with his younger brother Elias and his sister Ruth, remained with their mother until her second marriage, after which Amasa lived with his grandfather until he was eleven years old, and with Parley Mason, a relative, seven years longer. During the year 1831 he became somewhat thoughtful on the subject of religion, but did not unite himself with any of the religious denominations until the spring of 1832, when the neighborhood in which he resided was visited by Elders Lyman E. Johnson and Orson Pratt. Amasa believed the gospel when he first heard it preached by those Elders, and was baptized by Lyman E. Johnson April 27, 1832. The following day he was confirmed by Orson Pratt. On account of ill feelings that arose in his uncle's family because of his baptism, Bro. Lyman resolved to go west, and accordingly started on a journey of some seven hundred miles May 7, 1832. His earthly wealth at that time consisted of some sixteen pounds of half-worn clothing and $11.35 in money. The weariness consequent upon the first day's walking admonished him to travel by stage and canal to Lyons, Wayne county, N.Y. Arriving there, his funds were all gone, and he hired out to Mr. Thomas Lacky, the man who bought Martin Harris' farm when he sold it to raise money for printing the Book of Mormon. Bro. Lyman worked for this man two weeks and earned money to take him to Buffalo, whence he took steamer to Cleveland, Ohio, and from there he walked 45 miles to the residence of John Johnson, at Hiram, Portage county, Ohio. This was the place where Joseph Smith had been tarred and feathered a short time previous. Father Johnson and family received young Lyman kindly, and he remained with them until the following July, when the Prophet returned from Missouri. "This," writes Elder Lyman, "afforded me an opportunity to see the man of God. Of the impressions produced I will here say, although there was nothing strange or different from other men in his personal appearance, yet, when he grasped my hand in that cordial way (known to those who have met him in the honest simplicity of truth), I felt as one of old in the presence of the Lord; my strength seemed to be gone, so that it required an effort on my part to stand on my feet; but in all this there was no fear, but the serenity and peace of heaven pervaded my soul, and the still small voice of the spirit whispered its living testimony in the depths of my soul, where it has ever remained, that he was the Man of God." Bro. Lyman continued laboring for Father Johnson until some time in the month of August, when one Sabbath evening, after a social prayer meeting with the few members in Hiram, the Prophet, in his own familiar way, said to him: "Brother Amasa, the Lord requires your labors in the vineyard." Without thought Bro. Lyman replied, "I will go," and on August 23, 1832, he and Zerubbabel Snow were ordained to the office of Elders in the Church, under the hands of Joseph Smith and Frederick G. Williams. On the following day they started on their first mission to proclaim the gospel of salvation. About the time of their starting an application came to Pres. Smith to visit an old gentleman by the name of Harrington, who was afflicted with a severe pain in his head. From a press of business, Joseph could not go, but instructed Bros. Lyman and Snow to call upon the old man, which they did, and as they came near the house, before they entered, they heard his groans extorted from him by pain, which seemed intolerable. The missionaries entered and introduced themselves, being strangers. They then prayed for and laid hands upon him, in the name of Jesus, and rebuked his pain, which was instantly removed, and the sufferer rejoiced and praised God, who had so signally blessed him. From this place the missionaries continued their journey, and the following Sabbath evening they met in prayer meeting with a few Saints in Chippewa township. A few non-members also attended, among whom was a Miss Smith, who reclined on a bed in the corner of the room. The brethren sang a hymn and prayed, and Elder Snow proceeded to make some remarks, when, in an instant, a cry of alarm from the bed attracted the attention of all. On stepping to the bedside the Elders discovered that Miss Smith's face and her entire form were distorted in the most shocking manner, her eyes were glaring wildly, but apparently sightless, her respiration was very difficult and her limbs were rigid as iron. The common restoratives were used without effect. The Elders laid their hands upon her and rebuked the devil, when she was instantly relieved, but in another moment she was bound as before; they now kneeled down by her bed and prayed, when she was again released, and asked for baptism, stating that she had been acting against her convictions of right in some conversations the missionaries had held with her during the day. They repaired to the water and there under the mantle of night introduced the first soul into the Church as the fruits of their labors. During the following winter Elders Lyman and Snow labored in southern Ohio and Cabell county, Virginia. Some forty souls were added to the Church by their administrations. Early in the spring they returned to Kirtland. March 21, 1833, with Wm. F. Cahoon as companion, Elder Lyman started on his second mission. He continued his labors for eight months, during which time he traveled as far east as Chautauqua and Cattaraugus counties, N.Y. He held 350 meetings and saw about one hundred souls added to the Church. In December following he attended a conference in Erie county, Penn., where he was ordained to the High Priesthood under the hands of Lyman E. Johnson and Orson Pratt. In the winter he continued his missionary labors in the States of New York and New Hampshire. While in the latter State the call to go to Missouri reached him through Elder Lyman E. Johnson. Responding to this call, he changed his plan of operations and went direct to Kirtland, Ohio taking in charge as a contribution some money and teams, and two sons of John Tanner (John J. and Nathan). They arrived at Kirtland May 1, 1834, and a few days later Elder Lyman joined Zion's camp at New Portage and traveled with this organization to Missouri. After waiting upon his brethren who were attacked by the cholera, he suffered considerably with the ague and fever. Having been discharged from his duties in the camp, he returned to Kirtland, preaching by the way. Soon after his return he married Miss Louisa Tanner, daughter of Elder John Tanner. On a subsequent six months' mission to the State of New York, his labors were rewarded by liberal additions to the Church. He traveled over two thousand miles and preached nearly two hundred sermons. In the spring of 1836 he attended the dedicatory services of the Kirtland Temple, after which he, in company with Elder Nathan Tanner, filled another mission to the State of New York. In 1837 he removed to Missouri, where he became subject to the persecutions which befell the Saints there, and took also an active part in their defense until he, together with Joseph Smith and others, was betrayed by Col. Geo. M. Hinkle into the hands of the mob militia. Escaping the execution which the court martial had contemplated, Elder Lyman shared the fate of his fellow prisoners until Nov. 24, 1838, when he was discharged at the mock trial held at Richmond, Ray county. He immediately returned to Far West, where he was elected justice of the peace. While suffering under a severe attack of sickness, his family was enabled to remove to Illinois, through the kindness of friends; and after aiding the brethren in the matter of disposing of their land in Missouri, Elder Lyman joined his family in Quincy, Ill., in March, 1839. During that year he made two dangerous trips back to Missouri for the purpose of assisting Elder Parley P. Pratt and fellow prisoners and to attend to unsettled business. Early in the spring of 1840, he went to Iowa, on the half-breed tract, in Lee county, where he built a cabin, to which he moved his family. A portion of this summer he spent on the Mississippi river, boating wood to St. Louis. From this work he returned in the fall, sick. In the spring of 1841 he moved his family to Nauvoo and occupied part of a house belonging to Brother Osmyn M. Duel, and worked with Brother Theodore Turley in his shop at repairing guns, and other work. He had been thus engaged a short time, when Brother Charles Shumway, from northern Illinois, called on Brother Joseph for Elders to go home with him to preach in that country. The Prophet sent him to Elder Lyman, with directions that he should go. The steamer on which they were to go up the river was in sight when he received the word in the shop. He went to his home, one mile distant, took leave of his family, and was at the landing as the boat rounded to. He preached in the region of Galena, and in Wisconsin, until October, when he returned to Nauvoo, where he arrived on the last day of the conference, in the afternoon. During the conference he was appointed a mission to the city of New York. This was countermanded by the Prophet; and during the winter he went, in company with Peter Haws, on a mission to secure means to build the Temple and Nauvoo House. They went as far east as Indiana. In the spring of 1842, Elder Lyman went on a mission to the State of Tennessee, accompanied by Horace K. Whitney and Adam Lightner and also William Camp, from whom they had the promise of some help on the public buildings. In this they were disappointed. Elder Lyman was joined in this mission by Elder Lyman Wight, one of the Twelve. After their failure to accomplish what they expected to with Brother Camp, they returned to Nauvoo. While on this mission Elder Lyman held one public discussion with Thomas Smith, a Methodist presiding older, and baptized some of his church. Subsequent to his return to Nauvoo, Elder Lyman was ordained to the Apostleship Aug. 20, 1842, and on September 10th he started on a mission to southern Illinois, in company with George A. Smith. Some portion of their time, on this mission, they were in the company of Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball. From this mission Elder Lyman returned Oct. 4th. The following winter he was engaged by the Prophet to move his family to Shockoquon, in Henderson county, where he had bought some property. Bro. Lyman repaired to the place where he superintended the surveying of the town site and commenced building. He remained here until the following summer (1843). When the Prophet was kidnapped, he participated in the efforts that resulted in his rescue. On his return from this expedition Elder Lyman was taken ill and became helpless, in which condition he was taken to Nauvoo, from where (when he had partially recovered from his sickness) he was sent on a mission to the State of Indiana, taking with him his family. He went to the small inland town of Alquina, Fayette county, where his family resided, while he traveled through the surrounding counties, preaching as opportunity offered. In this manner he passed the time until the spring of 1844, when he repaired to Nauvoo to attend the April conference, at which it was determined that he should go to the city of Boston. A few days after the conference, he had an interview with the Prophet, in which he taught him some principles on celestial marriage. Elder Lyman returned to Alquina, and prosecuted his labor of preaching in the country, until the 1st of June, when he repaired to Cincinnati, where he remained until July, when he received the news of the murder of the Prophet and Patriarch, Joseph and Hyrum Smith. A few days later Brother Adams arrived, and confirmed the news of the murder. He was also the bearer of a call to Elder Lyman, to return immediately to Nauvoo, and in response to this call he repaired to Nauvoo, where he arrived July 31, 1844. Having attended the special meeting at Nauvoo, Aug. 8, 1844, in which the Twelve Apostles were acknowledged as the presiding quorum of the Church, Apostle Lyman, as a member of that quorum, continued to take an active part in all the affairs of the Church. He rendered efficient aid during the exodus of the Saints from Illinois in 1846 and was one of the Pioneers of 1847, returning to Winter Quarters in the fall of the same year. The following year he led a large company of emigrants to Great Salt Lake valley. After this he was appointed on a mission to California, from which he returned Sept. 30, 1850. In 1851 he and Apostle Charles C. Rich were called to lead a company of settlers to California, which started from Payson, Utah county, March 24, 1851, and arrived at San Bernardino, Cal., in the following June. A few months later (September) the rancho of San Bernardino was Purchased, and a settlement located, which was continued until 1857, when, on account of the hostilities between Utah and the United States, it was broken up; the inhabitants removed to Utah. In 1860 Elder Lyman was sent on a mission to Great Britain, arriving in Liverpool, England, July 27th. In connection with Apostle Charles C. Rich he presided over the European Mission until May 14, 1862, when he embarked to return home. While on this mission he delivered a remarkable sermon at Dundee, Scotland, March 16, 1862, in which he denied the atonement of the Savior. Some years later he was summoned to meet before the First Presidency of the Church to answer to the charge of having preached false doctrines. He acknowledged his error and signed a document, dated Jan. 23, 1867, in which he also asked the forgiveness of the Saints. But soon afterwards he again preached in the same strain, and was finally excommunicated from the Church, May 12, 1870. He died at Fillmore, Millard county, Utah, Feb. 4, 1877. (For further details see "Millennial Star," Vol. 27, p. 472; "Historical Record," Vol. 6, p. 122.)
