Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Holbrook, Jean Clara

Holbrook, Jean Clara, one of the first Latter-day Saint lady missionaries who labored in Great Britain, is a daughter of Lafayette Holbrook and Emily A. Hinckley and was born Nov. 14, 1878, in Fillmore, Millard county, Utah. She was baptized in 1887, and in speaking of this event, she says: "Though only in my ninth year I was old enough to have some serious thoughts on baptism. I felt that in being baptized I was not only obeying one of God's commands, but was also promising him that I would try to be a good girl." In the spring of 1890 she moved to Provo, with her parents, where she still resides. Here she took an active part in the primary association work and later in the Y. M. M. I. A. labors. She was educated in the public schools of Fillmore and Provo, in the Millard Stake Academy, and in the Brigham Young Academy, at Provo. There came a time when doubt entered her mind, and caused her to feel unhappy, but in answer to the humble and sincere prayer of her heart she was told, "Do not worry about that which you cannot understand. Try to learn the simple lessons of daily life, and by degrees your mind will expand so that you can grasp the higher gospel truths." By following that advice she rapidly grew in faith and knowledge, and in a short time bore a firm testimony to the truth of the gospel, each day her testimony becomes stronger. In January, 1898, she was called to act as an assistant in the the primary association of the First Ward, in Provo. In 1897 she was called to be assistant secretary, and later to be secretary of the Sabbath school, filling both positions with credit and ability. She was set apart May 19, 1899, by Apostle John W. Taylor for a mission to Great Britain, leaving next day for her field of labor. On arriving in England, she was assigned to the London conference, where she labored, together with Sister Inez Knight and later with Sister Alice Sargent, assisting the Elders in their regular missionary work by distributing tracts from house to house, holding street and indoor meetings, visiting the people and explaining the gospel to them. Sister Holbrook's experience as a missionary is the same as that of the Elders generally. She was treated kindly by the people and at other times with contempt. She labored principally in Ashford, Kent and London, but she also had the privilege of visiting many of the principal cities in Great Britain and on the continent. While on this mission she also attended some of the meetings of the International Council of Women in London, in 1899, and visited, by invitation, the Windsor Palace at a tea given by Queen Victoria. She arrived home June 21, 1901, and has this to say: "I feel to thank my Heavenly Father, that He deemed me worthy to be a gospel messenger. I have learned to love the work, and know that the most perfect joy in life comes from working for the great Master."
