Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Booth, Josephine D.

Booth, Josephine D., one of the first Latter-day Saint lady missionaries who labored in Great Britain, is the daughter of John E. Booth and Maria J. Harvey, and was born in Provo, Utah, March 16, 1876. She was baptized when eight years old. Her mother died about this time, leaving four children of which she was the eldest. Josephine attended the Brigham Young Academy part of each year from the time she was eight until sixteen; the remainder of the time she assisted her father in his office as typewriter. When she was seventeen years old she went away to teach school at Glendale, a pretty little town in Kane county. This was practically her first trip away from home. On her return she accepted a position as reporter for one of the Salt Lake papers, at the B. Y. A. summer school, when Dr. Hinsdale was the lecturer. The following winter she was engaged in the Provo city schools and taught for two years. During her vacation she visited the Yellowstone National Park. When about 22 years old, she visited Zina Y. Card at Cardston, Canada. Although she had been an active worker in the Sunday school and in the Y. L. M. I. A., her spiritual nature was not developed as it should have been. It proved that her visit to Cardston was exactly what was needed. The people there were devoted to the gospel, and lived their religion as nearly as they could. At one meeting, which particularly impressed her, five people spoke in tongues, and there were at least four in the congregation who had the interpretation each time, and who rose up in power and testified that it came from Almighty God. She now began to seek the Lord more earnestly than ever before, in order to be guided aright in all the ways of life, and with each succeeding day the beauties of the true and everlasting gospel became more apparent. She remained in Cardston for seven months, after which she taught school at Lake View. She boarded with a family who were not in the Church, and for the first time in her life she felt the real need of an education in the gospel, so as to be able to defend it. She was convinced of its truth for herself, but found that one must have more than a testimony of a truth, to make others see the light. In the summer of 1898 she, with her father, visited the Exposition at Omaha, and also went to Denver, where she met the missionaries and Saints and had the privilege of attending a number of meetings. May 19, 1899, she received a call to go to Great Britain, as a missionary, and on May 26th she bade farewell to home and loved ones. Before leaving, she went to the Temple of God, and in that sacred building offered a prayer that she, as a daughter of Zion, and a representative of her people, might have courage and strength to do her duty. On her arrival in Liverpool, she was appointed to labor in Scotland. She arrived in Glasgow, Aug. 1, 1899, and began her real missionary work. She did much the same as the brethren, attending street meetings, going from house to house with tracts, and visiting both among strangers and Saints. While in Glasgow she had the privilege of speaking three times in one of the largest established churches of that city. Whenever she accepted these invitations she was introduced as a "Mormon" missionary girl from Utah. During the summer of 1900 she and her companion, Sister Eliza Chipman, labored in Edinburgh, and also visited most of the branches throughout Scotland. In Febuary, 1901, she received a call from Pres. Platte D. Lyman, to travel among the conferences in continental Europe. This was a wonderful opportunity and a great blessing to her. She met Saints in many lands, attended conferences in Holland, Germany, Switzerland, Norway and Sweden, and visited Italy, Belgium and Denmark. While in Stockholm, Sweden, she received word of her release, and that she was to sail for home June 5, 1901, on the "New England." She traveled night and day, in order to get to "bonny" Scotland, where she now bid her friends good-bye. She had made many true and devoted friends, and many sweet memories are twined about the two years she spent among the kind, hospitable and honest people of Europe.
