Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Chipman, Washburn

Chipman, Washburn, a prominent Elder in American Fork Ward, Utah county, Utah, is the son of Stephen and Amanda Chipman, and was born at Landstown, Leeds county, Canada, April 16, 1829. His parents were baptized at Landstown in 1838, and in January of that year they left Canada to join the main body of Saints. The winter and spring, until April, 1838, were spent in the State of New York, thence they journeyed to DeWitt, Carroll county, Missouri, thence to Far West, where they underwent many persecutions, and remained there until the surrender of the Saints to the mob in the fall of 1838. Then they returned to DeWitt, and remained there three years, after which they moved to Montrose, Lee county, Iowa, busying themselves for five years in farming, erecting homes for the Saints, etc. In the early part of August, 1846, they started westward, staying at Winter Quarters to recruit. In 1847 they were organized into a company on the Elkhorn, and traveled west in Abraham O. Smoot's hundred. Major Russell's fifty and Daniel Russel's ten. They arrived in Utah in September, 1847. Their first house was built on what is now known as Pioneer square. In the spring of 1848 they moved to Mill Creek, and began farming. In July, 1850, Washburn, in company with his father, Stephen Chipman, Arza and Barnabas L. Adams, "Grandfather" Eldredge, Ira and John S. Eldredge, surveyed lands on the American Fork, on which they afterwards settled. In the winter of 1850-51 Washburn was called as a pioneer to settle Iron county, and after laboring there one year he returned to American Fork, where he has since lived, following farming and sheep and cattle raising for a livelihood. He was baptized in 1855 and has always remained an active member of the Church, serving in the capacity of a Ward Teacher, an Elder, and as a Seventy (in the 44th quorum). He is now a president in the 67th quorum and a member of the Ecclesiastical Board of American Fork Ward. Elder Chipman filled a five-months' mission to Missouri and Iowa in 1872. For one term he served as a city councilman in American Fork. He acted in the military organization in crossing the plains, and after arriving in Utah he attained to the office of colonel in the Nauvoo Legion. Elder Chipman has three wives and is the father of twenty-six children.
