Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Rich, Charles Coulson

Rich, Charles Coulson, a member of the Council of Twelve Apostles from 1849 to 1883, was the son of Joseph Rich and Nancy O. Neal, and was born Aug. 21, 1809, in Campbell county, Kentucky. He was baptized by Ira M. Hinkley in Tazewell county, Ill., April 1, 1832, and ordained an Elder in Fountain county, Indiana, by Zebedee Coltrin, while en route to Kirtland to see the Prophet Joseph. He received his endowments in the Kirtland Temple, and was ordained a High Priest under the hands of Patriarch Hyrum Smith, at Kirtland. He moved, with his father, to Far West, Mo., in 1836, and was married to Sarah D. Pea, Feb. 11, 1837, near Caldwell county, Missouri, by George M. Hinkle. Brother Rich took a prominent part with the Saints in all the persecutions in Missouri. While carrying a flag of truce between the camp of the Saints and mobocrats, at Far West, he was shot at, about ten yards distant, by Samuel Bogart, a Methodist preacher and a mob officer. At the battle of Crooked river, when David W. Patton fell mortally wounded, and while bullets were flying thick and fast, he laid down his sword in the heat of the battle and administered the ordinance of laying on hands to the dying hero; after which he resumed the sword, assumed command, and the battle of Crooked river was won by the Saints. Because of the prominent part he took in the Missouri troubles, he was forced to flee for his life through the wilderness into Illinois. He was ordained a member of the High Council in Nauvoo, and was also a member of the city council. He left Nauvoo Feb. 13, 1846, and presided over Mount Pisgah branch the following winter; left Pisgah March 20, 1847, for Winter Quarters, starting for Great Salt Lake valley June 14, 1847, in charge of a company of moving Saints. He arrived in Great Salt Lake valley Oct. 3, 1847. During the absence of the Twelve, on their return to Winter Quarters, he acted in the valley as counselor to Father John Smith, who was left to preside over the colony. Elder Rich was ordained a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles by Brigham Young, Feb. 12, 1849, and started on a mission to California on the 9th of the following October, returning home Nov. 4, 1850. He again started for California, March 6, 1851, with a portion of his family and a company of Saints by the southern route, to purchase a place for the location of the Saints that might be gathered from the islands of the Pacific. With Elder Amasa M. Lyman, in September, 1851, he purchased the rancho of San Bernardino, containing about one hundred thousand acres of land, for the sum of $77,500, to which place the company removed and began the foundation and settlement of what is now one of the richest and finest countries in southern California. When the Buchanan war broke out, the rancho of San Bernardino was sold, and the Saints returned to Utah. Brother Rich leaving there April 16, 1857, arrived in Salt Lake City in June of the same year. He accompanied Gen. Daniel H. Wells to Echo canyon and Fort Bridger during the Buchanan war, rendering valuable counsel and aid. In 1860 he was called on a mission to England, and for a time was associated with Elder Amasa M. Lyman in the presidency of the European Mission. He returned home in 1862. In the autumn of 1863 he explored Bear Lake valley and moved his family there the following spring. He was a natural pioneer and was the leader of the original settlers of that valley, where he resided until his death, continuing to be the main director in the establishment of towns and settlements in that region. Rich county, the extreme northern county of Utah, was named in honor of him. During the early years of the Bear Lake settlements, the only means by which the residents could get their mails from, or have any communication with the valleys farther south, when the snow was deep in the mountains, was by crossing on snow-shoes. When others would shrink from the dangerous undertaking of traversing the mountains at such seasons, when terrific storms prevailed, Brother Rich would set out. His wonderful strength and great powers of endurance, of which he never seemed to know the limit, and his almost intuitive knowledge of the country, always enabled him to go through, though in doing so he sometimes bore fatigue enough to kill an ordinary man. He made many of these hazardous journeys over the mountains; indeed for a number of years that was his usual mode of traveling when going to Salt Lake City to attend the session of the legislature, or returning from the same. In the early days of the Church Elder Rich figured conspicuously as a military man and was distinguished for his coolness and bravery. He held the office of major-general in the Nauvoo Legion, and was by many familiarly called General Rich up to the day of his death. When an attempt was made to kidnap the Prophet Joseph Smith in 1843 and take him to Missouri, Brother Rich, at the head of twenty-five men, started out from Nauvoo to render him assistance, and returned after having traveled about five hundred miles on horseback in seven days. In the political affairs of Utah he served several terms as a member of the council and house in the Territorial legislature. Throughout his lifetime he was less noted for his brilliant talents than for his real goodness. He was a man of generous impulses, and seemed to live for the happiness of others rather than his own. Cheerful, honest, industrious, benevolent, extending substantial sympathy to those in need, and giving fatherly counsel to and setting a worthy example before all around him, he moved on through life, honored and beloved by all who knew him. He was stricken with paralysis Oct. 24, 1880, and died at his home in Paris, Bear Lake county, Idaho, Nov. 17, 1883. During all these three years of affliction he was never heard to complain or in any manner evince anything but a spirit of the utmost contentment and resignation. (See also "Southern Star," Vol. 2, p. 385.)
