Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Walker, Henson

Walker, Henson, Bishop of Pleasant Grove Ward, Utah County, from 1853 to 1863, is the son of Henson Walker and Matilda Arnell, and was born March 13, 1820, in Manchester, Ontario county, N.Y. When he was fifteen years old, the family moved to Michigan, and Henson spent much of his time wandering through the dense forests in search of game, with which he supplied his father's household. During the succeeding years he heard the gospel in its purity and simplicity, and was much impressed by it, and in April, 1840, he was baptized by Elder Mephibosheth Serrine. In his backwood's home his advantages for obtaining an education did not increase. He worked faithfully on the farm until the summer of 1841, when he married Martha Bouk. Leaving his home at Howell, he moved to Salem. At the close of the year 1841 he was ordained a Teacher and here began the ecclesiastical duties of a life of devotion to the work of God. In the year that followed, he, with his father-in-law, traveled from New York to Michigan and thence to Illinois by team. While here they visited the city of Nauvoo, where they first met the Prophet Joseph. About this time he was ordained to the office of a Seventy by Joseph Young. In the early spring of 1843 the happiness of their sunny Salem home was increased by the arrival of their first child, a boy. But when the warm summer days came, his wife sickened and died, leaving her bereaved husband to care for the babe, then only five months old. Henson then moved to the home of his father-in-law, where the child was tenderly cared for. While living with the Bouk family, he became well acquainted with the Prophet Joseph Smith, and stood guard for him at different times, when his life was in danger. The trials and sufferings of the Prophet were then at their height. When the Prophet was kidnapped, near Dixon, Ill., by Joseph H. Reynolds and Harmon T. Wilson, in June, 1843, Henson was called with others to rescue him. They rode night and day until they overtook him. On their return they rode along by the carriage that contained the Prophet and the officers. One of the officers put his head out of the carriage and, seeing more than a hundred people riding along, he said: "We would never have come after the Prophet, if we had known he had so many friends." Henson was a member of the Nauvoo Legion and enjoyed their drill very much, but more than all else in the world he enjoyed standing in the square listening to the inspired commanding' lanes of that humble young Prophet, Joseph Smith. He was always happy when in company with him and was more than willing to render him all possible aid. He was with the Legion at the old frame house, near the Mansion, June 18. 1544, when the Prophet unsheathed his sword for the last time. When Joseph left Nauvoo for Carthage, Henson, was very anxious to see an armed escort go with him, because he was pledged to support him. In a dream he was told that Joseph and Hyrum were all right, that they were beyond the reach of the mob. And when the next news came, they were truly beyond the reach of all mobs. Henson was present at the time that Sidney Rigdon set forth his claims to the presidency. He also witnessed the mantle of Joseph resting upon Brigham Young and was fully convinced that he was the future Prophet of God. He now commenced work on the Nauvoo Temple, remaining at work until it was completed for endowments and baptisms for the dead. April 10, 1846, he was married to Elizabeth Foutz, by Apostle Orson Hyde, in the Nauvoo Temple. A few days after the celebration of this happy event, his little child, now three years old, was accidentally drowned. In May, 1846, he started west with Elder Cutler's company and crossed the Missouri river. He returned to assist suppressing the mob that threatened to massacre the rest of the inhabitants who were left in the city. The company then moved on to Winter Quarters. When the call came for the Mormon Battalion, though filled with the bitter experiences through which he had so lately passed, he volunteered to defend the flag. He was, however, released from that service, but in the spring of 1847, though just recovering from a severe attack of fever, he was called by the presidency to be one of that immortal 143 pioneers who took up their weary march across the trackless desert to seek a new home for the Saints in the west. Putting his trust in God he left his bride of one year almost at death's door, knowing not when he would see her again. The water was high and some difficulty was experienced in crossing the rivers. But at last, after many hardships, the tedious journey came to an end on July 23, 1847, when he, in company with others of the pioneer party, wended their way into Great Salt Lake valley. The following day Pres. Brigham Young and Wilford Woodruff, with the remainder of the company, arrived. Exploring parties were now sent out west, north, and south. They soon returned, convinced that the present site of Salt Lake City was the place for the Saints to locate. He now returned to Sweetwater on the trail to meet his folks. When he arrived at the camp he found his wife's health much improved and they resumed their journey. When they arrived in the valley, Father Bouk divided the flour they had brought, and the share that fell to Henson and his wife to last them until harvest came again equalled nearly a hundred pounds. They began at once to ration themselves. In a short time Henson was called to go to California. He began at once to prepare for the journey by selling the few things he had gathered around him. When he was about ready to go the presidency released him from this labor, giving him other work. When planting time came, he took seed from his scanty allowance, and, with a number of others, went up to where Fort Douglas now stands and began farming. They planted various kinds of seed, and when everything was looking well, the crickets came. Many people thought they would be driven to California through starvation. Men, women and children, old and young, all turned out to fight the crickets; they dug deep ditches around their farms and tried to drive them in and drown them, but all efforts were vain. One Sunday Jedediah M. Grant rose to speak to the people. In his remarks he said: "I find that many of the people are becoming discouraged; but this present calamity will pass off; we will have a bounteous harvest and a big feast." On returning from the services, Brother Walker said to his family. "We will not go out to fight the crickets tomorrow. I think they will all be dead." But on the evening of the following day they went to see if anything had really happened, but alas! the crickets seemed even thicker than before. And the old adage, "It is always darkest just before dawn." was again realized, for as they stood watching their crops being devoured, up came the gulls-those blessed gulls, thousands of them. They lighted and began at once the work before them. They ate, drank, vomited, and began again. The dead crickets laid in piles along the bank of the ditch. Brother Walker says: "I wept for joy, as I saw how miraculously we had been saved from starvation; and as I saw how truly the words of a servant of God were being fulfilled." In 1849 the Indian war broke out in Provo and Brother Walker prepared to take his place on the defense. One day, while they were having a little skirmish, he got into close combat with an Indian. The two stood behind the trees, only moving aside long enough to fire at each other. They continued the shooting until each had fired sixteen shots at the other. As the sixteenth shot was fired, the Indian raised a little and then disappeared. In the spring of 1850, Bro. Walker went to the Platte river, in company with some others, to start a ferry. He worked hard, and at the close of the year was able, to pay $75 in tithing. After returning from this expedition he started out to get a home. He settled at what is now known as Pleasant Grove, where he has resided ever since. He took up a farm and the following spring moved his family to the new settlement. That summer he was called to go with Pres. Brigham Young to St. George, which he did cheerfully. In July, 1852, as Pres. Young and others of the authorities were traveling through Utah county, they dined and rested at his home. They resumed their journey, but in three days returned and appointed him presiding Elder of the Pleasant Grove branch. At the close of 1853 he was ordained a High Priest by Pres. Young and called to serve as Bishop of Pleasant Grove. In 1855, after the incorporation of the city of Pleasant Grove, he was elected mayor. These positions he held faithfully until 1863, when he was called to carry the gospel to the nations of the earth. He labored in Great Britain, was president of the Scotch mission and returned in 1865. About this time he served for several years as selectman. He was major of the Nauvoo Legion and a member as long as it lasted. He has filled two missions since that time to the Northern States. During the raid he visited his relatives and friends in Michigan, the home of his boyhood. In August, 1889, he was ordained president of the High Priests' quorum by Pres. Abraham O. Smoot, which position he holds at the present time in the Alpine Stake of Zion. He is the father of twenty children, eleven of whom are living. He has 95 grandchildren and 45 great grandchildren. Elder Walker's life has been one of self-sacrifice and devotion to the cause for which he has spent his life's strength.
