Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Brown, John

Brown, John, Bishop of Pleasant Grove Ward, Utah county, Utah, from 1863 to 1891, was the son of John Brown and Martha Chipman, and was born Oct. 23, 1820, in Sumner county, Tenn. He was baptized into the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints by Elder George P. Dykes, in July, 1841 in Perry county. Ill., and gathered to Nauvoo the following October. Feb. 9, 1842, he was ordained an Elder by Hyrum Smith and soon afterwards called to go on a mission to the Southern States. He left Nauvoo May 29, 1843, labored in Tennessee, Alabama and Mississippi, baptized a large number of persons and organized several branches of the Church. May 21, 1844, he married Miss Elizabeth Crosby, in Monroe county Miss., and on the 12th of November, 1844, was ordained a member of the eighth quorum of Seventy. He returned to Nauvoo March 25, 1845, and labored on the Temple, in which he received his endowments. Leaving Nauvoo late in January, 1846, he returned to Mississippi and assisted in fitting out a company of fourteen families, with whom he started for the Rocky mountains, on the 8th of April following with teams. They traveled through Missouri to Independence, Jackson county, where three other families from southern Illinois joined the company, which, taking the Oregon trail to the Platte river, and up that stream, arrived at Fort Laramie in July, where they expected to have met with the Saints from Nauvoo, but finding nothing but a few mountaineers and straggling natives, the company turned south and located at Pueblo, on the Arkansas river, at the foot of the Rocky mountains, to winter. Elder Brown, with a company of seven men, returned from the Santa Fe route to Independence, Mo., passing through the battlefield of the Commanches and Pawnees, and continued back to Mississippi, where he arrived in October. Jan. 10, 1847, he started for Council Bluffs with teams, one thousand miles distant, and arrived there just in time to join the Pioneers. He was chosen captain of the 13th ten and was one of the chief hunters of the company on the journey. Being with Orson Pratt in the advance company, he was one of the first to look into Great Salt Lake valley from the Big mountain. Having returned with the pioneers to Winter Quarters in the fall, he again paid a visit to Mississippi, but came to Utah the next year (1848) with his family and settled on Cottonwood. In the fall of 1819 he went on an exploring expedition to the south with about fifty other men, under the presidency of Apostle Parley P. Pratt. This famous company explored the Sevier river and the country as far south as the Rio Virgen and Santa Clara rivers. From this adventurous trip Elder Brown returned in February, 1850. When the Utah militia was organized, he was chosen captain of the first company Of mounted life guards, and was in the skirmish with the Indians on Battle creek, Utah county, in 1848. In organizing the Nauvoo legion he was placed on the lieutenant-general's staff with the rank of colonel. When the organization of the company for the emigration of the poor took place, he was chosen one of its directors and served in that capacity for several years. In 1851 he went as traveling agent for the company to Pottawattamie, Iowa, and conducted a large company of emigrants across the plains, arriving in Great Salt Lake City, September 28, 1851. He was one of the representatives of Great Salt Lake county in the lower house of the first legislature of Utah Territory, and subsequently represented Utah county in the same capacity three terms. In 1852 he was sent to New Orleans to superintend the emigration at that point the following spring, and remained in that city during the winter, preaching the gospel. During March, April and May, 1853, eight vessels arrived from Liverpool with about two thousand five hundred emigrants, bound for Utah. They passed up the Mississippi river in steamboats to Keokuk, Iowa. Bro. Brown conducted the rear company across the plains, arriving in Salt Lake City October 17th. In 1860 he was sent on a two years' mission to Great Britain, where he labored most of the time in the London, Kent and Essex conferences, and returned home in 1862. On Feb. 2, 1863, he was ordained a Bishop by Pres. Brigham Young and sent to Pleasant Grove, Utah county, to preside. Previous to this he had resided a number of years in Lehi. In 1867 he was sent on a two years' mission to the United States, during which he presided over the missionary work in the southern, middle and western States. He also assisted in the emigration at Omaha in 1868 and returned to Utah in May, 1869. Among the numerous civil offices of trust to which he has been elected at various times may be mentioned that for twenty years he acted as mayor of Pleasant Grove city, being re-elected biennially until disqualified by the Edmunds law. Having acted as Bishop of Pleasant Grove Ward for twenty-nine years, he was honorably released from this position December 6, 1891, and ordained a Patriarch. He died at his home in Pleasant Grove Nov. 4, 1897, highly respected and beloved by the Saints.
