Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Schaerrer, John Jacob

Schaerrer, John Jacob, a High Councilor in the Nebo Stake of Zion, is the son of Henry Schaerrer and Anna Gots, and was born Dec. 28, 1845, in a village near the city of Winterthur, Switzerland. At the age of eleven years, while attending the public school, he first heard of the restored gospel. He at once became interested in the same and asked his parents to investigate. The result was that his mother soon became a convert to "Mormonism." John and his father were baptized later, and in 1860 the family emigrated to Zion, arriving in Great Salt Lake valley in the fall of that year. After a brief stay in Salt Lake City, the family moved north and located near Ogden. In October, 1861, they were called, together with other families, to go to southern Utah and assist in the upbuilding of that country. After a trip full of hardships they arrived in the St. George camp about Christmas. John went east to the Missouri river as a teamster after emigrants in the summer of 1864. In May, 1877, he was called to go on a mission to Switzerland and Germany, where he performed successful missionary work and returned home with a company of emigrants in June, 1879. On his return he was appointed to labor as a home missionary in the Utah Stake of Zion and was also called to act as presiding Priest in Payson Ward. June 27, 1891, he left home on another mission to Europe, having been called to preside over the Swiss and German mission. During the time he labored in that capacity, the work of the Lord made good progress in those lands. On account of the cholera which raged in northwestern Germany in 1893, all emigration was temporarily forbidden. In the spring of that year Elder Schaerrer was arrested on the charge of having violated the emigration law, but after a thorough examination he was discharged for lack of evidence. Being released he left Bern, Switzerland, Feb. 21, 1894, for Utah. After his return home he was called again to labor as a home missionary in the Utah Stake. He also became the senior president of the 46th quorum of Seventy, which position he held till the Nebo Stake was organized in 1901, when he was ordained a High Priest and set apart as a High Councilor in that Stake.
