Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Grover, Joel

Grover, Joel, second president of the Juab Stake of Zion, was the son of Thomas and Hannah T. Grover, and was born March 11, 1849, at Farmington, Davis county, Utah, being the first white male child born in Davis county. He was baptized into the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints when eight years of age. At the April conference, 1867, he was called by Pres. Heber C. Kimball to go on a mission to Europe. He started on this mission May 12, 1867, crossing the plains most of the way by team, and arrived in Liverpool, England, July 26th. He labored faithfully in the Kent and Glasgow conferences two years, preaching the gospel, and after having completed his mission, to the satisfaction of the presidency, he was released and departed from Liverpool in the steamship "Colorado," homeward bound, July 28, 1869. He arrived at his home in Farmington August 20, 1869. Dec. 5, 1869, he married Mary Asenath, daughter of Dr. Willard Richards, upon which occasion Pres. Brigham Young predicted that Brother Grover would yet occupy prominent positions of usefulness in the Kingdom of God. He was ordained a High Priest and called to preside over the Juab Stake of Zion Nov. 10, 1871. Subsequently, there being changes in the presidency, he acted as first counselor therein, and was a leading figure in the management of all the important matters pertaining to the welfare and prosperity of the Stake. In 1873 he was elected a representative to the legislative assembly of the Territory of Utah, and was repeatedly elected representative and councilor; he was well recognized and admired as a wise and able representative of the people. In 1875 he was elected to the office of selectman, and in 1878 to that of probate judge for Juab county; he held the latter office at the time of his demise. He was an extensive stockholder in the Nephi Mercantile Institution and in the Nephi Mill and Manufacturing Institution, and held the offices of president and superintendent of the store and secretary and superintendent of the mill. He was prominently identified with all the public institutions of the Stake and was a very liberal subscriber to every legitimate enterprise and industry organized since his arrival in Nephi. When the First National Bank of Nephi was about to be organized, he was a subscriber for a considerable amount, and at the preliminary meeting was chosen as one of its directors. As a financier he was of the first order, and his judgment and executive ability was quick and firm. Pres. Grover died in Nephi May 13, 1886. At the time of his demise the "Deseret News" said of him editorially: "He was a close, affectionate and lasting friend, and while being a faithful Latter-day Saint and having the love and confidence of the authorities and people of the Church, he was broad, liberal and charitable to such an extent as to gain the admiration end confidence of every class."
