Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Paxman, William

Paxman, William, fourth president of the Juab Stake of Zion, was the son of James Paxman and Esther Reynolds, and was born Oct. 25, 1855, at Hempstead, Essex, England. At an early age he went to London and entered into the service of a tinsmith, working his way up from errand boy to first hand in the large establishment in which he worked. While in London he made the acquaintance of Father Kemp, so well known to the early London Saints, by whom he was converted to the faith, and was baptized June 15, 1852, by Edward C. Brand. He married Ann Rushen Keyes in 1855, who embarked with him on the ship "Horizon" for America in 1856, and his first son, William Reed Horizon Paxman, was born on the good ship off the banks of Newfoundland on June 12th of that year, and was named after Captain Reed and the ship he commanded. On reaching Boston Bro. Paxman concluded to remain there and work for the necessary means to prosecute his journey to Utah. Here he accepted a position as salesman in a large stove warehouse; and in 1861 came on to Utah, arriving in Salt Lake City Sept. 13, 1861. He moved to American Fork, Utah county, in 1862, where he followed his trade of tinsmith for some time. At American Fork the innate powers and executive skill in doing good unto others, which exemplified his whole life, commenced to shine forth with great lustre, and was acknowledged by the people residing there in electing him to official positions in their city government. He was also superintendent of the American Fork Co-operative Mercantile Institution. But where his great love in blessing humanity shone the brightest at this time of his life was in the organization of the Sunday school of American Fork; in this his zeal and love shone forth in such power that in a short time he won to his side a corps of teachers, who, catching the fire of his zeal and love for his work, made the Sunday school cause of American Fork for many years the center of strength of that place, and from which emanated the best thought and action for the promotion of the union and happiness of that Ward. The love and respect in which he was held by his co-laborers in this great cause found voice in a beautiful testimonial presented to him by the teachers and officers of the school, on his departure to fill a mission to England in 1875. During his mission in his native land he presided over the London conference and returned from there in 1877, bearing with him the love of all who came under the influence of his kind ministry, as witnessed by the testimonials of the different organizations of the Priesthood of London then existing, that subsequently adorned the walls of his home at Nephi. After his return from England he filled the position of Bishop Edward Hunter's agent for Utah Stake, for which purpose he was ordained a Bishop and served in this position for several years. Next we find him installed as president of Juab Stake of Zion, Jan. 28, 1883, and in March, 1886, he was on his way to New Zealand to fill a mission in that far distant land, where he presided for the term of three and one-half years. The Book of Mormon was translated into the Maori language under his presidency and supervision. In this mission again shone forth the virtues and love of this truly good man, which endeared him to the hearts of the brethren and fellow servants in the mission field. The love and admiration in which he was then held is best told in the language of Brother Amasa Aldrich, a co-laborer with him there: "Humble and kind to a fault, his patience knew no bounds. The eternal sunshine of life radiated from his very person and the storms of adversity were dispelled by his calm and peaceful demeanor. He braved the perils of sea and land; he traveled through sunshine and storm, to bring the heart of man to more fully know his Maker. In all the varied vicissitudes of life in that land he was ever the same. He had a kind word and a hearty God-bless-you for every man, woman and child. No hardship was too difficult for him to surmount, and no peril too severe to endure. In the midst of affliction he never murmured or complained. In him the rich and the poor had a true and devoted friend, one whose friendship was as deep as the ocean and as enduring as the everlasting hills." Returning from New Zealand in September, 1889, he again resumed his duties as president of the Juab Stake and its Sabbath schools. He attended the St. Louis Irrigation congress, as a delegate from Utah, and subsequently represented Utah in all the Irrigation conventions held up to the time of his death, also served as delegate to the Trans-Mississippi Commercial congress of 1895. He died Oct. 12, 1897, at American Fork, Utah county, from the effects of injuries received while repairing the roof of his house. A numerous family survived him, consisting of three wives, by whom he had twenty-two children, eighteen of whom were living at his demise, and also forty-two grandchildren (thirty-three living). His funeral services were attended by Presidents Wilford Woodruff, George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith and several of the Twelve Apostles, together with many other prominent men of the Church. In the course of his remarks at the funeral services, Pres. Cannon said: "The name of Wm. Paxman was seriously considered in connection with the filling of one of the vacancies which had recently existed in the quorum of the Apostles. Brother Paxman was a man not illustrious for his mighty achievements, as the world generally views the lives of men, but he was enshrined in the hearts of all who knew him, for the noble, pure and virtuous life which he has led." Honored and proud are those who claim the closest relationship with this one of God's noble sons.-Albert Jones.
