Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Paxman, James Walter

Paxman, James Walter, fifth president of the Juab Stake of Zion, is the son of William Paxman and Ann Rushen Keyes, and was born in Salt Lake City, Oct. 12, 1861, two months after his parents arrived in Utah, they having crossed the plains in Captain Lot Smith's train of ox-teams. The family moved to American Fork, Utah county, in 1862, where the subject of this sketch attended the public school, and worked around the home. At this period he nearly lost his life by drowning in American Fork creek, while the waters of the creek were high in the spring of the year. He fell from the slight bridge which spanned the creek; his father, hearing the cries of the boy's elder brother, rushed into the stream to save his son, but the force of the waters carried him off his feet, and had it not been for the superior strength of Brother Joseph Wilds, of American Fork, by whom he was rescued, the history of Brother Paxman would have ended there. He was taken home unconscious, and knew nothing until he found himself in bed. A few days sufficed for his recovery. When about fourteen years of age he was apprenticed to William Webb, shoemaker of American Fork, where he served five years, and acquired a thorough knowledge and artistic skill in the building of the shoe. He made all the shoes of the numerous Paxman family, and his father exhibited his son's handiwork with pride. William entered the B. Y. Academy, at Provo, in 1880, and studied there for eighteen months, under the watchful care of the late Prof. Karl G. Maeser. He moved to Nephi in May, 1883, with his parents, his father having been called to the presidency of the Juab Stake of Zion. In the spring of 1884 he received a call for missionary service in Great Britain, and labored in the London conference for two years. As a result of his earnest labors in those days of gleaning after the harvest of so many souls, he succeeded in baptizing twenty-three persons, two of them being his own relatives. Returning home in 1886 he was chosen and sustained as counselor to his father in the presidency ýÿÿÿ
