Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

PPTeasdale, GeorgeTeasdale, George

PPTeasdale, GeorgeTeasdale, George, one of the Twelve Apostles since 1882, is the son of William Russell Teasdale and Harriet Henrietta Tidey, and was born Dec. 8, 1831, in London, England. Being naturally of a studious and thoughtful disposition, he obtained the best education that could be had at the public schools and the London University After leaving school, he entered the office of an architect and surveyor. But did not remain in this employment long, owing to the dishonesty of the employer. Later he learned the upholstering business. Although his mother was a member of the church of England, he was not at all impressed by the doctrines which were advanced and was not confirmed into the church. Still, he received many impressions on religious subjects from his mother, and from his childhood up he was a student of the Scriptures. In the year 1851, he learned for the first time something of the principles of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. This information came to him through a tract issued by the Tract Society of the church of England, entitled "Mormonism." Shortly after this, a man who belonged to the Church came to work at the establishment where Brother Teasdale was employed. Although this brother was a plain, unassuming man, he bore a powerful testimony, and there was no doubt in his mind as to the truthfulness of this work. His fellow-workmen ridiculed him and argued with him, but he was never overcome. So impressive was this humble man's testimony that at least one of his associates was led to investigate the principles of the gospel as he explained them. Brother Teasdale became interested in this unpopular religion, and, as is always the case, he met with opposition from his friends and acquaintances. They endeavored to show him the folly of the step which they feared he was about to take, and told him that all his bright prospects for life would be ruined if he persisted in such a course. But when a mind such as that possessed by George Teasdale becomes convinced that a thing is right, it requires more than the opposition of friends to turn it from its purpose. Therefore, without allowing, their ridicule to alter his determination, he rendered obedience to what he knew was a law of God. After his baptism, Aug. 8, 1852, he, like nearly all young converts, felt that many would believe his testimony. The gospel was so plain to him, and as he had nothing to gain by testifying to something that was not true, he felt that all who heard him must be convinced. However, he learned by experience, during his very early days in the Church, that it is a difficult matter to convert this generation to the truth. He was ordained a Priest and later an Elder, and spent much of his time in preaching and giving lectures on religious subjects. During this time he learned how necessary it is to have the Spirit of the Lord in speaking on the principles of the gospel. He had very little time for study, and, he tells us, he was not naturally a speaker, his first efforts in this direction being total failures; but later, when he was called to go out to speak, he dedicated his labors to the Lord and asked His assistance, and of course was successful. While laboring in this way Elder Teasdale made the acquaintance of Miss Emily Emma Brown, and in the year 1853 they were married. From this time until her death in 1874, this good lady was a great help to her husband, In the course of his ministry in England they had many trials to pass through-trials of poverty, of being ridiculed by former friends-but through it all, Sister Teasdale was ever the true, consistent Latter-day Saint, helping her husband by her counsel and by the fortitude which she exhibited during all the trials through which they passed. Later in life Elder Teasdale heard and, being converted to the principle, obeyed the law of plural marriage, taking good, faithful women as his wives. His zeal in spreading the truth caused his selection as president of the Somerstown branch of the London conference. In addition to this he was clerk of the conference, auditor of the book agency accounts, and President of the tract-distributing association. With all these duties his time was, of course, completely taken up, especially in view of the fact that his labor in these callings was entirely gratuitous, and he was compelled to devote a portion of his time to earning a livelihood; but in the year 1857, he was called upon to give his whole time to the work of the ministry. Obedience to this call required the giving up of an excellent position, and the breaking up of a pleasant, comfortable home. Elder Teasdale had determined to devote his life to the work of God, and here was an opportunity for him to show how firm this determination was. He decided to accept the call, and in this course he was encouraged by his wife. He sold his possessions, made his wife as comfortable as possible and entered upon his new duties. The peace and joy which always accompany the performance of religious duties were felt by him, and he greatly enjoyed his labors, presiding over the Cambridge conference. Though often footsore and weary from his long walks, the Spirit of the Lord brought happiness to his heart. In 1858, he presided over three conferences, the Wiltshire, Landsend and South conferences; in 1859, he was given charge of the Scottish mission, which included the Edinburgh, Glasgow and Dundee conferences. In 1861 he was released to come to Zion. Here another trial awaited him. Two of his children had died and two were still spared. From his long missionary labor, his means were all exhausted, and he and his family were compelled to make the ocean voyage in the steerage of an emigrant ship, the "Underwriter." On his arrival in Florence, Nebraska, he was called to assist Elder Jacob Gates in keeping the accounts, etc., of the emigration, owing to which he did not leave there until the last company of the season arrived, then he crossed the plains in Captain Sextus E. Johnson's company, which arrived in Great Salt Lake valley Sept. 27, 1861. Here he found a new experience, and for the first six months taught school in the Twentieth Ward, Salt Lake City. He also became associated with the Tabernacle choir, under the leadership of Brother James Smithies. In 1862 he was engaged to take charge of Pres. Brigham Young's merchandise store, by which he had the privilege of becoming familiar with that excellent man and his family. In the fall of 1867 he took charge of the General Tithing Store, and in 1868 was appointed on a mission to England. He crossed the plains with mule teams, and on his arrival in New York stayed to assist in that season's emigration, at the close of which he crossed the ocean in the steamship "City of Antwerp," with Elder Albert Carrington, who was on his first mission to England, and Jesse N. Smith, who was appointed to the charge of the Scandinavian Mission. On his arrival in Liverpool, Sept. 9, 1868, he was appointed to labor in the "Millennial Star" office. The next year, being called to assist Elder William C. Staines In the emigration business at New York, he crossed the ocean in the steamship "Colorado," and remained there until the close of that season's emigration, returning home in the fall of 1869. Zion's Cooperative Mercantile Institution was then being started, and he obtained employment in that institution, from one responsibility to an other, until he had charge of the produce department. In 1875 he was appointed on a mission to the Southern States, and labored in Tennessee, North Carolina and Virginia. On being released in the fall of 1876, he returned home by way of Philadelphia, visited the Centennial Exhibition and the Niagara Falls. On reaching Salt Lake City, after resting awhile, he was again employed in Zion's Co-operative Institution. Being called to the charge of the Juab Stake of Zion, he was ordained a High Priest and set apart for this position under the hands of Pres. Brigham Young. This caused him to resign an excellent position in Z. C. M. I., but he soon found suitable ways and means by which he could comfortably sustain his family. While residing in Nephi he was engaged in the tithing office, took contracts for the construction of a portion of the Utah Southern Railroad, acted as president of the Nephi Co-operative Store, and was also connected with other enterprises. He also served in two sessions of the Utah legislature, namely those of 1880 and 1882. In October, 1882, he was called by revelation to the Apostleship and was ordained to that high and holy position Oct. 13, 1882, by Pres. John Taylor. In 1883 he took a six months' mission to the Indian Territory, returning to Salt Lake City in October, 1883. In 1884 his labors were chiefly among the Saints from Snake river, Idaho, north, to St. George, Washington county, Utah, south. He also visited the Temples of Logan and St. George, attending to work in ordinances for the dead, etc. In January, 1885, he left home on a visit to the Saints in the southern country, in Nevada and Arizona. From there he went to Old Mexico, and assisted in forming a colony in that land. Thence he was called on a mission to Europe, to assist Pres. Daniel H. Wells, and afterwards to succeed him in the presidency of the European Mission. He arrived in Liverpool Nov. 30, 1886, and after traveling quite extensively in the various conferences of Great Britain, he entered upon the responsible duties of his office as president of the mission in February, 1887. He acted in that capacity till 1890, when he was released to return home. While on that mission he traveled through France, Switzerland, Germany, Denmark, Sweden, Norway and the British Isles. Since his ordination to the Apostleship, Elder Teasdale's life has been almost entirely devoted to his calling in the Church. If not absent from home on foreign missions, he has spent his time in traveling among the Stakes of Zion, preaching to the people and exhorting them to live lives of Latter-day Saints. In all his labors at home or abroad, he has always taken advantage of every opportunity to lift his voice against sin and iniquity, and to declare the glad message of great joy which is so dear to him. Throughout all his ministry he has appeared to have the same spirit which was exhibited by Paul of old when he said, "Woe is unto me, if I preach not the gospel." Notwithstanding the years Brother Teasdale has spent in the missionary field and in laboring among the Saints at home, he has felt at times that he was not reaching enough ears, and this feeling prompted him to write the tracts. "Glad Tidings of Great Joy," and "The Restoration of the Everlasting Gospel," thousands of which have been distributed by our missionaries in the world. "Elder Teasdale," writes Elder Hugh J. Cannon, "has always been greatly interested in the Sunday school work. While president of the Juab Stake, he also acted as Stake Superintendent of Sabbath Schools, and for some time he was teacher of the primary class in the vestry of the Nephi Tabernacle. For several years past he has been a member of the Deseret Sunday School Union Board. In his talks to the children he endeavors to impress upon their minds the value of a well-spent life and the necessity of living near to the Lord, and in this connection reminds them of the importance of keeping the Word of Wisdom. * * * One of the most striking characteristics of Apostle Teasdale is that he is always the same. Wherever you meet him he has the same genial, quiet way which makes friends of all with whom he comes in contact. And one of the first impressions made on new acquaintances is that he is a man of God. His life has been so taken up with his spiritual duties that he takes more delight in conversing on this subject than on any other. "Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh," is well illustrated in the case of Apostle Teasdale. His heart is full of the gospel, and of a love for his fellowmen, and knowing so well how the principles of truth have benefited him, and that mankind can not do without them and make a success of this life, he takes delight in bringing these principles to their attention. On every question which comes before him for consideration, his first desire is to find out what the will of the Lord is on the subject, and few men are more tenacious than he in doing what he understands the will of the Lord to be. Not only does Apostle Teasdale preach the gospel, but he endeavors by his daily life to show that he believes what he teaches. If an honest, upright life will benefit others, it will also benefit him. His life is spent, therefore, in striving, by precept and example, to lift mankind through the saving principles of truth, to a higher plane." (See also "Juvenile Instructor," Vol. 35, p. 353.)
