Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Lund, Anthon H.PPLund, Anthon Henrik

Lund, Anthon H.PPLund, Anthon Henrik, a member of the Council of Twelve Apostles since 1889, was born May 15, 1844, in Aalborg, Denmark. When he was three years and a half old his mother was taken seriously sick. The visit of the doctor, the subdued talking, and the anxiety he saw on the faces around him impressed him deeply. He even remembers what a dismal, rainy day it was. Next he remembers seeing his beloved mother lying in her coffin. These two occasions are indelibly stamped on his memory. In the fall of 1847 his father was drafted into the Danish army and sent to Schleswig, where an insurrection was threatening. In 1848 Schleswig and Holstein revolted and with the aid of Prussia and Germany waged a sanguinary war for three years. During this struggle, Denmark needed all her patriotic sons, and his father served with distinction through the whole war, and did not return until the boy was seven years old. It was a beautiful day when the victorious army returned; and standing near a triumphal arch, having hold of his grandmother's hand, the boy watched the soldiers marching under it. At last his grandmother pointed out the smiling face of his father, marching with his musket on his shoulder. A few hours later he was folded in his father's arms. This was a happy day for the boy. Shortly after his father moved away about thirty-five miles, and he was left with his grandmother, who proved a tender, loving mother to him, and he became very much attached to her: and when his father a couple of years later wanted to take the boy with him home, he pleaded to be left with his grandmother. She bestowed upon him a mother's love and devotion. She was the soul of honor, and though her own children thought her discipline rather strict, Brother Lurid only remembers how tenderly she cared for him. At the early age of four years Anthon Lund was sent to a private school, where he mastered the first elements of reading, writing, arithmetic, etc.,and when seven years old he entered the public school of the city of Aalborg. His industry as a student and his aptitude for learning are shown in the fact that he rapidly advanced from one grade to another, passing entirely over the second grade. And while preparing himself for graduation in the course of study given in the school, he took, besides, private lessons in English, and also studied German and French. At the age of eleven years he held the first place in the school. Already at this early age Brother Lund had an irresistible desire to study the word of God. In his grandmother's house was a Bible belonging to his uncle, which the latter had forbidden him to touch for fear he should soil or otherwise deface the precious volume. But his grandmother often asked him to read some of its chapters to her. This filled him with an ardent desire to read the whole book, and encouraged in this by his grandmother he commenced at the beginning and made himself familiar with the main events narrated in that sacred volume. One day in Lent, when the streets were filled with people looking at the Lent procession, he thought: What a delightful day I can have reading the Bible! He imagined that his uncle would be among the sight-seeing multitude. He had comfortably settled himself in his favorite place with the Bible open, reading the fascinating history of Israel under the kings, when he heard a step on the stairs; the door opened, and there stood his uncle before him. He asked his uncle to excuse his having taken the Bible without permission. His uncle answered: "I am delighted, my boy, to find you thus employed on a day like this. Read it as much as you like." As he was only in his eighth year, his uncle was surprised to find how much he had read, and how well he had grasped the meaning. Brother Lurid says those early readings have been a great help to him, as they fastened the events of Bible narrative securely upon his mind. Not having brothers or sisters he was left to himself much of the time, and books became his company. He read all the books he could get and all his pocket money was spent at the book stores. He was then, as later, fond of visiting such places. When, in the year 1850, Elder Erastus Snow arrived in Denmark, to open up the mission in the Scandinavian countries, one among the early converts was the uncle of Anthon Lund, Jens Andersen, at present a respected resident of Cedar City, Utah His grandmother, too, accepted the gospel just before his uncle emigrated, and was baptized in 1853, when Anthon was nine years old. In this way he came in constant contact with "Mormonism." In his grandmother's home he found an abundance of "Mormon" literature. He read this eagerly and the Lord opened his heart and his understanding to believe and to comprehend the truths set forth. He soon became familiar with the history of the Church and its doctrines. Elder Anthon Lund says he can hardly remember a time when he was not convinced of the truth of the gospel. From the first moment it was presented, it appeared to him, in comparison with common orthodoxy, as the clearest daylight compared to the uncertain flare of the northern aurora. It became to him "the pearl of great price," for the possession of which he would gladly sacrifice everything. Yet there was many a conflict in his young heart, before the step was taken which united him with the Church. Those who at that time identified themselves with the Church were generally ostracized socially, and often subjected to persecution, and some years elapsed before Anthon, though fully convinced of the truth of the gospel, asked for baptism. At that time there was a great deal of persecution of the Saints in Aalborg, and this spirit actuated even the school boys, and to such an extent that none of the Saints could send their children to the public schools. Brother Lund was the only one belonging to the Saints who attended the school. Sometimes the boys threatened to "baptize" him, and at other times they united in beating him, but as a general rule he was a favorite with both teachers and fellow-students. One of his father's younger brothers, about three years older than Anthon, was in the same class, and although he hated "Mormonism," he would not allow anyone to abuse his nephew. Having tact enough never to complain against those who had persecuted him, and always ready to help the boys in their studies, he won them. Nearly every one in his class was two or three years his senior; still they did not envy him his promotion. To become "Dux," or first in the upper class, was the ambition or all the pupils. When the school met after the summer vacation, when Brother Lund was eleven years old, and all were anxious to know where their places would be, the class was unanimous in giving the first place to him and would not allow him to take his old place. At the examination the bishop of the diocese was present and personally catechized Brother Lund. The answers surprised him, and he said to the whole school: "I have not heard a boy answer so well in any of the two hundred schools in my diocese." All the teachers but one were proud of the praise bestowed on one of their pupils. One, however, a bitter "Mormon-hater," felt much chagrined. On several occasions he would slur the boy because of his belief. One day he said: "It is expected that the 'Dux' of the school shall give a good example to the pupils. What a shame if they should imitate yours and become Mormons!" Brother Lund answered, "They would never regret it." The principal of the school was Brother Lund's best friend. When he learned that the boy acted on his own conviction he said: "I thought you were persuaded by others, but I see you are thoroughly convinced of the truth of 'Mormonism.' Follow your honest convictions, my boy. I would not hinder you from obeying the dictates of your conscience." Brother Lund loved this good man, and when he went back on his first mission he learned with regret that he had died a short time before. He loved his relatives dearly, and, as they were opposed to "Mormonism" they sought to keep him from joining the Church. They wanted him to take a collegiate course, which especially suited his inclinations; his teachers also urged him to take such a course. They did not know how great a temptation this was to the boy, but the Lord gave him strength to resist it, and His Spirit continually strove with him, reminding him of his duty. He was baptized May 15, 1856, on the twelfth anniversary of his birth, by Elder Jacob Julander, who died a short time ago at Monroe; and on the 18th of May he was confirmed by Elder Peter Madsen, now living in the Second Ward, Salt Lake City. When Brother Lund joined the Church, Elder Christian D. Fjeldsteal presided over Aalborg conference. Brother Fjeldsted's sermons made a deep impression on the young boy. His original, convincing and entertaining style was much admired. At the same time Elder Christian A. Madsen, now Bishop of Gunnison, was pastor over Aalborg and several other conferences. His excellent wife, who was a highly educated lady, rendered the boy much assistance in his studies of English, and he became very much attached to Brother and Sister Madsen. When Brother Lurid was thirteen years old he was called to labor in the vineyard. His mission was to teach emigrating Saints English, to distribute tracts and help the Elders hold meetings. When giving his first report at the conference, Brother Fjeldsted lifted him upon a table, and thus he made his debut before an audience. Besides his tracts he always carried copies of the "Millennial Star," which he would read to the Saints, he being able to translate them into Danish nearly as fluently as if he were reading Danish. The Saints were delighted to listen and were strengthened in their faith. A series of articles published in the "Millennial Star," entitled "Answers to Objections," was a great help to him in meet the arguments of the ministers, who were then publishing in Danish the same falsehoods about the "Mormons," which had flooded America and England. When he was first sent out to perform missionary work, some thought the "Mormons" were very unwise in sending one so young. Such a remark was once reported to Brother Lund. He said: "Never mind, I will make that man my friend." He did so, for in the course of time the man who had spoken so slightingly of him asked to be baptized and wanted Brother Lurid to perform the ordinance. Brother Lund became well acquainted in the whole conference. He traveled "without purse and scrip," and, during the four years and a half he labored as a missionary, he does not remember having bought half a dozen meals. Friends were raised up to him on every hand, and men outside of the Church told him to let them know what he needed and they would furnish him the money, and they did so. One day, while he was out tracting, he visited a large mill-owner, whom he found in his library with another gentleman. After spending an hour in answering their questions, the man of the house said: "It is too bad that you are a 'Mormon.' If you will study theology at the university in Copenhagen and become a Lutheran minister, I will pay the expenses and I will make you my heir." Brother Lund answered, "I have no doubt you are a rich man, but you have not money enough to buy my allegiance to the Church of God." The answer seemed to please both the gentlemen. Brother Lund has wondered since whether the man made the offer in good faith. He believed at the time that he did; but it was no temptation to him. He felt he had found "the pearl of great price." His experiences in the mission field were varied and interesting. Once he had promised to meet at a certain place to help hold a meeting. To reach this place he walked about ten miles facing a heavy snow storm. When he arrived at the place he found the house full of people, but the Elders had not come. He sat down among the people and heard them say: "The 'Mormons' have fooled us today." When the time for the commencement of the meeting came, and he saw no one else would be there, he arose and asked the people kindly to give him their attention. How astonished the people looked at the boy! But they were so still that you could hear a pin drop. After the meeting every one present came and shook hands with him and thanked him. Several present have since joined the Church and emigrated to Zion. It was not often Brother Lund was molested. Even in places where other Elders had suffered persecution he succeeded in making friends. Sometimes, however, he also tasted the opposite. On one occasion, when he was out inviting people to a meeting in the evening, he came into a house and informed a woman he met that there would be a meeting that evening, and invited her to attend. "What kind of a meeting?" she asked. "A 'Mormon' meeting," he replied. There came a change over her face instantly and she became a perfect fury. She grabbed her fire-tongs and screamed, "I will give you 'Mormon' meeting!" and flew at him. He thought discretion the better part of valor, and ran out of the house, but the woman followed, and in her highest key called on her husband to shoot the "Mormon." She made such a disturbance that the neighbors came running to see what was the matter. Years afterwards, when Brother Lund had charge of the Ephraim Coop., a lady came into the store and said to him: "You do not know me, but I have seen you once. Do you remember a woman who ran after you with a pair of fire-tongs?" "Yes," he answered, "but you are not that woman, for her face I have never forgotten." "No," she said, "I was her neighbor, and seeing her running after you, I asked her what you had done. She said that you had invited her to a 'Mormon' meeting. I became curious to learn something about the 'Mormons' and went to the meeting. I heard you speak and was convinced of the truth." The Lord made use of the wrath of an enemy to further His purpose. Brother Lund had on one occasion obtained permission to hold a meeting in a town where it had hitherto been impossible to make an opening. The meeting was appointed for the next Sunday; and in company with a couple of Elders Brother Lund went there. On entering the town they were warned not to go to the meeting, as the mob would disturb the meeting, and they had given the blacksmith, the bully of several parishes, all the liquor he would drink in order to get him to assail the "Mormon" Elders. They thanked their informant, but said they must honor their appointment. They found the house full of people and great numbers outside that could not get in. The meeting was opened, and in stalked the blacksmith. Brother Lund says when he saw him, he thought he was a very Polyphemus. He had only one eye, a sinister look, and fists like sledge hammers. The Elders prayed earnestly that God would overrule the plans of the wicked. The advent of the blacksmith was the signal for disturbing the meeting, and some commenced calling the Elders liars, etc. The blacksmith arose to his feet when he heard the interruptions, and slowly eyeing the audience he said: "I want you all to understand that these are men of God, and they speak His word pure and simple. If any one again interrupts them he shall feel the weight of this," showing his large fist. The crowd did not know what this meant: he had drank their liquor and promised to beat the Elders: he must be joking. A loud-mouthed fellow commenced again calling the Elders opprobious names, when the blacksmith elbowed his way through the dense crowd, and taking hold of the disturber, threw him out of the door. This settled it. For two hours the Elders preached to the congregation, and the one-eyed giant stood guard as a policeman; but as soon as the meeting was dismissed, he seemed to realize that he was on the wrong side and he commenced to be ugly and wanted to quarrel with the brethren, but they got away as quickly as possible. Brother Lund was the last to leave, and he heard those behind say to those in front of him, "Give him a diff!" but Brother Lund nodded politely to the crowd as he passed through and got away unhurt. Some of those present have since come to Utah and have informed Brother Lurid that even the man who opened his house for the meeting was in the conspiracy against the Elders. The Elders felt that their prayers were heard in an almost miraculous manner. Brother Lund often found that his youth was the means of gaining sympathy for him, and a hearing which was denied others, and the Lord blessed his efforts with many conversions. At the age of sixteen he was ordained an Elder and appointed president of the Aalborg branch, and traveling Elder in five Other branches. This was at the time quite a responsible position, the branch being large and requiring constant care. Elder Lund continued his missionary labors until the year 1863, when, at the age of eighteen, he emigrated to Utah. He left Hamburg on the "Benjamin Franklin." While lying in that city measles came aboard and made fearful ravages among the children. There was no doctor on board, and the captain would deliver the medicines and wine for the sick only on an order from a physician. Elder Christian A. Madsen laid the matter before the Saints, and they voted to appoint Brother Lund the physician of the company. He received the medicine chest and with it a book treating on common diseases and their cures. This he studied diligently and performed his duties so well that he gained the confidence of both the crew and the passengers. Brother Lund was always in demand. At times he had to hide so as to get the much needed rest and sleep. This was rather remarkable for a doctor that had been given his diploma by popular vote instead of by a medical faculty. Four ships left Denmark in the beginning of that year with emigrating Saints. These all met at Florence, whence some continued the journey in the conveyances furnished by the Utah Saints. The others were organized into two independent companies, one under the leadership of Bishop Christian A. Madsen, and one under the care of Patriarch Ola N. Liljenquist. Brother Lund traveled over the plains in Elder Madsen's company. The route traveled was via Elkhorn river, Loup Fork, Wood River, Willow Lake, Rattlesnake creek, Fort Laramie, Upper Platte Bridge, Devil's Gate, South Pass and Green river, and the travelers arrived in Salt Lake City Sept. 23, 1862. The overland travel had lasted seventy-one days. It had been an exceptionally pleasant journey. The Saints had found good camping places with an abundance of grass and water. Some had walked the entire distance, and very often the men had carried the women and the children across the rivers, but there were no accidents, and a good spirit prevailed. The "Deseret News" of Sept. 24, 1862, says the health of the arrived immigrants was excellent, and the animals were in good condition. They only lost seven or eight animals on the road, and the only accident that happened was the breaking of a wagon tongue, near the end of the journey. The hand of Providence was over Brother Lund, and with the rest of his fellow-travelers he arrived in Salt Lake City, rejoicing at having reached in safety the goal of the long journey over sea and land. Elder Anthon H. Lund's life since his arrival in the valleys of the mountains has been one of continual activity and usefulness. He has filled numerous positions of trust both in the Church and State. He first located at Fairview, Sanpete county, but three months later moved to Mr. Pleasant. Here he remained till the fall of 1870. His first employment in Utah was at farm labor, digging potatoes, working on the threshing machines, etc., as long as such work could be had, and then he got employment in a harness shop and afterwards in a shoe shop. Brother John Barton offered him a home in his family and engaged him to teach his children in the evenings. He was treated by those excellent people as if he were one of the family. To Brother Lund, as to so many others who have come to Utah, the first impressions and experiences of the new country were rather discouraging. He missed his books perhaps more than anything else. An old hand book in astronomy, without maps, which he happened to find, became one of his literary treasures. He studied it and drew his own maps, using the hearthstone for a table, and was able to locate the constellations of the stars and trace the planets. Thus passed his first winter in Utah. He felt that this was the land of Zion, the place to which God had led him, and his heart swelled with sentiments of joy and gratitude. In 1864 he was called to go as a Church teamster to the Missouri river, to bring back immigrating Saints. He performed this mission faithfully. When Pres. Brigham Young called a number of young men to come to Salt Lake City to learn telegraphy, Elder Lund was selected as one of them. During his stay in the city at this time he became acquainted with Elder John Henry Smith and others, with whom he later has been intimately associated in the ecclesiastical work. Having learned telegraphy, he returned to Mt. Pleasant and kept the telegraph office there. He also had a photograph gallery. And when the first co-operative institution was started in that city, he was appointed its secretary. He was also elected a member of the city council. But notwithstanding these varied duties, he found time to devote to the Church. In 1865 he helped to start the first Sunday school in the city where he lived, and achieved great success in this labor of love. He remained in Mt. Pleasant until the fall of 1870, when he moved to Ephraim. In the same year he married Sister Sarah Ann Peterson, a daughter of Stake President Canute Peterson. The issue of this happy union is nine children, of whom seven are still living. In 1871 Elder Lurid was called to perform his first foreign mission, since his arrival in Utah. He was sent to Scandinavia in company with Elder Canute Peterson. The latter was appointed president of the Scandinavian mission, and Elder Lund became the business manager of the central office, in Copenhagen. On his return to Ephraim he became interested in the co-operative store of that place, and the next year he was placed in charge of that institution. He held this position for nine years, and it is generally conceded that it was, during this time, one of the most successful in the county. In 1874 he was appointed a member of the High Council in Sanpete, and when the Stake was organized, in 1877, he became Stake clerk and a member of the new High Council. In 1878 he became superintendent of the Sunday School in Ephraim, a labor which he much enjoyed. In 1883 he was called to fill another mission to Scandinavia. He succeeded Elder Chr. D. Fjeldsted as president of the mission, and was absent from home two years and three months. During his absence he was elected a member of the legislature of the Territory of Utah, and he took his seat in that body on his arrival home. In 1888, he was re-elected. The Ogden Reform School and Agricultural College at Logan are lasting monuments of his untiring work in the legislative assembly of Utah, as well as of his wisdom and solicitude for the welfare of the people. In May, 1888, he was appointed vice president of the Manti Temple, assisting Pres. Daniel H. Wells, and in 1891 he succeeded Brother Wells in the presidency. At the organization of the General Church Board of Education he became a member of that board. At the October conferences, 1889, he was called to the high office of an Apostle in the Church of Jesus Christ. He was ordained Oct. 7, 1889, by Pres. Geo. Q. Cannon. In 1893 he was sent to Liverpool, to preside over the European mission. He was gone more than three years, and his administration was marked with much success. His linguistic ability was a great help to him in the performance of his duties, while traveling in the various conferences. At the demise of Apostle Abraham H. Cannon, Elder Lund was appointed director of the Z. C. M. I., and, some years before, of the Zion's Savings Bank. In 1897 he was called on a mission to Palestine and Syria to organize the Saints there into branches, and to look after their welfare generally. He returned in the summer of 1898. In the fall of that year he moved to Salt Lake City, where he now resides. Since then he has continued his labors as an Apostle, in the various Stakes of Zion. Since April, 1900, he has also been the superintendent of the religion classes, and in August, 1900, he succeeded Pres. Franklin D. Richards in the important office of Church historian. This, certainly, is a most remarkable career, and the key to it should be of value to the readers of this brief sketch. The writer once having the privilege of an intimate conversation with Brother Lund, asked him, "What has been the leading principle by which your life has been guided?" To which he replied, after a moment of deep thought: "I have always endeavored to find out what is right, and then to do it." That tells all. No one guided by that principle can fail in life. The Son of God Himself attained glory and power and dominion because He yielded faithful obedience to the will of His Father in Heaven. A striking feature of Brother Lund's character is his tendency to religious thought and meditation, which almost reminds one of the best representatives of the Pietistic school which during the last century had so much influence upon Lutheran Protestantism; it should be added, though, that his practical training during a life rich in experiences has preserved him from the errors of mysticism, which under different circumstances might have been difficult to avoid. In his public speaking it is easy to perceive that his thoughts center round the great themes of the gospel: the Redeemer, in His two-fold character of Priest, atoning for the sins of the world; and King, coming to rule and to restore all things. As a teacher in Israel he evidently at all times endeavors to magnify his calling as an Apostle and witness for the Lord Jesus Christ. It follows that in the daily events of life he readily acknowledges the hand of the Lord in all things. Through a varied experience he has obtained a firm faith in the promises of God to hear and to answer prayers, and this is a source of strength to him, which never fails. It is no wonder that Brother Lund is much respected and loved by all who know him, or that the feelings of regard grow stronger, as the acquaintance with him becomes more intimate. Few men go through life without enemies, but Brother Lund appears to be one of the few. He is very much like the late Pres. Wilford Woodruff in this respect, of whom it was said that even his antagonists loved him. The regard in which he is held by his associates in the council of Apostles was very well expressed by Elder Heber J. Grant, when in a meeting of Scandinavian Saints in this city, he said: "Erastus Snow was my ideal of an Apostle of the Lord, and Brother Snow's mantle has, in my opinion, fallen upon Elder Anthon H. Lund.-J. M. Sjodahl. (See also "Juvenile Instructor," Vol. 35, P. 705.)
