Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Cannon, Abraham Hoagland

Cannon, Abraham Hoagland, a member of the Council of Twelve Apostles from 1889 to 1896, was the son of pres. Geo. Q. Cannon and Elizabeth Hoagland, and was born March 12, 1859, in Salt Lake City, Utah. As a boy he was given the best opportunity that the times afforded for an education, and being of a studious nature, he availed himself of that privilege, finishing his studies in the Deseret University. For a time when his father was editor of the "Deseret News" he was employed in that office as errand boy. Later, he learned the carpenter's trade at the Church carpenter shop, and worked on the Temple Block. He also studied architecture under the late Obed Taylor, and became an architect. In 1879 he was called on a mission to Europe. After laboring for some time in the Nottingham conference, England, he was assigned to the Swiss and German Mission, where he mastered the German language and traveled as a missionary in both Switzerland and Germany. He wrote some of the hymns which the German Saints now sing in their congregations. During his absence on this mission, his mother died. He returned home in June, 1882, and was ordained and set apart as one of the First Seven Presidents of Seventies Oct. 9, 1882, in which calling he labored with diligence and zeal and traveled extensively throughout the Church in the interest of the Seventies. In 1882, when twenty-three years old, he assumed business control of the "Juvenile Instructor" and associate publications, developing what was a small printing office into one of the foremost publishing houses in the west. During the time of his management, which lasted until his death, a large number of publications were issued under his direction; and while he laid no claims to great literary genius, he found time, between his many other duties, to write many articles for publication. Having entered the order of plural marriage, he was arrested on a charge of unlawful cohabitation, and being convicted, he was sentenced, March 17, 1886, by Judge Zane, to a term of six months in the penitentiary and to pay a fine of $300. He served his term and was released Aug. 17, 1886. At the October conference, 1889, he was sustained as one of the Twelve Apostles, and was ordained by Pres. Joseph F. Smith, Oct. 7, 1889. In October, 1892, in connection with his brother, John Q. Cannon, he took charge of the "Deseret News," forming the publishing company which for a number of years conducted that paper, and he assumed the business management thereof. In 1892, also, he became the editor and publisher of the "Contributor." He was connected with many other business enterprises. He was the moving spirit in the Salt Lake and Pacific and the Utah and California railways-enterprises which had for their object the connection by rail of Salt Lake City and California and the building of a line into the Deep Creek country. He was also director, vice-president and assistant manager of the Bullion-Beck mining company; director and one of the organizers of the State Bank of Utah; director of the Utah Loan and Trust Co., at Ogden; director in Z. C. M. I.; vice-president of Geo. Q. Cannon & Sons Co.; director in the Co-operative Furniture Co.; first vice-president of the Salt Lake Chamber of Commerce; the owner of a prosperous book and stationery business in Ogden. He was also an active promoter in canal and irrigation enterprises; and was a member of the Deseret Sunday School Union, to the duties of which he gave much attention. In the vast amount of labor which he performed, and in which he never seemed to tire, he accomplished much more in the course of twenty years than many truly, active men have been able to do in double that time. He had extraordinary qualifications for business management, and conducted with success many enterprises undertaken under adverse circumstances. For some time previous to his death he suffered with severe headache; in returning from a business trip to California he became seriously ill, and he underwent operations for ear troubles; general inflammation set in, resulting in death July 19, 1896, at his residence in Salt Lake City. In an article published in the "Deseret News" at the time of his demise the editor of that paper says: "In his religious life and duties Abraham H. Cannon was scrupulously strict and energetic. He did not shrink from any duty devolving upon him and avoided no obligation; but responded to every call with promptness and fidelity. His precision in this regard was remarkable and was characteristic of him from his youth up. As a boy and as a man he was frank and fearless with a love for truth and virtue that was sublime. He never sought to shift to others any burden that devolved on him, and never hesitated to undertake a task that fell to his lot. In his public religious calling and in his private life he was a true disciple of Christ, essentially a servant of God, whose conduct endeared him to all associates by the bonds of that pure and holy love which comes of conformity to divine principles. When in the Course of events, during the persecutions of the Saints, it came his turn to endure imprisonment for his religion, he did so cheerfully, praising God that he was worthy to suffer in His cause; and all sufferings and privations then and at other times in his ministry he bore without murmuring, being willing to endure all for the gospel's sake. In his record as a man of God he will ever live in the hearts of the Latter-day Saints, by whom he was greatly beloved."-(See also "Contributor," Vol. 17, p. 644.)
