Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Woodruff, Abraham O.PPWoodruff, Abraham Owen

Woodruff, Abraham O.PPWoodruff, Abraham Owen, a member of the Council of Twelve Apostles since 1897, is the son of Pres. Wilford Woodruff and Emma Smith and was born Nov. 23, 1872, in a primitive log house, situated just a short distance south of Salt Lake City, and built by his father some twelve years before. The neighborhood is one of the most beautiful and peaceful rural districts to be found in all our scenic land. To the east stands the rugged Wasatch range. To the west, stretch farmlands, orchards and meadows threaded by canyon streams, wrapped in quietude, beneath the giant forms of the mountains. Amid such natural environments, which were peaceful and subdued, as well as inspiring and sublime, and surrounded by that plodding and persistent industry which characterizes western pioneer life, was the subject of our sketch born and reared. It was in such a place that he spent his boyhood's happy hours, and there, too, during the formative period, when youth buds into manhood, he spent his days in honest, natural toil. There, he passed his evenings in the humble cottage before the glowing embers of the cedar and the pine, and listened to the stories of a pilgrim people, who, upheld by a sublime faith, experienced perils and hardships unsurpassed in all ages. It was in such a peaceful home, too, that he enjoyed the sweet slumbers of untrammeled youth and dreamed of the future and what it could hold in its embrace for him. Of the earliest recollections which still live in his mind, perhaps the most impressive is that of the funeral of Pres. Brigham Young. He recalls vividly how his mother raised him in her arms, that he might view the great leader in his casket. At six his school days began. In the course of time he mastered "addition, subtraction and multiplication." And as is the experience of most school boys, his labors were not confined to the school room and with books, for he enjoyed all the dignified privileges of "chore-boy" around the farm. At ten he herded cows, by which means he often realized as much as fifteen dollars per month. Prior to that, however, his proclivity to engage in commerce led him to the Liberty Park springs, where he gathered watercress for the market, thereby supplying his boyish needs in the way of pocket-money. He assures us that the money spent in those days was too dearly earned to be spent in useless things, so that articles of real utility alone attracted his ready cash. As his years advanced, he passed from the 40th District school to the Latter-day Saints' College. Here he was trained under the splendid tutelage of Professors Done, Talmage and Maeser. At eighteen, he was placed in a bank, where he served the institution, first as a collector, and next as assistant bookkeeper. It was while thus employed, that he received a call to the mission field. In the year 1893, his father was far from enjoying his usual good health. The illness of his father, consequently, made his departure to a foreign land not a very easy matter, but, trusting in providence, and acquiescing with his father's wishes, he started for the Swiss and German Mission. Within a few days after his arrival at the mission headquarters he was appointed to labor, without a companion, in Frankfort-on-the-Main, at which place he was instructed to open the mission. A very charitable family opened their doors to him, which materially lessened the difficulties under which he was to begin his labors. The first great task before him was that of mastering the difficult German tongue. But this good family gave him willing and efficient aid in his task. He would read in concert with the children, and he found in them his natural teachers. He would arise at six o'clock in the morning and put in two hours of diligent work on the German grammar. He did not, however, spend all his time in studying the language and reciting it, but with singular courage and characteristic zeal, he set about his "Father's business." He distributed tracts during the day, and held meetings in the evening. His knowledge of German was, of course, exceedingly small, but he straightway began to preach and to expound the Scriptures in a broken, stammering manner. He was at first laughed at, but nothing daunting, he prosecuted his labors, and in an exceedingly short time, acquired the language. It came to him, he says, as a gift. After five months of aggressive, single-handed labor, a companion was sent to him, and in a short time a branch of the Church was organized where he labored. Two more months elapsed, when he was called to the presidency of the Dresden branch. Not long after he had commenced his labors there, he dreamed, one night, that he was fishing in a beautiful stream of water. In the dream, he was fortunate enough to catch three trout. The dream proved to be prophetic, for very soon afterwards he baptized a man and his wife and daughter. The ordinance was performed in the River Elbe, beneath the shade of the spreading lindens, on the exact spot where, many years before, Elder Budge baptized two of our very highly respected brethren-Elders Karl G. Maeser and Fred W. Schoenfeld. Elder Woodruff, at this time, had great pleasure in meeting and preaching to the old-time associates and fellow-teachers of these brethren. They showed him great respect and were courteous in their attention to Elder Woodruff, but it seemed that they were actuated by a sense of regard for their old associates rather than the teachings they heard. While he was presiding over this new conference, Elder Woodruff spent much of his time in distributing the written word in the villages that border the Elbe, extending from Dresden to Bohemia. He even entered one Bohemian village and delivered his message there. He was called from Dresden to Berlin, over which conference he presided one year. This conference comprehended such cities as Berlin, Hanover, Stettin, Sorau and Droskau. While laboring there, the civil officials undertook the banishment of the "Mormon" Elders, and in order that the good work might not be stayed, the Elders were often compelled to employ most subtle methods in order to carry on their labors without detection and consequent interruption. At Ernst, Elder Woodruff was disguised as a country swain. He donned the rude garb and heavy clogs, and, with the other peasants, toiled in the shop or field, during the day. With his fellow-rustics, he ate the black bread and "smear." No sooner, however, did the evening shades fall, than he would meet in some humble cottage, a company of eager Saints, who would perchance bring some trusted friend with them, whom they hoped to lead into the gospel light. One thing that impressed Brother Woodruff deeply, was the absolute trustworthiness of those country Saints. He found them as true as steel, and never were they known to disappoint an Elder, or betray his confidence, in those trying times. At this juncture, a furlough was granted him, during which he made a most enjoyable tour of the greatest European cities. He visited Austria and Italy, and spent the 4th of July in Geneva. He spent ten days in Rome, visiting, among other places, the Vatican. From there he went to Naples, Pompeii, and Herculaneum. Having read Bulwer-Lytton's fascinating novel, these two latter places were exceptionally delightful to him. He then returned to the mission, and, after reviewing his old field of labor, received a release to return home, having performed a faithful and acceptable mission. Elder Woodruff returned to his native city in 1896. For a short time, he resumed his work in the bank. On the 30th of June, he was married to Miss Helen May Winters. During October conference of the same year he was called to the Apostleship, and on the 7th day of October was ordained to that office by his father. In reviewing his brief life, Apostle Woodruff tells us, that though he was led into some follies, common to youth, though he was often found in unwholesome company, and many times gave way to the weaknesses of the flesh, yet he never, for a moment, felt himself liberated from that restraint which a belief in God imposes. This belief had been early and deeply implanted in his heart. As a Deacon, he did his duty; as a Sunday School member he was faithful. There is no doubt that the influence of these two duties, which by practice had become habits in him, stayed his feet from running toward sin, in that critical period of life, when youth, manhood and common sense are struggling against the temptations that are spread like the fowler's snare, across the paths of the young. To understand the character and disposition of Apostle Woodruff, one need but to know his parents, for he has received, like the rest of that exceptional family, the priceless heritages which a true and noble, God-fearing mother, and a peaceful, devoted, God-serving father, bequeathed them in their birth. The strongest qualities of the Woodruff family are, perhaps, natural honesty, child-like simplicity, implicit faith in God, and a due reverence for just and holy men. These very estimable qualities, combined with a gift of industriousness, and a total absence of ostentation, are the splendid endowments which Apostle Woodruff possesses in a high degree. These qualities, under a wise and tender mother's training, in his earlier years, and the powerful influence of a true father, in later years, constitute the agencies which formed his character, and determined his high course in life. He enjoyed the closest association with his father during the later years of that good man's life. They were most confidential one toward the other. There was a companionship between them, so close that it even excluded his nearest boy friends. In his father he beheld a shining example, in whose life truth had been held as the paramount quality. He had a profound reverence for his father, not only as a parent, but as a Prophet of God. Since his appointment to the Apostleship, Elder Woodruff has been most diligent in the high duties and offices of his calling. Perhaps the greatest special labor which has been given him was the colonization of the Big Horn country. That work was placed in his hands by the First Presidency and has thus far been carried on most successfully. He possesses the gifts of humility and sociability, by which he is in close touch with common, toiling people, thereby gaining their confidence and love. In addition to these qualities, he is highly spiritual in his temperament. Thus are blended the very elements necessary in the man who is to build up a country and at the same time build up the Kingdom of God on earth. His appointment to the Quorum of the Twelve was a happy choice. It was an inspiration; and in the work of the eventful future, which he will be called upon to perform, we can see in Abraham Owen Woodruff those qualities and gifts and dispositions which are needed in the man who is to assist in guiding and directing this people to their higher destinies. It is altogether too early to write his life, as it has only just begun. It is pleasing to contemplate, however, that, like a vessel that has left its moorings, with sails spread and full and bending to the wind, we see him well on his splendid career. Along the pathway of safe and honest purpose, will he, too, speed on, guided by true principle and impelled by a high sense of duty.-Nephi L. Morris.
