Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Clawson, RudgerPPClawson, Rudger

Clawson, RudgerPPClawson, Rudger, a member of the Council of Twelve Apostles since 1898, is the son of Hiram B. Clawson and Margaret Gay Judd, and was born March 1, 1857, in Salt Lake City, Utah. He was educated in the schools of his native city. The teachers who seem to have influenced him most were Dr. Karl G. Maeser, Miss Ida I. Cook and Dr. John R. Park. From his earliest boyhood, Elder Clawson was religiously inclined. One of the shaping forces of his character was his early reading of the Book of Mormon. His own words on this subject teach a lesson full of interest and deep meaning to the young Latter-day Saints. "Early in life I became deeply interested in the Book of Mormon," he says, "which I read and re-read, and drew from its divine pages inspiration and hope. Faith sprang up in my heart. By a careful study of that glorious book, well defined ideas of right and wrong were firmly fixed in my youthful mind, and I was thus measurably able to withstand the temptations that assailed me and was able to escape many of the sins and follies to which some of the young are addicted. With advanced years, the conviction has constantly grown upon me that the Book of Mormon is one of the grandest books of the age." Regarding the meeting-going of the small boy, Elder Clawson bears this testimony: "I remember the interest I felt as a boy, in the Sunday meetings at the Old Tabernacle, and later in the large New Tabernacle. The sermons of Presidents Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, George A. Smith and the Apostles and Elders made a profound impression on my mind for good. From my own experience I am led to believe that the effects and influence of the teachings of our leaders upon the youth of Zion-I mean the very small boys and girls, who, in the midst of the congregations sit almost unnoticed-is greater than many suppose." An important adjunct to Elder Clawson's school life was the Wasatch Literary Society, whose membership was composed of his companions and associates, boys and girls of early days, many of whom have since become prominent in public life Shortly after leaving school the young man, then only eighteen years old, became private secretary to Hon. John W. Young, then president of the Utah Western Railway company. In this capacity he spent two years in the East, visiting most of the prominent cities, but spending the greater part of his time in New York City. This trip gave the young man much practical and valuable experience. In 1879, Elder Clawson was called on a mission to the Southern States; and it was while laboring in the State of Georgia, preaching the gospel of Christ, that his friend and companion missionary, Elder Joseph Standing, was shot down by a brutal mob. The news at the time sent a thrill of horror through the Church. Briefly told, the terrible experience and Elder Clawson's part in it is as follows: In the summer of 1879, Elder Clawson and Elder Standing, who were laboring in Georgia, started for a conference of the Elders to be held in the city of Rome. On the way, they were to call on some members of the Church living at Varnell's Station, Whitfield county. Elder Standing had previously labored in that section and had succeeded in raising up a branch of the Church. The missionaries reached the place on the evening of Saturday, July 9th. Calling at the house of a Church member, they found the family to be in a state of great excitement, owing to the threats made against the Elders in the neighborhood. Because of this bitter and murderous feeling the brethren were refused the privilege of stopping over night at the house. They were, however, directed to the house of a Mr. Henry Holston, who was not a member of the Church, but was friendly to the Elders. Mr. Holston received the missionaries kindly, and when the situation was explained to him, he said he would defend them as long as they were under his roof. Elder Standing appeared pale and anxious over the trouble which threatened them. A dream he had had a short time previous seemed to worry him, as it appeared to forebode evil. The next day was Sunday. The morning opened beautiful, and the two Elders set out to get their satchels and bring them back to Mr. Holston's place. They found the family still fearful of trouble, hence, they did not remain long. The road between the two houses was densely wooded on both sides. On the way back to Holston's, the two young missionaries suddenly came upon twelve men, some on horseback and some on foot. They were all armed, and as they caught sight of the Elders, they set up great yells of exultation, and came rushing towards them like a pack of hungry wolves. Elder Standing asked the men by what authority they were thus molested on the public highway. "We'll show you by what authority we act!" they replied. One of them then jumped from his horse, and came up to Elder Clawson with a cocked revolver, pointing it into his face and at the same time uttering vile and most blasphemous language. The mob then ordered the brethren to follow them, which they did. To the expostulation of the Elders that they were peaceable, law-abiding citizens, the mob replied: "The government of the United States is against you, and there is no law in Georgia for Mormons." In this march to violence Elder Clawson walked rather slowly and thus lagged somewhat. At this, one of the ruffians came up behind and struck him a terrible blow on the back of the head, causing him to fall forward. He was, however, up again in an instant, but he knew he could do nothing to resent the attack. Shortly after the wretch attacked him again with a club, which only his comrades prevented him from using over Elder Clawson's head. After a time they left the road and went deeper into the woods. The party met an old man, well known in the neighborhood, and a girl by the name of Mary Hamblin, who had come to warn the Elders. Elder Clawson feared that the mob would injure the girl, but they let her go with a threat. Soon they came to a beautiful spot in the woods-a spring of clear water shaded by a large tree. Here a halt was made and the party seated themselves around the pool of water. Then the mobbers conversed for about an hour and a half, accusing the Mormons of all manner of vile acts. They seemed very eager to learn something of the whereabouts of Elder John Morgan, against whom they appeared to have a deep-seated hatred. They were much disappointed when they learned that he was in Utah. Presently three horsemen, who had left the party a short time previously, rode up again. One of them gave the command: "Follow us." At the same time, Elder Standing, who was sitting with his back to the rider, suddenly leaped to his feet, turned, clapped his hands together and shouted the word, "Surrender!" A man seated close to him pointed his pistol at him and fired, and the young missionary instantly fell. The mobbers at once arose, and one of them, pointing to Elder Clawson, said to his companions: "Shoot that man." Instantly every weapon was turned upon him, and it seemed to the young man that he was standing on the brink of eternity. He faced the mob, folded his arms and said, "Shoot!" But the order not to shoot was given, and the guns were lowered. Elder Clawson then went to his murdered companion and looked into his face. A ghastly wound was in his forehead where the bullet had entered. Elder Clawson got permission from the mob to go after some assistance for his friend. Running through the woods he hailed a wood-chopper, and asked him to assist in removing the body. "No; I haven't time," was the reply. Arriving at Mr. Holston's that gentleman gave Brother Clawson a horse to go after the coroner, while he left for the scene of the assassination. Elder Clawson again met the mob on the road fleeing from the State. He feared they would murder him also, but they let him pass unharmed, and with a thankful heart he traveled on. Arriving at Catoosa Springs, a fashionable watering place, telegrams were sent to Salt Lake City, and also to the governor of the State. The coroner, his clerk, and Brother Clawson, then set out to get the body. They were joined by Mr. Holston on the way. The coroner held an inquest, and the body was laid upon a plank and carried to the house of Mr. Holston. Here, during that gloomy night, by the light of a candle, with the awe-stricken spectators standing near, Elder Clawson performed the last act of kindness to his friend in washing the awful stains from his body and preparing it for its final rest. After much difficulty and danger, Elder Clawson got the body safely on the train, and arrived with it in Salt Lake City August 3rd. In September of the next year Elder Clawson went back to Georgia to attend the trial of the murderers. Feeling was high against him in the State, but he had a duty to perform, and he did it, although at the risk of his life. Three of the murderers had been captured, and they had been indicted for murder in the first degree. The trial continued for three days. The jury's verdict was "not guilty!" The result was greeted with great demonstration by the spectators. A friend told Elder Clawson that he was in danger, and as soon as possible after the trial he got quietly away. Having obeyed the law of plural marriage, Elder Clawson was one of the first victims of that terrible persecution which began under the Edmunds law, and which made many thousand sufferers for conscience sake. After a trial which attracted wide attention, Elder Clawson was convicted. He was sentenced to be imprisoned in the Utah Penitentiary for a term of four years, and to pay a fine of $800. He entered the prison Nov. 3, 1884. Just prior to passing sentence, Judge Charles S. Zane asked him if he had anything to say why judgment should not be pronounced, and he promptly replied: "Your honor: Since the jury in my case has seen proper to find a verdict of guilty, I have only this to say why judgment should not be passed upon me: I very much regret that the laws of my country should come in conflict with the laws of God; but whenever they do, I shall invariably choose to obey the latter. If I did not so express myself I should feel unworthy the cause I represent. The constitution of the United States expressly provides that Congress shall make no law respecting the establishment of religion or prohibiting the free exercise thereof. It cannot be denied, I think, that marriage, when attended and sanctioned by religious rites and ceremonies, is an establishment of religion. The anti-polygamy law of 1862 and the Edmunds-Tucker law of 1882 were expressly designed to operate against marriage as believed in and practiced by the Latter-day Saints. They are therefore unconstitutional, and, of course, as such, cannot command the respect that constitutional laws would. That is all I have to say, your honor." Elder Clawson was but twenty-seven years of age when this terrible experience came to him-a young man, full of the energy of life, with bright prospects opening before him, condemned to a loathsome prison cell for four years! A man of refinement, accustomed to the society of the noble and the pure, forced now to associate with men, low and degraded with vice; to come in close contact with them, to eat and sleep with men repulsively vile and debased; to mingle with robbers and murderers; to be served with poor food, hardly fit to eat; to breathe the filthy tobacco-laden air of the cells. There was but one source from which to ask relief-God, the merciful; and from Him and His comforting Spirit the young man received the strength to carry him through the awful ordeal. For a long time the prison officials treated Elder Clawson with indignities. He had to bear the insults of his fellow-convicts, some of whom took a delight in persecuting the lone "Mormon." After a time other brethren were received at the "pen," and Elder Clawson's life now became more bearable. His father, Bishop Hiram B. Clawson, entered the prison in November, 1885, and remained nearly six months. Naturally the young man took great comfort in his father's society, though at the same time grieved to see him in prison. Slowly the months lengthened into years. His brethren came and went, but Rudger was still there. The great number of "Mormon" convicts had its modifying influence on the prison and its life was easier to bear. During Elder Clawson's incarceration President Lorenzo Snow served a term of eleven months in prison. The aged Apostle was a great comfort to the brethren in showing them how to bear their affliction with due fortitude. Elder Clawson was pardoned by Pres. Grover Cleveland, and he left the penitentiary Dec. 12, 1887. "During my imprisonment of three years, one month, and ten days," says Elder Clawson, "I never once felt to murmur or complain, and as I emerged from the prison walls my faith in the principle of plural marriage was just as firm and unshaken as when I entered. I felt to praise and glorify the Lord that He had deemed me worthy to suffer bonds and imprisonment in defense of the right." Elder Clawson received a letter from Pres. Wilford Woodruff, dated Dec. 23, 1887, calling him to preside over the Box Elder Stake of Zion. At the quarterly conference of Box Elder Stake, held in Brigham City, February 5th, his name was presented and sustained. Elder Clawson at once moved to Brigham City, and entered upon the discharge of his duties. Under his presidency the Box Elder Stake came well up to the front rank in the completeness of its Church organizations and the general progressiveness of the Saints. During his presidency new meeting houses were erected in eleven of the fourteen Wards of the Stake. At the destruction of the Brigham City Tabernacle by fire, president Clawson at once took steps for its rebuilding, and thirteen months afterward, the elegant new tabernacle was erected, paid for and dedicated. Pres. Clawson was called to the Apostleship at the general conference held in October, 1898. He was ordained on the 10th by Lorenzo Snow. Since that time he has been occupied in the duties of his calling in traveling, organizing, instructing, and in office work for the Church. "What, Brother Clawson," asked the writer of this sketch, "has been the most potent factor in aiding you to success in life?" and the answer unhesitatingly was: "My success in life, if I have attained to any, is due to a fixed and unyielding determination on my part to seek and abide by counsel. I know there is safety in counsel, and that he who turns therefrom and seeks to become a law unto himself must surely fall."-Nephi Anderson.
