Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Smith, John

Smith, John, the sixth presiding Patriarch of the Church and the present incumbent of that office, is the son of Hyrum Smith and Jerusha Burden, and was born Sept. 22, 1832, in Kirtland, Geuaga (now Lake) county, Ohio. His mother died Oct. 13, 1837. She had six children-two sons and four daughters, and she died when the youngest was eight days old. His father was away from home at the time of her death. Dec. 24, 1837, his father married Miss Mary Fielding, who bore him two children, a son and a daughter. In the spring of 1838 John went with his father's family to Far West, Caldwell county, Missouri, where he shared with the rest of the Saints in the persecutions. In the fall of 1838 his father, his uncle Joseph and others, were taken prisoners by a ruthless mob, and, after being abused in many ways, threatened with death, etc., were finally lodged in Liberty, Clay county jail. During the winter his father's family, in connection with many others, were driven out of Missouri. Although small, John suffered much from cold and hunger. The family landed at Quincy, Ill.., early in 1839, where they remained a short time. Brother Hyrum Smith came home from Liberty jail April 22, 1839. The family subsequently went up the Mississippi river to a place called Commerce, afterwards the city of Nauvoo. Soon afterwards they moved about two miles down the river, where they remained in comparative peace for a short season. His father and his uncle, Joseph the Prophet, were martyred in Carthage jail by a bloodthirsty mob, June 27, 1844. In the month of February, 1847, John left his father's folks and started west with Heber C. Kimball's family. At this time he did not know where the people were going, but he supposed to California. This company crossed the Mississippi river on a ferryboat, and encamped on Sugar creek, about nine miles out. After two or three days, boy-like, he got homesick and went back to see his folks. During his stay at home, which was only for a few days, the river froze over, and he crossed back on skates, and joined the company. During the journey he had to drive loose stock, drive team, herd cattle and horses, and do any kind of work he could. Many times he was drenched in the rain. On one occasion Brother Heber P. Kimball and himself were driven by the force of the storm, stock and all, for a mile or so, although they were on horseback. The company journeyed westward through Iowa, stopping many times by the way in consequence of storms and soft roads, or, to speak more correctly, no roads but soft prairie. They finally landed on the hill where now stands Council Bluffs city, and crossed over the Missouri river at anoint near the present site of Omaha, called at that time Sarpee's Trading Post, among the Pottawatamie Indians. They then went up about six miles to the Little Pupillon, and remained a short time. During his stay there he became acquainted with Col. Thomas L. Kane, who was taken very sick, and John was his nurse for two weeks. In or about the month of August they moved into Winter Quarters, where the town of Florence now stands. In the fore part of September he learned that his father's family were on the road, and he went, in company with Brother Almon W. Babbitt, back about one hundred and fifty miles and met them. They came to Winter Quarters, where they remained two winters. John went to work with hired help, built a log house for the winter, and during the summer of 1847 made fence, tilled the soil, and took a man's place in the hay and harvest field, as he was the only male member of the family who was able to work. In April, 1848, the family started for Great Salt Lake valley. It was rather a hard journey, as they did not have teams enough. John had to drive a team composed of wild steers, cows and oxen, with two wagons tied together, and, before they had traveled more than two miles, a wagon tongue broke and they had to camp for the night. On the way over the plains he broke and they had to camp for the steers to work. He had to take a man's place, by standing guard at night, and in the day time to be the boy who brought the wood and water, herded the cows and assisted to double teams over bad places, up hills, etc. On one occasion a circumstance occurred which he will never forget. One day about sundown, while the party were encamped on the Platte river, it was reported that a woman was lost. Without ceremony he took his coat on his arm and a piece of corn bread in his hand and started out up the road, to follow a party of the company which had left at noon. He had not gone far when he came up with a dead carcass, which was covered with wolves fighting and howling. He walked past as fast and as quietly as possible. He traveled six miles before he came up with any wagons. During this distance he passed about twenty such frightful scenes, but he got through safe, and he thinks he was unnoticed by the wolves. He stopped for the balance of the night with an acquaintance, and at daybreak proceeded on his journey, and found the lost woman, a little after sunrise, safe with her mother, six miles from where he stayed for the night. On Sept. 22, 1848, his sixteenth birthday, he drove five wagons down the "Big Mountain," east of Salt Lake City; it was dark long before he got into camp with the last wagon. On the way, one wheel of his wagon ran into a tree which was about fifteen inches through. He had to lie on his back and chop the tree down with a dull ax before he could go any further. The next day he arrived in the Great Salt Lake valley. In the spring of 1850 John was enrolled in a company of horsemen, called the "Battalion of Life Guards," for the purpose of standing guard, or going out at a minute's warning, to protect the settlements from the marauding Indians, who were very angry at that time. For about ten years he was compelled to keep on hand a saddle horse and everything necessary for that purpose. Many times he was called and got up in the night and started off at once; at other times he had to leave in the heat of harvest, and then his wife was obliged to take his place in the field. This he had to do in connection with working in the canyon and attending to the farm to support the family. Sept. 21, 1852, his stepmother died, leaving him to provide for a family of eight, three of them-one man and two women-being old people, the youngest over sixty-three years old; also one brother and three sisters younger than himself. He was at that time twenty years, less one day, old. Dec. 25, 1853, he married Miss Helen Maria Fisher, who bore him nine children, five sons and four daughters. In the spring of 1856 he went on horseback to Salmon river with Pres. Brigham Young's party, a distance of 480 miles, and returned, which trip occupied six weeks' time. Feb. 18, 1855, Brother Smith was ordained to the office of Patriarch under the hands of Presidents Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball and Jedediah M. Grant, and Apostles Orson Hyde, Orson Pratt, Wilford Woodruff, George A. Smith and Lorenzo Snow, Pres. Young being mouth. It may be well here to state that this is the only office in the Church which is handed down from father to son by right of lineage. His grandfather, Joseph Smith, sen., was the first Patriarch to the Church. He was ordained by his son, the Prophet Joseph Smith. John's father, Hyrum Smith, was ordained to this office by his father; and John would doubtless have been ordained by his father if he had lived until John had arrived at a proper age. Sept. 16, 1859, John started for Florence with a four-mule team, to bring his sister and her husband and family to Utah. He traveled in company with Elder John Y. Greene across the plains, and made the trip from Salt Lake City to Florence in thirty-two days, laying over on the road two days of the time-distance, 1011 miles. During his stay in the East he took his sister and her two youngest children and traveled across Iowa to Montrose, a distance of 350 miles, in eight days, with a pair of mules and a light wagon, and visited Nauvoo and different places in Illinois, reviewed many places of his boyhood, and found quite a number of his connections. He returned to Florence in February, 1860, where he spent considerable time in assisting to put wagons and handcarts together, and in doing all he could to expedite the starting of the European emigrants on the plains. In the month of June he was appointed by Elder George Q. Cannon, who had charge of the emigrants that season, to organize a company and take charge of it across the plains. He went to work at once, got a company of more than forty wagons in readiness, loaded his sister and family, and started out. The trip was made in seventy days. At the general conference, April, 1862, he was called to take a mission to Scandinavia. On the 17th of May following he started out on horseback, without purse or scrip, to cross the plains and the ocean. He was invited by Elder John R. Murdock to go with him to the Missouri river, as he had charge of a company of wagons and teams to bring out emigrants. Brother Smith accepted the invitation, and Brother Murdock assisted him with provisions. All went well until about noon one day, as the company left the Sweetwater river, when Brother Smith was taken down with mountain fever. During the night the fever was very severe, and the pain through every joint was excruciating. Toward the latter part of the night he was administered to by some of the Elders, and in the morning was able to pursue his journey on horseback. He was very weak and had to get down often from his horse to rest. At Fort Laramie he sold his horse, which was worth $90, for $40, and at Florence his saddle, which was worth $20, for $10. He met friends, who gave him money to assist him on his journey. His fare from Florence to Liverpool was about $100. When he arrived in Liverpool he had twenty-one shillings in his pocket. This paid his fare to London, where he had to get a passport from the American Minister before he could cross the continent of Europe. There he borrowed money to take him through (which he afterwards paid) from Hull, England, to Hamburg, Germany. The boat met headwinds and a rough sea, and all on board were sick; even the captain had to get on deck for air. At Hamburg he met his cousin, Elder Jesse N. Smith, who had preceded him about eighteen months. Brother Jesse had with him an interpreter, and all went well. They landed at Korsoer, Denmark, Sept. 6, 1862. Brother Smith remained on this mission until April 13, 1864, when he sailed from Copenhagen, on his return home. While on this mission he studied hard and obtained a good understanding of the Scandinavian languages-Danish-Norwegian and Swedish. On arriving at Grimsby, England, they found some emigrants for Zion awaiting them, who had traveled by way of Lubeck, and they all, about three hundred in number, continued their journey by rail to Liverpool. There he was appointed president of the ship's company. He embarked in the large sailing ship, "Monarch of the Sea," bound for New York, having on board 973 souls of the Saints-Danes, Swedes, Norwegians, Germans, Scotch, Welsh, Irish, English and Americans-the largest company of Latter-day Saints which, up to that time, had left the shores of Europe. They were over forty days out at sea, with head winds a good deal of the time. On the banks of Newfoundland they saw a number of very large icebergs. On their arrival at Castle Gardens, New York, June 3, 1864, they went immediately on board the steamboat "St. Johns," and sailed up the Hudson river to Albany; from there they traveled by rail to St. Joseph, Missouri, and thence by steamboat up the Missouri river to Wyoming, Nebraska. On Brother Smith's arrival at Wyoming, he was appointed to take charge on the plains of a Scandinavian company of thirty wagons. He was there joined by more wagons in charge of Captain Patterson, making in all over sixty, for safety against the Indians, as the latter were very hostile that season, many people having been killed, and horses, mules and cattle stolen, and wagons burned. Many times on the journey ranchers, traders, and also officers at government posts would use every argument possible to induce them to stop for safety. The answer Brother Smith would give them was, "We are used to Indian warfare, and we have only provisions enough to take us home, even if we keep moving; and we would rather run our risk of fighting Indians than starve on the plains." The company reached Salt Lake City, Oct. 1, 1864. After a few days the immigrants were distributed among their respective friends in the various settlements, but for several years Brother Smith was kept busy as an interpreter for the Scandinavians. Since that time he has been engaged in the duties of his calling as a Patriarch, traveling through the settlements of the Saints, and attending to other business, and on the farm. Up to date he has given to the Saints 15,660 patriarchal blessings.
