Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Aldrich, Hazen

Aldrich, Hazen, one of the First Seven Presidents of Seventies from 1835-37, joined the Church at an early day, and was ordained to the office of a High Priest. As a member of Zion's Camp he marched to Missouri and back in 1834; he was ordained a Seventy under the hands of Joseph Smith and others, Feb. 28, 1835, at Kirtland, Ohio; and when the first quorum of Seventy was fully organized soon afterwards, Bro. Aldrich was set apart as one of the seven presidents of the same. Some of the High Priests and a number of the Seventies introduced a question as to which was the greatest among them, the Seventies or the High Priests. Their discussions increased with so much warmth that it amounted to jealousy, and at length it attracted the attention of Joseph the Prophet, who called a council in November, 1835, to decide the question. At this meeting the Prophet asked the newly-organized quorum, if any of their number had been ordained High Priests, previous to their ordination as Seventies. Five out of the seven presidents, namely Hazen Aldrich, Leonard Rich, Zebedee Coltrin, Lyman Sherman and Sylvester Smith, acknowledged that they were High Priests before they were ordained Seventies. Accordingly, the Prophet invited them to take their places in the High Priests' quorum again, which was complied with. This left only Joseph Young and Levi W. Hancock in the original council of Seventies. Owing to these changes, Hazen Aldrich's connection with the Seventies in a quorum capacity ceased April 6, 1837. During the great apostasy in Kirtland in 1837 and 1838, Hazen Aldrich was numbered among those who rebelled against the legitimate authorities of the Church, and became an apostate. Subsequently he joined the Brewster movement and published a paper at Kirtland called "The Olive Branch," of which the first number was dated August, 1848. He became a leading man among the Brewsterites, and finally emigrated to California, where he is supposed to have died.
