Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Hancock, Levi Ward

Hancock, Levi Ward, one of the First Seven Presidents of Seventies from 1835 to 1882, was the youngest son and seventh child of Thomas Hancock and Amy Ward, and was born April 7, 1803, in the town of Old Springfield, Hampden county, Mass. In 1805 his father removed with his family, consisting of his wife, seven children and his widowed mother, to New York State and settled in Bristol, Ontario county. Later, they removed to Chagrin, Cayahoga county, Ohio. As a boy and young man Levi exhibited noble characteristics and industrious habits, and was able to render his father efficient help from his early youth. His education was limited, as he was raised on the frontier; and through force of circumstances he was compelled to work for others for a living. He also learned the trade of a cabinet maker. About the year 1827 he purchased some land and built a house at Rome, Ashtabula county, Ohio, where he lived, though yet unmarried, when Parley P Pratt and fellow missionaries passed through that part of the country on their journey to the west. They held meetings at Chagrin, where the senior Hancock still lived, and among the first baptized at that place were Levi's father and his sister Clarissa. Levi followed the missionaries to Kirtland, where he was baptized by Elder Pratt Nov. 16, 1830, and soon afterwards he was ordained an Elder by Oliver Cowdery. He then commenced to preach the gospel successfully in the surrounding country. In June, 1831, he was called by revelation, together with other Elders, to travel to Missouri and preach the gospel "by the way," with Zebedee Coltrin as a traveling companion. They performed successful missionary labors in Ohio, Indiana and Illinois, and after their arrival in Missouri, Levi participated in the preparatory work done for the building of Zion. After his return to Ohio he became a zealous and faithful worker for the cause, and contributed liberally toward the erection of the Lord's House at Kirtland. In 1834 he marched to Missouri as a member of Zion's Camp, and, having returned to Ohio, was chosen and ordained one of the first Seventies of the Church Feb. 28, 1835, under the hands of Joseph Smith and others; soon afterwards he was chosen one of the First Seven Presidents of Seventies, which position he occupied with honor and faithfulness for forty-seven years, or until the day of his death. In 1838 he removed to Missouri, where he passed through the persecutions which the Saints were called upon to endure, and when the Church was expelled from that State in 1838, Bro. Hancock was among those who covenanted to place their means at the disposal of the committee which had been appointed for the removal of the poor Saints, to the State of Illinois. After the founding of Nauvoo he became a prominent and energetic citizen of that place, where he also acted as a police officer. Early in 1844 he was called on a mission to Vermont. He had previously filled a mission to Indiana. In common with the rest of the Saints he suffered persecutions and consequent hardships in Illinois and became an exile for conscience sake in 1846. Arriving with the camps of Israel on the Missouri river, he enlisted in the famous Mormon Battalion and marched with that military body to California, being the only man of the general authorities Of the Church who thus enlisted. On the long and tedious march his wise counsel and exemplary course did much to mould the character of the soldiers. He acted as chaplain of the Battalion. As an illustration of his susceptibility to the spirit of inspiration the following is related: A non-Mormon by the consent of the Battalion joined the company and soon after required baptism. Brother Hancock, in company with others of the brethren, took him down to the Missouri river and performed the ceremony. On raising him from the water he said, as if wrought upon by the spirit, "If I have baptized a murderer, it will do him no good." His words had such an effect upon the stranger that he soon afterwards confessed that he was a murderer, having killed his own brother. As many of the men of the Battalion were members of the Seventies' quorums, Seventies' meetings were held occasionally in the camp, when circumstances would permit, under the presidency of Bro. Hancock, who did his best to influence the men to live as their religion taught under every circumstance. On account of his zeal in this regard, some of the officers wrongfully accused him of being officious. After the discharge of the Battalion in California, in 1847, Bro. Hancock marched to Great Salt Lake valley with the main body of the soldiers, arriving there in October. From that time until his demise he labored assiduously for the upbuilding of the kingdom of God and for making the wilderness a fit place for the habitation of man. He traveled extensively throughout the Territory in the interest of the Seventies and the Church generally. He was also one of the Pioneer settlers of Manti, Sanpete county, from whence he was sent thrice as a representative to the Utah legislature. Subsequently he moved to Payson, Utah county, and still later located in Salt Lake City. About 1866 he removed to southern Utah and settled in Harrisburg; afterwards he became a resident of Leeds, and still later of Washington. About ten years before his death he was ordained a Patriarch in which capacity he blessed thousands of the Saints. He died at his home in Washington, Washington county, Utah, June 10, 1882. Elder Hancock was a sparsely built man, quick and active. He was a natural minute man and a good musician.
