Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Coltrin, Zebedee

Coltrin, Zebedee, one of the First Seven Presidents of Seventies from 1835 to 1837, was a son of John and Sarah Coltrin and was born Sept. 7, 1804, at Ovid, Seneca county, N.Y. He was baptized soon after the organization of the Church, and is mentioned as an Elder as early as June, 1831; subsequently he was ordained to the office of a High Priest, in which capacity he served occasionally as an alternate member of the High Council at Kirtland. He enjoyed the spiritual gifts of the gospel in a great degree, and as early as Jan. 24, 1834, he is mentioned in Church history as one of those who spoke in tongues at Kirtland, Ohio. Later in that year he went to Missouri as a member of Zion's Camp, but returned to Kirtland in the fall. At the organization of the first quorum of Seventy, Feb. 28, 1835, he was ordained a Seventy under the hands of Joseph the Prophet and others, and when the quorum was more fully organized he was chosen as one of its seven presidents. At a meeting held at Kirtland, Ohio, Jan. 28, 1836, he had a vision of "the Savior extended before him, as upon a cross, and a little after, crowned with glory upon his head, above the brightness of the sun." A few days later he saw the "Lord's hosts" in another glorious vision. Having been ordained a High Priest prior to his identification with the Seventies, he was advised to join the High Priests' quorum, which he did; and the vacancy caused thereby in the Council of Seventies was filled April 6, 1837, when Daniel S. Miles was chosen to succeed him. After passing through the Missouri persecutions Elder Coltran located in Illinois; but subsequently returned to Kirtland, where he was chosen second counselor to Almon W. Babbitt in the presidency of that Stake, May 22, 1841; but later he is found among the Saints in Illinois. When an attempt was made to kidnap Joseph the Prophet in 1843, Elder Coltrin rendered efficient service to save his beloved leader, and he afterwards traveled in the State of Illinois to allay the excitement caused by Joseph's arrest and deliverance. In 1844 he was called on a mission to Michigan. After suffering during the persecutions in Illinois, we find Bro. Coltrin a Pioneer of 1847, traveling to Great Salt Lake valley under the leadership of Pres. Brigham Young. He returned to the East, but came back to the valley at an early day, and was for many years a resident of Spanish Fork, Utah county, where he died July 21, 1887. At the time of his death the "Deseret News" said editorially: "This respected and venerable man was one of the oldest members of the Church and was identified with many of its earliest incidents in the days of Kirtland. He was closely associated with the Prophet Joseph and has often testified to having been a witness of and participant in many marvelous spiritual manifestations. Father Coltrin has for many years past officiated as a Patriarch, and has left an excellent record for faithfulness."
