Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Smith, SylvesterPPSmith, Sylvester

Smith, SylvesterPPSmith, Sylvester, one of the First Seven Presidents of Seventies, from 1835 to 1837, was baptized soon after the organization of the Church, and was one of the early Elders of the same; he was ordained a High Priest by Oliver Cowdery Oct. 25, 1831, and performed considerable missionary labor, being specially called to the ministry by a revelation given through the Prophet Joseph Smith Jan. 25, 1832 (Doc. and Cov., 75: 34). When the first High Council was organized at Kirtland, Ohio, Feb. 17, 1834, Sylvester Smith was chosen one of the members. Soon afterwards he became a member of Zion's Camp and marched in that body to Missouri and back. On that famous journey he manifested a quarrelsome spirit, and rebelled on several occasions against Joseph the Prophet and the established order of the camp, for which he was tried before the High Council after his return to Kirtland. He confessed his faults and retained his standing in the Church. When the first selection of Elders to be ordained Seventies was made, Sylvester Smith was among the number chosen. He was ordained a Seventy Feb. 28, 1835, at Kirtland, Ohio, under the hands of Joseph Smith and others; and on the following day (March 1, 1835,) he was ordained a president of Seventies. His place in the High Council was filled Jan. 13, 1836, by the appointment of Noah Packard as a High Councilor. At a solemn meeting held at Kirtland Jan. 22, 1836, "the heavens were opened upon Elder Sylvester Smith, and he, leaping up, exclaimed, 'The horsemen of Israel and the chariots thereof.'" During that winter Sylvester Smith studied Hebrew, together with Joseph the Prophet and others, in a class taught by Professor Seixas. Owing to his previous ordination to the office of a High Priest, he was released from his position as a president of Seventies, at a meeting held in the Kirtland Temple, April 6, 1837. John Gaylord was chosen to fill the vacancy caused thereby in the First Council of Seventy.
