Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Butterfield, Josiah

Butterfield, Josiah, one of the First Seven Presidents of Seventies from 1837 to 1844, was a native of the State of Maine. He is first mentioned in the history of Joseph Smith in connection with a meeting held at Kirtland, Ohio, March 8, 1835, when he was blessed for having assisted in the building of the Kirtland Temple. He was ordained and set apart as one of the First Seven Presidents of Seventies, April 6, 1837, under the hands of Sidney Rigdon and Hyrum Smith; and he was appointed one of the commissioners to lead the Kirtland Camp, which journeyed from Ohio to Missouri in 1838. As they traveled through the country, Elder Butterfield, together with others, was arrested by a county sheriff near Mansfield, Ohio, on a charge connected with "Kirtland Safety Society Money," and committed to jail. The brethren, who were thus deprived of their liberty, were discharged the next day by the court Sitting in Mansfield, as no bill was found against them. When the Saints were expelled from Missouri, Elder Butterfield enrolled his name among those brethren who covenanted to assist the poor to remove from that State. At Nauvoo, Ill., he appeared to be an active man, and he was called on a mission to the State of Maine in April, 1844. He was finally excommunicated from the Church for neglect of duty and for other causes, at the general conference held at Nauvoo Oct. 7, 1844. The vacancy caused thereby in the First Council of Seventies was filled by the appointment of Jedediah M. Grant, to be one of the First Seven Presidents of Seventies. Some years later, on his way to California with a herd of stock, he visited Fort Herriman, Salt Lake county, Utah, where his nephew, Thomas Butterfield, resided. At that time he explained to his relatives that his faith in "Mormonism" was as strong as ever. He continued his journey to California, where he, according to the statement of Pres. Joseph Young, died in Monterey county, in April, 1871.
