Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Pulsipher, Zera

Pulsipher, Zera, one of the First Seven Presidents of Seventies from 1838 to 1862, was born June 24, 1789, in Rockingham, Windham county, Vermont. In his youth he served in the wars of his country and heard the fulness of the gospel preached in the State of New York. He was baptized and ordained to the ministry in January, 1832, after which he traveled and preached extensively through the Eastern States and Canada. Among those baptized by him was the late Pres. Wilford Woodruff. He removed to Kirtland, Ohio, in 1835. When the bulk of the Saints removed from Ohio, to Missouri in the famous Kirtland Camp, in 1838, Elder Pulsipher was one of the commissioners appointed to lead said camp, having previously (March 6, 1838) been ordained and set apart as one of the First Seven Presidents of Seventies, under the hands of Joseph Young and James Foster. After passing through the Missouri persecutions, he became a resident of Nauvoo, and is mentioned in the famous revelation given through the Prophet Joseph Jan. 19, 1841. After the exodus of the Saints from Illinois, he shared in all the hardships endured by his people on the plains and mountains and arrived in Great Salt Lake valley in 1847 or 1848. For twenty-four years after that he was a resident of the valleys of Utah, and thoroughly learned the hardship of pioneer life. He transcended the bounds of the Priesthood in the ordinance of sealing, for which he was cited to appear before the First Presidency of the Church April 12, 1862. It was there voted, that he be rebaptized, reconfirmed and ordained to the office of a High Priest, or go into the ranks of the Seventies. Subsequently he was ordained a Patriarch. Elder John Van Cott was chosen as his successor in the First Council of Seventies. Elder Pulsipher was the father of seventeen children, eight of whom came to the mountains with him. At the time of his death, which occurred at Hebron, Washington county, Utah, Jan. 1, 1872, his posterity included 65 grandchildren and 37 great-grandchildren. He died as a member in full fellowship in the Church.
