Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Rockwood, Albert P.

Rockwood, Albert P., one of the First Seven Presidents of Seventies from 1845 to 1879, was born June 5, 1805, in Holliston, Middlesex county, Mass. Having heard of the Latter-day Saints through Elders Brigham Young and Willard Richards, he came to Kirtland, Ohio, to make further investigations. He soon became converted and was baptized at Kirtland, July 25, 1837, by Brigham Young. After his baptism Bro. Rockwood returned to the Eastern States. He was ordained a Seventy Jan. 5, 1839, under the hands of Joseph Young, Zera Pulsipher, Henry Harriman and Levi W. Hancock. He gathered with the Saints to Missouri, where he passed through severe persecutions. Later, he settled at Nauvoo, Ill., where he took a prominent part in the affairs of the growing city. When the Nauvoo Legion was first organized in 1841 he was elected captain of one of the companies and was also appointed drill officer; later he acted as commander of Joseph Smith's life guard, and when Joseph was kidnapped in Dixon, Illinois, in 1843, Elder Rockwood, as acting adjutant of a company of horsemen, rendered efficient service in his rescue. Still later, Bro. Rockwood ranked as a general in the Legion. He also acted as a municipal officer in Nauvoo. Having been called to fill a vacancy in the First Council of Seventies, caused by the release of James Foster, Elder Rockwood was ordained and set apart as one of the First Presidents of Seventies at Nauvoo, Dec. 2, 1845, under the hands of Apostles Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Hyde, Parley P. Pratt and Geo. A. Smith. When the Saints were expelled from Nauvoo, Elder Rockwood shared in the general sufferings and hardships endured by the Camps of Israel, and in 1847 he came to Great Salt Lake valley as one of the Pioneers, under the immediate leadership of Pres. Brigham Young. During his many years' residence in Utah he worked diligently for the upbuilding of the country, and he filled many important positions of honor and trust. For many years he acted as warden of the Territorial penitentiary. After a long life of usefulness and diligence, Elder Rockwood departed this life Nov. 25, 1879, at his residence in the Sugar House Ward, Salt Lake county, Utah, He had been confined to his bed with a disease of the lungs for three weeks. In his obituary published in the "Deseret News" at the time of his death, the following occurs: "He (Elder Rockwood) has been a prominent member of the Church and a man of integrity, position and influence in the community. He served in the first legislature of Utah, has been a member of the same body ever since and was elected for the approaching session this winter. He was also the Pioneer fish commissioner of the Territory, and one of the directors of the Deseret Agricultural and Manufacturing Society. In fact, through all his career, he has held high and responsible positions with honor to himself and benefit to the community in which he has resided. A good man has gone to rest after a long life of usefulness. He died peacefully, surrounded by his family and friends, and previous to his death shook hands with and bade them all good bye."
