Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Clapp, Benjamin L.

Clapp, Benjamin L., one of the First Seven Presidents of Seventies, from 1845 to 1859, was born Aug. 19, 1814, in Alabama. He joined the Church at an early day and labored as a missionary in Kentucky in 1838. He gathered with the Saints to Missouri, where he passed through severe persecutions, and after participating in the Crooked river battle he, together with others fled into the wilderness in order to escape their enemies. They traveled through the northern part of Missouri, and the southern part of Iowa and finally reached Illinois in safety. At a political meeting held at Nauvoo Feb. 2, 1843, Elder Clapp delivered a speech, in which he said that Joseph and Hyrum Smith had attempted to take away the rights of the citizens at a late municipal election. Two days later he made a public confession to the effect that he was wrong in his accusation. When Joseph the Prophet was arrested at Dixon, Ill., in 1843, and an attempt was made to kidnap him to Missouri, Elder Clapp joined the expedition which rescued the Prophet. Soon after this he departed on a mission to Alabama, on which he had been called at the previous April conference. He was ordained and set apart as one of the presidents of the eighth quorum of Seventy Oct. 20, 1844, under the hands of Joseph Young and Levi W. Hancock, and set apart as one of the First Seven Presidents of Seventies Dec. 2, 1845, under the hands of Apostles Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Hyde, Parley P. Pratt, and George A. Smith. He came west in the general exodus of the Saints from Nauvoo, Ill., and after residing for several years in Salt Lake City he removed his family to Ephraim, Sanpete county, where he had some difficulty with Bishop Warren S. Snow. After investigation before the council of Seventies, he was dropped from his position in the council and finally excommunicated from the Church at the general conference held in Salt Lake City April 7, 1859. He died in California about the year 1860, with a settled conviction of the truth of the latter-day work.
