Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Van Cott, John

Van Cott, John, one of the First Seven Presidents of Seventies from 1862 to 1883, was born Sept. 7, 1814, in Canaan, Columbia county, New York, and embraced the fulness of the gospel under the administration of Parley P. Pratt at Nauvoo, Ill., in September, 1845. He was ordained a Seventy Feb. 25, 1847, by Joseph Young, and was one of the early pioneers of Utah, arriving in Great Salt Lake valley Sept. 25, 1847. In 1852, agreeable to call, he went on a mission to Europe, and after reaching England, he was sent to Scandinavia to succeed the late Willard Snow in the presidency of the Scandinavian mission. He presided in that capacity nearly four years, and returned to his mountain home in 1856, after a most successful ministry. In 1859 he was called on a second mission to Scandinavia and again presided over the mission, this time about two and a half years. He returned home in 1862. On these two missions he became very much endeared to the Scandinavian Saints, whose sterling qualities and integrity he learned to appreciate. He also acquired the Danish language to a considerable degree of perfection. After his return home from his second foreign mission, he was chosen as one of the First Seven Presidents of Seventies, being first sustained in that capacity at the October conference, 1862. Soon afterwards he was called on a special mission to the Scandinavian Saints in Utah, and while laboring in that calling made his home temporarily in Sanpete county. He continued his labors among the Seventies with zeal and fidelity until his death, which occurred at his home a short distance south of Salt Lake City, Feb. 18, 1883, after a lingering illness of several months. In an obituary notice published in the "Deseret News," the editor of that paper says: "It would be difficult to find a more exemplary or conscientious man than Brother Van Cott. He was a good man in the broad sense, not negatively so, but as a producer of' the good fruits of a well spent life. He was one of those whose character and motives appeared so far beyond reproach that we doubt if they have ever been the subject of even suspicion. * * * At home and abroad, whenever Brother Van Cott adjourned, he was regarded with esteem and regard, his very presence and appearance inspiring sentiments of that nature."
