Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Taylor, William Whittaker

Taylor, William Whittaker, one of the First Seven Presidents of all the Seventies from 1880 to 1884, was the son of President John Taylor, and Harriet Whittaker, and was born Sept. 11, 1853, in Salt Lake City, Utah. With the exception of the time spent on a mission to Great Britain, he resided in the Fourteenth ward (where he was born) constantly from birth to death. After leaving school he obtained employment in the manufacturing establishment of Messrs. Folsom, Romney & Taylor, and succeeded in obtaining considerable knowledge of the business and of the carpenter's trade before he was called on a mission to Europe. While yet a youth he became a Teacher in the Ward and in the Sunday School, where he lived, performing the duties of each to the entire satisfaction of his superiors. Though naturally of a sedate turn of mind, religiously inclined, and free from all levity, he had a keen sense of humor and could appreciate pleasantry with great enjoyment. A little incident is related by an intimate friend which fully exemplifies his high sense of probity and honor. When a mere boy he, with a companion, went to the old adobe yard, where a skating pond had been prepared, for entering which a charge of 25 cents was made. William and his friend were anxious to get on the pond to skate, but they had no money. They succeeded, however, without the knowledge of the proprietor, in effecting an entrance. When William thought of what he had done, he felt condemned, and to satisfy his conscience resolved to repay the man with the first money he could earn. In course of time he earned a dollar, and he immediately took it to him and insisted upon his taking a four-fold payment for the wrong he had done him. At the April conference, 1875, he was called on a mission to Great Britain; he was ordained a Seventy and set apart for that mission Oct. 11, 1875, by Orson Pratt, and on the 26th of the same month, he took his departure. He returned home Oct. 16, 1877, bringing with him the love and confidence of the Elders and Saints with and among whom he labored. He filled his mission to England with that zeal and fidelity which were characteristic of him in all his labors. Shortly after his return, at a meeting of the Priesthood of the Salt Lake Stake of Zion, held Nov. 3, 1877, he was chosen as Stake clerk and clerk of the High Council. This position he filled till the time of his death. He was a sample clerk, possessing the rare faculty of seizing all the salient points of the case under discussion and presenting them in a terse and condensed form. No one could fail, after reading his minutes, to get a clear conception of every point involved and the arguments of both sides, and it was rarely they had to be corrected. At the death of Albert P. Rockwood, the question arose as to who should be appointed to fill the vacancy made by his departure in the First Council of Seventies. The presidents in attendance at a certain meeting mentioned various names, and as they did not readily unite upon any one. President Joseph Young, who had favored the selection of Wm. W. Taylor for the position, suggested that all the names be written on separate slips of paper and be placed in a box, and that one of the brethren should draw each slip separately, while he should sit with his back to the box; and when the slip should be drawn that the spirit indicated held the name that should be selected, he would mention it. Seymour B. Young drew the slips without, of course, giving any indication as to the name written upon each. One slip was drawn. The response from President Joseph Young was "Go on." Another was drawn, with the same response. A third was drawn, and Brother Seymour B. Young was told he need not draw any more, for that was the right one. An examination of the paper disclosed the name of Wm. W. Taylor, and those present agreed to his nomination, and it was afterwards agreed to by all the authorities and sustained at the general conference. Consequently, Elder Taylor was ordained and set apart as one of the First Seven Presidents of Seventies. After the settlements of the Saints had become numerous and widespread in the mountains, the organization of the several quorums of Seventies, which had been effected when the people were living in a limited area, was felt to be unsuited to the new condition and circumstances in which the Seventies were placed. When Elder Taylor took his place as one of the seven presidents of that body, he devoted much thought to the subject, and to the best method of correcting the inconveniences which arose from having the members of the different quorums living so wide apart and scattered among the different Stakes. President John Taylor's attention having also been drawn to the subject, he received a revelation, in which instruction was given in regard to the proper method of reorganizing the Seventies. None were more delighted by this word of the Lord than Wm. W. Taylor. He took hold of the labor with the utmost earnestness and zeal, and scarcely a Sunday passed after the revelation was received that he was not engaged in some of the Stakes, giving the Seventies instructions and helping them to perfect the organization upon the plan suggested by the Lord. The devotion and wisdom which he exhibited in his labor called forth the praise of the presiding authorities and the admiration of his fellow servants of the Seventies. At the general election for members of the legislative assembly of Utah, in 1883, he was elected a member of the council, and in him his constituents felt they had a representative who could be trusted to stand by and defend their rights and interest to the utmost extremity. He never faltered in the discharge of his duty, and was inflexible in demanding for the people every right which belonged to free men. In February, 1884, he was elected assessor and collector of taxes for Salt Lake City, to which office he devoted himself with assiduity and energy. In the evening of Saturday, July 26, 1884, he was attacked with bilious colic, which caused his death Friday morning, Aug. 1, 1884, in Salt Lake City. (See also "Deseret News," Vol. 33 (weekly), p. 470.)
