Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Fjeldsted, Christian Daniel

Fjeldsted, Christian Daniel, one of the First Seven Presidents of Seventies since 1884, was born Feb. 20, 1829, in Sundbyvester, a suburb of Copenhagen, Denmark. His parents moved in the humbler walks of life, and belonged to the respectable working class. Thus the subject of this sketch was taught early in life to work for a livelihood, and he learned the trade of a moulder. After the death of his father, he was obliged, though only ten years old, to do all he could toward supporting his mother. At the age of twenty he married a wife, and in 1851 he first heard the glorious truths of the gospel preached; for it had been brought to Denmark the year before through the instrumentality of Apostle Erastus Snow and his fellow-missionaries. Brother Fjeldsted believed and was baptized, together with his young wife, on February 20, 1852, by Christian Samuel Hansen, and confirmed by Ole N. C. Monster. Soon afterwards Brother Fjeldsted began to preach and bear testimony to his fellow-workmen, as he felt anxious that they should enjoy the same blessings that he had become a partaker of. As soon as his employer heard of this he dismissed him from his service one cold winter day, which virtually meant that he was turned into the street without a penny for the support of himself and family. After a short time, however, he obtained other employment. Not long after his baptism he was ordained to the Priesthood and appointed to preside over a district on the island of Amager; he then held weekly meetings in his home. On Sundays he usually performed missionary work in the neighboring towns and villages. July 25, 1853, he was ordained an Elder by Peter O. Hansen, and in the fall of 1855 he was called to labor as a traveling Elder in the Copenhagen conference. After working in that capacity for about one year he was appointed to preside over the Aalborg conference. In this calling he was signally blessed, and hundreds of people identified themselves with the Church during his two years' presidency. In 1858 he emigrated with his family to Utah, arriving in Salt Lake City in October of that year. He made his home in the Sugar House Ward, where he took an active part in Church affairs, and also performed much hard manual labor in order to support himself and family. He was ordained a Seventy, Feb. 5, 1859, by Elder William H. Walker. In 1867, he was called on a mission to Scandinavia. Accompanied by other Elders he crossed the plains in an ox train, and reached Copenhagen, Denmark, after eight weeks' travel. During the first year of his mission he presided over the Aalborg conference; later he labored as a traveling Elder in the Scandinavian mission, and finally was appointed to take charge of the Christiania conference, Norway. Being honorably released, he returned home in 1870. Two years later he was called to labor as a missionary among the Scandinavian Saints in the northern counties of Utah, and he located at Logan, Cache county, which is still his home.. In 1881 he was called by Pres. John Taylor to take another mission to Scandinavia, this time to preside over the mission. He occupied this position about two years and a half, and after his return home in 1884, he was ordained one of the First Seven Presidents of Seventies by Pres. Wilford Woodruff. This ordination took place April 28, 1884. In 1886 he was called on another mission to Scandinavia, when he labored as a traveling Elder in the Scandinavian mission for two years, and then succeeded Elder Nils C. Flygare, in the presidency of the mission. After an absence of four years he returned to his mountain home in 1890, and resumed his labors among the Seventies. In the spring of 1897 he was called on a special mission to Chicago, where he assisted in the raising up of a branch of the Church, consisting largely of Scandinavians. He returned to Utah in the fall of the same year. In the beginning of April, 1901, he left his home on still another mission to Scandinavia. Pres. Fjeldsted is universally loved and respected by all who know him. Especially is this the case with the Scandinavian Saints, in whose interest he has devoted nearly his entire life. His affable manner and pleasant, genial nature has paved his way to the hearts of the people, both Saints and strangers, and now toward the evening of his earthly career he certainly has the satisfaction of knowing that his life's labor has been a success, and that his efforts have been appreciated. His untiring devotion to his Master's cause has classed him among God's noblemen, and as long as the knowledge of the great missionary work done by the Latter-day Saint Elders in the nineteenth century shall be remembered and remain matters of record, the name of Elder Christian Daniel Fjeldsted will be had in honorable remembrance as one of the most energetic and faithful among them.
