Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Morgan, John

Morgan, John, one of the First Seven Presidents of Seventies from 1884 to 1894, was the son of Gerrard Morgan and Ann Eliza Hamilton, and was born Aug. 8, 1842, at Greensburg, Decatur county, Indiana. During the war of the Rebellion, which broke out when he was eighteen years of age, he joined the Union army, and served with honor and distinction, participating in several of the most important battles. Coming to Utah at the close of the war, he was soon engaged as an instructor in the University, when that institution was conducted in the Council House, Salt Lake City. Later, he established the Morgan Commercial College on First South street, in a building located where the Morgan hotel now stands. Having become converted to "Mormonism," he was baptized by Robert Campbell Nov. 26, 1867, in Salt Lake City, and ordained an Elder by Wm. H. Folsom Oct. 23, 1868. In 1875 he responded to a call as a missionary to the Southern States, which he filled with ability and zeal, and returned home in December, 1877. Prior to his departure on this mission he was ordained a Seventy, Oct. 8, 1875, by Joseph Young. In 1878 he was called on a second mission to the Southern States, this time to preside over the mission. In that capacity his devotion and energy in spreading the gospel made for him a bright and lasting record. While presiding in the Southern States, he made frequent visits home. In October, 1884, he was chosen and ordained one of the First Seven Presidents of Seventies, to fill a vacancy caused by the death of Wm. W. Taylor. In this high and holy calling he labored with diligence and faithfulness up to the time of his last sickness, and traveled very extensively among the Saints in the different Stakes of Zion. He also served as a member of the Utah legislature and held other positions of importance in the community. He became somewhat involved financially, over which he seemed to worry a great deal, and he was stricken with typhoid-malaria, which culminated in his death Aug. 14, 1894, at Preston, Oneida county, Idaho. His body was brought to Salt Lake City for burial. "Elder Morgan was a man of strict probity and honor," writes the editor of the "Deseret News" in an obituary. "Possessed of keen intellectual power and marked personal courage, he was an able, fearless expounder of gospel truths; especially were these virtues exhibited during his long presidency of the Southern States Mission, at a time when in that section of the country the feeling was high against the Latter-day Saints. His ministrations were attended with power and to the last his energies were earnestly devoted to the cause of truth which he had exposed. He has done much traveling and preaching among the Saints during the closing years of his life. In his death a true and good man has been called away, and the hearts of all Israel will be bowed in sorrow with his family at the departure from our midst of a beloved servant of God."
