Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Kimball, J. GoldenPPKimball, Jonathan Golden

Kimball, J. GoldenPPKimball, Jonathan Golden, one of the First Seven Presidents of Seventies since 1892, was born in Salt Lake City, June 9, 1853, "in a palatial Utah home of half a century ago-a residence of his father's, erected in 1848-49, which still stands practically as it was built at that time." Elder Kimball has many times stated publicly that he was very much pleased when being set apart for a mission by one of the Apostles to have it said in that blessing that he was a son of his father, Heber C. Kimball. His mother's name was Christeen Golden Kimball, she being the only member of her family that ever joined the Church. Brother Kimball was carefully trained by his father, as he was living in such close proximity to him that he was ever under his very watchful care. He had the privilege in his early years of accompanying his father with Pres. Brigham Young's large parties when visiting the settlements of the Saints. He was a student of the leading schools of Salt Lake City up to 1868, and had a life scholarship paid in what has now terminated in the University of Utah; he was also a student of the "Morgan Commercial College." His father died June 22, 1868, and being the eldest child of his mother's family, unfortunately and against his mother's wishes he became attached to the vocation of driving a team-hauled wood from the canyons, ore from the mines, etc. To follow a profession of any kind was not urged upon young people in those days, and notwithstanding every effort was made by his mother to secure more elevating employment, it failed; and the mother went out the second time, in 1875, as a pioneer, and with her family located in Meadowville, Rich county, Utah, where Brother Kimball and his brother Elias S., who has been his partner in business ever since, purchased four hundred acres of farm and meadow land, and in that cold, northern clime established a ranch and farm, and for fifteen years followed the horse and cattle business. They were successful and accumulated considerable means. From the time of his father's death, and up to the fall of 1881, he was under no restraint of any kind, but was as free as the birds that fly in the air; no man's hand was stretched [p.211] out to guide him in the footsteps of his father until that man of God, Elder Karl G. Maeser, was directed by the Spirit of the Lord to the isolated little settlement, made up largely of eleven of Heber C. Kimball's sons and their families. This great and good man called the people together in a log school house and testified of God, and spoke in the interest of the Brigham Young Academy. The Spirit of God awakened and aroused Brother Kimball and his brother Elias, and for the first time they realized there was something else to be accomplished in life besides looking after cattle and horses. They repented of their weaknesses, reformed, and after great sacrifices and the overcoming of many difficulties they both attended the Brigham Young Academy for two years, and were guided and tutored by Dr. Maeser and his associate teachers. While it is true they did not graduate or attempt to do so, they repented, reformed, and gained a testimony that God lives, and they have been loyal and true to the Brigham Young Academy ever since. At the expiration of the school term, Elder Kimball was called, April 6, 1883, by Pres. John Taylor, to fill a mission to the Southern States. In eight days after receiving his call he was set apart by Brother Moses Thatcher. Together with twenty-four Elders he landed in Chattanooga, Tennessee, and was appointed by Pres. Brigham H. Roberts to labor in Virginia, where he joined his companion as a traveling Elder and labored absolutely without purse or scrip. After laboring one year he was appointed to act as secretary of the Southern States Mission at Chattanooga under the direction of Pres. Roberts. He was very familiar with the details of the martyrdom of Elders Gibbs and Berry, as well as with the mobbing, shooting at and whipping of "Mormon" Elders during the year 1884. The last year of his mission his health and constitution were broken; he was troubled with malaria, which continued to afflict him for many years. In the spring of 1885 he received an honorable release, and returned via New Jersey, where he preached, and visited his mother's relatives. On his return he continued in the ranch business, and was ordained a Seventy by President C. D. Fjeldsted, July 21, 1886. On his return to Bear Lake he traveled as a home missionary in that Stake, and was appointed to preside over an Elders' quorum, after which he was chosen and set apart as superintendent of the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Associations of the Bear Lake Stake, and visited the associations until he moved to Logan city. The Kimball brothers partook of the spirit that is now running rife in the world and commenced to worship the "Old Gold Calf," hoping to gain honor and renown by becoming rich. Elder Jonathan G., together with Newel and Elias, entered into the implement business under the name of "Kimball Brothers," establishing places of business at Logan and Montpelier. They signed notes for the first time for over thirty thousand dollars. They labored hard for four years, and lost their investment, but saved their good name and paid their debts. Their ranch was exchanged for Cache valley property, and their cattle and horses invested in real estate. They were not yet convinced of the danger of speculation, but went into the real estate business during the boom, and bought everything almost that was for sale, and wound up their career as business men by investing in a company that had purchased 119,000 acres of land in Canada. What they failed to lose their friends helped them out of, and they were for the time being prevented from chasing after the golden calf. Moral: "Don't go in debt." The Lord again came to the rescue, and Brother Jonathan G. was called, Aug. 1, 1891, by Pres. Wilford Woodruff to succeed Elder William Spry as the president of the Southern States Mission. Notwithstanding his health was seriously impaired, and he was about to graduate in a business way, the Prophet of the Lord promised him he should regain his health and be blessed of the Lord, which was literally fulfilled. Brother Kimball labored three years as president of the Southern States Mission, and was succeeded by his brother, Elias S. Kimball. April 6, 1892, he was chosen one of the First Council of the Seventy, and was ordained by Apostle Francis M. Lyman, two days later. Brother Kimball was called to be one of the aids in the General Board of the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Associations in the year 1896, and has taken an active part in filling appointments, as directed by the [p.212] General Board, in nearly every Stake in Zion, visiting the young men's conferences, young men's and young ladies' conjoint conferences, and conventions. He has also been one of the chief workers for four consecutive years, as one of a committee in directing a missionary work among the young men, under the instructions of the General Board. In the year 1897 about eighty-seven missionaries labored in the Stakes of Zion, visiting about twenty-five thousand young men and urging upon them to enroll their names and become Mutual Improvement workers. The hearts of hundreds of young men were softened, and many repented and were baptized. One Elder baptized over ninety people in one Stake, and the young men followed this Elder from settlement to settlement to listen to his preaching on the principles of the gospel. There are many very interesting incidents and touching stories told connected with the successful labors of these missionary Elders. In the year 1898 one hundred and fifty missionaries were sent out and they visited sixteen thousand eight hundred young men and accomplished great good. The plan of missionary work was somewhat changed in 1899, as only thirty-eight Elders received a regular call (as all others had been called) by the Presidency of the Church, and were set apart as are the Elders who go on foreign missions. These thirty-eight Elders were called to Salt Lake City and instructed by the leading authorities of the Church for five days; and one Elder was sent to each Stake as a representative of the General Board, to labor with the officers of the Stakes and associations, and to awaken an interest in the work. In the year 1900 another change was adopted and a local missionary work was introduced, wherein local missionaries were appointed in each association. These brethren went quietly to work to convert careless young men, and it was intended to have as many missionaries in each Ward as they had young men to labor with. The committee this year (1901) intend to send out among the young people another company of select and choice young Elders as regularly called missionaries, under the direction of the General Board, as it is believed there is a great field of labor among the young people for the preaching of the gospel. There are very few, if any instances, where the young men have rejected these missionaries in their labors during the past four years. In January, 1901, Brother Kimball was appointed by President Snow and given the privilege, in company with his wife and Elder Heber J. Grant and family, to visit the California Mission, the object of the call being chiefly that he might become acquainted with that field of labor. He had the privilege of meeting with the Elders and Saints and listened for the first time to the "Mormon" Elders preach on the street corners. Elder Kimball was very much impressed with that country and people and believes a Stake of Zion will yet be established in the State of California.
