Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

McMurrin, Joseph William

McMurrin, Joseph William, one of the First Seven Presidents of Seventies since 1896, and at present the junior member of that council, is the son of Joseph McMurrin and Margaret Leaing, and was born Sept. 5, 1858, in Tooele, Tooele county, Utah. Shortly after his birth, his parents moved to Salt Lake City, where he spent his boyhood days. His opportunities for scholastic education were but meager, and while quite a youth he was apprenticed to the stone-cutter's trade, and worked for about two years on the Salt Lake Temple. When only seventeen years old he was called upon a colonizing mission to Arizona. He left his home to fulfill this call Feb. 1, 1876, driving two yoke of cattle on the way. After two months of hard travel he, with his companions, arrived near the present site of St. Joseph, on the Little Colorado river. He spent two years in assisting to establish that town. While upon this mission he gained considerable valuable experience in constructing dams and canals, in getting out timber from the forests, in building log houses, as well as in plowing and planting, and all such work as is common to pioneer life. A little incident that occurred while he was in Arizona is worth relating, showing, as it does, that he at that time had learned to put his trust in the Lord for guidance. It also furnishes an example of the efficacy of prayer. On one occasion, while upon the mountains in the midst of a dense forest, he lost his bearings and was unable to return to the camp where his companions were located. He searched for hours for the camp, but all in vain. His feelings at this time were most distressing, as he knew there was little hope of finding any human beings or habitation within a hundred miles if he missed his companions. As the shades of night approached he knelt down and sought the Lord in prayer, asking that he might be directed back to the camp. Immediately on arising from his knees he felt strongly impressed to go in a direction exactly opposite to the one he had previously supposed was the one to take. He followed this impression and to his great joy was led in a direct line to the camp. On being released from this Arizona mission he returned to his home in Salt Lake City, and for some time afterwards was engaged in hauling freight. Through this occupation he became familiar with the various mining camps in the vicinity of Great Salt Lake valley. In 1881, in connection with some friends, he secured a contract to build a part of the Oregon Short Line grade near Granger, Wyoming. While engaged in this work he received a call to take a mission to Great Britain, and in October of that year he left home in compliance with that call. Upon his arrival in Liverpool he was assigned to the Scottish conference. This was much to his satisfaction, as his parents were natives of Scotland and he had a strong desire to visit the land of his fathers. He labored for twenty-five months in that land, the last seven months as president of the conference. His labors upon this mission were very enjoyable as well as profitable to him. He had the satisfaction of baptizing fifty souls, and among this number were two of his father's sisters. Ever since this his first mission abroad Elder McMurrin has been an enthusiastic advocate of missionary work, and now, after a lapse of twenty years, he feels assured that no other experience or training could have been of so much worth to him as that gained while a boy missionary in Scotland. After his return from Great Britain he was called as a home missionary, and was also active in the Ward in which he resided. On the night of Nov. 28, 1885, a tragedy occurred which, were it not for a miracle, would have terminated in the death of Elder McMurrin. This was during the period known among our people as the "crusade"-when officers of the law were raiding the settlements of the Saints in search of offenders against the Edmunds acts, and when much unnecessary violence was resorted to in order to capture those who were most eagerly sought. Elder McMurrin, on the occasion above mentioned, was attacked by a United States deputy marshal, who shot him twice in the bowels, the bullets passing entirely through his body. Being wounded in such a vital part, no hope could be entertained that human skill would be of any avail in saving his life. The most eminent doctors of the city were positive in their opinion that he could not live. More than one of them declared that no person had ever been known to survive such deadly wounds. Brother McMurrin also felt that his life was fast ebbing away, and fully expected to die. While in this condition-waiting for the end-and believing that he had but a few hours at most to live, he was visited by Apostle John Henry Smith. He related to the Apostle what the doctors had told him, and expressed his own belief in the correctness of their views. After hearing what Brother McMurrin had to say, Apostle Smith took him by the hand and said: "Brother Joseph, as an Apostle of the Lord Jesus, I promise you in the name of Jesus Christ that if you desire to live you shall live, no matter what doctors may say to the contrary." Elder McMurrin had a wife and two children at this time, and had a strong desire to live to care for them, and the promise of the Apostle filled him with hope and joy. But when Apostle Smith had departed from the house, and when he looked at the dreadful wounds in his body, he could not believe it possible that the promise would be realized. God, however, in His merciful kindness, and in fulfillment of the promise of His inspired servant, spared his life. The wounds were healed, and Elder McMurrin was completely restored to soundness of body. His recovery was a miracle wrought by the power of the Lord, and he freely and emphatically acknowledges that such was the case. In 1886 Elder McMurrin was called a second time to take a mission to Great Britain. This time he labored in various parts of the mission. He was absent from home over four years, and during the last two and a half years of this period he presided over the London conference. He was accompanied on this mission by his wife and two children. While in London he was suddenly seized with an illness that caused him great pain for a considerable time. It appeared to be appendicitis that troubled him. His missionary companions administered to him, and through the prayer of faith he was instantly healed, and has never since been troubled in the same way. Again he had occasion to acknowledge the goodness and power of God exercised in his behalf. In July, 1896, he again took his leave of dear ones at home and started upon another foreign mission. This time he went as first counselor to Elder Rulon S. Wells, who at the same time was called to preside over the European mission. He spent two and a half years in the ministry while filling this position. During this time he traveled extensively throughout Great Britain, Holland, Belgium, Scandinavia, Germany, and Switzerland, and also visited France, Austria and Italy. At the general conference of the Church held in October, 1897, Brother McMurrin was sustained as one of the First Seven Presidents of the Seventies, and was ordained to this position by Apostle Anthon H. Lund, in Liverpool, England, Jan. 21, 1898. Brother Lund was then on his way to the Holy Land. Since his return from his last foreign mission, Pres. McMurrin has been chosen a member of the General Board of the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Associations, and has been actively engaged in the ministry in the Stakes of Zion, visiting the Mutual Improvement Associations, the quorums of Seventies, attending Stake conferences, and performing other such duties as pertain to his callings. In his travels he has visited nearly all the Stakes of Zion. In company with Apostle Abraham O. Woodruff he made an extended trip into what is known as the Big Horn country, during the summer of 1899. On this journey they traveled with team about twelve hundred miles, and in doing so were occupied about six weeks. For about three hundred miles of the way they journeyed over the old "Mormon" emigrant road, which was first marked out by the pioneers of 1847. This to them was quite an interesting feature. The country along parts of the Shoshone river was examined, and after the return of the brethren it was decided to send a colony into the basin to locate there. On their journey these visiting brethren found quite a number of Latter-day Saints located at a town called Burlington. They had been there for a number of years, and Elders Woodruff and McMurrin organized them into a Ward. This year (1901) a Stake of Zion has been formed in the basin, and the prospects are that many more Latter-day Saints will build homes in that section of Wyoming. Brother McMurrin has already spent nearly ten years abroad as a missionary, and has traveled seventy-five thousand miles while engaged in missionary work. As a minister of the gospel he is earnest, active and enthusiastic, and his extensive experience in the ministry has made him highly capable in performing and directing missionary labors. He has a good knowledge of the gospel and of Church government, is discerning and discreet; and in his labors he enjoys to a marked degree the spirit of inspiration, not only in public speaking but also in directing the efforts and movements of himself and others. His life is an example of what may be accomplished by a willing obedience to those in authority. By ever seeking to perform the duties required of him, and by his studious habits, he has gained an education in the practical matters of life that will serve him admirably in the calling imposed upon him. The development and knowledge received through his missionary labors make him eminently qualified for the position he holds as one of the presidents in the First Council of Seventies.-Edwin F. Parry.
