Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Little, Jesse Carter

Little, Jesse Carter, second counselor to Bishop Edward Hunter from 1856 to 1874, was the son of Thomas and Relief Little and was born Sept. 26, 1815, at Belmont, Waldo county, Maine. His parents were of Scotch-Irish extraction. He Joined the Church in the Eastern States, and was ordained a High Priest April 17, 1845, by Parley P. Pratt. In 1846 Elder Little acted as president of the mission in the New England and Middle States. On a visit to Washington, D.C., he learned from President Polk the intention of the government to raise a battalion of men to march to California. On hearing this, Elder Little started immediately for the camps of the Saints by way of Nauvoo, to consult with the authorities of the Church. Previous to this he had been very active in his labors in the East and had done all in his power to create a sympathy in behalf of his people. After assisting in organizing the battalion and accompanying the enlisted brethren as far as Fort Leavenworth, Elder Little returned to the East to resume his mission. Responding to a call from Pres. Brigham Young, he left a wife and two children at Petersboro, New Hampshire, early in 1847, and traveled three thousand miles to join the Pioneers, whom he overtook April 19, 1847, at a point about seventy miles west of Winter Quarters. When the company was organized as a military command, Jesse C. Little was appointed adjutant. After returning from his pioneer journey he was instructed to resume his presidency over the branches of the Church in the Eastern States, which he did. He arrived in Great Salt Lake valley the second time in 1852, and from that time until the day of his death he was a resident of the Territory of Utah. For many years he was prominent in ecclesiastical, civil and military affairs, and filled many important positions of honor and trust in the community. In the early fifties he opened a hotel at the Warm Springs, Salt Lake City, and did a good business there for many years. When an ordinance providing for the organization of a Fire Department in Salt Lake City was passed, Oct. 17, 1856, Jesse C. Little was appointed chief engineer. In 1856 he was ordained to the office of a Bishop and set apart as second counselor to Bishop Edward Hunter; and he occupied that important position till 1874, when he resigned. Subsequently he removed to Morgan county, and resided for a long time at Littleton, in said county. He died in Salt Lake City, Dec. 26, 1893. The immediate cause of his demise was a complication of ailments, and his last illness was somewhat protracted. In a short obituary published in the "Deseret News" at the time of his death the following occurs: "Col. Jesse C. Little is dead. The announcement will bring into the minds of thousands in Utah, particularly the early settlers, memories of stirring events, whose importance has become more thoroughly understood through the lapse of time, in which Col. Little was a prominent participator."
