Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 1 ( 1901)

Whitmer, John

Whitmer, John, the first regularly appointed Church Historian, was the third son of Peter Whitmer, sen., and Mary Musselman, and was born Aug. 27, 1802. He was baptized by Oliver Cowdery in Seneca lake in June, 1829, soon after Joseph Smith's arrival in Seneca county from Pennsylvania. His brothers David and Peter were baptized about the same time. John Whitmer assisted Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery considerably in writing while they were translating the latter part of the Book of Mormon in his father's house. In the meantime he became very zealous in the work, and, according to his earnest desire, Joseph inquired concerning him through the Urim and Thummim, and received a revelation in which he was commanded to declare repentance and bring souls unto Christ. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 15.) He was closely associated with the Prophet in his early administrations, and accompanied him on his first missionary trips to Colesville, Broome county, N.Y., where a large branch of the Church was built up in the midst of considerable persecution. He was also present at the little meeting held at Harmony, Penn., in August, 1830, when the revelation concerning the Sacrament was given. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 27.) In September, 1830, he was called by revelation to preach the gospel and to labor continuously in the interest of Zion (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 30), and on March 8, 1831, he was chosen by revelation to labor as a historian for the Church. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 47.) June 3, 1831, he was ordained a High Priest by Lyman Wight, at Kirtland, Ohio. In November, 1831, he was called by revelation (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 69) to accompany Oliver Cowdery to Jackson county, Missouri, with the revelations which he previously had assisted Joseph in copying and preparing for printing. He was also one of the "seven High Priests sent up from Kirtland to build up Zion," to stand at the head of the Church in Jackson county, Missouri, and at the time of the persecutions was a member of the committee who negotiated with the mob and agreed that the Saints should leave Jackson county. Later we find his name attached to petitions addressed to Governor Dunklin, of Missouri, praying for redress and protection against mob violence. In Clay county he was again quite active and his name appears in connection with several important documents and correspondences of the Church at that time. Next his brother David, John was the most prominent and able man among the Whitmers, and rendered efficient service to the Church in various ways, as long as he remained faithful. July 3, 1834, he was ordained one of the assistant presidents of the Church in Clay county, his brother David being ordained president on the same occasion. Some time afterwards John paid a visit to Kirtland, Ohio, where he acted as a High Counselor and took an active part in the affairs of the Church as one of the presiding officers from Missouri. He was present at the dedication of the Kirtland Temple, and received his blessings and anointings under the hands of the First Presidency, after which he returned to Missouri. At a meeting of High Priests held at Far West, Missouri, April 7, 1837, he was appointed to act as a member of a committee for the sale of town lots in Far West. At a conference held at Far West, Nov. 7, 1837, objections were made to John Whitmer as one of the assistant presidents of the Church in Missouri, but after he had made confessions he was temporarily sustained in his position. He was finally rejected, however, together with David Whitmer and Wm. W. Phelps, the other two presidents of the Church in Missouri, Feb. 5, 1838. John Whitmer was excommunicated from the Church by the High Council at Far West, March 10, 1838, "for persisting in unchristian-like conduct," for (in connection with David Whitmer and Wm. W. Phelps) having kept $2,000 of Church funds, which had been subscribed and paid in by members of the Church for building the Lord's House in Far West, etc. After his excommunication from the Church, John Whitmer refused to deliver up the Church documents in his possession to the proper authorities which gave occasion for quite a severe letter from Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon. The records, however, have never been obtained; they are still in the custody of the Whitmers or their relatives, who reside in Richmond, Ray county, Mo. But Elder Andrew Jenson, while on a visit to Richmond in 1893, succeeded in getting an exact copy of the "Old Whitmer Church Record," which is now at the Historian's Office. After the fall of Far West, in 1838-39. John Whitmer took advantage of the cheap rates at which the lands which the Saints were compelled to leave could be bought, and he succeeded in purchasing the principal part of the old townsite. When he died at his residence at Far West, July 11, 1878, he was known as an extensive farmer and stock-raiser. Although he never joined the Church again after his excommunication in 1838, he was always true to his testimony in regard to the Book of Mormon. Even in his darkest days, and at the time he first turned his back upon the Church and the Prophet Joseph, he declared in the presence of a number of Missourians-enemies to the work of God-that he knew the Book of Mormon was true. His nephew John C. Whitmer, of Richmond. Ray county, Mo., who was with him a few days before his death, testified to Elder Andrew Jenson in 1888 that John Whitmer bore testimony to the truth of the Book of Mormon until the last. This statement is corroborated by many others who visited him on various occasions previous to 1888. John Whitmer was the father of four children, three sons and one daughter. One of his sons died when about ten years old and another was killed in the late civil war. His only remaining son, Jacob D. Whitmer, lived in 1888 on the old Far West site, and owned one of the best farms in that part of the country, including the Temple Block, which he inherited from his father. John's only daughter also lived in Far West in 1888, on the old homestead, a short distance east of Jacob D. Whitmer's residence.
