Some years ago, Constance, a student nurse, was assigned to help a woman who had injured her leg in an accident. The woman refused medical help because she was afraid. The first time Constance dropped by, the injured woman ordered her out. On the second try, she let Constance in. By now the woman’s leg was covered with large sores, and some of the flesh was rotting. But still she didn’t want to be treated.

Constance made it a matter of prayer, and in a day or two the answer came. She took some foaming hydrogen peroxide with her for the next visit. As this was painless, the old woman let her use it on her leg. Then they talked about more serious treatment at the hospital. Constance assured her the hospital would make her stay as pleasant as possible. In a day or two the woman did get the courage to enter the hospital.

When Constance visited her, the woman smiled as she said, “You convinced me.” Then, quite unexpectedly, she asked Constance, “What church do you belong to?” Constance told her she was a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The woman said: “I knew it. I knew you were sent to me from the first day that I saw you. There was a light in your face that I had noticed in others of your faith. I had to put my trust in you.”

In three months’ time that festering leg was completely healed. Members of the ward where the old woman lived remodeled her house and fixed up her yard. The missionaries met with her, and she was baptized soon after. All of this because she noticed the light in that young student nurse’s face.

Service in this Church brings light to our eyes. Alma asked if we have received the Savior’s image in our countenances, or faces (see Alma 5:14). A sacred light comes to our eyes and countenances when we have a personal bond with our loving Heavenly Father and His Son, our Savior and Redeemer.

1.  How did the sick woman guess that Constance was a Latter-day Saint?

2.  With whom must you form a bond in order to have a “sacred light” in your eyes and face? How do you form that bond?

3.  Constance had a sincere desire to serve the sick woman. What did Constance do to learn how to serve her better? What can you do to learn to serve better?
