President George Albert Smith, the eighth President of the Church, was born on 4 April 1870 in Salt Lake City. When he was 13, he attended Brigham Young Academy. He later said:

“Dr. [Karl G.] Maeser one day stood up and said:

“‘Not only will you be held accountable for the things that you do, but you will be held responsible for the very thoughts that you think.’

“Being a boy, not in the habit of controlling my thoughts very much, it was quite a puzzle to me what I was to do, and it worried me.”

A week or two after this, young George Albert Smith came to a realization: “Why, of course, you will be held accountable for your thoughts because when your life is complete in mortality, it will be the sum of your thoughts. That one suggestion has been a great blessing to me all my life, and it has enabled me upon many occasions to avoid thinking improperly because I realize that I will be, when my life’s labor is complete, the product of my thoughts” (“Pres. Smith’s Leadership Address,” Church News, 16 Feb. 1946, 1).

“Trust in the Lord with all thine heart; and lean not unto thine own understanding. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths” (Prov. 3:5–6). In other words, as you fulfill your calling, seek the companionship of the Holy Ghost so you can know what Heavenly Father wants you to do. He will guide you. And when you receive His guidance, be sure to trust Him and follow what He has prompted you to do.

Many important events in Church history have taken place on 6 April. Here are just a few.

1830: The Prophet Joseph Smith organized the Church.

1841: The cornerstone ceremony was held for the Nauvoo Temple.

1853: The cornerstones of the Salt Lake Temple were laid.

1877: President Daniel H. Wells, Second Counselor in the First Presidency, dedicated the St. George Temple, the first temple completed in Utah.

1893: President Wilford Woodruff dedicated the Salt Lake Temple.

2000: President Gordon B. Hinckley dedicated the Palmyra New York Temple.
