Eldin Ricks, Case of the Book of Mormon Witnesses ( 1971)

Chapter 5

David Whitmer

Let us now shift the spotlight from Oliver Cowdery to David Whitmer. David Whitmer was cut off from the Church at Far West, Missouri, April 13, 1838. In time he moved from Far West, Missouri, to Richmond, Missouri, where he spent the remainder of his life. Here he was affiliated with a little splinter group of "Mormonism," which called itself the Church of Christ. Although he never returned to the Church, it is sufficient for our purpose to note that to the day of his death he belonged to a faction-indeed, was one of its leaders-that affirmed the divine authenticity of the Book of Mormon; so regardless of his differences with the leadership of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in other particulars, he appears to have been at one with them on the question of the truth of the Book of Mormon. Now, from the several incidents in his out-of-the-Church career that bear upon his testimony of the angel and the book there are a few representative ones to which I should like to call the "jury's" attention. I now ask David Whitmer to take the "witness stand."

12Mr. Whitmer, the Kansas City Daily Journal of June 5, 1881, carries the report of an interview between you and a newspaper man who allegedly had been sent to your home in Richmond to converse with you. The reporter found you somewhat pale and feeble in the wake of a recent illness. He introduced himself and, according to the article in question, began the conversation as follows:

12"Mr. Whitmer, knowing that you are the only living witness to the translation of the Book of Mormon and also that you were a resident of Jackson County during the Mormon troubles in 1833, I have been sent to you by the Journal to get from your lips the true statement of facts in regard to these matters. For nearly half a century the world has had but one side only, and it is now our desire to present to our readers for the first time the other side." [^1]

12The journalist says you replied:

12"Young man, you are right. I am the only living witness to the Book of Mormon, but I have been imposed upon and misrepresented so many times by persons claiming to be honorable newspaper men, that I feel a delicacy in allowing my name to come before the public in newspaper print again." [^2]

12The reporter maintains that he assured you that the interview would be published exactly as it took place and that your statements would not be garbled or distorted in any manner. Will you now give us the main elements of your story as you related it to the Kansas City Daily Journal man.

12"I first heard of what is now termed Mormonism in the year 1828. I made a business trip to Palmyra, N.Y., and while there stopped with one Oliver Cowdery. A great many people in the neighborhood were talking about the finding of certain golden plates by one Joseph Smith, Jr., a young man of that neighborhood. Cowdery and I, as well as others, talked about the matter, but at that time I paid but little attention to it, supposing it to be only the idle gossip of the neighborhood. Cowdery said he was acquainted with the Smith family, and he believed there must be some truth in the story of the plates, and that he intended to investigate the matter. I had conversations with several young men who said that, Joseph Smith had certainly had golden plates, and that before he attained them he had promised to share with them, but had not done so, and they were very much incensed with him. Said I, 'how do you know that Joe Smith has the plates?' They replied: 'we saw the Â� [place] in the hill that he took them out of just as he described it to us before he obtained them.' These parties were so positive in their statements that I began to believe there must be some foundation for the stories then in circulation all over that part of the country. I had never seen any of the Smith family up to that time, and I began to inquire of the people in regard to them, and learned that one night during the year 1827, Joseph Smith, Jr., had a vision, and an angel of God appeared to him and told him where certain plates were to be found, and pointed out the spot to him, and that shortly afterward he went to that place and found the plates which were still in his possession. After thinking over the matter for a long time, and talking with Cowdery, who also gave me a history of the finding of the plates, I went home, and after several months Cowdery told me he was going to Harmony, Pa.-whither Joseph Smith had gone with the plates on account of persecutions of his neighbors-and see him about the matter. He did go and on his way stopped at my father's house and told me that as soon as he found out anything either truth or untruth he would let me know. After he got there he became acquainted with Joseph Smith, and shortly after, wrote to me telling me that he was convinced that Smith had the records and that he (Smith) had told him that it was the will of heaven that he (Cowdery) should be his scribe to assist in the translation of the plates. He went on and Joseph translated from the plates and he wrote it down. Shortly after this Cowdery wrote me another letter in which he gave me a few lines of what they had translated, and he assured me that he knew of a certainty that he had a record of a people that inhabited this continent, and that the plates they were translating gave a complete history of these people. When Cowdery wrote me these things and told me that he had revealed knowledge concerning the truth of them, I showed these letters to my parents, and brothers and sisters. Soon after I received another letter from Cowdery, telling me to come down into Pennsylvania and bring him and Joseph to my father's house, giving as a reason therefor that they had received a commandment from God to that effect. I went down to Harmony, and found everything just as they had written me. The next day after I got there they packed up the plates and we proceeded on our journey to my father's house where we arrived in due time, and the day after we commenced upon the translation of the remainder of the plates. I, as well as all of my father's family, Smith's wife, Oliver Cowdery, and Martin Harris were present during the translation." [^3]

13That is very interesting, Mr. Whitmer, very interesting, indeed. Will you kindly also tell us when and under what circumstances you saw the Book of Mormon plates from which Joseph Smith translated.

13"It was in the latter part of June, 1829. Joseph Oliver Cowdery and myself were together, and the angel showed them to us. We not only saw the plates of the Book of Mormon, but he also showed us the brass plates of the book of Ether and many others. They were shown to us in this way. Joseph and Oliver and I were sitting on a log when we were overshadowed by a light more glorious than that of the sun. In the midst of this light but a few feet from us appeared a table upon which were many golden plates, also the sword of Laban and the directors. I saw them as plain as I see you now, and distinctly heard the voice of the Lord declaiming that the records of the plates of the Book of Mormon were translated by the gift and the power of God." [^4]

13Mr. Whitmer, approximately at this point in your interview with the representative of the Kansas City Daily Journal, the reporter says he asked you a question that we consider highly significant to this inquiry. I am going to restate the question very carefully and shall appreciate it if you answer just as carefully. Mr. Whitmer, "Did you see the angel?"

13"Yes; he stood before us. Our testimony as recorded in the Book of Mormon is absolutely true, just as it is written there." [^5]

13Thank you very kindly, Mr. Whitmer. We welcome this contribution. There is now another matter that, with your help, I should like to bring to the "jury's" attention. About two and a half months before your interview with the reporter of the Kansas City Daily Journal there appeared in the Richmond Conservator a strongly worded statement of protest written by you. It was directed at someone who apparently had misquoted you regarding your testimony of the Book of Mormon. Will you please tell us what you wrote in the Richmond Conservator at that time. The date was March 24, 1881.

13"Unto all Nations, Kindred Tongues and People, unto whom these presents shall come:

13"It having been represented by one John Murphy, of Polo, Caldwell County, Mo., that I, in a conversation with him last summer, denied my testimony as one of the three witnesses to the 'Book of Mormon.'

13"To the end, therefore, that he may understand me now, if he did not then; and that the world may know the truth, I wish now, standing as it were in the very sunset of life, and in the fear of God, once for all to make this public statement:

13"That I have never at any time denied that testimony or any part thereof, which has so long since been published with that Book, as one of the three witnesses. Those who know me best, well know that I have always adhered to that testimony. And that no man may be misled or doubt my present views in regard to the same, I do again affirm the truth of all my statements as then made and published.

13"'He that hath an ear to hear, let him hear;' it was no delusion! What is written is written, and he that readeth let him understand." [^6]

13That is certainly plain enough, Mr. Whitmer. That will be all.

13There is more to David Whitmer's statement in the Richmond Conservator, but only this much of it bears upon our investigation at this point. Whitmer's printed testimony is followed by an endorsement of his personal integrity and veracity signed by twenty-one public officials, judges, doctors, businessman, and other prominent citizens. It looks as if he went to a great deal of effort, indeed, to set the record straight about his testimony.

13In the same issue of the Richmond Conservator of March 24, 1881, the following editorial appeared. I offer it as a supplement to Whitmer's testimony. It is entitled, "An Explanation."

13"Elsewhere we publish a letter from David Whitmer, an old and well-known citizen of Ray [County], as well as an endorsement of his standing as a man, signed by a number of the leading citizens of this community, in reply to some unwarranted aspersions made upon him.

13"There is no doubt that Mr. Whitmer, who was one of the three witnesses of the authenticity of the gold plates, from which he asserts that Joseph Smith translated the Book of Mormon (a fac simile of the characters he now has in his possession with the original records), is firmly convinced of its divine origin, and while he makes no effort to obtrude his views or beliefs, he simply wants the world to know that so far as he is concerned there is no 'variableness or shadow of turning.' Having resided here for near a half of a century, it is with no little pride that he points to his past record with the consciousness that he has done nothing derogatory to his character as a citizen and a believer in the Son of Mary to warrant such an attack on him, come from what source it may, and now with the lilies of seventy-five winters crowning him like an aureole, and his pilgrimage on earth well nigh ended, he reiterates his former statements, and will leave futurity to solve the problem that he was but a passing witness to its fulfillment." [^7]

14Our next witness is the Honorable James H. Moyle, who for twenty-five years was United States Commissioner of Customs. With the help of Mr. Moyle we shall seek to gain additional insight into the story of the angel and the Book of Mormon plates as related by David Whitmer in July, 1885, forty-seven years after his expulsion from the Church and just three years before his death.

14Mr. Moyle, will you be so kind as to tell us the details of your 1885 interview with David Whitmer.

14"I was always deeply interested in the Book of Mormon, and had been on a mission to the Southern States before I entered the University of Michigan. During my three years' residence at the University I learned that David Whitmer was still living and in good health. I concluded to visit him on the way home to Salt Lake City. I graduated the latter part of June, 1885, and arrived in Richmond, Missouri, early in July.

14"Richmond is a small, rural town. I talked with the hack driver (that is what they called them) who took me to the hotel, and learned from him that David Whitmer was a highly respected citizen of the city. I likewise questioned the clerk of the hotel with the same results. I made such inquiry as I could concerning him during my visit of part of a day." [^8]

14I am not surprised to hear you say that the hack driver and others informed you that he was highly respected, Mr. Moyle. Despite calumny heaped upon the other witnesses to the Book of Mormon, David Whitmer seems to have come away relatively free from criticism. Now, please, continue with your narrative.

14"I found David Whitmer seated under a fruit tree in front of his home, which was located near the street and surrounded by an orchard. I understood that he had been bothered a good deal by curiosity seekers, and to make him feel more at home with me, I resented him with an appropriate book. I said that I had just graduated as a law student and was on my way home, and was extremely anxious to obtain from him whatever he would be good enough to tell me about the Book of Mormon, the plates from which it was translated and his testimony concerning the same which he had given to the world.

14"I entered in a little diary which I kept the mere fact that I had visited David Whitmer and that he had verified all that had been published to the world concerning the Book of Mormon by him in his testimony, and that was about all. In making that visit I had no thought of anything but my personal knowledge and did not contemplate publishing anything concerning it-it was purely an individual matter with me at the time. I told my friends about it and spoke of it in the ward, but at that time it seemed to be common knowledge. David Whitmer died about three years after I saw him. My memory of the main facts is perfectly clear. I have always enjoyed good health, never better than at the present." [^9]

14Mr. Moyle, pardon me if I break into your story, but would you mind giving us a description of David Whitmer?

14"David Whitmer was a man above medium height, slender rather than stout and was in his shirt sleeves. His hair was white, as was his long, patriarchal beard. As I remember, he was a man of fairly intellectual appearance, for the plain citizen that he was, and of good countenance. I am quite sure he was a serious-minded man." [^10]

14Mr. Moyle, can you tell us how you led up to the question about the angel and the plates.

14"I told him that I had been born in the Church, my mother also; that my father joined the Church when he was a boy in his teens; that I had grown up believing implicitly in the Book of Mormon; that I was about to commence life's activities as he was getting ready to lay them down, and pleaded with him to tell me the truth-not to permit me to go through life believing in a falsehood-that meant so much to me. I told him that he knew the facts and urged him to tell me just what happened in connection with the introduction of the Book of Mormon. I seemed to gain his confidence and felt free to ask him questions, and in fact did everything I could think of that would bring out the facts, particularly all of the circumstances and details of his seeing the Angel, seeing and handling the plates and where the interview with the Angel Moroni took place and the conditions and circumstances surrounding the same." [^11]

15 Good. And what was his answer?

15"He said that they (Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer and Martin Harris) were out in the primitive woods in western New York; that there was nothing between them and the Angel except a log that had fallen in the forest; that it was in the broad daylight with nothing to prevent either hearing or seeing all that took place. He then repeated to me that he did see and handle the plates; that he did see and hear the Angel and heard the declaration that the plates had been correctly translated; that there was absolutely nothing to prevent his having a full, clear view of it all. I remember very distinctly asking him if there was anything unnatural or unusual about the surroundings or the atmosphere. He answered that question. I do not remember exactly the words he used, but he indicated that there was something of a haze or peculiarity about the atmosphere that surrounded them but nothing that would prevent his having a clear vision and knowledge of all that took place. He declared to me that the testimony which he had published was true and that he had never denied any part of it. [^12]

15Coinciding with your testimony at this point, Mr. Moyle, is a statement made by Whitmer seven years before to Joseph F. Smith and a party of visitors. Since the statement bears upon the peculiar light that attended the angel's visit, I should like to insert it into the record at this point. I quote:

15"The fact is, it was just as though Joseph, Oliver and I were sitting just here on a log, when we were overshadowed by a light. It was not like the light of the sun nor like that of a fire, but more glorious and beautiful. It extended away round us, I cannot tell how far, but in the midst of this light about as far off as he sits (pointing to John C. Whitmer, sitting a few feet from him), there appeared, as it were, a table with many records or plates upon it, besides the plates of the Book of Mormon, also the Sword of Laban, the directors-i.e., the ball which Lehi had, and the Interpreters. I saw them just as plain as I see this bed (striking the bed beside him with his hand), and I heard the voice of the Lord, as distinctly as I ever heard anything in my life, declaring that the records of the plates of the Book of Mormon were translated by the gift and power of God." [^13]

15And now returning to your story, Mr. Moyle, you were saying that Whitmer declared to you "that the testimony which he had published was true and that he had never denied any part of it." What did you ask him after that?

15"I asked him why he had left the Church. He replied that he had never left the Church, that he had continued with the branch of the Church that was originally organized in Richmond and still presided over it. In answer to my questions, he said, in an unqualified, emphatic way, that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God, but had become a fallen prophet through the influence which Sidney Rigdon exercised over him; that he accepted everything that was revealed to the Prophet down to the year 1835, but rejected everything thereafter because he did not know whether it came from the Lord or from Sidney Rigdon." [^14]

15We are curious to know whether you gained any clue during your visit, Mr. Moyle, as to why his attitude toward Joseph Smith had become altered.

15"He manifestly had become embittered against Sidney Rigdon due to his promotion to second place in the Church over men like himself who had been with the Prophet from the beginning and who had done so much for the Church. I then concluded, as I now believe, that jealousy and disappointment had soured his soul, but nothing could obliterate his testimony of the divinity of the Book of Mormon. [^15]

15Did you ask him any further questions?

15"I asked him about the manuscript from which the Book of Mormon was published. He said that he had the original of the three copies [^16] that were made before the Book of Mormon was printed. I asked him if he would sell the manuscript. He said, 'No.' I then asked him if he wouldn't sell it at any price. He said, 'No,' that he would not part with it. He also said, pointing to his home, that when a cyclone struck Richmond a few years before every room in his house was destroyed except the one in which that manuscript was kept. He seemed to regard the manuscript sacredly. As he appeared to be a poor man, at least in very ordinary circumstances, I was greatly impressed by the fact that he would not even talk about selling it and with the fact that he seemed to regard the care of the manuscript as being something of a sacred trust. Neither did he seek a reconciliation with the Church, although that would have inevitably increased his worldly comfort, and made him a highly honored personage among Latter-day Saints.

15"President Joseph F. Smith had previously interviewed him and had seen the manuscript. He said to me that it was not the original, but a copy made by Oliver Cowdery." [^17]

15Thank you, Mr. Moyle; thank you very much. You may step down.

15I urge the "jury" of investigating readers to ponder for a moment on Whitmer's notion that the manuscript had been miraculously saved from the cyclone. You and I do not know whether the manuscript was providentially preserved. The important fact for our purpose, though, is that Whitmer felt that it was. He thought God had saved it from destruction and, with it, the room in which it lay. Plainly he believed there was something sacred about the book. Sometimes little out-of-the-way details like this are worth more than the obvious and big things in evaluating the sincerity of a man's convictions. Incidentally, the interview between Joseph F. Smith and David Whitmer, alluded to by Moyle, was held about three months after the cyclone, which swept through Richmond in June, 1878. In President Smith's report of the visit, which was published not long afterwards, he seems to have been intrigued not only with the fact that David Whitmer believed that the manuscript had been miraculously saved from the cyclone but also with the fact that:

16"The whole Whitmer family are deeply impressed with the sacredness of this relic. And so thoroughly imbued are they with the idea and faith that it is under the immediate protection of the Almighty that, in their estimation, not only are the Mss. themselves safe from all possible contingencies, but that they are a source of protection to the place or house in which they may be kept, and, it may be to those who have possession of them." [^18]

16David Whitmer died January 25, 1888, at eighty-three years of age. The ensuing week's issue of the Richmond Democrat carried an account of his death and of several incidents connected with his final illness. I wish to enter into the record several quotations from the newspaper in question. One of these involves, once more, an explanation of the angel and the book. Here is the newspaper reporter's version of his claim:

16"Repairing to the woods they engaged in prayer for a short time, when suddenly a great light shone round about them far brighter and more dazzling than the brilliancy of the noon day sun, seemingly enveloping the wood for a considerable distance. A spirit of elevation seized him as of joy indescribable and a strange influence stole over him which so entranced him that he felt that he was chained to the spot. A moment later and a divine personage clothed in white raiment appeared unto them, and immediately in front of the personage stood a table on which lay a number of gold plates, some brass plates, the 'urim and thummim' and the 'sword of Laban.' All of these they were directed to examine carefully and after their examination they were told that the Lord would demand that they bear witness thereof to all the world." [^19]

16The newspaper account also adds this informative detail:

16"While describing this vision to us, all traces of a severe cold from which he was suffering disappeared for the time being, his form straightened, his countenance assumed almost a beautified expression and his tones became strangely eloquent. Although evidently no studied effort, the description was a magnificent piece of word painting and he carried his hearers with him to that lonely hill by the old farm and they stood there with him awed in the divine presence. Skeptics may laugh and scoff if they will, but no man can listen to Mr. Whitmer as he talks of his interview with the Angel of the Lord, without being most forcibly convinced that he has heard an honest man tell what he honestly believes to be true." [^20]

16In the same issue of the Richmond Democrat is a report of what evidently was Whitmer's last formal testimony concerning the truth of the Book of Mormon. It was uttered just three days before his death.

16"On Sunday evening at 5:30, January 22, 1888, Mr. Whitmer called his family and some friends to his bedside, and addressing himself to the attending physician, said: 'Dr. Buchanan I want you to say whether or not I am in my right mind, before I give my dying testimony.'

16"The doctor answered: 'Yes you are in your right mind for I have just had a conversation with you.'

16"He then addressed himself to all around his bedside in these words: 'Now you must all be faithful in Christ. I want to say to you all the Bible and the record of the Nephites, (Book of Mormon) is true, so you can say that you have heard me bear my testimony, on my death bed. All be faithful in Christ and your reward will be according to your works. God bless you all. My trust is in Christ forever, world without end.-Amen.'" [^21]

16The aforementioned article in the Richmond Democrat pays this tribute to David Whitmer:

16"He lived in Richmond about half a century, and we can say that no man ever lived here, who had among our people, more friends and fewer enemies. Honest, conscientious and upright in all his dealings, just in his estimate of men, and open, manly and frank in his treatment of all, he made lasting friends who loved him to the end." [^22]
