Phillip R. Kunz, William G. Dyer, Effective Mormon Families: How They See Themselves ( 1986)

Chapter One

What This Book Is About

This book is about good Mormon families—families that work. Not perfect families, mind you—there's no such thing. We surveyed nearly two hundred Latter-day Saint couples and none of them came close to claiming they were perfect. But most of them said something like this: "We've got a good family. We love each other. We're proud of our kids. We don't have a magic formula, but we work hard at being a family, and we pray a lot about being parents."

Almost every popular magazine rack and bookstore is loaded with commentary on American families, but most of it concentrates on what's going wrong—drugs, child abuse, incest, teenage pregnancies, abortion, and suicide. Most reports from sociologists and other scholars of the family look at the same things. But what goes on in families that are trying to be effective and, in the main, are succeeding? What do parents and children do in these families? What factors build cohesion and harmony? What keeps children out of trouble and sends them on to form strong marriages and families of their own?

These were the questions in the back of our minds when we started thinking through a research project to find the answers. We'd both been intrigued by Thomas J. Peters and Robert H. Waterman's In Search of Excellence: Lessons from America's Best-Run Companies, a popular analysis of how the managers of outstanding U.S. corporations made them that way (New York: Warner Books/Harper & Row, 1982). The book was a number-one best-seller in the United States, for its principles were applicable to much more than business. The authors identified eight conditions that some twenty successful American companies had in common, from McDonald's to Procter and Gamble. Could we use the same approach with families, we wondered?

We think that effective families of any subculture or religion would have most, if not all, of the same characteristics of good Mormon families; but we wanted to see how Latter-day Saint doctrines and practices get translated into family living. Except in Utah and a few scattered communities in the Rocky Mountain area, Mormons are a minority in America. They live, work, go to school, and participate generally in the activity of the communities in which they live. Some of the differences between Mormon teachings and national practices seem to be the kind of things that could lead to greater internal cohesion or to potential conflict.

For instance, good Mormons are expected to abstain from alcohol, drugs, tobacco, tea, and coffee. If the parents follow the Word of Wisdom, and if the children accept it too, smoking, drugs, and drinking would not be problems in the family. But if children choose to disregard it, then the resultant confrontations could be even more stressful than in families where drinking might be a health problem but not also a religious issue.

Mormons have an active social life; but for youngsters, there are rules about not dating until age sixteen, no premarital sex, no marriage until after missions, and then marriage in the temple with its high standards for entrance. Young Mormons, surrounded by social alternatives, sometimes struggle with these expectations.

Being a good Mormon involves other expectations: regular family prayer, blessings on the food at every meal, regular church attendance every Sunday for three hours, weekly family council or family night, monthly fasts and donations, tithing, and working hard at church callings. Church emphasis on family also means that couples usually expect to have large families as well as close, loving, and hardworking families. But is there really a connection between doing all these things and having a good family?

We decided to find out. We wrote to selected stake presidents from a number of states and received responses from Washington, Oregon, California, Idaho, Montana, Utah, Texas, and Wyoming. We explained the project and asked them to identify fifteen families they felt were 'the best families in their church jurisdiction." We didn't try to define "best families," since the perception of effectiveness itself was one of the things we wanted to study. Interviews later indicated that almost all of the stake presidents used two criteria: the families were active in church and seemed to be united and supportive of each other. We specified that we wanted only families who had children still at home with at least one child old enough to be married or go on a mission, because we wanted parents who had worked through the strains of the teenage years with at least one of their children.

We did some preliminary interviews and, using that information as a guide, constructed a questionnaire, which we sent to approximately three hundred families. About two hundred usable surveys came back, and we held in-depth interviews by telephone and in person with about twenty-five families. From their answers, slightly edited for consistency of style, we selected the principles for effective families that we discuss chapter by chapter in this book.

Although these families have "effectiveness" in common, they are very different in other ways. Some live on farms. Some come from cities, like Salt Lake City, Houston, and Los Angeles. The husbands ranged in age from thirty-four to seventy-eight (average fifty-two) and wives from thirty-one to sixty-five (average forty-nine). The men had had, on the average, sixteen years of education—meaning through four years of college, but the actual years ranged from high-school drop-outs in the tenth grade to those who had had eight years of college. Wives had usually received less education, ranging from ten to nineteen years with an average of 13.7 years. The husbands were doctors, lawyers, managers, craftsmen, farmers, and blue-collar workers. Although most of the women were homemakers by profession, their careers and jobs also included the professions, managerial, secretarial, and blue-collar positions. The smallest number of children was three, the largest number twenty-one for the men (including second marriages), and fourteen for the women. The average was a little over six children per family. In contrast, nationally the average couple has 2.1 children.

Is this study representative of all Mormon families? Obviously not. This sample of active families doesn't tell us what a good Mormon family in Germany, Japan, or Peru might be like. We think they'd be similar, but we don't know. Families where only one parent is a Mormon might also be very effective, but our survey didn't try to find out how. Furthermore, younger parents may have different philosophies of parenting that result in different but equally effective families. But our study was not meant to include them.

We didn't try to get a control group of "ineffective" families, but we asked some bishops and stake presidents, who knew their congregations rather well, for some names of Latter-day Saints that, in their opinion and for whatever reasons, just weren't doing as well with their children, then did some limited surveying and conducted about thirty-five interviews in Utah, Idaho, and Wyoming, trying to identify some of the differences.

Despite the limitations of the sample, we think the study does give a clear picture of what goes on in most Mormon families with parents who have a strong commitment to the Church and who feel that their parenthood is a stewardship from the Lord.

One of the valuable parts of doing this project was the insight it gave both of us into our own families. Both of us had felt that we were the only parents we knew doing certain things; but as the surveys came back, we discovered that many families had independently made the same connections. We both also learned about techniques and activities we wished we'd known about earlier.

Bill: Neither my wife, Bonnie Hansen Dyer, nor I came from a traditional Mormon home. My father, George William Dyer, never joined the church, and my mother, Ada Gibb, was a fiercely devout Mormon, so we seven children were reared in a split family. I never experienced family prayer, going together to church, a father's blessing, or an administration. My father was forty-nine when he married, and my mother was thirty-two. Because my father was in his fifties by the time children started coming along, he didn't involve himself much in our activities. Neither of my parents drove, so we didn't go far from home—a little corner grocery store with an attached house on the outskirts of Portland Oregon.

Bonnie's family was also atypical. Her father, Clarence Hansen, died when she was six months old, leaving her mother, Wyroa Hansen, to rear four small children alone, first in Spring City, Utah, but later in Provo, where her mother taught school to support the family.

We met in 1949 at BYU just after I returned from a Southern States Mission. I was twenty-four, and Bonnie was twenty-one. We had both been active in church and had absorbed the lessons from the manual about ideal family life, but we married without a role model about how an active LDS mother and father built a family together. And we both wanted a good family—a loving, caring, sharing family.

Our first child, Gibb (William, Jr.), was born when I just started my first teaching job at Iowa State University. Then Michael, Lisa, Jeff, and David all followed in rather rapid succession, all born in Provo, after I had returned in 1955 to teach at BYU. All along the way, we tried to figure out how to be good parents.

We watched the behavior of families we admired in the branches and wards where we lived, read books on child rearing and family relations, and tried to follow the counsel of Church leaders. This led us to a general pattern of Church-directed activity. We made sure we went to all meetings with out children. We accepted Church assignments and tried to have regular family prayer and family night. But some of the activities in our family just seemed to emerge out of experience. A family pattern—one of the healthiest, in retrospect—was the evening drift into our bedroom, where all the children would end up piled on the bed with us, rehashing the day, shooting the breeze, swapping stories, and communicating a lot of affection. We were the only family we knew that did such a "crazy" thing, but I was pleased from the survey to see that most effective families talk a lot and sometimes develop unusual traditions to be sure there's time to talk. Whatever the elements of the Dyer mix, we've been very satisfied with the results. All of our children have graduated from college, the boys have all gone on missions, and now all four children have been married in the temple.

Now that Bonnie and I have the pleasures and perplexities of grandparenthood to deal with, we can look back on those parenting years with a great deal of gratitude, some satisfaction, and the feeling every parent has of knowing there were just a few things we'd like to change.

Phil: Any sociologist gets used to people asking, "What kind of research are you doing? Oh? Mmmm." But not with this project. Nearly everyone who has learned about it has wanted to know more. Many of the people who participated in the survey went the second mile and sent us letters and lengthy comments on the questionnaire. During the interviews, they wanted to know what other families were doing. I shared their interest. Gathering the data and analyzing it helped me understand more about my family, feel reinforced in the things we were doing right, and feel motivated to change in areas where we need to do better.

Both my wife, Joyce Sheffield Kunz, and I came from what would be considered strong, active families. My mother, Hilda Stoor, was a convert to the Church just before her marriage to my father, Parley P. Kunz, who was already a third-generation member of the Church. My parents were farmers and ranchers in Bern, Idaho. I was born in the house where my father had been born, a house his father had built. Our mountain village had been founded by my great-grandfather, John Kunz II, who had been sent to Bear Lake by Brigham Young to develop the cheese industry. Even now, only three of Bern's bishops have not been named Kunz. My father was one of those Kunz bishops.

At the beginning of his ten-year term, he was promised that if he kept the commandments he would live to see all of his thirteen children grow to maturity. As we brothers and sisters gathered once in 1983 and again in 1985 to bury our eighty-nine-year-old father and our eighty-five-year-old mother, we thought of that promise. The youngest child is now over forty years of age.

Our home was a home of twice-daily family prayer, missions, temple-going, tithing, and a lot of work and play within the family. There were spankings, heartaches, and trials, but we also experienced a lot of love. I grew up knowing that my parents supported and loved me. I grew up knowing that they expected me to succeed in something.

Joyce also grew up in a home of Church tradition, as a seventh-generation Church member. Her father, Kenneth H. Sheffield, was a member of the general board of the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association and had been for some twenty years. He was the coordinator for MIA June Conference for many years up until the time of his death in an automobile accident. Joyce grew up in a home based on family prayer, temple-going, missions, and service to the Church. Her father was involved in Scouting all of his life and with young people, and worked as a seminary teacher, a principal, and an area coordinator. Even into her eighties, her mother, Lucile Beck Sheffield, was a diligent participant in the genealogy extraction program.

She, like my mother, labored in the Church all her life.

Thus, the pattern for our own home was one centered within the Church. We both saw a method of producing a family that had worked, and we tried to bring the principles we learned into our own family. After I served in the army in Germany, I filled a mission to the Southern States, where my companions and I had several dozen converts. At Brigham Young University, where I obtained a B.S. and an M.S., I met Joyce and fell in love. Our son Jay was born when I was a senior, putting Joyce's degree on slow-down. We moved to Lyman, Wyoming, where I taught seminary for a year and where Jenifer was born on a minus-37-degree day. Ann Arbor came next with a Ph.D. in sociology, then a year teaching in Laramie, Wyoming. We had waited and hoped for another child for a long time, then when Jody was born, almost simultaneously, Joyce's father was killed at the height of his achievement. We then returned to Provo, where I taught at Brigham Young University, Joyce finished her B.S. in elementary education, and our family was rounded out with Johnathon Kenneth (named for his grandfathers), and Jana. Our eldest son served a mission in Germany, married Rebecca Neumann from Illinois, and is now in graduate school. He was followed into the mission field by Jenifer, who has learned to love the people of Uruguay. Our remaining three children are also looking forward to these kinds of experiences.

In other words, this has not been an abstract project. Even though we've been careful in our research and methodology, it has more than intellectual interest for us. There are some principles that underlie the creation of a good family. For both of us, this project has been personally rewarding. Phil and Joyce come from traditional Mormon families. Bill and Bonnie do not. Yet the activities and results in both families have been very similar.

The memorable opening line of Tolostoy's Anna Karenina is: "Happy families are all alike; every unhappy family is unhappy in its own way." Happy LDS families are certainly not clones of each other, but it was remarkable to us that there was so much consensus. Here is a profile of an effective family's characteristics, characteristics discussed a chapter at a time in the rest of the book.

(Chapter 3.)

(Chapter 4.)

(Chapter 6.)

In chapter 12, we discuss how these effective parents have felt about how well they were doing as parents when their children were at different ages. We also discuss how to initiate change if things aren't going well or could be going better.

Finally, in chapter 13, we take a look at some trends in families, nationwide and in the Church. What does the pattern look like for the future? Can this pattern of success be replicated in another generation? Will other techniques need to be developed?

For us and our wives, family living is a great adventure—strenuous, taxing, and immensely rewarding. The insight into the process of family living shared by the couples we've met in doing this research has been our great pleasure.
