Phillip R. Kunz, William G. Dyer, Effective Mormon Families: How They See Themselves ( 1986)

Chapter Two

"We Chose the Church": The Parents' Foundation Values

Although successful families are far from being identical, nearly all of them share the characteristics outlined in chapter 1. Of those characteristics, the single most important—unvarying, unanimous, and preeminent—is that the parents have made a public and private commitment to the Church and gospel principles. This commitment is the foundation value of their homes.

The last question in our survey asked: "Looking over all of the kinds of issues we have raised and any others you may think of, what do you consider has been most important to make you a strong LDS family?"

Typical answers were: "We feel we truly love the Lord" and "Trying to live the principles of the gospel." "Consistent activity in the Church," said a Montana family with six children by the husband's first marriage and two by the second. One couple wrote: "The thing that has been most important to us in our family is the great feelings we have about the gospel. We know what the purpose of life is and we know why our children are important. Our whole life revolves around the Church. Heavenly Father is a partner for us, and we certainly count on him to assist us after we have done our part. We can forego a lot of things that neighbors have because we know that helping a child to be successful will pay more in the end than a bigger house or a boat. Missions, temple marriage, and sticking close together—that's what's important to us."

When we asked parents to identify the most important positive factor in making them a strong LDS family, 96 percent gave one of two answers (or both): forty-two percent mentioned the Church and its programs; 54 percent cited personal religious practices such as prayer, or their feelings of faith. Early in the questionnaire, we asked several questions about typical Mormon activities that probably most people would take for granted in active families and asked parents to say whether they always, usually, sometimes, or seldom did them. The activities were:

The most important activities were attendance at Church meetings, paying tithing, and accepting Church jobs. Ninety-nine percent of the couples said they always paid their tithing. Ninety-seven percent indicated they always attended Church, and 93 percent responded that they always accepted Church callings or assignments.

We also gave these parents a list of six goals that seemed fairly typical of LDS families and asked them to check the items that were "special goals" for them. The goals were:

Note that the first three percentages are tied, but the first three goals do not, in our opinion, represent a mixture of secular and religious goals. The Church's emphasis on education and self-esteem both have theological bases summarized in the common phrases "I am a child of God" and "the glory of God is intelligence."

Parents talked about how closely these goals were connected. "If we could help each child develop a good self-concept, then reaching all the other goals would be simpler," said the parents of five. A father of six noted: "If one of the kids feels dumb or untalented and ends up not doing well in school, even for a short time, we really worry about that and take steps to see that he or she gets some successful experiences. I've seen too many youngsters who feel stupid in school start hanging out with friends who aren't doing well, get involved in drugs, marry inappropriately and too soon, and spend the rest of their lives struggling, never making a good living, never feeling good about themselves, and usually getting a divorce. When kids are doing well in school and are really involved in what's going on in church, it just seems to close the door on a whole bunch of negative possibilities." In their own ways, many other parents expressed their own feelings about the interconnectedness of self-esteem, economic security, and Church service.

We also asked parents to identify other goals that they had for their families. (See chapter 11.) Answers included "Be happy. " "Be together in the celestial kingdom." "Teach each child to function as a mature, responsible, independent person as early as possible." "Have fun as a family." The families in this study also placed a high priority on teaching their children good work habits. "Teach them the importance of working and taking pride in what they do," said the parents of nine who run a farm. Other parents said similar things: "Be self-reliant and dependable." "Teach them to work, save money, and be honest."

And lest all of this sound desperately determined, many families listed "having fun together" and "having a good sense of humor" as part of their family pleasures and goals. Mormons have long been known for their industriousness and integrity. It is no accident that these highly effective parents articulate the same values for themselves and their children.

"We Decided . . ."

We asked a cluster of questions trying to find out where this commitment to the Church came from and were impressed to discover, once again, the principle of agency. Commitment did not just happen, and it wasn't just programmed into parents by their own parents. It was a conscious decision, and we were encouraged to discover that it could take place at almost any point in the marriage. In other words, you don't have to come from a strong LDS family yourself to have one. Forty-nine percent of the husbands and 39 percent of the wives had not graduated from seminary. Only 21 percent of the husbands had been on missions. Twenty percent of the fathers and 18 percent of the mothers were not baptized at age eight. Between 15 and 18 percent were baptized after the age of twelve.

Of course, many parents came from active homes, some from homes where they were fourth-, fifth-, and sixth-generation Mormons. But at some point, sometimes before marriage, sometimes as a couple, these people decided that their own children would be raised in a gospel environment. For some, the point of decision was very clear. For others, the decision was so logical that there didn't seem to be an alternative. However, they followed it up with action. It's the action that seems to separate highly effective couples from less effective couples. One Utah couple with seven children described the process succinctly: "We simply made up our minds, as parents, that we were going to be a strong LDS family and put all our time and energies into accomplishing it. The father had many, many Church callings. The mother and children joyfully supported him in them. We have tried to teach the children to be aware of the blessings that have come to us as a family for doing so."

For a more extended example, let's look at a couple we'll call Harvey and Joan, who live in the Bay Area. They chose a different pattern than the one they saw in their own homes when they began rearing their children. Early in their marriage, they made conscious decisions to be active in the Church. Joan's father was not only inactive but hostile to the Church, though her mother felt more supportive and encouraged Joan to participate, especially while she was a teenager. A brother was killed during World War II when Joan was fourteen, and she began seeking religious understanding from that point. When she went to college at Berkeley, she began attending LDS institute of religion classes, where she met and began dating Harvey.

Harvey came from a split family. His father was not a Mormon and his mother was not active. However, she had had Harvey blessed as a baby and baptized at age eight. He became a fairly active member on his own. Harvey and Joan dated, fell in love, and married while they were still in college. Harvey graduated, but Joan stopped when the first of their seven children was born.

Although neither of them had learned religious activity from their parents, they knew they wanted their own family to be different, and the model of the large, loving family engrossed in Church service appealed to them. They admired the active Mormon families they saw in the ward, particularly how close and happy they seemed. "Love, respect, and being happy together, that's what we wanted," they said. "We knew we wanted a different family life than the kind we came from." They decided to adopt the activities that the Church recommended as ways of reaching that goal: daily prayer, weekly family night, regular church attendance, and obedience to Church standards. Harvey blessed the children as babies, baptized them at age eight, and usually ordained his sons to the priesthood.

Harvey also regularly gave the children priesthood blessings—administering to them when they were ill and giving them special father's blessings on important events like birthdays, the first day of school, going away from home, leaving for a mission or marriage, and so on. "In addition to the very real blessings that he called down on them," Joan said, "I realize now that it was a way of telling each child, 'You're important to us. We know that starting school is important to you. We're all in this together, and we want you to be successful.'"

Harvey and Joan were talented, committed, and creative. From the earliest days of their marriage, each always had a demanding Church assignment. Harvey even served as a bishop. Joan wonders, "As I look back on those early years with several young children, maybe we were too busy, but we seemed to survive successfully. We always felt that we belonged to a group of people who cared about us and our children, no matter what ward we lived in. We felt that our children grew up feeling accepted at church, happy to be there, and happy to help."

Perhaps most important, Joan says, "We tried to live consistently. If we told the children we believed something, we didn't feel we had the right to show something different in our actions. We never asked the children to do things that we didn't do ourselves. We hope that this attitude can carry on in the families of our children and grandchildren."

Interestingly enough, one mother of seven sees the children as having a great influence on their decision to be active in the Church. Like Harvey and Joan, she and her husband had both been raised by inactive Mormon parents. They were hard-working, he as county road superintendent and she as school cook after the children were older. As a couple, they wanted more and decided, after the birth of their fifth child, to go to the temple. "We wanted what the Church had to provide for our children," she recalls, "but we counted on the teachers to give our children the desire to pray and to do what Heavenly Father wanted them to."

They had two more children and, as the children grew older, the parents made an important discovery. They wrote: "We had been blessed with seven fine spirits who wanted something in their home that we hadn't necessarily thought about having earlier. We could have filled out the whole questionnaire with different answers, depending on which point in our marriage we referred to."

Mixed Feelings

Ironically, we found that many couples in the survey whose family values are inseparably entwined with gospel values still feel somewhat apologetic or guilty because, although they are carrying out a Church program, they are not doing it the "Church way" and feel that their families would work even better if somehow they could do it "by the book." They genuinely want to do everything the Church teaches them to do, and they want to do it perfectly. Yet in these effective families, they do not feel paralyzed by the desire for perfection. The statistics and interviews paint a remarkable picture of being simultaneously contented with family strengths while never feeling they can say "We've got it made." These mixed feelings should, however, be read in the light of a historical gap; many of the programs now being advocated for families have come along in the last few years when family patterns were already set. Each of the families in this survey had at least one child old enough for marriage or missions and averaged six children. In other words, the parents are reporting on a busy household where at least some children are working full time or part time, going to school, living away from home at school, or married.

At some point, it will be interesting to see if families with younger children—those who have grown up with this new battery of Church programs for families—have established and maintained a different pattern for five "test" activities: temple attendance, family prayer, family night, scripture study, and keeping personal journals.

Temple Attendance

Despite the importance of the temple in Mormon theology and beliefs, only 24 percent of these couples indicated that they "always" go to the temple regularly. An additional one-third attended the temple "seldom" or "sometimes." However, many of the couples explained their answers, anxious not to have their feelings about the temple misunderstood. It was easy to understand the couple from Texas before the construction of the Dallas Temple. They wrote: "We live several hundred miles from the nearest temple. As a result we only go to the temple on certain special occasions. We probably could go more, but it is a major effort."

Other couples had the same situation. One Montana couple said, "We always go when we're traveling near a temple." Another family plans summer vacations to include a day at the temple but lives twelve hundred miles away from the nearest one. Another couple two hundred miles away from the nearest temple attends "approximately three times a year."

Even where distance from a temple is not great, other priorities may come first. One Utah couple confessed, "Our schedules are so tight that we often have to cancel plans to attend the temple. We feel bad when this happens, and the children know we're disappointed." One father discussed the idea of "seasons" in relation to temple attendance: "We don't go to the temple as often as we would like to, but there are a lot of things going on. When we were in graduate school we had to study and since that time we have been trying to verify our four generation sheets in the genealogy program. In our family we think the scripture about the season for all things is correct. The season for more temple attendance is not right now. Oh, we go as often as we can—about once or twice a month. We try to go when a relative is married or on other special occasions. My grandparents just about lived in the temple the last twenty years of their lives, which was great for them, but they didn't do that when they were trying to make a living on the farm and raising their children. We look forward to the time when we can go more than we do."

Our view is that attendance once or twice a month demonstrates a substantial commitment, but it does help explain why this family—and probably others—foresee a more intensive season of temple activity after the children are gone. Temple attendance does not involve the whole family. Usually the parents go together, leaving the children at home, although occasionally the returned missionary son or daughter or married children who live nearby might join the parents as a special occasion. Still, the temple itself represents an unquestionably high value in effective Mormon families. Almost all of effective couples were either married or sealed in the temple (in a couple of cases, distance had been prohibitive); all of them want their children to marry in the temple. All show strong support for temple attendance, even though their regular attendance is not as high as one might assume that it would be.

Family Prayer

In addition to temple attendance, other religious activities that are stressed in lessons but that don't show up as top priorities for these effective families include regular family prayer, regular family home evenings, and regular scripture study as a family. And nearly all of the families described the guilty gap between an ideal they accept and the tough realities of getting through a day.

Twenty-eight percent of the families said they "always" held morning and evening family prayer, and 45 percent said they "usually" did—making a total of 73 percent that usually had prayer together. A common comment was, "We almost always get the family together for prayer once during the day but not every morning and evening."

Also, part of the problem may be in the families definitions of family prayer. In an interview, one father said with some feelings of frustration and resignation, "Given the ages and situations of our children, it is almost impossible to have regular family prayer. Some work right after school until rather late. They aren't here for evening prayer and don't want to get up when others have to be up and gone for early morning seminary. Then when you add in different ones having practices, games, meetings—it just seems the family is not all together to have regular prayer. What we do is to have a prayer when we bless the food with all those who are here, and I know that all of us say our private prayers. But regular morning and evening prayer with all of the family just seems to be practically impossible."

Another family that clearly seemed to hold what we would call "family prayer" didn't think they were: "We have family prayer once in a while, but it is hard to do since our children work out of the home. We are seldom all home at the same time. We pray with whoever is there—sometimes only four or five us at a time, but that is all we can get together. Sometimes there may just be the two of us or only one of the children with us. On Sunday we can usually all pray together in family prayer."

Family Home Evening

Only 18 percent of the families said they "always" held a family home evening each week. An additional 48 percent "usually" held family home evening, bringing the total to 66 percent. The remaining one-third said they held it "sometimes" or "seldom."

Family home evening was instituted as a formal program only in the early 1960s; many of the families in our sample had already established other patterns with the children that did not involve a pre-formatted "meeting", so many of them probably said they were not holding family home evening. "Our last girl is leaving for college," wrote one Idaho mother of seven. "When there were other children at home, we had family home evening and family prayer regularly." But with almost all the children gone and the husband working night shift, these programs no longer seemed to fit the family's needs. Several other families said that the program worked better with younger children than with older ones.

Still, many families spent time together regularly and accomplished many of the goals of the program. For example, a regular Sunday dinner-table topic would be about the lessons presented in Sunday School and Primary that day. One mother wrote, "We spend more time together as a family than most other families we know. We read together regularly—scriptures and other books. We play games together, work together, and eat together." Many families hold extended discussions about the scriptures, problems of life, personal and family problems, and plans for a particular project. One of these families, which seems to be characterized by an extraordinarily high level of family interaction, still said somewhat apologetically: "We can see the value of the family home evening lessons to us. It is too bad that we didn't get those lesson manuals earlier in our married life. I guess we did do a lot of that sort of thing but not as well as the book does now."

Family Scripture Study

Only 28 percent of the families in this study indicated that they regularly read the scriptures together. Considerably more hold family home evening than read the scriptures. Sixty-six percent or two-thirds of the families said they "usually" or "always" held family home evening, and one-third said this activity was carried out only "sometimes" or "seldom." Scripture reading was markedly less. Over 70 percent of the families said that scripture reading as a family was done only "sometimes" or "seldom."

When it works, it seems to be rewarding. One Utah father described in an interview how they were doing on the project: "Our stake president used to talk in stake conference about how each morning they were reading the scriptures as a family. We felt that we should do it too, but it's tough to find time for it. We talked with the children who are still living at home, and they wanted to do it. We finally decided that we could read for a while if everyone got up ten minutes earlier. We read about four or five days a week now. So far we have read the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price, and now we are in the New Testament. We start reading around the breakfast table while my wife is putting the final touches on breakfast, and that seems to work well."

In one family where the father is disabled and the family has been under considerable financial pressure, the mother wrote that one of their greatest strengths as a family came from "our family mornings where we sing, read the scriptures, and pray together every day."

One Utah mother of six, ages twenty-two to six, who filled out the questionnaire alone, noted that the family studied the scriptures regularly and, in fact, that their three most important rules were: "Everyone comes to scripture study, everyone goes to church, and everyone comes to family home evening." An explanatory note clarified: "Mom sets up these rules, gets everyone up, and prepares the lesson, and Dad comes if he feels like it."

Several families said that individual study works well for them. One Wyoming father listens to tapes of the scriptures while he's working and the children play them at bedtime. Another mother includes taped stories from the scriptures as part of the family activities. One California family of four reads individually, following the schedule in the priesthood manual, and then discusses their readings together. Still other families try to make scripture reading an important part of their family home evenings.

Personal Journals

Another area of Church-family activity particularly stressed by President Spencer W. Kimball during his presidency was keeping a journal. Twenty-five percent of the fathers indicated they write in a journal regularly, and 45 percent of the mothers said they make regular journal entries. The children's activities in this area are almost the same as mother's—about 48 percent. These results suggest that children reared with journal writing as a Church program may adopt the practice at a higher level than their parents.

Less-Effective Families

Even though parents felt that they could be doing better at Church-related family goals and worked hard to see that they and their children were involved in Church activity, there was no sense that they had turned part of child rearing over to the Church. Many expressed gratitude for help from the Sunday School, a Scout leader, or an outstanding Young Women leader; but they saw it as supplemental. As one mother said, "We are happy for the programs of the Church. Programs seem to come up to help various children from time to time. Nevertheless, we realize the whole thing is ours. If we fail in our home, we are responsible. If a child goes astray, we can't say that he had a bad Sunday School teacher, can we? That wouldn't buy much sympathy."

Among the less-effective LDS families that we interviewed, we were intrigued to find that at least one family still functioned very well as a family though without much Church activity. Beth had come from a long line of Mormon pioneers and was proud of it, even though her family did not attend church regularly and did not hold regular family prayer. She met Jim, a non-Mormon, at BYU, and they married. They went to church occasionally, their six children were blessed and baptized, and Jim was also baptized. Moral behavior and educational achievement were strong family values, and the children have grown up to be close to each other and mutually supportive. Most consider themselves to be Mormon but are not deeply committed to LDS practices.

Most of the less-effective families that we interviewed, however, had not been able to maintain very close ties to the Church. One Wyoming father of five had started smoking, then no longer felt comfortable at church. "Things have been pretty much downhill since then," he said. Another couple who had not been worthy to qualify for a temple marriage admitted, "Then it just got to be easy to stay away from Church." A third couple "just never did get around to" holding family home evening and family prayer although they said they "probably should have." Another Utah mother with three teenagers felt that it was too late to start holding family prayer: "My kids would probably just laugh at the idea."

Couples in our highly effective group, however, are clear about the role of the gospel and the Church in their families' successes. One Salt Lake City professional couple with six children wrote: "Without question, the gospel has been the most important factor in making us a strong family. We don't know how families function in this world without this knowledge and without the influence of the Spirit. We're not just saying this because it sounds good or is expected of us. It is true for our family."

In short, the couples who have made a decision that they want a thoroughly Mormon family have found that personal values and institutional values work together. Their children receive clear messages that affirm their worth, set high expectations for them, and pay off in feelings of being loved and respected. It's a potent combination.
