Phillip R. Kunz, William G. Dyer, Effective Mormon Families: How They See Themselves ( 1986)

Chapter Three

"United We Stand": Building A Strong Family Identity

When effective families try to put their finger on what makes them successful, an overwhelming majority mention the same two factors: (1) their commitment to Church principles and programs, and (2) a mutual sense of internal bonding, a deep sense of love, caring, and unity. Although we've discussed these factors in two separate chapters, again and again parents in our survey linked them. "The Church and love for each other and the children" were the most important values to an Idaho couple. "We have a testimony of the gospel of Jesus Christ," said a couple from a small Utah town. "We know why we are here, and the family is the center of that reason." "We love our children and place the success of the family above material success, professional success, social status, or political recognition," said the Provo parents of seven children ranging in age from twelve to thirty-two. Another Utah couple with seven children said that one factor in their success was "spending lots of one-on-one time, letting our children know they are more important than work, friends, or hobbies."

Without actually using the word very often, unity was a concept that these parents described in detail with statements like these: "We work together." "We're on each other's side." "We help each other." "We're each other's best friends."

A Montana couple, parents of ten, said simply, "Each person has a responsibility to the rest of the family." A mother in Washington with five children wrote, "Being in this family means knowing that when everything else in the world is against us, we can come home and feel loved and know that other family members will show that they think we're special." The Idaho parents of eight asserted, "We're all proud to be members of our family." One Utah couple, the parents of ten, even expressed a kind of wistfulness in answering a question about the age at which they found their children easiest to rear. They responded, "Between birth and twelve," explaining, "We were a complete community within our family." An Idaho couple observed, in a backhanded critique of society, "We have been so contented as a family that our children are probably not as outgoing and aggressive as the business world sometimes demands." A mother said, speaking of a strong extended family with actively involved grandparents, aunts, and uncles, "It means something to belong to this family, and our kids know it. Not that we're anything special—well, yes, special—but not exactly."

In our egalitarian society, these parents seemed to be struggling to find the word that earlier generations and other societies would have understood more easily: clans. Without any necessary suspicion of outsiders or any smug superiority, they still sense deeply that being a member of the family—this family—makes a big difference. All people aren't equally important. The family comes first, and then comes everybody else. That's probably why so many parents, trying to talk about the sense of unity in their family, resorted in frustration to repeating, "We're a family."

In less-effective families, this sense of identity and unity may not develop. One mother of three, whose teenagers had been characterized by rebellion, drug abuse, and confrontation, said bleakly, "We're not a special family." What makes the difference?

Family identity may take the form of cute T-shirts at family reunions or a joint family savings account, but those are just manifestations that come from a deeper source. Parents communicate to children that they have entered a distinctive society by entering the Walker or the Thompson family. There's a boundary. They're just different. "Friends are wonderful and great," as one Texas couple, the parents of six, put it, "but families are eternal." "The children would rather do things with family than with peers most of the time," observed the Idaho parents of seven.

As a result of communicating a sense of family specialness, parents find it easy to say, "In our family, we do . . . "(or "don't do . . ."), and the children accept it because they understand, even on a level they can't articulate, that belonging to their family means something extra.

One couple phrased the meaning of family this way for their children: "Families are more important than friends. This means we will treat family members better than we treat our friends. And family activities will take precedence over activities with friends."

Sociology is full of examples of families that are highly united around rather antisocial purposes: organized crime, for instance, or just endless bickering. In other words, you can be united without being loving. But love is an element that nearly all of these families linked with their unity when we talked to them.

Do love and unity occur spontaneously, or can you create them as a result of certain kinds of activities? The answer seems to be yes to both questions. Feelings of love generate sharing and caring activities. The success of these activities in turn confirm and strengthen sharing and caring feelings.

Valuing Children

A clear underlying condition of family unity is the high value that parents place on their children. By society's standards, they have a lot of children—an average of six per family. The average American family has 2.81 members, including the parents or parent. Usually, traditional societies tend to value children somewhat as possessions. The parents of large families have status because children represent sizable financial leverage for the future. Our highly individualistic society tends to see children as unique little planets, orbiting for a time around the parents' sun but soon shooting off into their own space.

These views represent two extremes, but in effective families, the value of children seems to come somewhere in between. The children are definitely individuals but they complete, enrich, and complement an already existing pattern. In other words, children are seen as both giving something and getting something—that sense of family.

"We put our family life above everything else," says one couple. "We always have in mind that we are going to make it work." "Our kids come first," says another couple, "and they know it." A Texas couple with four children from ages twenty-four to sixteen, wrote, "We really love and support each other. Our family comes first." Another couple says, "Unconditional love for each other has got to be one of the factors that makes our family work." In contrast, the mother in one of the less-effective families said resignedly, "My husband has never taken any interest in the children. His activities are always more important than mine or theirs. He's never helped me with anything."

In successful families, nearly every couple expressed how eagerly they anticipated the births of their children and how excited the older children were when the younger children arrived. Naturally, the parents had a great deal to do with shaping those feelings. One couple described how they did it: "Before each of the later children came, we would talk with the older ones about the new brother or sister who would come. When the baby began to move in the womb, all of the children would like to feel the movement. It was exciting to them. There were never any phony stories about the stork delivering babies. They all knew that the baby was in mother's tummy and that she would have to go to the hospital so the doctor could help the baby come out. When they asked, "How did the baby get into Mother's tummy?" we easily explained that Mother and Daddy together started the baby there. Something like planting a seed together so it would grow into a beautiful baby. They also knew that when the new baby came that they would have to help around the house while Mother was in the hospital, and they were all excited when they were told they would get to help tend the new baby."

As a second characteristic, some activities were simply—no questions asked—family activities. In other words, the parents gave clear messages about the priority of family time. Children did not "own" all of their own hours. For example, many parents stressed that attending church was a family activity, a value they enforced and reinforced even when one parent had to go early or stay late to meetings, even when teenagers exasperated them by dawdling during preparation. They did not leave children home and they did not leave children to come on their own. As a result, they communicated two things: the value of church attendance and the value of family participation. Even when the children, at worst, were giving the most grudging of physical compliance, they still learned these two values. Most of the time, of course, they were also hearing in talks and classes a repetition and reinforcement of the same values and goals their parents had taught them at home.

One Idaho family had a delightful variation on this "always in church" rule. When their three eldest surviving children, spaced two years apart, decided to test the rule, the parents countered ingeniously: "We explained to them that they have their free agency about attending Church meetings. If they choose not to honor the Sabbath by attending their meetings and consider it just another day, then they are free to stay home—and do a weekday chore that we assign. So far they have chosen to attend their meetings." A Salt Lake City family of eight, ages twenty-seven to nine, discussed how church attendance never became a problem: "The father has always just led by example and the children follow. The mother also is dedicated and without fanfare. Going to meetings is just what our family does. All of our children have chosen sometimes to stay home from church but quickly recognize themselves that they'd rather go." In a whimsical afterthought, the mother added, "We let them choose; and fortunately, they have always chosen well. I don't know what we'd do if they didn't."

Supporting Each Other

Whenever a child or a parent took part in community life outside the family circle, it was still considered a family affair. Everyone went. Everyone was pleased about a family member giving a talk in church or being in a play or program. As children got older and participated in sports or dance or music, everyone would go to the games or recitals. One Utah couple with five children noted: "We attend all of the children's activities: dance, piano recitals, tennis matches, gymnastic meets. We have gone to horseback competitions together for twelve years."

When the parents cannot attend a child's event, they find other ways to communicate their support. One mother indicated how she handled the sheer logistics problem of not being able to be in two places at the same time: "We have a large family, and time does not permit us to go to everything we would like to. If we cannot attend a game in which our son is playing or a meeting where our daughter is speaking, we try to go out of our way to say something about it. For example, a comment like, Brother Briggs told me that you really gave a good talk, helps the child know that we are interested and would have been there if we could have."

Children in such families learned that the achievement of one family member reflected positively on all of them. There was no sense of competition but rather a sense of reinforcement—at least in theory. Most families agreed that they worked toward this feeling but had better success at some times than at others.

Family Courtesy

Most effective parents also established and enforced standards of family courtesy. They did not expect automatic love from their children; they expected to teach it to them. One Utah family with seven children repeated 1 John 4:7 before every meal: "Let us love one another." At times, the tone of voice hardly matched the words, but the sheer repetition, three times a day, week after week, month after month, year after year, gradually sank in.

"We try to give a lot of emotional support to each child," said one set of parents. Another couple said, "We often tell each other we have the best family in the world. There are a lot of hugs and "I love you's.'" One Utah family has a code word: "Remember. . . " which means, "Remember I love you." Another family's rule about the same kind of behavior is "Be congenial. There is no excuse for bad manners."

Most parents feel that they should set the example in apologizing when necessary. "We think it is important that our children learn from their mistakes," said one couple. "Therefore we feel we must let them know we make mistakes too; and when we err, we try to admit it."

An Idaho couple explicitly taught their ten children to say "thank you," "please," "I'm sorry," and "I love you." The mother explained, "My husband and I speak to each other that way. It's a thrill to overhear them playing or working and saying, "Please." Even salespeople who regularly call on us have commented on the special feeling we have in our home."

Hardly any family would think of quarreling as positive. Most families have rules against it. But a certain amount of quarreling among children sometimes seems inevitable, no matter how strenuously it's discouraged. How do these effective families deal with sibling squabbles?

Many of them have explicit rules about what is and is not acceptable behavior: no fighting, quarreling, or bickering. Parents intervene quickly when they hear voices begin to rise, sometimes to suppress the symptoms by a firm reminder of the rule, sometimes to send the combatants to different rooms, sometimes to talk through the differences and negotiate a compromise, and sometimes to say, "You can settle this disagreement by yourselves in a friendly way with no yelling. Come tell me when you've worked things out." One practical mother of seven always considers fatigue and hunger as possible causes of quarreling. Even if the disagreement is rooted in other causes, the offer of a snack or rest is sometimes enough distraction to derail an explosion.

One mother emphasized a principle that probably most of the families would agree with: "We spend a lot of time training our children when they're young. And we don't fight ourselves." Another mother observed that they consciously began praising positive interaction among the children when they noticed that "some of the other family members (our brothers and sisters) spend a good deal of time talking about how much their children fight. I don't think they fight any more than most families, but they keep focusing on it rather than on the good things that happen."

Several of the families reported, with real appreciation, the quality of love among their children. A delightful example came from one Utah family with nine: "The children not only love each other but they respect and enjoy each other. They enjoy talking for hours with each other. Older children work and play with the younger ones. Our seventeen-year-old son took the four-year-old twins along on one of his dates. He thought it was great, but his girlfriend may have been surprised." Another eighteen-year-old boy, one of ten children, spent his summer vacation with his married sister in Connecticut, tending her four children.

Taking Charge Of Family Time

Another common element in most of these effective families was a deliberate structuring of family time. In one family it was a rule: "Every family member is expected to eat and pray together at least two times daily."

One Utah couple with seven children deliberately plan their time around togetherness. In addition to showing up en masse for recitals, talks, games, baptisms, and ordinations, they "work in the yard together, pulling weeds in the garden in twos and threes or sevens. Mowing the lawn usually sees two working together—and talking. Canning fruit or drying apricots is a family project. Some do all of some jars, which they then enter in the county fair. Every member of the family has won ribbons and trophies which are displayed around the house."

This family also noted: "Although many of our projects are family projects, we also encourage all our children to achieve in some area. We try to plan activities and events that will focus attention for their successes just on them, so they can know the feeling of having family and friends know they have done well. Sometimes helping our boys earn their Eagle Scout rank has taken lots of parental effort. A good report card may require evening study time with the parent learning new things, helping, encouraging, and sometimes insisting. Although our family consumes a lot of popcorn together, it's hardly ever at the movies or in front of the television.

"We try to keep coordinated with a family calendar, filled in at family home evening for as far ahead as possible and quickly reviewed at the breakfast table for the day—after scripture reading but before toast. And occasionally we send out an emergency SOS to our home teacher to please pick up someone from somewhere because something unexpected came up."

One Texas family felt apologetic about not having family home evening every week and family scripture study every day but felt that "spending good time together" was one of their strengths as a family. In spite of busy work schedules, they made time to have family parties at home where everyone could invite guests, went to the beach together, went crabbing together, and also went out to dinner together. A Utah family with seven children speculated, "Maybe we should be more "others" oriented" but listed as traits that make their family special: "We like each other. We're friends as well as family. We enjoy each other's company, are interested in each other and our accomplishments, have a strong sense of loyalty, take pride in one another's achievements, and have fun together." One of the most important activities they do together is "just visiting together—having a lot of laughs."

It was quite common in effective families for family vacations to be given great importance. During these vacations, the normal routines are suspended and the parents and children can concentrate on enjoying each other in a pleasant setting. In fact, for many families, the time of highest family interaction is the vacation. A significant number of families owned or rented motor homes or campers to make traveling with a large group more convenient. One family has a fifteen-year tradition of "living in swimming suits for two weeks" at a beach house in California that they rent from a family they know. The father gets only two weeks vacation in the summer but has willingly chosen to spend it in this way during the major part of his married life: "It has become a family tradition, and everyone loves to go and to be together. . . . We surf, swim, play ball, sunbathe, go out and play tennis or golf nearby, read, play games, eat, and just have a good time. Sometimes other relatives will stop by for a visit and everyone enjoys that. It seems that everyone gets along better on vacation that at any other time during the year. We always take along some old familiar games (Old Maid, Detective, Monopoly) and some new ones like Trivial Pursuit. All our children who have married still want to come back for the family vacation."

A Utah father with five children said: "Early on, we discovered that one of the most unifying experiences for our family was to travel or take a family vacation. Since there were no others around to play with, the children had to relate to each other and to us, and we found that we really enjoyed each other and had fun together. These outings gave us memories that we will share and talk about all our lives. My wife and I adopted a slogan: 'Experiences are more important than things.' Often we were faced with a decision: should we take a family trip or buy a new refrigerator or carpet? Almost always, the trip won out."

Talking

National studies on family interaction have become popular since about the mid-1960s, when the "generation gap" was discovered. Families, like other social organizations, are beginning to deal with "wellness," making plans and choices to maximize the potential of each family member. While this is becoming a more widespread goal of many families, it is also being translated into programs and plans to help increase the chance of obtaining this wellness. Open communications is one of the most important factors identified in family health so far.

The 200 families in our study would probably concur about the importance of communication—and their family patterns bear out the value. Parents and children in these families talk a lot, willingly spending the time to be with each other. One father put it this way: "I would say if there is one thing that has made a difference in our family, it has been that we have always talked together. When our children were little, they would all climb in our bed and we would talk. The kids loved to hear how we met and got married and all the events around their births and how special each one was. This pattern has continued through high school and college and even now that some are married. It is common to have these older children sit around the bed on the floor and talk until we have to kick them out so we can get some sleep."

Ninety-nine percent of the parents listed "talking" as their most crucial teaching method. Only "example" (100 percent) ranked higher. And when discipline was needed, "talking with" a child was seen as the most important method in 97 percent of the families.

When children do something of merit, 88 percent of the parents respond most frequently with verbal praise. In fact, almost any change in children's behavior in these families—good or bad—produces increased communication.

Effective fathers and mothers perceive themselves as spending a remarkably high amount of time talking with each child each day. We asked parents how often they engaged in the following activities:

Parents also said that the father and mother spent on the average twenty-five minutes a day together talking with each child. Additionally mothers claimed they averaged thirty-three minutes daily taking with each child while fathers averaged about eighteen minutes. In families with six children, this could amount to three hours a day for husband and wife together, an extremely high figure, especially when the husband would reportedly spend another two hours in private conversation with the children and the wife another three hours. If they are accurate in this perception, talking together has an extremely high priority. Almost certainly some parents included time spent talking as a group, for some of them specified mealtimes and dinner times as conversational hours when more than one child would be present. It would be interesting to follow this up with more study that would include the parents' perception of time spent in group conversation with two or more children and children's perceptions of the time their parents spent in both private and group conversation with them.

We asked parents, "Overall, who talks to the children most?" Sixty-eight percent said that the mother talked with the children most. Out of all the families only two (1 percent) said the father talked to the children most. Another 27 percent said that both parents talked to the children equally but at separate times.

One mother felt that the figures might not represent family interactions accurately and added, "I know I spend more time talking with the children than my husband does. But the children respect their father very much and look up to him as the spiritual head of our home. When he does talk to the children either alone or all together, they usually listen very carefully." Another mother also agreed that she spent more time talking to the children than her husband did, but when she baldly asked them, "Who's the boss?" they "all agreed Dad was. I am probably more aggressive and outspoken, but they look to their dad for a final word." One couple saw this pattern as a result of personality: "Father is quieter and more reserved, but the children respect him and seek his counsel. They understand and respect his nature, but this may have been a problem for them at times, just as the mother's nature has been at times."

As with other activities that foster family unity, talking is a planned activity, arranged for and encouraged even when it's inconvenient. "Our talking is mostly at bedtime or after every sensible person should be asleep," says one father wryly. In one Utah family where two of the married children live out of state, weekly long-distance phone calls are part of the family budget.

One self-employed businessman routinely puts in long days and sometimes has to work weekends, but every week "he takes one child at a time with him to the office and takes him or her out to lunch. And he talks with them before they go to bed."

Several couples, who articulate the value of spending time with each child individually, have set up formal mechanisms to be sure it happens. One couple reports, "This means setting aside time with each child to talk, discuss, do something together, and help them learn in their own areas of interest." Monthly father-child interviews seem to be effective, and no one complained that they seemed stilted or unnatural. "I talk with each child about what has happened during the month, review any problems, give encouragement, and set goals," said one father. "I like being able to have time that I can't be "squeezed out" of," said another. One set of Utah parents, whose seventh child is eighteen, wished the ideas of personal interviews with each child had been around when their children were younger. "We would have started it at a very young age," they said.

Several of the couples mentioned "monitoring" to catch problems early and then spending extra time with the troubled child. One couple said, "We try as much as possible to interact with each child and watch for special needs very carefully. The children interact with each other a great deal and will handle some situations between them, but when they have special needs, they come to us." The parents of an Idaho family who own a farm equipment business consciously included their ten children in the family business, "worked together, and talked as we worked. If we noticed something amiss, we took time to be with that child alone."

At least two families have consciously taken advantage of contact times to turn them into conversation times. One Idaho couple commented, "The fact that our drapery business is in our home and we are close to schools was a special help. The kids come home one or two at a time, and Mom and Dad are both there to listen to the events of the day. We are do-it-yourselfers, and there are lots of talking opportunities as we work together. The kids work with their dad on the car and home upkeep and repair, and with Mom on cleaning, canning, and sewing. When we help the kids with their projects, we talk. Gathering for prayers night and morning usually winds up in a gab session unless we are under time pressures. After meals, we wind up visiting for sometimes an hour after we are through eating. Whenever a question arises, we look it up in one of our reference books and share it with the family. We save jokes to bring to the family or read each other sections of books we're reading, then talk about it."

A second set of parents observed, "Our most meaningful talks have been in the car, going to and from music lessons, ball games, and so on, and also after children come home from dates and parties. It always pays to be waiting up to share in their joys or sorrows."

The Extended Family

While popular literature might portray each family as somewhat isolated from any kin network, some studies done on families in Detroit in the 1960s show an active and healthy pattern of interaction among extended families. Mormon families also are "plugged into" family networks. For most of the effective families in this study, grandparents, aunts, uncles, and cousins are an important part of their own family unity. Only five families, 2.5 percent, said they were "seldom" involved with the extended family. In some cases, long distances from other family members made visiting a rare occurrence, while several other families had no close living relatives. Out of the remaining families, 51 percent responded "always" to the question: "We are involved in family activities with our extended family." Forty-four percent answered this question "usually" or "sometimes," 2.5 said "seldom," and the remainder did not answer the question.

Three-fourths of these families would "always" or "usually" attend family reunions. In contrast, a study in progress by Phil of college students in western Canada and the Midwest shows that only 10 percent of their families attend reunions. Forty percent specifically mentioned that for vacations, they would visit relatives, either as the main purpose of a trip or as part of a trip. One couple explained that they tried to plan their vacations to include seeing a "new place," either a Church-history site like Winter Quarters, some natural feature like Yellowstone Park, or a site connected with national history like Mount Rushmore.

A Utah family with nine children joins the extended family for a week's camping at Yellowstone, a tradition that has now lasted for thirty-five years. When asked to list their three greatest strengths as a family, the first was love, the second was a sense of stewardship for talents, and the third was "being supported and valued by members of our extended family on both sides."

One Utah couple, the parents of ten children, all but two of them married, writes a monthly letter summarizing events from their journals. Not only do the children get a copy but so do their own brothers, sisters, and parents.

One family of four in Utah, with easy access to relatives on both sides of the family, noted, "When more than a week goes by that we haven't seen grandparents, aunts, uncles, and cousins, our children begin to ask, "When are we going to see Grandma and Grandpa" or "When are they coming to see us?" Thirty of us are generally together at least once a month and sometimes every week. We celebrate each birthday and anniversary, and we often get together for no special reason."

Possibly as a result of this kind of attention, relatives were most frequently listed as family heroes after Spencer W. Kimball (president of the Church when the survey was administered) and several other Church figures. Relatives easily outranked sports figures, popular entertainers, or politicians as heroes. One couple said, "We all follow BYU sports and identify with various sports figures. But the children look up to their grandparents more than anyone else. They were strong, exceptional people. Even our married children talk about them and their ideals." Another couple with five married children said, "We admire a son-in-law who has had a lot of adversity."

The intergenerational impact of family members on family solidarity might make a rewarding study in itself. A family that can supply its own heroes communicates a sense of clan specialness that makes belonging to the family something to be proud of. Family heroes constantly reinforce the notion of "our family," "my grandparents," "my father," or "my cousin" for the children. One family who had a relative listed in Who's Who in America was very proud of it, showed the entry to a lot of people, and reminded the children of it. It was not so much an individual accomplishment as a family achievement.

Conclusion

We didn't actually tabulate the number of times the phrase "spend time" appeared in the answers to the questionnaire. Our impression is that every set of parents used it at least three or four times. Its sheer repetitiveness impressed us. Parenthood is expensive—time-costly. We've heard a great deal about "quality time" in parenting in recent years; and certainly there's a great deal to be said for intelligent intervention and deliberately planned interaction. However, the 200 families in our survey, although they never used the phrase or talked about it directly, would probably be advocates for "quantity time" as well. They spent time working with their children, talking with their children, being with their children, and teaching their children.

On the whole, we'd have to say that one of the reasons they have united families, bound by commonly shared gospel values and intense love, has to be the sheer number of hours they've put into building those high-quality relationships with each other. "No one else has a higher investment in these children," these parents seem to say, "and there's nothing else we value so much."
