Phillip R. Kunz, William G. Dyer, Effective Mormon Families: How They See Themselves ( 1986)

Chapter Four

Discipline: Few Rules, High Expectations

None of the highly effective couples in our survey would say that their family is perfect. As one mother said, "We find there are problems in every phase of our lives. We just get through one set and find another. It is literally that the ultimate test of a "good" family is to be able to endure to the end."

However it is also true that, at least during the time that the survey was conducted, other people felt that these parents were doing an effective job of rearing their children.

How do these parents get their children to do what they want them to? Do they have strict rules? Do they demand obedience to rules? Do they check on and control their children closely? The answer is no to all of these questions. One of the patterns that stands out for almost every family is they have a few (but specific) rules for children. Even more important than the rules, however, are the expectations. They're high. They're clear. And they have a profound influence on the behavior of the children.

Expectations are a major part of what constitutes the "culture" of family. They represent a general set of unofficial guidelines and standards that everyone in the family understands and accepts, but few families could give you a comprehensive list. As one teenager in such a family said: "I remember when one of my friends was over to our house on a Saturday night and asked if I would like to go to a movie with him on Sunday afternoon. Of course I said no, and he wanted to know why. He asked me if that was one of our rules. As I thought about it, it suddenly dawned on me that it was one of our rules except that no one had ever told me the rule that I could remember. There are just a lot of things that our family does different from some others I know, but we just have come to expect the differences and think that is the best way to do things."

Another teenager in a highly effective family told of going home with a friend and showing his father his straight-A report card. The father smiled, gave his son a pat on the shoulder, and said, "Good job, son. I'm proud of you." The friend was dumbfounded. Later he told the son, "Your dad saw all those A's and told you that you had done a good job. I took my card to our dad and it was A's and B's and he was so delighted that he let me put my own phone in my room." The son with the straight A's came from a family where good grades were expected. All of the children were expected to go to school every day, do all of their homework, and get grades consistent with their abilities. This son had always received straight A's and it was routinely expected that he would continue to do so.

In the survey, we asked each family some questions about rules, discipline, and motivation:

How Many Rules?

Nearly 50 percent of the families indicated they had from zero to five rules, and another 31 percent said they had between six and ten rules. This means that 80 percent of these families felt they had fewer then ten rules. Several families commented that they had many important and high expectations in the family but almost no rules, indicating that a rule represented something more formal than expectations. One Utah couple with five children did not give a number and said, "Our "rules" are habit and are not itemized." In contrast, one Utah couple conscientiously gave up counting after twenty and said, "We have more than twenty. They must be well understood for a large family to function and feel comfortable in their roles." Another family reflected the same frustration with the assignment by quipping, "We've never really counted our rules. They so quickly become habits which become ways of life!"

Often rules were written down, usually discussed and identified as "one of the rules in our family." Whether written down or not, all family members generally understood what constitutes a "family rule."

One of the most interesting findings came, however, when we asked parents to identify their three most important rules. The three most common rules were:

Some families indicated that this rule became something of a sore spot between parents and older children, particularly when these children (especially boys) came home from missions. The returned missionary often wanted to be allowed to come and go from the home at will while the parents still wanted to know where the son was going and when he would be back. That had always been the rule, and the parents wanted the rule to still be in force, but now the sons felt that they were adults and that the rules should no longer apply.

Parents, by requiring to know the whereabouts of the children, are in effect saying to the child, "We love you and want to know that you will be all right." This requirement also implies that the child will not be at the wrong place and doing the wrong thing. One mother had a rule that the children must come in after dates and kiss her good night before they went to bed. Not only could she be sure that they were home safe, but it gave her a chance to talk about anything really important that had happened. Also, she noted, "I think that the children were not tempted with Word of Wisdom problems because they knew that when they kissed me good night I would be in a pretty good position to smell any deviation."

These families were large, busy, and hard-working. The parents clearly needed some assurance that their children would be where they said they'd be and do what they said they'd do. One farm couple explained, "If we left the kids with the milking, we just assumed that it would get done. The milking has to be done, and there is no room for any kind of excuse. They know that if they are detained somewhere for some important reason, they had better get in touch with some of the neighbors and have them start the milking."

Several parents also had firm rules about the use of private property. Some said that if one child used another person's belongings without asking permission, the matter would be discussed in family council and a penalty decided there.

In addition to these three rules, shared by over half of the families, came another cluster of three rules shared by about 25 percent. First was the rule that each child had to do his or her share of the work. Some families wrote out weekly lists of chores each person was to do, while others simply had "understood" assignments. Many farm families, for instance, tended to assign more of the outside chores to the sons while daughters concentrated on helping their mother with the household tasks. Other families assigned chores more or less by age, with one child inheriting a task from an older sibling when he or she became old enough to do it. Still other parents simply assigned the children jobs on the basis of whatever needed to be done, but they frequently reminded them, "Remember, everyone is supposed to do his or her fair share."

Teaching children to work, assigning work fairly within the home, and launching children into the larger world of work is certainly too complicated to be dispatched by a couple of rules. Chapter 7 discusses the topic in greater detail.

A second rule shared by 25 percent of the families was the requirement to treat the home with respect. This usually meant that children were not to break things, "roughhouse," or be careless with property that would be expensive to replace or that had sentimental value. One rebellious teenager deliberately flouted this rule by making greasy footprints on the carpet.

The third rule, which about 25 percent of the families said they had made explicit for their children, was living Church standards. This rule covered a multitude of activities: not dating until sixteen, participating in family prayer and family home evening, not swearing, paying tithing, and reading the scriptures. A Utah Valley couple with six children observed dryly, "It is a rule to obey the rules." However, nearly all of the families indicated in one way or another that adherence to Church standards was an expectation, more fundamental and pervasive than rules.

Discipline

Of course, children sometimes break rules, and the parents must then decide what to do about it. From a longterm perspective, a rule serves a function even if a child persists in defying it. A child who knows that the family standard forbids smoking, for example, may experiment with smoking during the growing-up years, but the clear standard of right and wrong is there. He uses that rule as a measure of his own conduct, and it generally serves as a constraint and eventually as a motivation in helping him change.

When we asked parents to identify the disciplinary measure they used with their children, this was the order:

Still, in evaluating the highly controversial measure of spanking, it is interesting that 12 percent of these highly effective families see spanking as either first or second in importance in disciplining their children. Since these children seem to have turned out to be successful and effective, spanking does not seem to have been disruptive and alienating, particularly in the way it was done. One father described his spanking sessions this way: "I spanked my little children seldom, but it was serious. I would use a belt and it hurt. I also don't think I ever spanked any of my children as they got close to being a teenager. However, after a child had received a spanking, I think I honestly tried to follow the scriptural admonition to 'show forth afterwards an increase of love.' I would hold the child in my lap and hug and kiss him or her and tell that child I loved him or her. Then I would talk with that child about why I had given the spanking, and we would try to come to an agreement about avoiding problems in the future."

One of the fathers in our sample recalled something of his own growing-up years and remembers being spanked: "I got spanked a lot—more than I do my own children. You know, the interesting thing about it is that I can never remember my dad spanking me when I was not at fault. Oh, I didn't like it at all, but even at that time I knew I had it coming. Now that I am older I can really say that all of the spankings did me good. We don't spank that much, though. Probably my wife has had more influence on better discipline than I."

Philosophically, some parents use spanking as a last resort, when everything else seems to have been ineffective. One son said about a spanking from his father: "Dad didn't spank any of us children very often, but when he did, we knew it was about something Dad felt very strongly about. It didn't take us kids long to learn what would get us a licking from Dad!" Still other parents used it on a serious first offense, particularly with little children, to teach them the seriousness of it.

It would be interesting to probe this element a little more. Did some parents who would not spank a child on the bottom slap him or her? How did the children see spankings? And how, for that matter, did the children perceive their parents' measures? Were they as aware of positive reinforcement as they were of groundings or spankings?

Still, the data from this research is clear. Almost all of the parents tried to control their anger in disciplining children and hence avoided the most emotionally intense forms of scoldings and spankings. Instead, they seem to have used preventative discipline—first by teaching correct behavior and reinforcing it, then by using an escalating scale of communicating with the child—discussing, withdrawal of privileges, and so on. "And sometimes," sighed the parents of nine ranging from five to twenty-one, "you try everything and nothing works. Sometimes success is just a matter of the right combination of the child, the day, and the situation."

Many parents who added "other" forms of discipline agreed with the Utah parents of eight who listed "natural and logical consequences." Another frequently applied form of discipline was sending the offending children to their rooms. The Utah parents of six found that waiting up for late teenagers was very effective because "they hated it." The Wyoming parents of five children would use additional chores as an incentive for obedience. Another family found that "reasoning together" was their most effective method of discipline.

Reasons for Disciplining

When we asked parents to identify the reasons they would apply discipline, they gave these reasons in order of frequency of occurrence:

There is considerable overlap between these reasons. Most families would agree that doing assigned chores and not fighting would be family rules; but obviously obedience and responsibility are high values in all of these families. One parent said, "I feel that children should "honor their father and mother," and when they do not obey our requests I feel this is not honoring us." Many couples listed specific infractions that had triggered a discipline "clamp-down": sassing, stealing, and jumping on the beds. One couple said they punished their thirteen-year-old for unauthorized joy-riding in the family car.

In an area so value-laden as discipline and one in which advice from child-rearing experts has changed conspicuously and often within two generations, many parents sometimes flounder and feel confused. In an interview, parents in one of the less-effective families mused, "If we could start over again, we would make up more rules. The kids have always done what they wanted to, and we thought that they would make the best choices, but they didn't, and now it is too late. Of course, we haven't done so well with the choices we made either." A father in a less-effective family stated, "My dad used a belt on me, and I think I turned out okay. It's the kids who don't get belted that end up in reform schools. They just run wild, and the parents don't line them up." A mother in a less-effective family commented somewhat wistfully, "Our standards are too high, I think. With our oldest children we get after them for not getting all A's on their report card. We never do tell them that they are doing well, even when they get better grades than most of their friends." Still another set of less-effective parents was completely frank about their motives in discipline: "We send them to their room a lot, and that gets them out of our hair and away from each other."

The highly effective families in our study were not immune from confusion and fatigue, but they seem to have thought through some of the issues more thoroughly and carefully. They also seem to have behaved more consistently. Many of them wrote illuminating comments about their philosophy of discipline. A Texas mother of four wrote: "When they were too small to reason with, we sometimes used spanking, but generally only when they were endangering themselves or someone else. When our oldest was about seven years old, a neighbor asked me how often I spanked him. I honestly couldn't recall the last time I'd had to spank him! In general, we have found that Joseph Smith's method worked best for us: Teach them correct principles and they govern themselves.

"I think the three oldest were probably all in grade school when we had a family council where they helped make the family rules and also determined what the punishments would be for breaking them. The rules included such things as (1) Be on time for dinner, (2) Let Mom or Dad know where you are going, (3) Bed made before school, and so on. They chose the penalties, and often they were more severe than we would have imposed. During the council meeting, we sometimes had to temper the penalties a bit. We didn't want penalties we weren't willing to enforce!

"We tried to help the children choose natural consequences. For example, the penalty for not making one's bed was to have to sleep on the floor the following night. The penalty for not checking out with Mom or Dad was being grounded for a period of time. Being late for dinner meant no dinner. The interesting thing about this whole plan was that they imposed punishment and really helped us enforce it with each other. When we might have been tempted to "go soft" on one of them, the pressure from the others wouldn't allow it. "Ha, ha, you sleep on the floor tonight!" was usually met with good-natured embarrassment. The first night of floor sleeping may have been fun, but it soon wore off.

"We asked our daughter about this method of discipline the other day, and her comment was, "We just knew if we didn't do right, you'd be so disappointed in us, and we didn't want that."

"Not all children would respond to this method in the way ours have, and perhaps we have not really been tested as parents. My grandmother used to say she wouldn't know what kind of parent she had been until she saw how her grandchildren turned out. She was training not only children but the next generation of parents! Too few young couples set out on the sea of matrimony with so large a view of their destination."

"In our family," echoed one set of Idaho parents with four children, "we did not use discipline so much as we allowed children to suffer the consequences of their own actions, without too much interference. If they stayed out late, they still had to get up early and go to work."

Another couple wrote, "We have felt it important that our children learn to complete assignments at an acceptable level. We try to follow up on every assignment to see if it was done and how it was done." They passed over silently the level of self-discipline such consistency requires of parents.

One Texas couple "always resolve contention immediately," they wrote. "We never let a child go to his or her room angry and let pouting make the problem larger." This couple also felt strongly that children shouldn't be "bribed for good behavior"; and instead of offering rewards for good behavior, they tried to create an atmosphere with an "abundance of love where all the children could express their feelings, even angry ones, knowing that we loved and accepted them. We tried to have reasonable expectations but then tried to be absolutely consistent. Needless to say, we weren't always great at the consistency part." When their children pointed to other children who were rewarded for good behavior, these parents explained the principle behind their action: "In this life, rewards don't always come to deserving people. We need to learn to do right because it's right, not for any other reason. Only our Father in heaven will always reward us. Trust him."

These parents used physical punishment to teach acceptable behavior at a very young age. If a child threw a tantrum in public, an immediate spanking in public followed. If one daughter (their four oldest were girls) bit another, the mother bit back, explaining that the daughter needed to know how it hurt and cuddling her until she was comforted, then asking her if she understood about making a different choice the next time. The parents decided that, at about the age of eight months, their children were old enough to be quiet in church, and each child got a "bare-bottomed spanking" for misbehaving, followed by explanation and loving. "With five of the children, it took only one experience. With one it took two. And with one it took five," the mother recalled. "All of our discipline is based on "reproving betimes with sharpness"—perhaps not always moved upon by the Holy Ghost—then showing forth afterwards an increase of love, explaining, talking, and loving."

The mother wrote that as a result of this early and thorough training, "I could take our children anywhere and be proud. We called them our angels while we heard other parents referring to theirs as monsters and beasts. It's true that some of those children seemed hyper, rowdy, and snoopy. Perhaps because our expectations were clear and our discipline was consistent, we knew we could depend on ours." Furthermore, she said, "our girls have been such a good example for our [three younger] boys that we've never had any trouble with them."

Some parents focused on making the discipline itself a learning experience. "When we discipline we ask our children to pray about the situation and listen to what the Holy Spirit tells them to do," wrote the Utah parents of nine. "Thus they are disciplined by a higher source than us, and by themselves." In answer to a question later in the survey about the three most important rules, the mother wrote, "Follow the Spirit! Follow the Spirit! Follow the Spirit. The children can always recognize it, for it encourages them to do good and gives them a joyous, peaceful feeling."

Another family reinforced agency by letting the children choose between two punishments or choose their own. A Utah couple with seven children ranging in age from five to twenty checked all the forms of discipline except spanking as "number one" and explained, "The most important thing is that they know the price of their unacceptable behavior before the transgression. Then the form is really irrelevant." Still another set of Utah parents explained, "We have a high degree of trust that our eight children will make the right choices. We are generally tolerant of errors and treat them as errors rather than as a sign of badness."

One mother reflected ruefully, "We have not been strong disciplinarians. We didn't know how to be. But I was against hitting or spanking." In another family, the couple had decided before they were married, "Our children will never own a car of their own until after marriage or mission. They would be privileged to use the family car when necessary and as they deserved to do so. We have never had a problem with discipline and cars with any of our nine children (six boys). We attribute this to making our decision and sticking to it."

Most parents would probably agree about the importance of consistency: "We feel it is very important for parents to stick together on discipline whether they agree at the time or not." Another set of parents corroborated, "By being firm and not changing the discipline, we grew closer together." In a Utah family with seven children, the parents saw their discipline styles as very different. The mother did most of it, using positive reinforcement first with talking second, and "not making an issue" out of rebellion but instead finding "another way to give the children the responsibility for their actions." The father was stricter about most things and tended to begin discipline with a "talking to," but both agreed that they were more relaxed parents with the younger four than with the older three, and the wife felt good about supporting the father's discipline, even when she didn't agree with it.

Consistency did not necessarily mean sameness. Several parents acknowledged the differences between their children: "Some of our children were very sensitive to heart-to-heart talks," said one mother. "Others sometimes required a loss of privileges to get their attention." Another couple observed that "our oldest often shuts us out. The other two are very attentive and have shown no signs of rebellion." In one Idaho family where the father had been married four times (the first three wives had died, leaving several small children each, and the fourth wife brought eight children of her own to the marriage), the parents had a firm rule for themselves in imposing discipline of "never comparing children or what they do or do not do."

One couple wrote: "Our children have all been different from one another in many ways. A couple of them didn't seem to respond to discussions, and we had to spank them occasionally. Others we would talk to and they would just seem to understand and were willing to do what was right. One son would become very difficult and obstinate unless we found something to praise him for. A little good, honest praise would make him work all the harder to make sure that he would get praised again. As he grew older, we didn't have to praise him so much. He just got better in all areas, it seemed. We think we would praise more and spank much less if we were starting all over again with little tykes."

The parents also revealed their own efforts at self-discipline in dealing with their children. "We always endeavor to be fair," said one couple. "We feel it is important to listen to them to know where they are coming from." Their own commitment to listen defused anger and hence curtailed "explosive" disciplines. Another couple also set controls for themselves: "We tried not to discipline in front of other people. We learned early that if the kids were humiliated, even the best form of discipline would be ineffective." One father said, "I would spank only occasionally, and then I'd send them to find a stick while I collected my thoughts and feelings and evaluated them."

Children's Response to Discipline

In an attempt to determine effectiveness, we asked parents, "How do your children generally respond to your discipline attempts?" Three-fourths (76 percent) of them said that their children generally accepted it. One couple said that "closer relationships and mutual respect" resulted from their discipline. An older couple, the parents of seven, expressed a sense of reassurance about the choices they had made: "Good, sound, constructive, consistent, loving discipline has actually built a bond between us and each of these children. You want them to be their best because you love them. We feel we have been on the right track with our disciplining, because all four of our married children are using basically the same methods."

Other parents said that their children basically accepted the discipline but that acceptance was not infrequently preceded by resistance or waiting, a "testing it out" or "thinking it over" period, but that usually the child ended up agreeing with the parents.

A minority of parents reported compliance with the desired behavior after discipline but in such an angry and resentful mood that it ended up being a generally negative experience. "Pouting" was a problem with some of their eight children, confessed one Utah couple. The Idaho parents of four boys recall a consistent pattern of the children "arguing, debating, reasoning, and finally submitting" while the parents reciprocated by listening, reasoning with them, accepting their reasons as valid when they could, and negotiating more satisfactory solutions when they felt their children had a good point. About 20 percent said that they could not give one answer for all their children because some accepted discipline while others rejected it.

It is interesting that even in these effective families, 5 percent of the parents reported that the general response to their discipline was rejection. Usually teenagers seemed to feel this way, certainly one of the reasons why many parents feel teenagers are the hardest to rear.

Comparative Strictness

When parents were asked, "How strict are you in your family compared with other families you know?" the results were:

Much stricter 17%

Somewhat stricter 54%

About the same 17%

Less strict 10%

Much less strict 2%

Since each family compared itself to other families they know, there is no way of knowing if there is any common standard of strictness. It is quite possible that in some areas "grounding" a child could be seen as being very strict, while in another community "grounding" is a standard practice and only spanking a child or giving an angry scolding would be considered strict.

It is also possible that strictness is seen as consistency of discipline. A strict family, by this definition, would be one that always applies discipline for an infraction. A less strict family would be one that would overlook infractions much of the time and only occasionally apply discipline. One parent put it this way: "I don't think we are a very strict family—at least when I compare our family with the way my dad handled us kids in my parents" home. But when I watch the way many of the children of our friends behave, I am astonished. We just would not allow our children to act that way. I see kids talking back to their parents, arguing—almost fighting, refusing point-blank to obey, staying out late without thinking of calling home, never seeming to do any work around the house—well, we just would not accept that kind of behavior. So in comparison, I guess we are stricter. But we didn't have to talk about it to discipline the children because nobody did certain things. They especially didn't sass us. We had high expectations that everyone understood and met, but certainly we were not a rule-regulated family. We had a lot of freedom and flexibility, and as I look back on it, our children seldom abused the freedom we allowed."

A Provo, Utah, couple with three girls and four boys wrote: "From a strong base of commitment to each other and the gospel, a strong family is able to be very flexible about rules, patterns of life, and interactions with each other and the community. We feel that the love and nurturing the children get during their earliest years is critical in building that foundation. In our family, the mother was constantly available for preschool children because that was crucial, we felt, to their development. We also feel that having a sense of humor and not taking ourselves or each other too seriously has enabled us to enjoy each other and build a bond that enables us to be happy."

A California wife with four living daughters wrote somewhat with mingled apology and pride: "My husband's partriarchal blessing says that the children who would come into our family would be choice spirits and they have been. I'm afraid the Lord would not trust us with any of his problem children. Our girls have just naturally seemed to want to do right. My husband's remarkable sense of humor has done much to make our home a happy place."

A Salt Lake City father with eight children observed, "We're strict when it counts, yet we allow a lot of discretion. If we take a stand, we follow through to enforce it; however, we do not take stands lightly." Another couple explained, "Our family standards are higher than average but perceived discipline is less because family members generally do not need strictness."

"Must-Do"Requirements

We asked parents, "What are the things your children must do?" In addition to checking off the kinds of things they required from their children, many families wrote this kind of comment: "In our family there are very few things our children must do in the sense we absolutely require it. Particularly as our children get to the age of eight, we feel they have their free agency and should have the right to choose." Another wrote: "The word "must" on your questionnaire is too strong for us. We do not make them do anything, but rely on the principle of free agency. Our children know that we use a pretty hefty amount of persuasion, though. We strongly encourage a lot of things but don't make them do anything in the final analysis." "We don't insist or force them to do any of these activities," wrote the Utah parents of nine, "but we encourage them to do all of them. They choose for themselves." A California couple with six children ran an eye over the list and admitted, "These are all "musts" with room for exceptions—and there have always been plenty of them."

However, most families felt that they had strong enough expectations that there was a sense of "must do" for the following activities:

Among the "other" must-do's listed here were working hard, saving money for their own needs and wants, speaking respectfully to parents, and respecting the rights of others.

It is interesting to note that going to school is significantly ahead of the next-nearest activity, helping around the house. Going to school is also a legal requirement, and most parents feel they cannot let their children make a choice to stay home. Interestingly enough, one of the less-effective families felt that "our kids have to go to school every day unless we have something better to do. School isn't the only place to get an education, and we take them out a lot and do other things like skiing and fishing." While many effective families would agree that "school isn't the only place to get an education," probably very few of them would agree that recreation would be more important than school or agree with the rule-flouting attitude expressed in "unless we have something better to do." All of these effective families expect their children to take rules seriously—family rules, Church principles, and law.

Motivations and Rewards

While discipline is sometimes seen as the negative, controlling side of child-rearing, positive attempts usually have the same end in mind: to increase desired behavior and reduce unwanted behavior. We also asked some questions about this area so that we could make some appraisals of which factors seemed most effective.

We first asked parents, "Do you reward your children for some things?" Eighty-seven percent said yes; 13 percent said no. We then had them go over a list of rewards:

Parents jotted down such items as treats, special clothes, sports equipment, notes of appreciation, and "trusting them with real responsibility."

The rewards that were seen as most effective and producing the best results were praise (57 percent) and permission to do something special (15 percent). The Idaho parents of six explained that a real reward was "allowing them more freedom to do things they wished to do when they learn responsibility. They have usually chosen good things." One Utah mother of seven cheerfully confessed, "I usually give money when I'm too tired to be creative and think of a reward that will build character."

"Love and approval is the reward they get, and they appreciate it," said a significant number of parents.

"We did not set up an award system," said one couple. "We just gave what we had at the time. Sometimes it was a special meal or dessert. Other times it would be a rose, a treat, or a note left on a pillow or put on a plate."

"We would contract for a reward for something accomplished," said other parents. "Our three sons achieved the Eagle rank. We agreed to pay half on a shotgun if they completed their Eagle. With another child, we agreed to get contact lenses if she finished reading the Doctrine and Covenants by age fourteen."

Several parents expressed concern about the "bribery" aspects of a rewards system, even though one couple frankly listed it among the "other" forms of discipline they used. One widowed Salt Lake City mother of five said: "I've always felt that rewards as such were not the best system. Children should do many things for the simple reward of accomplishment. We expect good grades and praise them, but we don't bribe our children to get them. We might want to do things together after we've worked hard together on a project, but we don't hold up the reward of a movie or money as an incentive. When the children were little, perhaps we'd go out for ice cream or make cookies—something that particular child would especially enjoy—but we never decided on a reward ahead of time. We've tried to identify their feelings of joy when they've done something and praise that, make that the reward."

Another Salt Lake couple who adopted ten children use rewards in a combination of system and spontaneity. They keep party-favor surprises in a "treat bowl," and a youngster who manages to do something right that he's been struggling with gets to pick one out. Other rewards are a night out alone with Mom and Dad, or a pizza party for the family. "Often," says this mother, "we give a reward just for love—because we just love the children and want to do something special for them."

Parents most frequently rewarded these actions:

"Other" rewarded behavior included "no cavities," advancement in Scouting, "doing their best in their activities—concerts, ball games, or competitions," and compassionate service.

A Texas couple with four children wrote: "Many of our children's friends have been rewarded for good grades with $1 or $5 for each A. We have never felt this was a healthy approach. One of the best rewards we have found has been a family celebration. When one of the children brought home especially good grades, we took the whole family out to dinner to celebrate. It is good reinforcement when an older brother brags about how his younger brother's good grades are the source of a pleasant experience for the whole family, and we all look forward to the next grade period. Praise and rejoicing together over each others' accomplishments has been our best reward technique."

One Utah Valley couple take their four sons out to dinner every quarter to celebrate good grades—but it's not a reward. They've never had low grades. In one Utah family with seven children, giving talks, getting good grades, and going to church are "expected—therefore no material rewards are given." Probably other parents would also agree. "We tend to give rewards spontaneously, after the fact," said one couple. "We don't routinely hand out rewards in an attempt to foster improved behavior." Even here, however, flexibility paid off. With one child, money was the most successful motivation for achieving a goal.

Often the parents would plan how the reward system was going to work and make it correspond with the goals they set, within the framework of their family values. "We really use the rewards in diverse ways for each family member," wrote one couple. "As we talk together, we discuss each child and try to come up with something that will help him or her move in the proper direction. For one it may be a reward to get her to work on her music, as we think she has a pretty good talent with that. For others it is a reward to help them pick up their grades a little bit. Sometimes the children complain when another child gets a reward that they would like, but we tend to ignore that. The children have been told that we try to personalize the rewards to help them do better, and they know that in the end they all about even out."

Conclusion

These effective Mormon families have high expectations, a few rules, and usually a struggle, whether they use positive or negative means to obtain compliance. We asked two of our final questions to see how well parents thought they had done. They were to check the appropriate blank: (1) "In general, we think our family is _______ very special, _______ about average for the families we know, or _______ not as good as most families we know." (2) "How does your family compare with your own ideals and expectations for your family?"

Eighty-nine percent of the parents checked the "very special" place on the first question; 10 percent checked "'about average for the families we know"; and only 1 percent checked "not as good as most families we know."

In answer to the second question, 75 percent of these parents said that their families met their expectations. Twenty-three percent said that their family fell "somewhat short of our expectations." But only 1 percent responded that it fell "very short" of their expectations. (One percent did not respond.) One of the couples who checked the second answer, a family with seven children, had seen two of them divorced and two fail to graduate from high school. They commented: "I think as a family we've learned that the principle of free agency is very important; and when you reject it, you're taking a course that will afterwards bring some sorrow. However, as a family we've learned about unconditional love and caring and never giving up. We're not the typical wonderful family that boasts of every child a missionary and all married in the temple, but we've had enough adversity to help us be compassionate to others in difficulties (there are a lot of them in the Church) and enough of seeing children change to give us hope. We've learned that life is always going to be a test. There's never a time when you are through with the hard things and can relax."
