Phillip R. Kunz, William G. Dyer, Effective Mormon Families: How They See Themselves ( 1986)

Chapter Five

Parents as Teachers: Gospel Teachings and Secular Education

Several of the parents in our study cited the well-known quotation from Joseph Smith about his method of governing the Saints: "I teach them correct principles and they govern themselves." The Lord has assigned parents the responsibility to teach their children, and these parents accept it. Another favorite quotation is: "Inasmuch as parents have children in Zion, or in any of her stakes which are organized, that teach them not to understand the doctrine of repentance, faith in Christ the Son of the living God, and of baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of the hands, when eight years old, the sin be upon the heads of the parents." (D&C 68:25.)

LDS children, to some extent, live in two worlds: the gospel-centered world of the Church and the achievement-oriented world of secular society. Sometimes these two worlds are seen as compatible, sometimes not. The family and Church classes are the primary means of instruction about the first world. Public education is the primary means of instruction about the second. The effective parents in this study consider themselves responsible in both spheres to help their children succeed.

We asked a cluster of questions designed to show what parents do in both areas:

Teaching Activities

We asked parents, "How do you teach your children?" Here are the responses:

Many parents added explanations about the top two methods, clearly the favored and, they felt, their most effective teaching methods. "When we go out to build fences or work with the machinery, we talk together as father and sons," said one ranching father. "Sometimes we talk about the gospel and my mission. Sometimes we talk about political issues and things that are happening in the world. And sometimes we just work."

Ninety-nine percent of the parents said they always pay their tithing; 97 percent always attend Church meetings; and 93 percent always accept Church callings and assignments. Furthermore, 97 percent of them said they actively try to help neighbors who need it, with the result that the children see a model of rendering service to others. Over 98.8 percent of these couples were married in the temple or were sealed there after a civil wedding. Both father and mother have a personal commitment to education (80 percent of the fathers and 70 percent of the mothers had attended college). They are very active in fulfilling Church callings, and they emphasize the importance of the family by the amount of time they spend with their children. Clearly, as far as modeling Church commitment is concerned, they expect to be their children's primary models.

Sixty-six percent of the families said they hold a weekly family home evening "usually" or "always," but only 28 percent say they "usually" or "always" read the scriptures regularly. From this, we infer that the parents do most of their teaching in informal settings.

Actually, this is quite logical. Family home evening is only once a week, but informal talks or discussions seem to occur almost every day. When we asked parents what they did regularly together in the family, this is how they responded:

These families see themselves as spending considerable time together talking, discussing problems, and doing things together. Doing household chores together is lower than we might have thought; but at least one family from Idaho listed "working together" as one of their most effective teaching techniques, while a Utah Valley couple with five children "always worked with the children on household or yard chores to teach them properly." One Utah couple with seven children ranging in age from eighteen to thirty-three recalled, "We not only have always played and prayed together, but we have had some of our best teaching moments working as a family."

Several parents included examples of the kinds of values they taught. "Sometimes in our prayers we will address a specific problem and ask for divine guidance in helping to understand or cope with a situation," one couple observed. The working out of the problem then constitutes a built-in basis for discussion. "We have used important events in the extended family as times for discussions; for example, mission farewells and homecomings, temple marriages, blessings, baptisms, Scouting advancements, and family reunions," say another couple.

An Idaho couple with ten closely spaced children remain alert to "take advantage of the teaching moments that come daily. Whenever questions arise, we go to our reference books and find an answer." They also have lively mealtime conversations dealing with current events and recent lessons from Church and school classes.

Similarly, another couple has formed the practice of talking "with our children about the lessons they have been given in Seminary, Primary, Sunday School, and so on. A common table topic at dinner is "what did you talk about in your class today?'"

"Often we will take a certain person (Church leader, current-event figure) and talk about that person and look at what we can learn (either positive or negative) from their example," said the parents of another family. "Sometimes we will just talk about the good things in the lives of those who live around us."

A Texas couple and their four children have a tradition of "piling on the parents' bed and talking—making plans, sharing ideas, setting goals, swapping experiences. . . . That's probably our best teaching technique." A Montana biologist and his wife found that the family council with their four children was an effective place to teach. A Utah couple worked consciously to ensure that their eight children "have good [then crossed it out and wrote "growing"] experiences inside and outside the house."

One Wyoming couple with six children gave them responsibility "at an early age and then held them accountable." They commented that this was one of their most effective teaching devices.

School

We asked parents in our sample about their own schooling. Husbands averaged 16.0 years—coming out to exactly four years of college—and wives averaged 13.8, or almost two years of college. When we asked them to appraise their own children's scholastic performance, about 66 percent reported that their children had above-average grades. (The breakdown for the children by birth order was that 64 percent of the first-born children earned "above average grades," with second children coming in at 67 percent, third children at 66 percent, and fourth children at 65 percent.)

One couple said, "We try to talk with our children's teachers to see how they are doing and what we can do in the home to support what the teacher is trying to get across." They did this with the children's Primary, priesthood, and MIA classes as well. One Salt Lake City family with five children, the father a technician and the mother a secretary, have made academics a high priority. They have "one Sterling Scholar, one nominee, and one working for it" among their children.

One mother of four, who said her children were "very easy to teach" and had "never given us worry or heartaches," observed, "Our children have not been leaders in student government or high achievers such as Sterling Scholars, though they have all averaged high grades in school and received several scholarships."

Reading and Television

We asked our parents to identify their reading and television habits for two reasons: we wanted to get at some of the attitudes they had toward education (and reading is usually a fundamental) and also to see how they handled the potentially controversial problem of television.

More than two-thirds of the highly effective parents felt that their home libraries were above average in the neighborhood. The breakdown looks like this:

One Utah mother of five, who checked "better than most" observed in the margin. "We're always loaning books."

What kinds of books do the families have in a home library? Almost every home has a dictionary and an. encyclopedia, and about 80 percent have an atlas. In these homes, Church books occupy an important place—99 percent said the home library included "a lot" of such volumes. Literature—novels, poetry, adventure, Westerns, science fiction, and essays—appeared in about 80 percent of the libraries, followed by history and biography in two-thirds of the home libraries. Parents also mentioned cookbooks, game and joke books, "how-to" books, foreign-language books, children's books, and books dealing with science, Scouting, politics, business, art, music, and special fields. Some families also mentioned "heavy" traffic in and out of the public library, or made a comment like, "We read a lot." One Utah couple with a professor father and college-graduate mother checked everything and then jotted down, "We have tons of books of all kinds."

Church magazines formed a good share of the reading. Ninety-two percent of the families took the Ensign, and 46 percent read at least half of the magazine. (Only 2 percent "never read" up to half.) Eighty-four percent of the families took the New Era, and 52 percent read at least half. (Only 3 percent "never read" at least half.) Forty-three percent of the families took the Friend—probably reflecting the age distribution of the children—and 41 percent read at least half. (Only 5 percent "never read" half.) Besides Church magazines (several couples also listed such Mormon-oriented publications as This People and Church News), the average family also subscribed to four other publications. Most frequently mentioned were National Geographic, Time or Newsweek, Reader's Digest, and Better Homes and Gardens. Many homes would also include a specialty publication connected with the father's work (Chemical Engineer, Money) a special interest of the parents (Farm Journal Workbasket, Golf Digest, NEA Journal), and some other magazine geared to the interests of the children, such as Popular Mechanics, Boy's Life, Sports Illustrated, Byte. Compute! or Seventeen.

One Montana family with a contractor father, homemaker mother, and only two of six children still at home (boys fifteen and seven) subscribed to all three Church magazines as well as Reader's Digest, Smithsonian, National Geographic, U.S. News & World Report, Hot Rod, Oceans, Montana Outdoor, Church News, World, Ladies Home Journal, McCall's, Better Homes and Gardens, Freeman, and Prevention. A Utah family with seven children subscribes to more than twenty magazines, including two on pigeon racing and five on horse racing. Additionally, almost all the families interviewed reported that they subscribed to a daily newspaper. Our study did not ask who in the family read what or how much, but the evidence is clear that parents in these homes had a generous supply of good reading available for the family members.

When it comes to television watching, our sample showed a strikingly low number of hours compared to a national sample. Our study showed that on an average day, the parents and children at home watched for an hour and four minuets. A national survey in 1982 showed almost triple that time: two hours and fifty-one minutes a day median time. (Robert T. Bower, The Changing Television Audience in America [New York: Columbia University College, 1985].) When we looked only at the college-educated portion of our sample, they watched only 55 minutes compared to the 1982 national sample of two hours and eighteen minutes. We tried to break the pattern down even further; here's what the data show:

Children between two and five watched twenty-seven hours and nine minutes a week in a sample collected by the Nielsen rating. Our sample watched eight hours and thirty-six minutes. Children between six and eleven from the national sample watched twenty-four hours and fifty minutes while ours watched eleven hours and forty-two minutes. Starting at age twelve, we broke the figures down to see if there were any differences between male and female viewing patterns. Teenage boys in the national sample watched twenty-five hours and seventeen minutes while ours watched nine hours and twenty-four minutes. For girls, the time was almost identical. The national sample watched television for twenty-four hours and sixteen minutes while the teenage girls in our sample watched for nine hours and twenty-nine minutes.

Young adults between eighteen and thirty-four showed an even greater divergence from the national sample. Young men in the national sample watched twenty-eight hours and thirty minutes compared to five hours and fifty-seven minutes in our sample while young women in the national sample watched thirty hours and nineteen minutes compared with our sample of six hours and twenty-two minutes. During the highly productive years of thirty-five to fifty-four, when most adults are juggling the responsibilities of work and rearing their families, the national sample of men watched an average of twenty-seven hours and fifty minutes (compared to our sample of ten hours and eighteen minutes), while the women watched thirty-three hours and twenty-three minutes. The women in our sample actually watched less than the men, with seven hours and twenty-four minutes. The biggest gap, however, occurs in the retirement years. American men over fifty-five watch television an average of thirty-five hours and fifty-three minutes, while our sample was seeing six hours and six minutes; women of the same age were up to forty-one hours and thirteen minutes—the equivalent of a full working week—while women in our sample tuned in their sets an average of six hours and twenty-four minutes. (Trends in Attitudes Toward Television and Other Media: A Twenty-four Year Report by the Roper Organization. 5B:84, April 1983; Public Perceptions of Television and Other Mass Media: A Twenty-Year Review, 1959-1967: A Report by the Roper Organization, April 1979.)

Thus, in our sample of highly effective families, most of the television viewing was done by the children between six and eleven by an impressively large margin, while young adults watched the least amount of television. At most, however, members of highly effective families are watching less than half the national average number of hours and, at the point of widest divergence, only one-eighth as much. About 5 percent of the parents we surveyed said they did not watch television at all during the week. One Utah family with six children from ten to twenty-five logged barely an hour's viewing time a day for everyone except for the seventeen-year-old, who had medical problems and whose viewing was about ten hours a week.

In general, watching television together is not an important activity that the family does together. Fifty-four percent of the families said they watched television together as a family two hours or less a week. One Washington family with six children explained, "We do not watch television often because we find other activities, especially reading, more interesting." Another 37 percent said they watched less than ten hours a week as a family. The Provo parents of nine wrote: "When our twins were asked what their favorite television show was, on a school survey, they wrote "The News." They were eight years old. This was probably because we all watch the news together and discuss the day's events."

One mother observed, "Sometimes we watch television as a family, and sometimes I listen to it a little as background noise when I am home alone doing the ironing or other work. I seldom ever really look at it, however. About the only thing that we consistently watch is the news and the Choir broadcast on some Sundays." (Several women mentioned having the television on as "background" while they did housework.)

When we asked parents if they controlled what their children watched, they answered:

However, the matter of control means different things to different people. One Provo family of five commented that the television had always gone off after supper until homework was finished, unless an exceptional program was on. One father said: "We don't check up on what programs our kids watch. However, we have talked about television programming, and our children know the kinds of programs we don't approve of. Since we can't check every program they watch (and don't want to), we feel we must tell our children our standards of television programming and trust them to control their own television watching."

A Wyoming couple commented, "Our family seems to choose good programs. If we comment that a show is unfit or if the children see material that they know is not appropriate, they don't watch it."

A Wyoming forest ranger and his wife do not monitor what their children watch, but they have decided against cable television, and they screen the videos the children are allowed to watch. A Provo couple with seven children seldom control programming: "We suggest; they choose," is the way they put it.

Although our study did not probe this area particularly, the comments of the parents who wrote them indicated that they had thought through how they wanted their children to relate to television—whatever it was—and felt comfortable with it. In contrast, one of the less-effective families indicated dissatisfaction but vagueness: "Our kids watch way too much television. I guess we shouldn't let them do it like they do."

Cultural Exposure

One couple wrote, "We have read to our children extensively from birth, and we talk about what we have read. We have used books and observation to learn about trees, flowers, birds, animals, and a whole range of subjects."

Another couple corroborated, "It is important to us that our children learn something about the elements of good culture. We have tried to have good music and paintings in the home. We keep books and have a recommended reading list. Then we take our children to concerts, plays, seminars." "When we travel or even on short trips, we try to visit places of interest," said one couple. "We have gone to historical places of interest to the Church or the country. We may visit a museum, an art gallery, a beautiful building or natural setting." A couple of families have reading lists of suggested books, or find books on interesting topics that come up. In a Utah family with seven children, the piano-teacher mother wrote: "We started at an early age to steer our kids toward appreciating better music and away from rock. We feel terrific about how they respond to classical music."

In one Provo family of seven where the father is a professor and composer and the mother is a homemaker and student, the family works together on reports and projects. The children "have had many hours of reading from their mother," and they take walks together. "We sustain excitement about learning and accomplishments," they wrote. In another family of seven, also from Provo, the parents deliberately include good music and great paintings as part of the home environment.

Music lessons, as a reflection of family culture, came in for a high share of comments. Several parents commented that they had tried rewarding their children for practicing, often unsuccessfully. Another couple required that the children pay the teacher, but then paid the children for practicing, a rather ingenious rule. Another family had the rule that "every child must learn something about music. He or she can choose the instrument to play, but must be involved in music lessons and practice for two years. After that they can choose to continue or stop."

An Idaho farm couple with four sons and three daughters observed that practicing music lessons was not only expected and required but "needed rewards" to really work.

Conclusion

Although family educational goals in our survey differed from family to family, a general pattern is clear. Highly effective parents feel comfortable in their role as their children's teachers, whether that involves giving them the skills, structure, and discipline they need to succeed in school; explaining and implementing gospel principles; consciously exposing them to important cultural elements; or reinforcing the children's own learning efforts. They consider themselves responsible for and they are responsible about helping their children become well educated. They also consider themselves to be the primary conveyors of religious values.
