Phillip R. Kunz, William G. Dyer, Effective Mormon Families: How They See Themselves ( 1986)

Chapter Six

Showing Affection

Because love has always been part of the pattern of happy family life, and since the parents in this survey ranked it with gospel commitment as one of two important elements in their successful family life, we wanted to know more about what that meant.

Do loving families express love verbally? By hugs? By kisses? By doing kind things for each other? Do they always treat each other with respect? At one point Christ said to his disciples, "If ye love me, keep my commandments." (John 14:15.) Should we expect to find more obedience in families where members say they love each other? The Doctrine and Covenants (121:41-43) says that power and influence should only be exercised by "love unfeigned," and that if reproof is given, it should be followed by an "increase of love." How do highly effective couples teach family love to their children?

We asked:

While the data gathered may not give us complete answers to all of our questions, it is possible to identify certain trends:

Answers in the "other" slot seemed to cluster in a couple of major areas:

Getting together, talking, sharing, supporting 72%

Teasing and joking 20%

We also asked parents to rank in order the various expressions of love and to indicate which they did first, second, third, and so on. The findings show the following as the actions they took first or second:

These families indicated that "telling"—either face-to-face, on the phone, or in writing is most important, followed next by "doing things" for a loved one, and then by touching.

As this tabulation shows, 94 percent of the families indicated that hugging was a part of family expressions of love, and 85 percent said that kissing was. Still, it seems that there are some good families that have little or no physical expressions of love and affection. Both hugs and kisses were among the top seven, but they were not at the top, and they were only two of the top. Hugging was the most popular form of physical affection mentioned, with kissing occurring 10 percent less often. About 17 percent said that kissing would be the last method for showing love, and 7 percent said that hugging would be last.

It is not possible to tell what constitutes a hug or a kiss in these families. When we asked people to be more descriptive during interviews, we got definitions of a hug that ranged from a two-armed, full-body embrace to putting an arm around the shoulders. Kissing might be a generous smack on the lips or a peck on the cheek. Some families have a pattern of kissing openly. Bishop H. Burke Peterson, formerly a counselor in the Presiding Bishopric, and his brothers have a habit of kissing each other on the lips whenever they meet. This pattern would be absolutely foreign to many other equally good families. President Spencer W. Kimball was almost legendary for his overflowing love, which manifested itself (outside his family as well as inside it) with a kiss on the cheek, an affectionate hug, or holding the hand of someone he was talking to.

It would be interesting to check perceptions with the children in our sample to see if they felt love being communicated as the parents meant to communicate it. One mother, who indicated that "doing things" for her children was a primary mode of showing affection, commented, "I don't think my children will ever appreciate how much we love them and how much we sacrificed and did for them until they have children of their own. When they are up all night with a sick child, frantic with fear, or when they go to work the next day heavy with fatigue, or when they spend the few dollars on toys for the kids rather than something for the parents—maybe then they will remember that we did all of the same things for them." Perhaps she is right, and perceptions of behavior as love will develop more over time.

None of the survey responses suggested that affection was not important. One Utah couple with four children checked everything and wrote in the margin, "This is what it's all about!" An Idaho farming couple with seven children wrote, "These are all important. Our family has needed them all depending on age and circumstances." The Provo mother of nine children explained that "the boys wrestle with their father in a fun way," but she added, "All the forms of affection are interrelated. You can't have one without the other. We do feel it is very important to express our love for each other often."

One Utah father of five, four of the children sons, had deliberately patterned physical affection into the family structure. He wrote: "I think we're an affectionate family—at least, we hug and kiss a lot as family members come and go and at special events. When our children were young, we gave them lots of physical affection; but as the boys got older, they seemed somewhat embarrassed if we kissed them, especially in front of their friends. I tended to back off a little, although their mother still kissed them. It was nice to have a daughter, because she liked to be hugged and kissed and I enjoyed doing it. But I didn't like never touching my boys either, and I found they liked it when I'd sneak up behind them and grab them in a big bear hug or start a mock tussle. Later, I decided to kiss them as I left on a trip and returned—or if they were going somewhere. I talked with them about it; and aside from the initial awkwardness of starting the custom, it has become an accepted family practice. We still do it, and all of the children are married now."

Many parents wrote comments that showed their family had created a "family definition" of love. One Utah family added that they showed love by "forgiving." Another Utah couple wrote: "Love is service to one another, feeling or showing that you care through actions, showing interest in and involvement in each of their individual activities, interests, projects, and friends." An Idaho family with ten children also had little family traditions of "winking across the room, holding hands, or blowing a kiss." Another Idaho family added "honoring birthdays, family jokes, and stories" to the list of how they showed affection, while "being together" and "talking to them with respect and appreciation" was tops on other families' lists. A Utah couple with seven children also added "pats, backrubs, teasing, horseplay, and special family home evenings to honor someone." A Texas couple with four children simply said, "Surprises!"

Traditionally, parenting has meant providing. We included the question about providing a living to see how strong this belief still was. Some parents were puzzled by it and jotted down an explanatory note that the children were "on their own now" or that "this went without saying." One of the less-effective fathers, interestingly enough, responded to it directly by saying, "We don't show any affection in our family. Oh, I think that we love each other most of the time, but we just don't show it. I guess just making a living for the children ought to be an expression of love for them. Lots of families don't even provide for themselves." A Provo couple indicated that they showed love by "providing educational opportunities" for their children and "going places together."

One mother said, "I do many things out of love for my children. I will fix a meal early or make a lunch when they have to go to work. I will iron a dress or shirt, provide refreshments for a party, pick up after them if they are busy. I feel I do many things for my children because I love them. But I am not always sure they recognize what I have done or if they really appreciate it."

When we did follow-up interviews with some families, we found differences in the ease and openness families felt in expressing love. Several of the questionnaires had indicated some inhibition about physical affection. In one California family, the parents hugged and kissed, but one child did not like to be kissed.

More frequently, it was the mother and father who had different feelings about hugs and kisses. One mother said, "The father by nature is not a hugger or a kisser." In one family, the parents indicated that neither hugs nor kisses were part of their affectional repertoire and explained, "We're just not the type." Both parents had grown up in home where physical affection was not common, but they had found other ways to communicate affection for their children. In a follow-up interview, they agreed that there was a lot of love in the home but that "it gets expressed in other ways."

Some couples indicated that a common way of expressing love was "me too" response. If one member of the family were to tell another that she loved them, the other's response would be to say "me too." In some families, it seems difficult to freely say, "I really love and appreciate you." The interviews also revealed that in some families the most open expressions of love and appreciation came through the public forum of ward testimony meetings. Often a husband or wife could more easily express deep feelings of love and appreciation in a meeting than in a private, face-to-face encounter. One reason may be that there would be no possibility of rejection or interruption during the meeting; and while a child might feel squirmy or embarrassed, he or she would not feel required to respond in some way when the parent had finished. The public setting thus, in a way, becomes a method of safeguarding privacy. Children also used this public form to express feelings of tenderness and appreciation that they might otherwise have kept to themselves. More than one couple said, "The first time I heard our son say he loved us was at his missionary farewell."

We also asked parents how often members of their family showed physical affection to one another. The results were:

Since this question did not ask couples to specify which form of affection was used on these occasions, it could range from a hug or a kiss to a pat on the back, a touch, or a routine greeting or goodnight kiss. It could also include a warmly affectionate conversation with horseplay or lots of hugs.

In a family's life span, the pattern of showing affection seems to undergo some development. We have a general impression that the American culture shows kissing and hugging as commonplace in most families when children are young but decreasing as children get older. It also seems somewhat more culturally acceptable for daughters to continue to kiss both parents than for boys. A son now forty, who was interviewed during the follow-up phase, recalled the pattern in his family of thirteen children: "When I was small my parents would always kiss me, but as I grew older my mother would kiss me, but father did only on special occasions, like when I went into the military service. Then as I got older I had left home, of course, and I would always kiss both of my parents when I saw them. My sisters did all along, but I don't think that any of the other brothers did.'

Most families indicated that they "of course" hugged and kissed an adult child on landmark occasions: when he or she left for college or on a long trip, at a wedding, at graduation, or at a time of special recognition. They also responded this way when a child was ill or emotionally upset, no matter what his or her age.

It seems remarkable that so basic an area of family interaction has never been studied with a national sample, but there is simply no data available for comparison. A recent study of BYU students shows very little physical affection expressed between fathers and sons, except when the sons are very small, although there is rather more between fathers and daughters. It seems logical to expect some generational differences to develop, with families of the future being more openly affectionate. The new emphasis in the nation as well as in the Church on involving fathers more actively in the actual work of caring for infants and toddlers may make them feel more comfortable about continuing to hug and kiss them as they grow.

Certainly, the absence of ways to express physical affection appropriately must be related in some way to the shocking rates of father-daughter incest in this country and the widely publicized correlation (though not necessarily a cause) between homosexual men and emotionally aloof fathers. Some serious family specialists have encouraged more appropriate physical affection between dads and boys, dads and daughters, and other members of the family. There is no way to measure the tragedy of normal, healthy affection between parents and offspring that must manifest itself in joyless, abnormal, and even violent ways.
