Phillip R. Kunz, William G. Dyer, Effective Mormon Families: How They See Themselves ( 1986)

Chapter Seven

Chores, Work, and Money

We asked families to identify activities "that you consider to be very important in your family and that family members usually have a strong interest in doing." Here are the top items for activities strongly centered inside the family:

Besides these activities, we also asked parents to identify what the children did outside the family. They reported:

Families also added such recreational activities as watching videotapes, camping, working on art projects, canoeing, horseback riding and horse racing, swimming, picnicking, hiking, visiting family and friends, reading good books together, and watching family movies and slides.

In one Salt Lake City family, the eldest daughter of the five children cuts everyone else's hair. A Utah couple mentioned a family project of "appreciating our American heritage and freedom," but they did not explain how they carried it out. One Utah family with two boys and two girls did a lot of boating, water skiing, and "forever feeding friends. Our kids always brought their friends here, even when they were small. " Another Utah family with eight children finds that "guests" are a major family activity: "We have lived in a number of places," the couple explained, "and our list of friends is long. We have overnight guests very often, and children from the families of friends stay a number of weeks at a time in the summer." An Idaho family with ten children, five of them married, regularly gets together on Sunday evenings to make and show home movies. Another Idaho family of ten has a "game closet filled with games and puzzles and a large dining-room table where we gather regularly to play."

It was interesting that the second-most important reason why children were not home was that they were employed. Usually, it was not poverty that drove them to work. When we asked these families to rate their income as above, about the same, or below that of their neighbors, 60 percent of them checked the "above" box. A more important reason is that these highly effective parents have a strong work ethic. They teach their children good work habits, encourage them to work, and want them to experience the satisfaction of earning their own money. One mother reported, "All of our children have been expected to work around the house even when they were small. As they got older, we didn't actually force them to get a summer job or to work on Saturdays or after school, but all of the children knew that they would have a lot more money to spend if they earned it than if they always came to us for a handout."

How did these parents pass on work values? And how did they handle the problems involved in getting children to do their share of the household chores? We asked:

In answering the question about requiring household chores, 77 percent of the parents responded that children did at least some of the household chores on the list. A surprisingly high 60 percent said that children did these chores willingly. One family of five headed by a lieutenant colonel in the army added conscientiously, "Most of the time," and a Utah father of seven penned in, "Sometimes. Kids are kids." A Utah couple with five children added, "We never expect them to do something we would not do ourselves," and a Utah couple with eight children acknowledged, "Our children are above average in their attitude, but they did not always do household chores without occasional feelings of unfairness."

We had asked an earlier question about "the things that your children must do." Although many of the parents rephrased the question in terms of expectations rather than requirements, almost 90 percent said that helping with the family chores is an expectation in the family. Thus, the expectation is about 15 percent higher than the children who actually do work.

One mother explained the problem this way: "We have tried to get our kids to help around the house, and we have tried everything—restricting TV, paying for work done, grounding, scolding—but nothing has worked for very long. The kids get busy, and I find it really easier to do it myself that to get into a hassle with the children."

One Provo father of six recalls the chore/allowance intersection as a consistent frustration: "This was always a bugaboo for us. We tried every scheme imaginable to get our children to work in the home, and nothing was too successful. TV was used as a reward, and that worked for a time. We tried putting out a list of jobs in the home with the amount to be earned for each task. That just didn't work. The children said they didn't need money when we needed work done. We finally came to the point that we provided money as it was needed and tried to get agreements with each child as to that child's fair share of the family work. It's some comfort now to discover that many other good families struggle through the same issue. My wife has also found out that she isn't the only mother who moved in and silently did a child's chores when she felt that the child was struggling with a heavy schedule or a problem with a friend. But we were probably too lenient in requiring work around the house. If a child was busy in some other legitimate activity, we nearly always excused him or her from the chores."

We asked parents how much time they expected children to work each week around the home. Here are the results by the ages of children, the average time expected, and the most frequently listed time. This third listing is important. For example, for ages five to ten, most families expect only two hours of work a week. However, some families, usually farm families, expect much more, so the average is much higher—four hours a week.

Average Hours of Expected by

Age Work Expected per Week Most Families

5-10 years 4 hours 2 hours

11-15 years 7 hours 4 hours

16-20 years 9 hours 4 and 10 hours

21-28 years 11 hours 2 hours

The group of children between sixteen and twenty actually has two points—four and ten hours. Again, the difference is clearly related to where the family lives. Urban children who have a heavy schedule of academics, sports, other lessons, recreation, and easily accessible friends are expected to work at home only four hours a week. Rural families with the demands of crops and animals to care for required more hours of work from their children and usually checked ten hours. One farm mother explained, "Our children have always been willing to assist with the home and farm work. Most of the families in the community seem to have about the same pattern. Everyone works. Some, of course, seem to let their children get by with doing less, but our whole community works and seems to believe in it. As we have watched the children get older and leave home, we see the most success from those who had responsibility and had to work. Work is just part of life."

The reports on children ages twenty-one to twenty-five still living at home are too varied to produce a common pattern. Only forty-five families out of the 200 still had children of that age living at home. Usually, missions, work, school, or marriage have taken them away. In some of the families, children in this age group had almost complete responsibility for taking care of the home. Others working full time had almost no chores. Thus, our data rather misleadingly shows that the average amount of time expected for this older group is eleven hours a week, but the time most frequently checked is two hours. One mother whose twenty-three-year-old son was living at home and working full time said: "Now that he is working full time, we expect very little from him in helping around the house. In fact, we would be delighted if he would just make his bed and keep his own room picked up. He is a great young man (returned missionary) and we want him to save his money and get married, so we do not charge him room and board. I don't think he realizes how much additional work he creates. He thinks since he is gone to work all day and out most evenings that he doesn't have much impact in the home. But I still do his laundry, fix his meals, make his lunch, and pick up after him and his friends when they are here. There is a lot more work than he thinks."

A substantial number of parents jotted down explanatory comments about how much or how little their children worked, at what, and how willingly:

"In our family there was no set number of hours children were expected to work each week. Everyone was expected to pitch in, and we all kept the house neat and clean. The house is cleaned for the day before everyone leaves for school or work. We have breakfast together, family prayer, and sometimes scripture reading."

"The amount of time children work at home is difficult to measure," observed one Provo couple with nine children ranging from nine to twenty-two. "In the summertime, those at home work one to four hours per day. As they get older, they get jobs away from home and they spend less time working at home."

One Utah couple doesn't give their fourteen children allowances or pay them for working. They said, "We want our children to learn how to work in the family without feeling, "What will you give me for it?" or "How much is it worth?"' They also required a substantial amount of work from their children: seven hours for children under ten, ten hours for children under fifteen, and twelve hours for children between sixteen and twenty.

"In our family each person is responsible for some personal things—room and clothes,"wrote another couple. "Then we usually all work together until what we need to do is finished."

One couple controlled the amount of time spent in work because they wanted the children to do other things: "We had a bulletin board with the jobs each person was assigned to do after school. We varied jobs from time to time so one person didn't always do the same thing. But once the children finished their work, we did not add to the list. They need time for some play and homework." In another family, academic interests and doing well in school were extremely important to the parents. "To provide study time for six children, we gave them a break at home—so Mother did more of the work than in many families," they wrote.

A Salt Lake City family with seven living children took a middle position. "All of our children have delivered the paper from age eight. This has always provided them with their spending money until they choose to earn more," wrote their mother. "But we think that their senior year is soon enough to work at more than odd jobs. Too much money too soon makes them too independent when they are not always wise. There's a time for everything; and we want them to enjoy and learn during high school—not earn." This same family also puts a limit on housework: They clean one floor of their two-story house on Thursday and the other story on Friday. Then they use Saturday as a "fun day."

Interestingly, a mother in one of the less-effective families commented, "Our kids are all involved in the farm, but the kids hate it because their dad is a workaholic." The term, "workaholic" did not appear in any of the discussions about work among the highly effective families.

"Men's Work" and "Womens Work"

We wondered how traditional these highly effective families might be and if strict gender roles were part of the family pattern. For that reason, we asked parents which chores boys did and which chores girls did. Interestingly enough, most of these homes showed a very egalitarian approach to work:

Girls Boys

Job Only Only Both

Out of all of these activities, only "fixing the car" is clearly seen as men's work. For all of the rest, over half of the responses indicate that the activity is considered appropriate for both boys and girls. One Idaho couple with three children wrote down "sewing and mending" as another activity and said that it was required of their two boys as well as their daughter. Other families specified that child care was required of both boys and girls, while a Provo family of seven also involved both sons and daughters in grocery shopping, typing, doing the laundry, and "balancing the checkbook."

The responses indicated preferences for girls doing dishes, house cleaning, and cooking, while boys more often did yard work, farm or garden work, animal care, or fix-it projects. But it is possible to see in this pattern an emphasis that getting the work done—not who does it—is the important value.

Some of the comments parents added indicated an unconscious awareness of gender in the family's work patterns. "As long as our children lived at home, they made their own beds and kept their rooms straight," wrote one couple. "The boys took out the garbage and did the yards. The girls helped with meals and general housework. Sometimes they would have to fit these chores into their schedules, so jobs were not always done at the same time."

One Texas family with four daughters followed by three sons checked everything in duplicate, then commented: "No sex discrimination here. We feel it is vital for everyone to know how to perform all these tasks. The girls gas cars. Mom takes it in for repairs. The boys cook and clean."

Family Projects

We also wondered if these effective families encouraged or created family projects, either to increase togetherness or to teach skills. We asked if their projects included a garden; genealogy; memorizing poetry or scriptures; building, remodeling, or adding on to the house; a family business; missionary activities; or service projects. The only projects that received a significant number of answers were:

Forty-four families distributed their answers among the rest of the choices.

About three-fourths of the families had a garden, but it was not clear that all of the family members worked in the garden. Some families responded that the whole family helped prepare the plot and plant the seeds, but the upkeep fell on the mother or father or perhaps one child. A service project would often occur once or twice a year: Sub-for-Santa, taking a basket to a needy family for Christmas, helping a widow clean her yard, or doing something special for a family with an illness or some other special need.

Money

As discussed in chapter 4 in the section on motivation, 43 percent of the families used money as a reward for behavior they wanted to celebrate or encourage, but this figure was low compared with 88 percent for praise and 72 percent with permission to do something they particularly wanted.

Money in our society represents independence, but it can come to people in two ways: as a gift motivated either by the recipient's need or the giver's generosity or as earned income, directly related to work.

Allowances

We asked our effective parents about allowances. Their responses showed clearly that there is no one right way to handle money in the family. Forty-three percent of the couples gave their children an allowance, but 57 percent did not. When we asked if the parents required their children to work for the money they gave them, the results were symmetrical. Nine percent said "always" and 9 percent said "never." Thirty-two percent said "most of the time," 13 percent said "often," 25 percent said "sometimes," and 12 percent said "seldom." Thus, equally effective families have very different strategies for dealing with money.

One Utah couple with five children ranging from three to sixteen had an allowance formula: "Twenty cents per week per year of age up to the age of ten. After that, the allowance is based on work completed around the home and yard." One couple gives each child a modest weekly allowance with a healthy bonus: $10 a month if they follow the family guidelines on low-sugar use.

One father tied family money closely to the work ethic, explaining, "We have our children work for what they get. There are too many who grow up expecting things for nothing, and we think we can start at home to avoid this problem. If our children want money, they work for it." One Salt Lake City couple ruled, "Anyone who lived in the home was obligated to help keep it operating"; and when one daughter was going to summer school full-time and could not hold a regular job, they paid her for yard work and cleaning on the apartments they owned. "We feel this is wiser than giving her money," her mother wrote. "It becomes "her" money, and we have noticed that she spends it more judiciously."

At the other end of the spectrum, a father responded, "There are a lot of things more important than money, although it's certainly significant. We let our kids have what they need and don't require them to work for it per se. Working around the house is just part of being in our family. We do for them what they need and hope that the advantages will pay off in the long run for them."

Among the families that gave allowances, many had set amounts for younger children but provided what was necessary to supplement what the teenagers earned on their own. The families paid weekly allowances in these ranges:

For ages 6-10

$1 a week 76%

$2 a week 14%

over $2 a week 10%

For ages 11-15

$1 a week 52%

$4 through $6 34%

$7 through $10 10%

over $10 4%

For ages 16-20

$1 through $5 57%

$6 through $10 21%

$11 through $20 16%

over $20 6%

Only 14 families out of 200 gave allowances to children twenty-one or over, and then the amounts varied widely. In one case where a daughter lived at home to care for an invalid parent, she received a sort of salary for this service to the family. Many parents also helped their college students by paying tuition and books or by providing room and board while the student worked part time. Some parents also gave a college student a car or helped pay for car expenses as a contribution toward education.

It is also clear from these amounts that the parents were not lavish with their children. Children under ten seldom received more than $2 a week, and children under fifteen received about $5 a week. Since these families usually would not allow dating before age sixteen, we expected to see an increase around that age; but even then, the weekly allowance was less than $10 a week. Many parents said that they provided money as needed for a trip, a special dress, or a prom; and an increasing number of children had part-time jobs of their own. In response to the question "Have your children obtained jobs outside the family while they were still living at home?" 94 percent responded yes; 4 percent responded no.

In some cases, these part-time jobs were seen as contributions to the family income, not as personal income. In other cases, the money belonged exclusively to the child. In one family, the father, a miner, was injured in an accident. "The kids just had to help with things," explained one of the married children. "Each one contributed so much of their babysitting money and then their wages, as they got older, and I don't think any of them regretted it. We all loved Dad so much and were happy to assist as we could. Now that some of us are married, it is a little easier to assist since we make more money, and I know that Mom and Dad appreciate it."

Financial support from the children seemed to be the exception, however. Instead, most of the comments from parents dealt with the thorny problem of allowances. Fifty-seven percent said something like: "No fixed allowances. We gave them what they needed." "We tried an allowance when the children were young," said one couple, "but found with us it was better to give money when they needed something. If they wanted something special, we gave special assignments and had them 'earn' their money. We kept track of their savings and payment of tithing. When they had 'savings,' they could buy things. They would also add to their savings account at the credit union."

Another couple gave regular allowances and required regular chores but said that their children were "allowed to work to earn extra money." Several families used this system. One mother wrote, "Occasionally, if extra money was needed, I would try to find a project—painting, extra yard or housework—that they could do for extra money. Allowances were given regardless of behavior or daily chores done."

One couple with four children wrote: "Our children have had an allowance, mainly to help them learn the principle of tithing and the principle of saving and managing money. When they needed money over and above what their allowance covered, we kept a list posted that included fifty-cent and dollar jobs. They could arrange with us how much extra work they wanted to do, after their regular chores were completed. We used a job chart when they were younger and assigned such chores as cleaning the bathroom and doing the dishes on a rotating basis. As they grew older, we sometimes made a list of jobs that needed doing and let them sign up for two or three they chose. Changing the method occasionally helped make the routine more interesting."

In some cases, payment was in kind. One farm couple did not try to keep track of how much work the children were required to do, but in exchange "they got a 4-H steer they sold for spending money, missions, and school." During busy seasons like harvest, they would also get wages. In an Idaho ranch family, the three children had to feed their calves before breakfast and catch the 7:30 A.M. bus. Both sons bought a dairy calf and a range calf from their father when they were about 4-H age and received wages for taking care of the calves and also as a percentage of the milk check. They could build their own herd as the animals matured, deciding whether to keep or sell their animals. The daughter also worked on the farm for wages. "She preferred it to housework," her mother commented.

In one Salt Lake City family, all ten children—seven sons and three daughters—had their own paper routes to earn spending money. When the parents needed babysitting, they would hire the older children to do it at $1 an hour, and there were set amounts for some jobs: $5 to wash the car, $5 to mow the lawn, $5 a day for working in the father's accounting business, and so on.

For one couple, the most important value was teaching proper work habits to their children. Paraphrasing the Lord's commandment to Adam to "earn his living by the sweat of his brow," one couple explained: "We have taken it upon ourselves to teach this to our children. A lot of the problems of the world result from people who never learned to be dependable and to work. We go out of our way to find work for our children to do. It is not easy for us, as it was for our parents who lived on farms. When we were young, the jobs never ended; but here in the city, the jobs end sometimes. We scout out work for our children at home and in the neighborhood. There's always someone who is glad to get some yard work done. Our daughters all babysit. The jobs don't always just come. We sometimes have to help the children put signs and get the word out that they can babysit. This doesn't relieve them from their regular household duties. When time is short, the kids help each other, and we even help deliver newspapers when our son has to get through in a hurry to get to a special Scout program or something like that. Most of the time, we let him sweat it himself, however."

In a few families, money was not private property. One couple did not give allowances but allowed their children to earn spending money by doing yard work and babysitting at about age ten or twelve. "We function under the idea that since we work as a family, all the money that comes in is for all of the family. The children ask for money when they have a need; if the money is available, they receive the amount needed."

One Utah family with nine children and a disabled father used a "United Order" model. All the money that came in belonged to the whole family. This common fund "paid the bills, sent missionaries, and so on," wrote the mother. "When they needed anything, and if it was a good thing and if it was possible to give it to them, they got it." She praises their financial management: "They do not spend money foolishly. They can have money in their pocket and never spend it if they don't need to."

In one Idaho family with twenty-one children produced in four marriages, each child celebrated his sixteenth birthday by being placed on the family checking account on which he or she could draw with permission.

Still another couple accustomed their eight children to the world of work by paying an hourly wage. With a Montana farm, they found it comparatively simple to work out a regular bookkeeping system: "The children get money only when they work. Up to age ten they earn between a dollar and three dollars an hour. Up to fifteen, they make between two and three-fifty an hour. Between sixteen and twenty, they earn three to four-fifty, and more during harvest—up to $80 a day. Over twenty-one, they earn between four and eight dollars an hour, and they put in long hours." This couple also pointed out that their children are very good at saving most of their summer wages and that the four boys old enough for missions have paid at least half of their own way.

Support for Married Children

We were also interested to know how the financial arrangements within families changed for married children. Did money seem to be in a different category than supplying emotional support, child-care, and other goods or services? It would be interesting to have comparative national statistics, but the closest available are from a 1983 Better Homes & Gardens survey called What's Happening to American Families. This survey showed that 56 percent of the parents would let a married child return home to live for a limited time; 21 percent would welcome an adult child back with no reservations; 9 percent would be reluctant; and 6 percent would refuse. Most students of the family generally believe that many people supply money or child-care service for their young married children and also supply money and care for elderly parents. In our sample, 14 percent of the parents tended grandchildren regularly for married children who worked, and an additional 60 percent tended grandchildren occasionally. Sixty-four percent "gave advice" to their married children; 52 percent gave money as gifts; and 50 percent loaned money to married children. We were pleased to see that 60 percent of the fathers gave blessings to their married children on request.

As usual, the comments that had been added were illuminating. A Utah couple with fourteen children helped their four married children build or remodel their homes. Several couples mentioned supplying food to their married children, particularly meat and milk from dairy farms and cattle ranches, fresh fruit and garden produce, bottled fruit, and food-storage items. Car repairs and the loan of a vehicle were also mentioned. A Salt Lake mother of six children, three of them married, made home-sewed clothing for them and the twelve grandchildren. One Wyoming couple have cosigned notes with their two married children.

An Idaho couple have a family partnership on their farm with their two sons; and one son and his family live in the basement apartment where the parents lived as newlyweds. "The partnership makes things somewhat equal," the father wrote. "The farm has paid for everyone's schooling, missions for both sons and our daughter, and individual pay as a living wage every month. Our arrangement is probably unusual. Everyone must work, but we all work together and share, and we consider one another's well-being. We work hard at getting along, too, especially by letting our children discipline and raise their own children."

One Utah couple own a four-plex and have allowed all of their children to live in it rent free at one time or another—"while they were finishing the last year of school or when they were newly married." Still another Utah couple have an "open-door policy on our food-storage in the basement when our married children are hard up." A Salt Lake couple gives each child a quarter-acre of land as he or she marries to build on or sell. Still another Salt Lake City couple usually gives each newlywed couple "a piece or two of furniture from our home."

While all of these effective families have had to work out some system for channeling money to their children, they usually do not directly buy good behavior with it. Parents give money as it is needed, will pay for work, or will give an allowance because the children are "part of the family." There seems to be a common feeling that money is either shared or earned.

None of the parents in our study indicated that money for the children was a particularly difficult problem. Many did what seemed appropriate at the time, changing their strategy as the times, needs, and children changed. One couple wrote: "As with so many other areas, we have tried a lot of different things. One thing worked for one child and another for another. We don't see how some parents set up one system and hold to that as if it were the only way. If we had done that we couldn't have made allowances a helpful system in dealing with our children. Money is a tool, not the master; whom the money is given to is a tool, too, not a master.
