Phillip R. Kunz, William G. Dyer, Effective Mormon Families: How They See Themselves ( 1986)

Chapter Eight

The Husband-Wife Relationship

Although this study focused on parenting in effective families, it is impossible not to consider the effect of the husband-wife relationship on their ability to provide love and direction to the children. In the well-known words of President David O. McKay, "The best thing you can do for your children is to love their mother."

As we interviewed the less-effective families, several of them indicated problems in their marriage as well as dissatisfaction with their parenting. "We do not have what I would call a special family," said one woman sadly. "In almost every way we have botched it. Our family fights a lot, and the marriage has about come apart for a number of reasons. I doubt we could do any better if we were going to begin again with a fresh start. Nobody taught us to be parents, and I guess we didn't get it from instinct."

Another wife also expressed the same sense of near-hopelessness: "Finances have been tough for a long time, and we fight about it a lot. My husband works all the time and is never home much. Things aren't too happy for us."

One couple had actually divorced, then remarried. "We try harder, but it doesn't always work out," they said. The wife wrote that one of the best things they had going for them was their "strong determination to lead a fairly happy life in spite of major differences in husband and wife." Another woman admitted, "It's hard to get the children to understand that marriage is really important when I have been divorced two times."

For some, any kind of satisfaction in the marriage was almost completely gone. One woman observed flatly, "My husband hasn't told me that he loves me since we were married over twenty years ago." A husband admitted, "I just got some time on my hands and started seeing this other woman, and one thing led to another and everything just sort of fell apart."

No marriage is trouble free. The highly effective couples in our study are the last to claim any special exemption from problems. But they seem to have found out how to keep a high-quality, committed relationship as a husband and wife. As one wife said: "We are so pleased that we were raised when couples worked out their problems instead of giving up the marriage as so many now do. This is one thing that we have really talked about with our children. No marriage is perfect, but it becomes more so as problems are worked out with love and understanding. After all, this earth life is to build both here and for eternal worlds. Good families move right into the next life."

We asked each couple several questions about household chores, decisions, and general happiness:

Earns family income?

Does the housekeeping?

Keeps in touch with relatives?

Organizes family recreation?

Cares for preschool children?

Teaches, helps, and disciplines girls ages 6-12?

Teaches, helps, and disciplines boys ages 6-12?

[We asked them to check one of five choices: husband entirely, husband more, both equally wife more, wife entirely.]

Earning family income?

Doing the housekeeping?

Keeping in touch with relatives?

Family recreation?

Sexual intimacy?

Duties and behavior of girls ages 6-12?

Duties and behavior of boys ages 6-12?

[We asked them to mark one of the same five choices as above.]

Very happy marriage 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 Very unhappy marriage

The parents in the sample responded this way:

Scale Number Percent

3 2%

5 2%

6 2%

7 8%

8 16%

9 71%

The mean or average score for all of the families was 8.5, a very high perception of the happiness in their marriages. Nearly three-fourths of the parents felt their marriage was a 9. One Washington man and his second wife (his first had died) had been married for about eight years when they took this survey. The wife circled 9 and drew sunbeams around it, adding, "We feel that our marriage is very rewarding to us. We are best friends." One national survey with a similar scale showed 20 percent of the couples reporting "unhappy" marriages while the rest were "relatively happy." (Leslie Gerald, The Family in Social Context [New York: Oxford, 1979].) In a 1983 study of 200,000 people, 81 percent of the married respondents would marry their present spouse if they had it all to do over again, and 79 percent indicated that their "expectations of happiness are being fulfilled." (Better Homes and Gardens, What's Happening to American Families? [New York: Meredith Corporation, 1983].)

It's logical to suspect a certain bias in the response to this question since these parents knew they were a part of a study looking at good LDS families, and they may have felt some pressure to indicate they felt their marriage was a happy one. Still, 30 percent marked below the highest score, indicating some areas of disturbance, and 4 percent placed themselves at the midpoint or lower.

We can draw two inferences from these scores. On the one hand, it would seem that effective families are led by parents who have a very positive feeling about the happiness of their marriage. On the other hand, it seems possible in some cases to have a family that the stake president and others regard as highly effective even though the marriage is less than ideally happy. Very few people wrote comments about the marital score itself, but one wife commented that the financial worries were their chief problem, with sexual incompatibility next. Another wife indicated a lower happiness score than her husband and penciled in: "It's that darn money!"

None of the families we interviewed would say they have a perfect marriage, and all admitted to having real problems and adjustments as they have lived together. They have had personality differences. One spouse wanted to talk things out, the other didn't. Expectations about how to run a home or rear children have differed. But through it all the couples have had a common set of goals and values and a desire to stay together and be a happy family.

What are some patterns that contribute to harmony or to dissatisfaction? This table shows how the husband and wife in these families divided up certain tasks.

Husband Husband Wife Wife

Task Entirely More Equal Entirely More

Earns family income 62% 34% 3% .5% .5%

Housekeeping 1% 3% 70% 26%

Keeps in touch with

relatives 3% 37% 54% 6%

Organizes family

recreation 9% 58% 31% 2%

Cares for pre-school

children 10% 77% 13%

Teaches, helps, and

disciplines girls

ages 6-12 3% 52% 44% 1%

Teaches, helps, and

disciplines boys

ages 6-12 8% 56% 35% 1%

As we look at these duties, the only one that was clearly the domain of the father was earning the family income, while the mother was clearly responsible for keeping up the house and taking care of the preschool children. This is a predictable pattern in couples of their generation and matches what we know of Americans in general from national data.

The mother's rather exclusive responsibility for preschoolers shifted once the children entered school. As the parents reported, more than 50 percent of the fathers worked with children of both sexes ages six to twelve.

Husbands sometimes took the responsibility for planning family recreation, although they were likely to share this task equally with their wives. One wife remarked wryly, "My husband plans a lot of his own recreation but not much for the whole family." However another husband, reflecting on the general topic of divisions of labor, wrote: "It takes a lot of effort to make money for the family to obtain the things my wife and I have decided are important. She doesn't work outside the home, but believe me, she works hard—I think much harder than I do. Her work is really never done. I try to help with the children and with things in the home all I can, but admittedly most if it falls to her. I love her for what she does, and someday perhaps I will be able to do more. It makes me feel bad when I see how some of the husbands I know try to get out of helping their wives by staying away or going on a lot of fishing trips. Women are pretty special to do so much and complain so little."

As the data on household chores revealed, most parents taught both sons and daughters to do most tasks, although boys were more commonly assigned to yard work, car repairs, working in the garden or the fields, and dealing with ranch animals, while girls were more likely to be assigned cooking, housecleaning, and doing dishes. It is expected that these same patterns would hold for mother and father. It would be interesting to see, in view of the national trends toward more egalitarian marriages, if this parental pattern is modified in their children's families.

After looking at the tasks, we then asked how decisions were made in the following areas:

Husband Husband Wife Wife

Decision Entirely More Equal Entirely More

Earns family income 28% 52% 21%

Housekeeping 1% 7% 66% 26%

Keeps in touch with

relatives 2% 52% 42% 4%

Family recreation 8% 75% 17% 1%

Sexual intimacy 2% 28% 65% 5%

Duties of girls

ages 6-12 52% 46% 1%

Duties of boys

ages 6-12 18% 58% 23% 1%

Comparing responses, we see a general parallel between parents and children, but it is also clear that many couples make joint decisions even though only one will actually perform the task. For example, even though earning the family income is predominantly the husband's task, 21 percent of the wives said they have an equal voice in making decisions about their husband's work. One wife explained: "My husband and I talk over every decision he makes about his work. In the past we have jointly decided not to take a promotion that meant moving the family. We have resisted work assignments that interfered with Sunday activities or family vacations. I feel I should have a say in those kinds of work decisions that affect the family." One Utah couple, with the husband in his early fifties and the wife in her mid-forties, described a traditional relationship that seems to work in a very egalitarian way: "We have a patriarch in our home who loves the Lord and is committed to obeying his commandments, including teaching our four children. He is also willing to accept and implement suggestions from me. We work well as a family presidency and have regular meetings to plan for the family."

Several couples expressed strong feelings on the subject of marital unity. One Utah couple in their mid-forties with five children wrote that "husband-wife unity—a strong relationship through thick and thin!" was one of the most important factors in making them a strong family. Another Utah couple with nine children, ages seven to twenty-two reported: "We as marriage partners are in love and are absolutely committed to each other. As parents we are absolutely committed to the gospel. We work hard at teaching our children what is right and at helping to channel them, but we respect their free agency." One Washington wife wrote: "We feel that because we, as husband and wife, have a great feeling of love and respect for one another and a very rewarding relationship, that this will set an example for our children and help them to have happy marriages. Our one married child has a happy marriage."

A Utah couple with nine children ranging from nine to twenty-four observed, "We feel a sense of security in the concept "Love is harmony even in discord.'" An Idaho couple strongly believed in "sticking together on discipline, whether they agreed at the time or not."

In another Utah family, also perceived as highly effective, the parents acknowledged strong differences between them. The husband commented, "Our compatibility has grown somewhat less as my wife's education has increased. However, we have tried to keep our differences from our seven children." They had marked two places on the marital happiness scale, the wife about an 8 and the husband about a 7. At other points in the survey they had written their own answers when they differed from each other. For instance, the husband felt that the most important factor in the family's success was "going to church together," while the wife felt that it was "letting our children know—no matter what—that we really love them." The husband had felt that the children "must do" all of the activities they had checked, while the wife "doesn't like the term "must.'" They had also rated their preferred discipline styles differently from each other. Obviously, they were able to acknowledge and deal with these differences, not feeling that differences paralyzed the marriage or had to be concealed.

We added the issue of the couple's sexual intimacy since this is a much-studied area nationally. With sixty-five percent of these couples, decisions about intimacy seemed to be shared. In 28 percent of the cases, the husband was seen as more influential in these decisions. (Nationally, 80 percent of both spouses indicated that sexual activity is initiated by the husband. [F. Ivan Nye, Role Structure and Analysis of the Family (Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage Publications), p. 105.] Two percent indicated that the husband was completely responsible for decisions about intimacy. We do not have data to determine if this is acceptable to the wife or whether it is a point of disturbance in the relationship. Our data also show that in 5 percent of the cases, decisions about intimacy are primarily the responsibility of the wife. Again our data do not show if the wife's decision is to initiate or resist intimacy.)

As we would expect from couples of this generation, they considered sexual intimacy to be a personal and private matter, not one to be discussed openly. Respecting these feelings, we did not probe deeply during the follow-up interviews. One couple shared this appraisal: "We have found that our sex life has undergone a lot of changes through the years. Early in our marriage there was concern about pregnancies, and we never completely resolved our feelings about using birth control methods. There was often a difference in the eagerness and energy we had toward responding to each other. The wife was often tired from a lot of work with a lot of children and outside assignments. It seemed that for a time she would go along to meet the needs of the husband. As children have gone from the home and we have fewer pressures, our own relationship has become more important and more satisfying, although there is still some imbalance in terms of who has the stronger needs."

Sexual incompatibility is often cited by nonprofessionals as a "cause" of divorce, but statistics show very little correlation between marital happiness and sexual satisfaction. (Randall Collins, Sociology of Marriage and the Family [Chicago: Prentice-Hall, 1985], p. 249.) However, it is probably true that sexual problems are symptomatic of other problems. Couples who are angry over money problems or exhausted by fights with their teenagers may use the sexual relationship as a weapon in fighting about their differences.

Probably many of the couples in the survey would agree with one couple's analysis of their own compatibility: "Our answers to these questions as to how happy our marriage is and how various decisions are made will vary depending on such things as stress, pressures, mood, cycles, and health." Other families have indicated that while they have a generally consistent pattern of making decisions, shifts and variations in circumstances will cause "periodic readjustments and fluctuations."

A Utah couple in their mid-sixties with seven children wrote, "Our family has been our top priority. As parents we have desired some individuality too, not just living for our children. We have felt that the things we pursued together as a family have been important—additional education, cultural refinement, missions, building homes together, civic and church involvement. All of these things have enhanced our children's involvement."

For another couple, the key to successful parenting is that "there was always unity between husband and wife. We shared Church positions, welfare assignments, and meetings. Our children also shared in all of these things because it was part of family life." A Wyoming couple in their early fifties, the youngest of their six children now eighteen, agreed that the most important factor in making a strong family was "'acting together as husband and wife, as mother and father, and always keeping a strong front."

The high commitment to gospel ideals and the deliberate, long-term cultivation of love in the home that nearly all of these effective couples have achieved are both signs that the husband and wife closely shared the same interests and goals. It is a truism that couples with similar goals and values have happier, less stressful marriages. Many years ago, a popular notion was that "opposites attract" and that differences made the marriage more interesting. However, enough inevitable differences exist in most marriages that it is unnecessary to advise a couple to look for more. One couple wrote: "We used to have more problems in our marriage than we do now. We never really had too many serious problems, just the little things that come along now and again. Well, they don't come along so much anymore, and we would say that we have never been happier in our marriage. We started out happy, and things have really just gotten better all the time. We thought we were happy then, but we are happier now. We have always thought that we couldn't be happier, but each year gets better, especially as the children have gotten older."

These effective couples have highly compatible values. They want the same things for their children—missions, temple marriage, education, strong family ties. They have been willing to spend their time and money on the family. They have generally had large families and devoted a great deal of time to teaching them, encouraging them, and modeling Church teachings for them. They have spent a lot of time talking with and teaching their children.

It has been their goal to rear a good family, to prepare as much as they could to be a family that might be a candidate for a celestial heritage. All of these families acknowledged certain weaknesses and shortcomings. But the essence of their lives is clearly that they have tried to live as close to the standards and values they believe in as they can. They want to be a close, unified family. One couple wrote: "We fell in love a long time ago and made the commitment to team up in this life. Some of the time we had difficulties, but we have worked at it, and we think we love each other more as the years go by. Some of the hardest times were when most of the children were starting to get older, but we stuck it out. We really do love each other, and our children sense that. We talk and share. We pray together and do a lot of planning about our family. We think the Lord helps us a lot in our marriage and with our kids."

An almost mirror reversal of this position is the statement of the husband in one of the less-effective families: "We have had our share of problems as a family. My wife and I have not been able to get along like we should always. Some of our kids have "acted out," at times and this has brought us a lot of embarrassment and so on. I see a lot of families who seem to have things together, and how I wish we could be more like them. I don't know, I guess we made our bed and now we have to sleep in it. All of my sisters' families do well, and my wife's brothers and sisters do well too, but we just have had a hard time. I guess we love each other, but most of the time it doesn't get demonstrated very well."

Which comes first—a good marriage or good parenting? It's probably impossible ever to decide. But when parents are truly committed to family-centered goals, they seem happy together in their marriages and feel that what they are accomplishing is good. The sense of contentment they feel is real.
