Phillip R. Kunz, William G. Dyer, Effective Mormon Families: How They See Themselves ( 1986)

Chapter Nine

Adversity: Coping With Difficult Times

We wanted to know how much of the effectiveness of the families we surveyed came from good circumstances ("we raised our children on a ranch away from many temptations and distractions") and how much depended on the character and decisions of the parents. We asked each couple four questions:

We wanted to probe what constituted adversity for these families and what their coping mechanisms were. The evidence seems to be that even though the families had experienced difficulties, they were able to cope with them; and as many families indicated, the problems have strengthened them.

When we asked, "Have you experienced any real family problems or adversities?" about 20 percent answered "no." Another 30 percent said they had experienced several severe problems, and the other 50 were in between—they had had some real problems, but not what they considered to be an unusual number.

These percentages are probably on the low side. During our follow-up interviews, we found that some couples who had marked "no real problems" had in fact faced a number of problems including long-term unemployment, illnesses, and disappointments with children. However, they compared themselves to others who had suffered the death of a child or permanent disability of a family member and felt that their problems were relatively insignificant. One couple told us: "We have had problems, but we just never thought of them as special problems. If illness, death, and financial problems are problems, we have had them, but Job suffered more, and we think that one purpose of this life is to encounter problems, so we certainly wouldn't single ourselves out as anything special on this account. It's true that many whom we know seem to have clearer sailing in this life. Perhaps the Lord will test them in some other manner."

Another husband offered an explanation: "We have had a number of family problems in our married life. I have had a heart attack, but recovered. We have had to take care of aged parents for many years. My wife's brothers and sisters have had divorces and problems. But in our own family we have been blessed. Our boys have all filled missions. Our daughter married a fine young man in the temple. Compared to other families we know, we really have never had any real problems."

Among the families who were willing to define their problems as adversities, these difficulties appeared:

National measures of family stress usually turn up the same problems: divorce, death, drugs, alcohol, abuse, unemployment, and so on. The families in our survey clearly define health problems as the major difficulty they have had to face. It is interesting that to some extent illness and accidents are outside the control of individuals (that is, people do not "decide" to be sick or healthy), while the second greatest problem, a rebellious child, is a matter of someone's will (that is, the child decides to depart from the family norms and values).

These good families are not problem free. They have drunk from the bitter cup. But they also seem to have been able to cope with these problems instead of being devastated by them. When we asked how long they had suffered from these adversities, 63 percent responded that they had faced the situations for years, and another 24 percent indicated the problems had lasted for many months. Several people who had suffered deaths in the family wrote comments like "When is a death "over"?" These problems, in other words, are not short-term matters.

In response to the question about how they had handled their adversity, about 35 percent of the couples said that they had turned to the Lord in prayer, fasting, and exercising their faith. About an equal number (30 percent) described a process of accepting the situation, developing patience, and assuming the burden of living successfully with the adverse condition. ("We lived through it," is a stoical comment that appeared more than once.)

Another group (22 percent) said that the family had pulled together and strengthened each other so they could deal with the situation, whether it involved a solution to the problem or developing the patience to live with it. One Texas couple with six children had suffered illnesses, the death of loved ones, and financial difficulties. "We handled them one day at a time," they explained. "Fasting, prayer, and the support of each other all helped."

More than seventy-five of the 200 families explained their problems in enough detail that we could glimpse both their dimensions and their solutions.

In one Utah family with nine children, the husband was disabled and ill during most of the years the children were growing up. For a good many years, he was confined to a wheelchair and threatened with the loss of his legs. His inability to work and provide for his family was a secondary but very real problem. His wife wrote, "We try to make our problems pay off for us by being thankful for our added time together and looking at the positive side of problems." Among those positive aspects were the children's learning to rely on the Spirit and the unity fostered by working for the common good. The children have also always contributed their income to a common fund.

A Texas couple with four children had endured illnesses and broken bones among the children and the much more disruptive illnesses of the parents—open-heart surgery for the father, thyroid surgery for the mother. "Self-reliance and keeping an eternal perspective have helped," they wrote. "Prayers are important and very strengthening to all of us."

A Utah couple recalled as their greatest times of trouble a terrifying two-week crisis when they almost lost one of their eight children to spinal meningitis and a longer crisis when their eldest daughter ran away at age sixteen. "That crisis lasted six months—maybe it isn't completely over yet," wrote the mother. They had dealt with the first crisis by "lots of prayer and communicating" for emotional support and used the same method in trying to reach their daughter again. "Professional counseling also helped," she added.

With "faith in the gospel and much prayer, we made it through," wrote a Montana farm couple with five living children. A sixth had died and another had Down's syndrome; drought and hail had decimated their crops; and various accidents around the farm had been debilitating to other members of the family.

A Utah couple with eight children had one child who required open-heart surgery, brain surgery, and numerous hospital stays. Another child involved in a car accident was hospitalized for a long time and required eye surgery, physical therapy, occupational therapy, and special schools. The family finances suffered, and the mother fought recurring bouts of depression. "We handled it by dropping everything else and just carrying on," wrote the father.

A young daughter in one family developed cystic fibrosis. "Everyone knew that this was a terminal disease," reported the father. "All of the other children, both older and younger, treated this little girl with special care. She was a beautiful, loving child anyway. You couldn't help but love her. But she was the one that everyone tried to help, be with, or do for."

One Idaho farmer, now seventy-eight, lost his first wife when she died at age thirty-one, leaving five living children. Their first child had died. His second wife bore eight children in ten years and died at age thirty-four. A third marriage, which produced five surviving children and two babies who died soon after birth, again ended with the death of his wife at age fifty. His fourth wife brought eight children to the marriage. He also laconically listed "several serious accidents, crop failures, etc." among his moments of adversity, commenting that "they lasted from one to the next." In answer to the question about how he handled them, his wife wrote: "1 Nephi 3:7." That scripture says, "I will go and do the things which the Lord hath commanded, for I know that the Lord giveth no commandments unto the children of men, save he shall prepare a way for them that they may accomplish the thing which he commandeth them."

For twenty of their almost-thirty-year marriage, one Idaho couple coped with their particular adversity: their second child of six was killed at the age of ten in a sleighing accident. Her younger brother became handicapped, couldn't walk, and died at the age of nineteen. All four grandparents died. "Being close together is the way we gained strength," they wrote.

A Wyoming couple with five children stoically listed "death of a baby, home fire, cancer and the loss of Mother's leg, health and surgery, and taking over the family ranch" among their adversities, handled by "prayer, fasting, and blessings, and a lot of family communication."

One Washington family underwent the strain of losing their mother to death when the four children were between the ages of five and twelve. The second marriage added two children to the family and readjustments to all, over the succeeding fifteen years. "One boy acted out a great deal of anger," the parents wrote, "but loves his family. A healing still needs to take place with all the older children in regard to their mother's death. They all have some anger and will not attend church now; however, they are very responsible and independent people. The grief gets better with time, but it will never end. There is always an empty spot for Mom. It's a challenge to build and maintain unity; but we love the gospel and our children. We've experienced times when only our faith in God gave us hope and encouragement. We have seen miracles take place in seemingly simple ways and feel that we have great blessings."

One Texas couple with five children suffered deeply when their oldest daughter went through three or four years of flouting family standards and finally gave birth to a child out of wedlock. "We try to be there when she needs us," they explained, "but we want her to be responsible. We backed off on giving advice and we also backed off on giving help. We have not helped financially with the baby."

One Utah management consultant had to work abroad for a year, a time that his wife acknowledged as a strain. All of their seven children who were old enough graduated from seminary; the boys who were old enough served missions; but one daughter did not marry in the temple. The wife felt that dealing with this "child who wouldn't follow counsel" had been a source of adversity that they had handled "with much prayer and fasting, and relying on the Spirit. On occasion," she added, "we have sought counsel from professionals in the problem area—usually someone we knew already who advised us about specific problems."

A Texas couple with five children recalled concern over the poor grades of one child and the troubled marriage of an older daughter. "In both cases," they wrote, "we got professional evaluation and counseling, and we gave our personal advice and support."

A Montana couple with six children were grieved when three of the six had "morality problems," but the problems did not last long and all three went to the bishop on their own.

A Texas couple with five children were saddened by the long-term inactivity of their oldest child ("He has since returned"). They describe themselves as "a very affectionate family. We love each other and tell it often." Thus, it was an area of special pain when their oldest daughter's in-laws misunderstood her, creating a problem that lasted about two years. "Fasting, prayer, and love is how we handled both problems," wrote the mother.

A Montana couple with seven children had one son who "found himself in serious trouble with the authorities." During the three-month ordeal, they tried to keep their problem in perspective: "Every family has its share of crummy happenings. You handle them with prayer, love, and support for whoever needs it." The lesson they learned was "bending with the adversity so as not to break," but still, they confessed, "it's awfully hard, putting away wonderful beautiful dreams about a child's life and just standing behind him, loving him no matter what."

A California couple with four children suffered the loss of their third child, which "brought the family even closer," they wrote. "We all want to be worthy to be with her again." Another problem was that the parents had a strong preference about which college one daughter should go to. They reported candidly, "She obeyed her father but hated it, so we let her go to her choice and it worked out fine. She was right, and we admitted it." Another couple, grieved when their son came home from his mission early, found the family, all ten children, "pulling more together and relying on the Lord." The son in one Idaho family accepted a mission call, then eloped. A daughter was diagnosed as having cancer, and the father nearly died from health problems that resulted in twenty days of hospitalization and six months of recuperation. "Prayer and family councils were our mainstay," wrote the mother.

In another Utah family with three children where a classic but hardly reassuring pattern of teenage rebellion, drug abuse, and dishonesty occurred, the parents handled it, "first with confrontation, then more with patience, prayer, and understanding." An Idaho couple with five children had a problem for about a year with one teenager's "improper reading materials, Word of Wisdom temptations, and spending habits." They handled the situation by "expressing our disappointment and explaining the hazards, then demonstrating increased love."

A Utah couple with five children struggled for twelve years with their rebellious eldest son who dropped out of school, stole, and was abusive to the other children. They worked with a counselor and their bishop, and resorted to foster placement for a month. They have seen him gradually return to Church activity, family relationships, and school. One couple with six children are still living in a nightmare that followed their eighteen-year-old son's report of homosexual rape. "We thought he was okay—just scared," they wrote. "Now he says he's homosexual, has rejected all authority, and has turned to homosexual friends." Two other couples mentioned the rape of a daughter.

Several parents mentioned, as a source of adversity, the negative influence of friends. A Utah couple with eight living children had undergone a two-year period of seeing their children influenced adversely by friends. Their method of dealing with the problem was "logic and encouraging new friends." One Montana couple with four children saw their eldest daughter begin dating nonmembers and, after six months, marry one. Another Montana couple had one daughter marry out of the temple and later divorce, as did a sister who had been married in the temple, who also suffered from experiments with drinking and smoking. In answer to the question "How did you handle these adversities?" the parents wrote from the heart, "We feel really bad."

One Texas family had taken care of a senile grandmother during the last three years of her life by "working together and talking a lot."

In one Utah family, the couple had married in the temple when they were both twenty-one or twenty-two. The husband is a university professor, and his long schooling had been a financial struggle for them, particularly since the first three of their five children were born within the next five years and the wife had had difficult pregnancies. They had faced their problems with "work, prayer, fasting, faith, and endurance."

One Utah couple with eight children had weathered a ten-year financial crisis coupled with the serious four-year illness of one family member by "pooling all our resources, including our talents, to deal with it." Adversity had made them "more considerate, helpful, and prayerful," they wrote. A Utah couple with seven children identified as a chief problem the financial difficulties caused by the husband's unsatisfactory employment. (He is currently a janitor.) "We endured job changes again and again for twenty-three years," the wife wrote. They rated their marital happiness at about an 8, and the wife jotted down: "Financial worries are the main problem" followed by sexual differences. (They had checked that decisions about sexual intimacy were equally shared.)

For another couple, adversities included the financial difficulties of a son who struggled to pay school debts and support his family. Although this couple has given and loaned money, along with providing occasional child care, advice, and blessings to all their married children, they comment, "Our son is still having money problems, but he's working them out. We helped some but feel he should handle it himself."

A Salt Lake City couple suffered severe financial reverses when the husband's partners embezzled from the firm. "Prayer, hard work, and being positive about the future" were chief strategies for handling these problems. An Idaho farm equipment manager with ten children found himself in serious financial difficulty when his partner pulled out, leaving them with all the debts to pay. He and his wife negotiated with the debtors and, over a five-year period, "paid off the obligations and cleared our name." Another Idaho couple discovered, when the husband was forty-eight, that their financial future had changed when the bank foreclosed on their business and the husband had to find a new occupation. They had already weathered the wife's three-year-long disability and managed, they felt, "very well."

An Idaho couple felt that their most serious problem was gradually being forced to realize that they could not make a living farming, especially when the third of their eight children was injured and permanently handicapped. After a three-year struggle, they sold the farm and went back to school, and both became teachers.

An Idaho family survived the year-long recuperation of a child scalded so badly that hospitalization was required for two months; but it took them three years to get back on their feet when their home was destroyed in the 1976 Teton Dam flood in southeastern Idaho. During both traumatic periods, they relied on "blessings, the psychological support of friends and family, keeping busy with hard work, and planning ahead even when there seemed to be no future."

Other types of problems also showed up on the questionnaire. One Utah couple with seven children had had a baby die, but the adversity they listed was overcome by "getting along, considering one another's feelings, overcoming selfishness and impatience." A Utah couple with four children experienced as their greatest trial one period when the husband had to work out of state for extended periods of time. "Thank goodness that only lasted a few months," wrote the wife, "and we got through with lots of prayer and fasting and our patriarchal blessings." One Texas couple mentioned marital problems as adversity, but added that "prayer, work, and faith had resolved them after a few weeks."

Only two couples said they had handled their problems "well" and conversely, only two or three said they had handled them "not too well." Thus, most of the families felt that they had handled their difficulties. To a remarkable degree, they also seemed to have handled them as internal problems and with internal resources. It is interesting that with all of the problems with health, not more than half a dozen families mentioned doctors as helping them cope with their problems, even though their technical assistance goes without saying. Approximately a dozen mentioned counselors or therapists as helping with the emotional problems, about the same number as those who mentioned bishops or other Church authorities. No doubt, as in the case of medical assistance, it goes without saying that some consulted professional people and their bishops, but apparently the coping process inside the family was not noticeably influenced by these professionals. Prayer, blessings, and fasting were often mentioned. The Better Homes & Gardens survey had asked couples to identify whom they turned to for help in confronting significant problems. Seventy-one percent reported that they turned to the family, 21 percent to friends, 10 percent to clergy, 7 percent to another member of their church, 2 percent to a co-worker, and 7 percent to "other." Thus, the family-centeredness of the effective families in our survey is emphasized by the comparison.

It is probably impossible to determine which came first—strength to handle adversity well or the adversity that produced increased strength. Certainly, working through their problems made these families stronger, no matter what the comparative strengths with which they began; and the feeling of success in coping with their problems would no doubt have increased their ability to deal with other forms of stress.

One couple quoted Ether 12:27 in an interview: "If men come unto me I will show unto them their weakness. I give unto men weakness that they may be humble; and my grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me; for if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them." They commented, "We think this is how working out problems happens in our family. For us, this scripture explains how the Lord uses problems to help people make something out of life."
