Phillip R. Kunz, William G. Dyer, Effective Mormon Families: How They See Themselves ( 1986)

Chapter Ten

Friends and Dates, Siblings and Heroes

Even though effective families, like effective corporations, seem to have strong internal "cultures," rules, norms, expectations, myths, and patterns of behavior, no family exists in a vacuum. We asked some questions to get some insight into how friends and older siblings influenced children, and we wondered if heroes outside the family had much impact. The questions were:

Friends

Eighty-five percent of the families in the survey indicated that the children's friends have been a "very helpful" influence. One couple checked that answer on their questionnaire but also reported that one daughter had married a good but inactive man while another daughter's first marriage, which ended in divorce, had not been a temple marriage.

The number of friends seemed to be related to age. Only 22 percent of first-born children had more friends than most children their age, while about 33 percent of most of the other children in the family had "more than most." Furthermore, between 15 and 20 percent of the families felt that their children as a whole had fewer friends than most. In some cases, this perception may have simply reflected the fact that there were plenty of children at home to play with and that the family's emphasis on unity would tend to draw children and their friends into the family, rather than encouraging the children to seek companionship elsewhere.

A few parents expressed concern that a particular child did not have more friends. One couple wrote: "We always worried about our third child. He seemed to have a hard time making friends and always spent a lot of time doing things alone. We tried to invite children in and foster friendships, but it never was easy. Our other children all seemed to make friends easily and had lots of companions. It was hard for us to see this child left out when others were going places with their friends." However, another couple said, "Our youngest son didn't have very many friends, but he did have one or two with whom he was very close. This seemed to satisfy his friendship needs, so we didn't worry too much because these close friends were good boys and had a good influence on him." A Texas couple with seven children took the long view in pointing out that their second son had had only one friend all through high school; "but now that he's in college he has many and is more open and lively."

Thirteen percent of the parents felt that some of their children's friends had "seldom" been a positive influence, and 2 percent felt that some of these friends had been downright negative in leading them away from family norms. One Utah couple with five children checked the "very helpful" box but wrote, "Friends led one child astray temporarily." A second Utah couple with six children also checked the "very helpful" box but qualified their answer: "One child had problems for a period of time with friends we would not have chosen." An Idaho couple wrote that friends have "sometimes" been of value in their children's lives, explaining, "There are some exceptions; but generally they have had to learn to stand up for their own convictions."

One father denied any significant impact from friends by observing, "Our children's friends have been of great value to them but have not influenced their basic values—either for good or for bad." One Montana couple who checked "seldom" observed, "We live in a very small branch, and most of the children's friends have been nonmembers."

Still, it seems clear that the friends of the children generally had an important positive influence on them and 95 percent of the parents said they had approved of their children's friends most of the time.

Among the 5 percent who registered a negative vote was a mother who told us in an interview, "Our children played with the most active families in our ward, but we found sometimes their influence was against observance of Church standards (for example, observing the Sabbath, no R-rated movies, no dating until sixteen). This resulted in a situation where we seemed to be the only family pushing for the observance of church counsel."

One couple reported: "We had a lot of trouble with one daughter because of the friends she had. They had different values, and she was always in some sort of difficulty with them. As we talked about it, we decided to intervene more directly and encouraged her to have parties in our home to which she invited other girls. She sort of discovered that it was fun to have other friends—friends who reinforced family values rather than presenting her with conflicts."

When we asked parents whether children generally brought their friends to their home or went to their friends' homes, 34 percent answered "mostly in our home," 57 percent found the time divided about equally between friends' homes and their own home, and only 8 percent indicated that their children spent most of their time in the homes of their friends. The Utah mother of nine explained a family policy of discouraging the children from spending "a lot of time with friends outside of the family" (there is an absolute prohibition on sleep-overs) but noted that "our younger children possibly play more elsewhere than the older ones did because they don't have as many brothers and sisters at home." A Utah couple with six living children observed that the children mostly brought their friends home, except for one boy who "loves to be everywhere. Everyone is his family." One mother of six, during an interview, reflected mixed feelings about having her home as the neighborhood hang-out: "I was usually glad that our children's friends wanted to come to our home. It was fun to have lots of kids in the house—parties, music, talking. But I have to admit that sometimes I would wish that just some of the time they would go to somebody else's house besides ours. I would have liked to see some of the other mothers prepare the food or snacks and then clean up after everyone had gone home."

Dates

We did not ask specific questions about the children's dating patterns and partners; but as we expected, a number of parents mentioned them. If they mentioned dating ages, it was usually to stress their insistence that the children wait until age sixteen to begin dating. Twenty-three percent of the parents identified peer influence and attractive influences outside the home as the factors that made it hardest to raise teenagers.

One Utah couple expressed real ambiguity about their youngest daughter's insistence on dating only Latinos. An elder sister had already undergone a divorce, and they were concerned about potential instability in another marriage. "We are trying to handle this situation with love, support, and nonjudgmental attitudes," they wrote. "They have all been fine young men, and we've included them in our family activities; but by so doing, we are in fact okaying the relationship. This is a conflict for us." A California couple with three children was dismayed when their only daughter insisted on going steady through most of her high-school years against their wishes. They tried to handle the situation with "patience and love" rather than direct confrontation.

A Wyoming couple with seven children recalls "dating controversies" as a major form of adversity, which they tried to handle with "love and concern." An Idaho couple, also with seven children, considered a long-term relationship of one daughter's a major difficulty in their life. "They were going steady in high school and wanted to marry. We didn't want them to," they wrote. The parents' way of dealing with the situation was "patience and talking with the boy. He spent so much time here he felt like our son." The problem was resolved as the two teenagers "became very bored with each other and broke up, and our daughter went to college."

One couple felt that a beneficial rule for their teenagers had been that they could not own a motorized vehicle until after they left home. Although the children with licenses had generous access to the family car, this rule meant that parents continued to exercise a good deal of supervision over their whereabouts. Another couple held out firmly against the local popularity of dirt-bikes and motorcycles for the same reason. Other parents had driving-related rules: no driving until after driver's education; no driving for sons until they had become Eagle Scouts; no driving if the grades slipped below a certain level; no driving without permission. Family members who drove had to help transport others. One couple wrote: "We found it was a great help in the family when the older children learned to drive. Then they could take the younger ones to school, Church functions, seminary, ball games, and so on."

Since dating, courtship, and establishing independent families represent a crucial "launching" period for young people, it would be interesting to know how much parents did before dating age to help their children internalize Church and family rules, how much local customs from area to area of the United States were allowed to influence their children, and what synthesis the children made for themselves.

Sibling Influence

We did not ask parents to compare the influence of friends with the influence of brothers and sisters, but we suspect that siblings would rate much higher than friends.

Eighty-eight percent of the couples responded that their elder children were "very important" in training the younger children. Another 11 percent felt that they were "somewhat" important. Not a single couple checked "not at all important." One father, who had been raised in a family of twelve children, recalled that his own father had often said, "Mother and I reared the first six and then they reared the last six." He and his wife felt that their own children had followed much the same pattern.

This is how parents rated the influence of the elder children:

Written-in comments on the "other" line included "sharing books they've enjoyed," "including young ones in many of their activities," "encouragement in Scouting, physical fitness, grooming, and manners," teaching them dancing, piano, and songs," "passing their jobs from one to another and expecting them to do as well," "training them in sports," "helping them reason out problem situations," "helping them see the importance of the family and doing well," "playing together a lot, particularly in areas where the parents don't share the same interests," "playing ball with them," "being interested in each other's welfare," "being a good friend," and "participating in family activities even after they are married."

Many parents had commented in one place or another that they consistently counted on the older children to tend the younger ones in the absence of the parents.

Several parents added comments about the influence of their children on each other. One mother remarked, "I don't know how we would have reared the younger children in the family without the great example of our eldest child. She had such a sweet, loving disposition and was always so helpful that all of the other children loved her and wanted to be like her. She made it easy for us to keep all the rest on the right path." The California mother of four observed that one of the most effective forms of discipline in their family was "pressure from other siblings to do what was right."

An Idaho couple with seven children discovered that the nature of discipline in their family had changed as the children grew older because the three older children actually did a great deal of parenting for the younger four. With a touch of humor, the mother wrote: "I asked our three older children how many rules we have, and they said, "Oh, lots! When we were little anyway. Now there don't seem to be any for the younger four brothers and sisters."

"I asked the younger ones and they answered, "Oh, lots!"

"'What are some?

"'Oh, I guess to obey is the only one."

"The older children feel that their father and I have really become less strict through the years—perhaps with some foundation in fact, although if we did, it was unintentional. The younger children have the older children and their friends for examples as well as us. Many times as parents we've found ourselves taking sides with a younger child who has violated a rule; but when three or four siblings pounce on them for correction, the parents don't also need to pounce."

The Utah father of five closely spaced children recalled, "We soon discovered that we relied heavily on our eldest, a boy, to set the example and be responsible for the others. Like many other parents, we saw (too late to change much) that what we expected was a quantum leap more demanding than what we expected from the youngest. But the elder ones did look after the younger ones. They always went to the others' ball games or programs. They set the pattern for Church attendance, good grades, mission preparation, and general obedience."

Another father wrote, "I will always be grateful for the great example our eldest daughter set for the rest of the children. She had such a great spirit—never complained, pouted, or rebelled. We could count on her to get behind the things we were trying to accomplish. She worked hard in school, got good grades, and had a sensitive feeling for spiritual things. All of this rubbed off on the younger ones."

Only two couples indicated that older children could sometimes be negative examples. "In our family the older ones are so involved in themselves they don't always have time for anyone outside themselves," wrote one mother. A Texas couple with five children wrote, "Our older children were not always a good example, so the younger ones knew what they should not do." One girl remarked, "I learned from the tough experiences my older brother had with our parents. He would get into trouble with the folks and I would learn what not to do."

Heroes

We asked about family heroes in an effort to determine whether parents deliberately selected people worthy of emulation and held them up as models for their children. In retrospect, we wished that we had specifically asked about "heroes and heroines," since almost no one identified women as role models. Our phrasing may have influenced parents to think only of men in their answers.

Also, by asking the parents, we excluded many individual models. It is possible that a whole different set of names would emerge if we had asked the children to identify their own heroes instead of asking the parents to identify family heroes. In fact, a few questionnaires specified "no family heroes" but listed people who were heroes for certain individuals or groups in the family. For instance, in one California family with four children, the twenty-one-year-old son had President Ronald Reagan as a hero, the twenty-year-old daughter had Marie Osmond, and the husband had Bob Hope.

Still, the results are interesting. Forty-nine percent either said they had no family heroes or qualified the question in some way. For example, one Idaho couple wrote, "There are many people we admire but no heroes." Another Idaho couple observed, "We respect our Church leaders, especially our bishop, but we don't have heroes." One couple identified M*A*S*H as a family hero but did not specify which characters in the show they particularly enjoyed. A Montana couple with eight children identified as family heroes "those who are righteously successful," while a Salt Lake City couple with five children said their family heroes were "strong, active, loving, friendly men in our ward."

When we analyzed who the listed heroes were—either as first or second choices—we got these results:

President Spencer W. Kimball 51%

Church leaders (as a group) 46%

Other relatives 44%

Parents 42%

Sports figures 24%

Political leaders 18%

Jesus Christ 8%

Movie stars 8%

We found it interesting that family members are mentioned as heroes less often than President Kimball but more often than LDS athletes like Johnny Miller, Steve Young, or Danny Ainge.

One couple, who identified some as ancestors as family heroes, explained: "We have had some fine grandparents who are really special to us. They were among the early converts to the Church, and they did a lot for our family in setting a good example. Their lives were not easy. Some of their little children were buried along the way West. They built a new home in a new area without assistance from anyone but the Lord. We don't need any hero from out in the world somewhere. We have great heroes in our own family."

In a family of four, the mother consulted the children on the question of heroes. "Our daughter said, "Hannah Dustin!" She is an ancestor who was captured by Indians, scalped a great number of them, and helped two others captured with her to escape. We visited her monument one year on vacation when our daughter was about eleven. Her brother, who was six at the time of this vacation, also mentioned Hannah. Other heroes are Spencer W. Kimball and John W. Hess, another ancestor."

A Montana couple with seven children wrote: "Husband likes LeGrand Richards. We all agree on Jesus Christ, Nephi, Joseph Smith, Moroni, President Kimball, and John Glenn. I'm sorry it's such a sarcastic world. It's hard to find someone contemporary to emulate." A Utah family for whom culture was important listed "great artists, authors, and musicians" among their heroes. An Idaho family with seven children observed, "We all follow BYU sports, but the children look up to their grandparents more than anyone we know. They were strong, exceptional people. Even the older married children talk of them and their ideals." A Utah couple wrote, "Jesus Christ is always mentioned as our model, yet to call him a hero is somewhat sacrilegious!" A Utah family with seven children listed Walt Disney, Nephi, and "pilots."

Another family had a long list: "Jesus Christ, President Kimball, a German soccer player, Kane in the TV series "Kung Fu," Patriarch Copeland, the family in "The Little House on the Prairie," Danny White, and Merlin Olsen."

Conclusion

Effective families do not exist in a vacuum. But they do seem to pay a great deal of attention to the values held by those who associate with their children, and they train their older children carefully. The payoff is that these older children almost always perpetuate the parents" values in dealing with the younger children so that the family can have a strong internal culture, a clear sense of "this is how we do things in our family. "Friends have a generally positive influence on the children, probably because the children unconsciously select friends with similar values for the most part, and partly because the family culture also affects these friends. The fact that almost 85 percent of family heroes are either other family members, Church authorities, or other Church members only reinforces the already strong pattern of family values.
