Phillip R. Kunz, William G. Dyer, Effective Mormon Families: How They See Themselves ( 1986)

Chapter Eleven

Family Goals

Effective families can tell if they're making progress because they know where they're going. These parents articulate a clear vision of what they want for the whole family and for each family member—"Being together forever." Planning on forever, they are strongly motivated to maintain a high degree of unity and affection within the family. When inevitable adversities come, it is toward each other that they turn for support.

We asked parents, "What special goals do you have as a family?" We offered some choices, and here's how they responded:

Have children go on missions 100%

Have children marry in the temple 100%

Have children get good educations 99%

Develop a strong sense of family unity 98%

Help each child to develop a strong feeling of self-worth or a good self-concept 97%

Have everyone active in the Church 99%

Then we specifically invited, "List other important goals that you have as a family." That list included:

Being good Christians and good citizens 37%

Putting the family first 22%

Business success 16%

Work 10%

Grades 2%

Health 2%

Sports 1%

It comes as no surprise that the parents wanted their children to be active in the Church, go on missions, and marry in the temple. We have discussed their support of public education in chapter 5 and how they developed family unity in chapter 3. This chapter will concentrate on feelings the parents expressed about developing self-esteem in their children and on the individual goals that each couple articulated for their own family.

Developing Self-Esteem in Children

A wide range of studies have shown the importance of children's feelings of self worth as an influence in their decisions and actions. Those who have a poor self concept are more likely to engage in self-defeating behaviors. It is also clear from the research in this area that children's self concept is learned, particularly as they hear others talk about them or compare them to others in either positive or negative terms. Since these comparisons are most often made with other family members, friends, or relatives, the influence of these people on children's self worth is vital.

On the chart where we asked for demographic data (like age and sex) for each individual in the family, we also asked parents to evaluate "each person's feelings of self-worth: 1-High, 2-Medium, 3-Low." We assumed that there would be an implied comparison with others that they knew. Here are the ratings:

Husbands' Self-Esteem Wives' Self-Esteem High 73% 64% Medium 23% 33% Low 3% 2%

In reporting results for the children, parents rated 75 percent of them with high feelings of self-worth, 20-25 percent with medium, and only 1-2 percent with low. The only real variation from this pattern was that the third child generally rated lower: 53 percent high and 46 percent as medium. (There is nothing in birth-order research that might provide a reason for this.)

None of this is a surprise. Positive people come out of a positive environment and, in turn, reinforce positive feelings for each other. When couples added comments on self-esteem, it was usually to describe a problem. One couple explained that one of their children had had low self-esteem from babyhood, and that being consistently positive and nurturing had been a great challenge for them. Another couple, in which the wife rated her feelings of self-worth as low and the husband as medium, had four children, all of them either medium or low as well. "We tried," they commented briefly opposite the line about helping each child develop self-worth.

A Utah mother with seven children listed as an adversity "one child with low self-esteem from birth" and commented, "It was long and slow to work out but has been done, I'm grateful to say. We handled it with much talk and love and patience and talk and patience and love and then still more."

A Utah mother rated her seven children and herself high in self-esteem (the husband's rating was blank), and explained that one of the important factors in making their family strong was "building high self-esteem through a positive, nurturing, loving attitude toward the children, encouraging them to choose the right and showing them what right is, and manifesting a commitment to the marriage, the family, and the Church." A California mother with three sons, jotted down by the question on self-worth: "If we can accomplish this one, then all the others will be easier."

An Idaho couple with three children rated everyone in the family as having medium self-worth. The mother noted, next to the goal of helping each child develop self-worth, "This is the hardest to do." One Salt Lake City mother with ten adopted children described their greatest challenge as a couple: "Helping the children have a good self image and not always succeeding." Then she articulated their family philosophy: "We know that we are here to help one another. Knowing that we are an eternal family also tells us that we must work out our problems and difficulties. We keep telling our children that we are experiencing the adventure of our lives—this life on earth—and to accept it as such. When you're down, don't stay down, because there's always something around the corner. And most importantly, we teach our children that everyone is here to learn and that some have progressed more than others. Everyone must be accepted for the level they are on, but do not allow whatever level they are on to affect you and how you act. Love God and serve and keep your testimony in spite of bad experiences. Have a good sense of humor. Go for it!"

What Effective Families Want

About 25 percent of the couples did not add any additional goals to the checklist we provided, but they made some of the most interesting reading in the entire questionnaire, and we followed up in some of the interviews on topics brought up there. Many of the goals were related to topics already discussed, such as maintaining warm affection and strong unity. Some typical comments were "Taking care of each other in need"; "Maintaining strong family ties after the children leave home"; "Staying close as a family and as an extended family"; "Continuing the close-knit family unity in generations to come, with my husband and me still at the head of our extended family, worthy and qualified to give counsel and advice"; "Rendering assistance to the children's grandparents and other older people"; "Having the family love and enjoy one another"; "Doing things together and including the extended family"; and "Participating in activities together." Several couples mentioned attendance at family reunions as a goal, and one couple with four children, two of them married, described a "family cruise" as a goal.

Gospel-Related Goals

Many couples said things like "Be a celestial family," "Attain the celestial kingdom," "Eternal life," and "Be together eternally." A Utah couple with nine children, all five of the married children with temple marriages and all of the sons who were old enough having served missions, wrote, "Our biggest goal is to learn to listen and understand and follow the promptings that come to us from the Holy Ghost." This was the same couple who had consciously taught their children to pray and listen for the guidance of the Holy Ghost from babyhood and who, when the children needed discipline, asked them to pray and listen to the Spirit.

A Texas couple in their fifties with four daughters, the youngest one twenty and a stake missionary, have the goal of going on missions themselves. A Utah couple have as a goal, "Internalizing the principles of the gospel." A California couple lists as a family goal, "To be strong Christians and serve the Lord all our lives." An Idaho couple with six daughters "would like each of our girls to be happily married and have a good family; and we'd like all of us to be together in the celestial kingdom." Two of their daughters are married, one with one child and the other with four, and a third daughter is divorced. An Idaho couple with five living children, only the oldest married, wanted their children to "marry and raise a good strong family and be better people than their parents." The Idaho farmer with twenty-one children by four marriages lists as goals for his children: "Always support Church authorities, always have and use a temple recommend, and maintain individual integrity" along with "being financially independent." An Idaho couple with seven children wanted, "happiness for each member." One Salt Lake City couple with five children, four of them married and with eight grandchildren among them, reflected their own delight in family life by listing as a goal, "Seeing the children with families of their own." A Wyoming couple with three children, none of them married yet, hopes for "happy marriages" as a major goal.

One Wyoming couple had had two sons killed at ages nine and seven. For them, an important goal was "to be a celestial family and be with the two that have gone on ahead of us." A Utah couple with seven children, six living, put "enduring to the end" as a family goal. A Salt Lake City couple with two sons and three daughters wrote they wanted their children to "keep a proper perspective on what is really worthwhile in life—who you are and not how much you have."

Educational and Economic Goals

Financial stability and security appeared as a goal on a significant number of couples' lists. A Salt Lake City couple with six children, all of them college graduates except for a son who is a college junior, wrote that a family goal was to "help each one get started in their own homes, businesses, and so on." A Texas couple with five temple-married daughters and one son waiting for his mission call had wanted to have their children "be self-reliant and dependable." A Provo professor and his wife with six children, three sons and three daughters, listed as an important goal, "Becoming good providers and being financially sound." For one Idaho family of seven, the goal was to "have each child able to function as a mature, responsible, independent person as early as possible."

A Montana farm couple want their eight children to "have a good business and be able to live comfortably." An Idaho couple (the husband is a travel agent and the wife is a teacher) want their four children, ages twenty-six to eighteen, to "succeed in their professions." The California parents of seven children say that "to be ambitious" is one of their family rules. A Utah couple with eight children at regular two-year intervals, none of them married and two on missions (the eldest daughter also served a mission), list "financial management" and "helping others."

Other parents said, "Have each person prepared for an occupation"; "Make the farm pay"; "Live within our means"; "Be financially secure"; "Have a satisfactory profession that suits their abilities and interests"; "Learn the importance of work"; "Achieve economic independence"; "Have independence from parents"; "Be out of debt"; "Learn the work ethic"; and "Have strong career goals."

Some of these professional goals are broad enough to include more general self-development and educational goals. A Provo couple with seven children in which the father and the oldest son are both college professors list as goals, "Discovering and developing talents. Developing a love for truth and learning." An Idaho farm family with seven children want each "to develop their talents and interests." A Utah couple with seven children say they "expect each to find his or her special talent or interest and excell in it. Finances are not a high goal, nor is competitiveness." All of these children are making above-average grades in school; one is in medical school and another is a music student at the college level. One Wyoming couple with seven children said that an important goal for their family was, "Don't interfere with private time. Let each child choose to enjoy his or her special interests." A Salt Lake City couple with five daughters and a son has set the goal of developing musical and athletic talents. For a Wyoming family with seven living children, four daughters and three sons, Eagle Scout awards for the boys and the honor roll for everyone were high priorities. For one Provo family, a strong goal was "to acquire culture and an appreciation of the arts."

Relationship Goals

Many couples mentioned the importance of communication and related skills as family goals. In addition, others listed the kinds of qualities that would foster good relationships for their children. An Idaho family with ten children works hard "to teach the children manners and behavior that will help them be welcomed wherever they may go. We especially teach them to be appreciative of the things others do for them (especially their Father in heaven for his blessings) and to express thanks easily." An Idaho couple with three children lists as a family goal, "Be sensitive to and care for other people." A Utah couple with nine children has as a goal, "Improving love at home." A Utah couple with two sons and three daughters, all married except for one daughter who is engaged, wrote that a goal was "keeping lines of communication open among family members and in our own individual families."

For a Utah couple with eight unmarried children ranging in age from two to twenty-one, "respect for others" is a family goal. An Idaho couple with seven children listed "having a sense of humor." A Utah mother of three listed, "Have fun as a family." An Idaho couple with seven children listed "cheerfulness" as a family priority. A Montana blended family valued "honesty and communication." Another family wanted their children to "learn to reverence all of God's creations, recognize the right of all to their opinions, and learn the absolute necessity of being kind."

Service Goals

Many couples listed "service," "being good citizens," "patriotism" "loyalty to country with a knowledge of correct economic and political principles upon which the nation was founded," or being "responsible members of the community" among their family goals or as the most important family goal added to the checklist. A Utah couple with eight sons and a daughter have seen all of the boys but the sixteen-year-old serve missions and the six marriages performed in the temple. One of their important family goals was to "be useful citizens and neighbors, helping others with their means, time, and talents." A Utah couple with seven children said: "We want our children to be responsible workers and serve the community. We think it is important to plant more than we harvest, to help others less fortunate." One Texas couple (the father is a physician and the mother is an artist) wrote as a family goal: "Be an asset to the community."

Conclusion

Plans are not always accomplished as parents would like. Many of the parents pointed out that despite their best efforts, sometimes a child, or maybe two, had drifted away from the pattern or plan of the family. Parents were aware that they had made mistakes in implementing their plans. Sometimes they felt they were too strict, or maybe not strict enough. At times they might have given too much to one child and not enough to another. The children made mistakes, and the parents did not always know just how to respond. One Montana mother probably spoke for many parents when she looked at five mission-age sons, only one of whom had filled a mission, and confessed, "Some hopes went down the tubes."

But despite certain weaknesses and some failures, these parents had a vision of where they wanted to go and some understanding as to what they needed to do to get there. Many of the families seemed to evaluate their progress continually. This began with the couple talking together to assess how they were doing as parents and how well their children seemed to be doing. As they sensed the need for new directions and shifts in some areas, they might have held a family discussion, perhaps a family home evening, where the family planned to correct their course. At times this correction may have involved the entire family; at other times, it might have been directed toward one person who was not measuring up.

Successful parents seemed to know the state of the family. They saw their goals and their progress and sort of tapped things back into shape periodically. The knowledge of where they were and what was needed required husbands and wives who understood one another and wanted to get the job done. In contrast, one of the less-effective mothers confessed, "I don't know, but we're just at the stage where we have several teenagers, and they're acting just about like we did when we were younger. We've attempted to fix the problems up, but it never works as well as we hope it will. I guess we'll just live with it and maybe the kids will shape up when they get married. That's our only hope, I guess." In sharp contrast—not with satisfaction but with commitment—stands the comment of one Salt Lake City mother of eight children, seven of them living. She wrote that one of their most important family goals was "to have joy," then added a candid progress report: "I think we will not know if we have raised a successful family until we see how our grandkids turn out. Also I must admit I think we would not have had as much success as we have had if we had insisted on following every Church plan to perfection. We cannot really separate our family and the Church, but in some instances, our family has had first priority when it came to choosing how we would spend our time, yet our children all know the Church is first in our lives—without them having to be second. We are not a perfect family. We have a long way to go, but we are all on the way. For this we are grateful, yet humbled by our shortcomings. We want to be better. We will be! Twenty years from now, if we are identified as a successful family, it will be more believable. Right now, we think it is premature."
