Phillip R. Kunz, William G. Dyer, Effective Mormon Families: How They See Themselves ( 1986)

Chapter Thirteen

Facing the Future

Since doing this research, we've talked with many young Mormon couples who are engaged, newly wed, or parents of a new baby. They ask us if our research applies to them. The world they face seems very different from that of our 200 families, whose children are either launched on their own or are within a few years of leaving.

We think the answer is yes; but they will also have to consider that they are different from our survey families in many ways. What are some of these differences?

The percentage of converts in the Church is steadily growing larger. Will these numbers tip the Mormon tradition toward more "worldly" values when it comes to raising strong, Church-centered families? In our opinion, this should not be a major challenge. Mormons did not invent strong families. Almost every religious tradition enhances and encourages family life. And despite the bad press on families, the institution of the family is still—and probably always will be—a prime American value as well.

For instance, researchers Nick Stinnett and John Defrain describe Secrets of Strong Families (New York: Little, Brown, 1985) based on a sample of 3,000 families from a variety of religious backgrounds. Here are some of the characteristics they found that strong families have in common:

Do these findings sound familiar? What they tell us, as family researchers, is that families are healthy across the nation. The Church doesn't have all the good families. Alarm about the "disappearing" American family, or about the family slipping into a slough of greedy materialism, seems decidedly misplaced. Furthermore, building better families will probably get more emphasis nationally in the years ahead. Converts who came from strong families will find only support for values they already espouse.

"Strong" does not, however, necessarily mean "traditional." Currently fewer than 25 percent of American families fit the pattern of a full-time homemaker/mother and full-time wage-earning father. In the younger families especially, both couples are likely to be employed and also share child-care and homemaking responsibilities, although this division of labor is far from equally shared in most cases, and the woman is usually most heavily burdened. In such cases, couples must usually make a decision to have fewer children or else to have at least one parent at a time limit his or her career development to spend more time with the children. Although the research is far from final on dual-career couples, parents who have the energy, resources, and commitment are able to provide high-quality parenting and maintain satisfying careers simultaneously. Probably more and more young couples will move into this pattern, although some who are not suited for it by personality are forced into it by economic necessity.

By far the greatest increase, however, has come among single-parent families. Approximately 11 million American children—20 percent of the nation's youngsters—are currently being raised by their mother alone. Another 1 million are being raised by their father alone. Sixty percent of black children and 33 percent of white children have divorced parents.

Latter-day Saints who marry in the temple have a divorce rate of 6 percent, while 30 percent of Mormons married out of the temple have been divorced. Nationally, 23 percent of "ever married" people have been divorced. About 65 percent of all Latter-day Saints households have a married couple in them, while about 35 percent are single-adult households. About 4 percent of Latter-day Saint households consist of children and a single parent.

All of this means a shift in the traditional pattern of the family. Parents will be under much greater pressure to plan well the time they have available for their children, particularly if they are parenting without partners. As this study shows, mothers have spent more time with the children than the fathers have—talking with them, checking on direction and problems, monitoring situations, and acting as an early warning system to bring the father's attention to bear on problems that the mother spots. In the future, both parents, not just the mother, will need to spend quality time with the children and to make family activities their highest priority. Even though work may still take the biggest chunk of time, we feel that the most creative and energetic thought should be spent on family life.

If two working parents (or a single parent) come home exhausted to children who have been doing nothing but watching television after school and sink down in front of their own favorite programs, the patterns that build effective families could be in jeopardy. Parents who are too tired to attend church, or too pinched financially to pay tithing, or too busy to have family prayer will not be able to teach these values to their own children.

Our data show that most LDS parents exercise some control over their children's television (either directly or by teaching them what constitutes appropriate viewing) and make schoolwork a high priority. Will busy parents allow children to watch more television as a way of freeing up time for themselves? If so, what will the results be if "media values" become the most dominant in the home?

Another real problem is complacency. Bill is president of a Brigham Young University stake. Over the past five years, attendance at sacrament meeting has remained constant; but attendance at priesthood meeting, Sunday School, and Relief Society has declined steadily along with home teaching and visiting teaching. When we talk to students about these trends, some frankly describe lessons from Church manuals as boring and some Church programs as irrelevant; but by far more serious and more frequent is the "it doesn't matter" feeling. "There's no real reason for me to feel that being active is essential," observed one. "The Church is so strong here that what I do or don't do doesn't make a difference to it." Others added, "Besides, everyone misses some meetings or goes to an R-rated movie. It's no big deal."

While we might agree about the quality of certain lessons or the lack of earthshaking consequences for going to an occasional R-rated movie, what we do see—very clearly—is that relativity is a slippery slide. Young people who don't have clear boundaries on their behavior and who keep waffling about what is or isn't important can be backed over the edge into serious transgression in a remarkably brief period of time. Furthermore, even if there are no dire immediate consequences, will these people, as parents, have firm convictions about what's right and wrong and the will to pass on these values to their children?

Another difference for the future is family size. The couples in our study averaged six children apiece. The average number of children ever born to Latter-day Saint families is now 3.3 compared to just over 2 for the average American family. There seems to be some evidence that Latter-day Saint families are following the national trend downward. What differences might this trend make?

We can make some hypotheses. Parents with six children obviously cannot do all the work themselves. No matter how hard it is to get children to do chores, the children have to help. Also, with six children to provide for, the family income is stretched thin. To have extra money, children have to take jobs outside the family or work for what they get within it. If parents have smaller families, will they still have the same motivation and need to teach their children the work ethic?

Although the difference between one and two incomes in some Mormon families already spells the difference between whether the children can go on missions and college, at the same time personal income is generally rising across the nation. (Utah is fourth in per capita income [1981] but higher in family income. The mean earnings for families where the husband worked and the wife did not was $22,580 in the United States and $21,822 in Utah in 1979. When the wife also works full time, the mean is $27,644 [U. S.] and $25,855 [Utah]. Utah comes out lower on the per-capita income scale because of comparatively large numbers of people per household. [Jerry Mason, "Family Economics." Unpublished manuscript.]) The income distribution for Latter-day Saint families is not much different from national levels.

Mormon families are already, according to our data, concerned about keeping a nice home, going on vacations, and doing things together. Right now, these factors reflect the parents' emphasis on achieving greater family unity. It is possible, however, that they could be seen as ends in themselves rather than as means to an end; if so, then family unity may be one of the casualties of a more materialistic life-style.

Does this mean that we, as sociologists, advise young couples to plan a traditional marriage? Not necessarily. Certainly, we feel that the traditional model is an option that young couples should have available if they wish to make that choice and can sustain its demands. And certainly, there is nothing "easy" about a traditional marriage, any more than there is about a nontraditional marriage. However, we are not advising young people to choose that model without looking at it carefully, weighing its pros and cons, and considering other options as well. For instance, the stereotype of the traditional marriage could be described with these adjectives: "poor but happy," "hard-working and close," "lots of children and loving."

We see no virtue in poverty for its own sake. We've seen too often how financial tensions can absorb nearly all the emotional energies of a couple until there is nothing left to enrich the relationship. There can also be some negative consequences in a scenario where the husband is so concerned about providing for his family that he has neither time nor energy left over for parenting, and where the wife, who is having a baby every two years, is increasingly isolated in caring for the children, largely alone. It is usually her own academic interests and training that get put on hold, sometimes permanently, for the sake of the family. We see a great potential for happy family life in a pattern that allows—even insists—that both parents get to develop both their nurturing sides and their achieving sides simultaneously.

However, making this pattern work effectively will require a degree of intelligence, awareness, and flexible planning as the family moves from stage to stage that simply was not required of previous generations. The traditional pattern has worked and worked well largely because the assignment of tasks made it possible to keep the bases covered. If these tasks and roles have to be renegotiated every three to six months because of inevitable shifts in the family situation or activities, that could seem like an enormous amount of work—too much to be worth it. Actually, the communication skills required, the awareness of the needs of individual family members, and the choosing—time after time after time—to put family values and Church service first over other demands cannot help but have the same good results as those we see in highly effective traditional families. And what a lesson for children! But it's definitely not a scenario that fits every family.

We have every reason to believe that families of the future might respond quite differently to some items on a questionnaire such as ours that asks questions about activities, money, education, and chores. But we suspect that the answers about family strengths, family values, and feelings for each other would be just about the same. The task of building a strong family is one that has to be undertaken by each couple, no matter how successful or unsuccessful their own families were.

Our scenario for the future sees diversity. The principles of family building as emphasized by our Church leaders and described in Church magazines and lessons are still the same, but the actual forms into which these principles are translated are changing. We see not just one image of a successful family but many. We see a pattern of increasing pluralism where the emphasis is not on roles but on skills—the same skills of communication, teaching gospel principles, and developing competence as a variety of tasks that successful families in this study have discovered.

Despite the ugly side of our society—violence, unchastity, and materialism—it supports some family values in a way that earlier American society did not. It stresses problem solving, not just problem enduring. It puts a high value on communication skills. It recognizes the real satisfactions of achievement. It emphasizes planning and taking charge of the future. These societal values can and will reinforce important gospel values for thoughtful, sensitive parents who are committed to each other and to their children.

As authors, we've done most of our parenting, but we're cheering for our children as they become parents in turn. In some ways, we envy them. The future is going to be an exciting time to build strong families, and we wish them—and you—joy in the process.
