Mark E. Petersen, Sons of Mosiah ( 1984)

ENEMIES WITHIN AND WITHOUT

Rebellion within and persecution from without: this deadly combination faced the church in Zarahemla during the reign of King Mosiah. The trouble within arose where it was least expected, from the king's own home and the family of Alma, the presiding high priest.

Under the rule of Mosiah's father, the great king Benjamin, all the people had pledged solemnly to serve the Lord. But the little children did not understand this covenant and were not converted to it. Many in this rising generation rejected the faith as they grew up.

Chief among them were young Alma, son of the prophet Alma, and the four sons of Mosiah. They not only refused to follow their parents' teachings and turned to riotous living, but they also went among the Saints defying their own fathers and destroying the faith of those who would listen to them.

The scripture describes them in this way:

"Now the sons of Mosiah were numbered among the unbelievers; and also one of the sons of Alma was numbered among them, he being called Alma, after his father; nevertheless, he became a very wicked and an idolatrous man. And he was a man of many words, and did speak much flattery to the people; therefore he led many of the people to do after the manner of his iniquities."

He and the sons of Mosiah "became a great hinderment to the prosperity of the church of God; stealing away the hearts of the people; causing much dissension among the people; giving a chance for the enemy of God to exercise his power over them." (Mosiah 27:8-9.)

The record further describes the young men as "the vilest of sinners." (Mosiah 28:4.) It explains:

"There were many of the rising generation that could not understand the words of king Benjamin, being little children at the time he spake unto his people; and they did not believe the tradition of their fathers.

"They did not believe what had been said concerning the resurrection of the dead, neither did they believe concerning the coming of Christ.

"And now because of their unbelief they could not understand the word of God; and their hearts were hardened.

"And they would not be baptized; neither would they join the church. And they were a separate people as to their faith, and remained so ever after, even in their carnal and sinful state; for they would not call upon the Lord their God."

These unbelievers were "not half so numerous as the people of God; but because of the dissensions among the brethren they became more numerous.

"For it came to pass that they did deceive many with their flattering words, who were in the church, and did cause them to commit many sins." (Mosiah 26:1-6.)

Some members joined the dissenters in threatening the safety of the church.

The prophet Alma went to the king for advice, but as it was a religious, not a political matter, the king refused to take action. Alma then approached the Lord for direction. The Lord, by revelation, told him:

"Therefore I say unto you, Go; and whosoever transgresseth against me, him shall ye judge according to the sins which he has committed; and if he confess his sins before thee and me, and repenteth in the sincerity of his heart, him shall ye forgive, and I will forgive him also.

"Yea, and as often as my people repent will I forgive them their trespasses against me.

"And ye shall also forgive one another your trespasses; for verily I say unto you, he that forgiveth not his neighbor's trespasses when he says that he repents, the same hath brought himself under condemnation.

"Now I say unto you, Go; and whosoever will not repent of his sins the same shall not be numbered among my people; and this shall be observed from this time forward." (Mosiah 26:29-32.)

Persecution immediately intensified.

"And now it came to pass that the persecutions which were inflicted on the church by the unbelievers became so great that the church began to murmur, and complain to their leaders concerning the matter; and they did complain to Alma. And Alma laid the case before their king, Mosiah. And Mosiah consulted with his priests.

"And it came to pass that king Mosiah sent a proclamation throughout the land round about that there should not any unbeliever persecute any of those who belonged to the church of God.

"And there was a strict command throughout all the churches that there should be no persecutions among them, that there should be an equality among all men." (Mosiah 27:1-3.)

In the midst of this bitter dissension stood Mosiah's own four sons and young Alma, destroying faith on all sides. They went about secretly, apparently in fear of the discipline of their fathers, leading people astray "contrary to the commandments of God, or even the king." (Mosiah 27:10.)

If the prophet Alma and king Mosiah could do nothing to control their own sons, the Lord could, because he had a work for them to do.

As the five were going about "rebelling against God, behold, the angel of the Lord appeared unto them; and he descended as it were in a cloud; and he spake as it were with a voice of thunder, which caused the earth to shake upon which they stood;

"And so great was their astonishment, that they fell to the earth, and understood not the words which he spake unto them.

"Nevertheless he cried again, saying: Alma, arise and stand forth, for why persecutest thou the church of God? For the Lord hath said: This is my church, and I will establish it; and nothing shall overthrow it, save it is the transgression of my people.

"And again, the angel said: Behold, the Lord hath heard the prayers of his people, and also the prayers of his servant, Alma, who is thy father; for he has prayed with much faith concerning thee that thou mightest be brought to the knowledge of the truth; therefore, for this purpose have I come to convince thee of the power and authority of God, that the prayers of his servants might be answered according to their faith.

"And now behold, can ye dispute the power of God? For behold, doth not my voice shake the earth? And can ye not also behold me before you? And I am sent from God.

"Now I say unto thee: Go, and remember the captivity of thy fathers in the land of Helam, and in the land of Nephi; and remember how great things he has done for them; for they were in bondage, and he has delivered them. And now I say unto thee, Alma, go thy way, and seek to destroy the church no more, that their prayers may be answered, and this even if thou wilt of thyself be cast off.

"And now it came to pass that these were the last words which the angel spake unto Alma, and he departed."

All five young men fell to the earth, "for great was their astonishment; for with their own eyes they had beheld an angel of the Lord; and his voice was as thunder, which shook the earth; and they knew that there was nothing save the power of God that could shake the earth and cause it to tremble as though it would part asunder.

"And now the astonishment of Alma was so great that he became dumb, that he could not open his mouth; yea, and he became weak, even that he could not move his hands; therefore he was taken by those that were with him, and carried helpless, even until he was laid before his father.

"And they rehearsed unto his father all that had happened unto them; and his father rejoiced, for he knew that it was the power of God." (Mosiah 27:11-20.)

The prophet Alma called the members of the church together to see what God had done for his wicked son. They then joined his father in fasting and prayer for his recovery.
