Mark E. Petersen, Sons of Mosiah ( 1984)

THEY SEEK A MISSION

After their efforts to repair the damage done to the church in their sinful days, the sons of Mosiah desired to serve a mission to the Lamanites. These four young men—whose names were Ammon, Aaron, Omner, and Himni (Mosiah 27:34)—particularly wanted to go to the land of Nephi, now occupied by Lamanites but formerly the home of the Nephites.

They "returned to their father, the king, and desired of him that he would grant unto them that they might, with these whom they had selected, go up to the land of Nephi that they might preach the things which they had heard, and that they might impart the word of God to their brethren, the Lamanites—

"That perhaps they might bring them to the knowledge of the Lord their God, and convince them of the iniquity of their fathers; and that perhaps they might cure them of their hatred towards the Nephites, that they might also be brought to rejoice in the Lord their God, that they might become friendly to one another, and that there should be no more contentions in all the land which the Lord their God had given them.

"Now they were desirous that salvation should be declared to every creature, for they could not bear that any human soul should perish; yea, even the very thoughts that any soul should endure endless torment did cause them to quake and tremble."

The record says that "thus did the Spirit of the Lord work upon them, for they were the very vilest of sinners. And the Lord saw fit in his infinite mercy to spare them; nevertheless they suffered much anguish of soul because of their iniquities, suffering much and fearing that they should be cast off forever.

"And it came to pass that they did plead with their father many days that they might go up to the land of Nephi."

Remembering full well their past deeds, and not knowing if the Lord would accept them as missionaries, Mosiah knew he must seek permission. Would God approve of this mission? Would he guide Mosiah's sons and protect them and help them to convert these Lamanites, who had been so hostile to the Nephites?

"And king Mosiah went and inquired of the Lord if he should let his sons go up among the Lamanites to preach the word.

"And the Lord said unto Mosiah: Let them go up, for many shall believe on their words, and they shall have eternal life; and I will deliver thy sons out of the hands of the Lamanites.

"And it came to pass that Mosiah granted that they might go and do according to their request."

The young men then departed and went into the wilderness to begin their missionary work.

With his sons gone, Mosiah now turned to some ancient records that had been brought to him. They were engraved on gold plates in a language not understood by his people. (Mosiah 28:1-11.)

A group of Nephites who were known as the people of Limhi lived in another part of the country. They had no idea how to reach Zarahemla, but they wished to come and live there. They sent out an expedition to seek the way, but without success.

They did discover a land in which still another people had died in a great battle. Among the relics of this battle were records engraved on twenty-four gold plates. When they finally found their way to Zarahemla, they gave these records to King Mosiah, knowing that he was a prophet as well as a king and that he had the power to translate from unknown tongues. (See Mosiah 8:7-13;22:11-14.)

"Now after Mosiah had finished translating these records, behold, it gave an account of the people who were destroyed, from the time that they were destroyed back to the building of the great tower, at the time the Lord confounded the language of the people and they were scattered abroad upon the face of all the earth, yea, and even from that time back until the creation of Adam.

"Now this account did cause the people of Mosiah to mourn exceedingly, yea, they were filled with sorrow; nevertheless it gave them much knowledge, in the which they did rejoice."

Feeling that he was near the end of his life, Mosiah now gave to Alma these plates, the brass plates of Laban, and all other records that had accumulated, as well as the Urim and Thummim by which the Lord allowed him to interpret strange languages.

Mosiah commanded Alma to "keep and preserve [the records], and also keep a record of the people, handing them down from one generation to another, even as they had been handed down from the time that Lehi left Jerusalem." (Mosiah 28:17-20.)
