Mark E. Petersen, Sons of Mosiah ( 1984)

THE MISSION BEGINS

A transformation very similar to the change of heart that came to Alma following his encounter with the angel also changed the sons of Mosiah.

"They had waxed strong in the knowledge of the truth; for they were men of a sound understanding and they had searched the scriptures diligently, that they might know the word of God.

"But this is not all; they had given themselves to much prayer, and fasting; therefore they had the spirit of prophecy, and the spirit of revelation, and when they taught, they taught with power and authority of God. . . .

"Having taken leave of their father, Mosiah, in the first year of the judges; having refused the kingdom which their father was desirous to confer upon them, and also this was the minds of the people; nevertheless they departed out of the land of Zarahemla, and took their swords, and their spears, and their bows, and their arrows, and their slings; and this they did that they might provide food for themselves while in the wilderness.

"And thus they departed into the wilderness with their numbers which they had selected, to go up to the land of Nephi, to preach the word of God unto the Lamanites.

"And it came to pass that they journeyed many days in the wilderness, and they fasted much and prayed much that the Lord would grant unto them a portion of his Spirit to go with them, and abide with them, that they might be an instrument in the hands of God to bring, if it were possible, their brethren, the Lamanites, to the knowledge of the truth, to the knowledge of the baseness of the traditions of their fathers, which were not correct.

"And it came to pass that the Lord did visit them with his Spirit, and said unto them: Be comforted. And they were comforted.

"And the Lord said unto them also: Go forth among the Lamanites, thy brethren, and establish my word; yet ye shall be patient in long-suffering and afflictions, that ye may show forth good examples unto them in me, and I will make an instrument of thee in my hands unto the salvation of many souls.

"And it came to pass that the hearts of the sons of Mosiah, and also those who were with them, took courage to go forth unto the Lamanites to declare unto them the word of God."

When they reached the borders of the Lamanites, they decided to separate and each go to a different part of the country, trusting the Lord to guide and protect them. "They supposed that great was the work which they had undertaken."

They realized that their efforts were to be directed toward "a wild and a hardened and a ferocious people; a people who delighted in murdering the Nephites, and robbing and plundering them; and their hearts were set upon riches, or upon gold and silver, and precious stones; yet they sought to obtain these things by murdering and plundering, that they might not labor for them with their own hands.

"Thus they were a very indolent people, many of whom did worship idols, and the curse of God had fallen upon them because of the traditions of their fathers; notwithstanding the promises of the Lord were extended unto them on the conditions of repentance.

"Therefore, this was the cause for which the sons of Mosiah had undertaken the work, that perhaps they might brings them unto repentance; that perhaps they might bring them to know of the plan of redemption.

"Therefore they separated themselves one from another, and went forth among them, every man alone, according to the word and power of God which was given unto him."

Little did they know the trails that awaited them for "they did suffer much, both in body and in mind, such as hunger, thirst and fatigue, and also much labor in the spirit." (Alma 17:1-17.)

However, these brave young men had full confidence in the Lord, remembering that Mosiah had received assurance by revelation that their lives would be spared. The promise was, "Let them go up, for many shall believe on their words, and they shall have eternal life; and I will deliver thy sons out of the hands of the Lamanites." (Mosiah 28:7.)
