Mark E. Petersen, Sons of Mosiah ( 1984)

AMMON AND LAMONI

Before the missionaries separated for their various fields of labor, Ammon, their leader, blessed them and counseled further with them about the gospel principles they were to teach. Then, leaving his brothers, Ammon went directly to a land called Ishmael, where he was promptly seized by the Lamanite guards. He did not know that the king was temporarily outside the security area or that it was some of the alert royal guards who took him captive.

Ammon was tied securely and taken before the king, whose name was Lamoni. When intruders into the land had been caught previously, they were taken before the king, whose pleasure it was either to kill them, make slaves of them, put them in prison, or banish them from the area.

The king asked Ammon why he had come there and if it was his desire to live among his people.

"Yea, I desire to dwell among this people for a time," Ammon replied, "yea, and perhaps until the day I die."

Lamoni, who was greatly pleased with Ammon, ordered the guards to remove the ropes that bound him. Without any more knowledge of Ammon, and evidently being willing to let him live there, the king offered to give one of his daughters to Ammon as his wife.

"But Ammon said unto him: Nay, but I will be thy servant. Therefore Ammon became a servant to king Lamoni. And it came to pass that he was set among other servants to watch the flocks of Lamoni, according to the custom of the Lamanites.

"And after he had been in the service of the king three days, as he was with the Lamanitish servants going forth with their flocks to the place of water, which was called the water of Sebus, and all the Lamanites drive their flocks hither, that they may have water—therefore, as Ammon and the servants of the king were driving forth their flocks to this place of water, behold, a certain number of the Lamanites, who had been with their flocks to water, stood and scattered the flocks of Ammon and the servants of the king, and they scattered them insomuch that they fled many ways."

The king previously had slain some of his servants who had allowed the sheep to be scattered. The men with Ammon now feared that they, too, would be killed for the same reason.

But Ammon saw here an opportunity to show the power of the Lord in protecting the king's flock. He said to the other servants, "My brethren, be of good cheer and let us go in search of the flocks, and we will gather them together and bring them back unto the place of water; and thus we will preserve the flocks unto the king and he will not slay us."

His companions brought the sheep back to the watering place while Ammon faced the intruders.

"And those men again stood to scatter their flocks; but Ammon said unto his brethren: Encircle the flocks round about that they flee not; and I go and contend with these men who do scatter our flocks.

"Therefore, they did as Ammon commanded them, and he went forth and stood to contend with those who stood by the waters of Sebus; and they were in number not a few."

Because the Lamanite intruders outnumbered Ammon, they did not fear him, believing that any one of their men could kill him. They could not know, of course, that the Lord would deliver His servant.

Ammon "began to cast stones at them with his sling; yea, with mighty power he did sling stones amongst them; and thus he slew a certain number of them insomuch that they began to be astonished at his power; nevertheless they were angry because of the slain of their brethren, and they were determined that he should fall; therefore, seeing that they could not hit him with their stones, they came forth with clubs to slay him.

"But behold, every man that lifted his club to smite Ammon, he smote off their arms with his sword; for he did withstand their blows by smiting their arms with the edge of his sword, insomuch that they began to be astonished, and began to flee before him; yea, and they were not few in number; and he caused them to flee by the strength of his arm."

Six were knocked down by Ammon's sling shots. When their leader attacked him with the sword, Ammon drew his own weapon and killed him. Others who now came against him with clubs found they were no match for him, for as they raised their arms to strike him, he cut off their arms with blows from his sword.

"And when he had driven them afar off, he returned and they watered their flocks and returned them to the pasture of the king, and then went in unto the king, bearing the arms which had been smitten off by the sword of Ammon, of those who sought to slay him; and they were carried in unto the king for a testimony of the things which they had done." (Alma 17:18-39.)

The servants told the king all that had happened. Frightened, he said, "Surely, this is more than a man. Behold, is not this the Great Spirit who doth send such great punishments upon this people, because of their murders?

"And they answered the king, and said: Whether he be the Great Spirit or a man, we know not; but this much we do know, that he cannot be slain by the enemies of the king; neither can they scatter the king's flocks when he is with us, because of his expertness and great strength; therefore, we know that he is a friend to the king. And now, O king, we do not believe that a man has such great power, for we know he cannot be slain.

"And now, when the king heard these words, he said unto them: Now I know that it is the Great Spirit; and he has come down at this time to preserve your lives, that I might not slay you as I did your brethren. Now this is the Great Spirit of whom our fathers have spoken.

"Now this was the tradition of Lamoni, which he had received from his father, that there was a Great Spirit. Notwithstanding they believed in a Great Spirit, they supposed that whatsoever they did was right; nevertheless, Lamoni began to fear exceedingly, with fear lest he had done wrong in slaying his servants."

One thing Lamoni feared was that the Great Spirit would now punish him for killing other servants who had allowed the sheep to be scattered.

Lamoni asked his servants where Ammon was. "And they said unto him: Behold, he is feeding thy horses. Now the king had commanded his servants, previous to the time of the watering of their flocks, that they should prepare his horses and chariots, and conduct him forth to the land of Nephi; for there had been a great feast appointed at the land of Nephi, by the father of Lamoni, who was king over all the land.

"Now when king Lamoni heard that Ammon was preparing his horses and his chariots he was more astonished, because of the faithfulness of Ammon, saying: Surely there has not been any servant among all my servants that has been so faithful as this man; for even he doth remember all my commandments to execute them. Now I surely know that this is the Great Spirit, and I would desire him that he come in unto me, but I durst not."

When Ammon came at the king's call, he asked, "What wilt thou that I should do for thee, O king? And the king answered him not for the space of an hour, according to their time, for he knew not what he should say unto him."

The king was so frightened that he could not talk, so Ammon repeated his question. The king still did not answer.

"And it came to pass that Ammon, being filled with the Spirit of God, therefore he perceived the thoughts of the king. And he said unto him: Is it because thou hast heard that I defended thy servants and thy flocks, and slew seven of their brethren with the sling and with the sword, and smote off the arms of others, in order to defend thy flocks and thy servants; behold, is it this that causeth thy marvelings? I say unto you, what is it, that thy marvelings are so great? Behold, I am a man, and am thy servant; therefore, whatsoever thou desirest which is right, that will I do."

Lamoni then asked Ammon who he was. "Art thou that Great Spirit, who knows all things?

"Ammon answered and said unto him: I am not.

"And the king said: How knowest thou the thoughts of my heart? Thou mayest speak boldly, and tell me concerning these things; and also tell me by what power ye slew and smote off the arms of my brethren that scattered my flocks—and now, if thou wilt tell me concerning these things, whatsoever thou desirest I will give unto thee; and if it were needed, I would guard thee with my armies; but I know that thou art more powerful than all they; nevertheless, whatsoever thou desirest of me I will grant it unto thee."

Ammon then asked, "Wilt thou hearken unto my words, if I tell thee by what power I do these things? And this is the thing that I desire of thee."

The king replied, "Yea, I will believe all thy words."

Ammon boldly began to teach the king. He asked Lamoni, "Believest thou that there is a God?"

Lamoni answered, "I do not know what that meaneth."

"Believest thou that there is a Great Spirit?"

"Yea."

Ammon told him, "This is God." Then he asked again, "Believest thou that this Great Spirit, who is God, created all things which are in heaven and in the earth?"

Lamoni said, "Yea, I believe that he created all things which are in the earth; but I do not know the heavens."

"The heavens is a place where God dwells and all his holy angels," Alma explained.

"Is it above the earth?" Lamoni asked.

"Yea, and he looketh down upon all the children of men; and he knows all the thoughts and intents of the heart; for by his hand were they all created from the beginning."

Then King Lamoni said, "I believe all these things which thou hast spoken. Art thou sent from God?" (Alma 18:1-33.)
