Mark E. Petersen, Sons of Mosiah ( 1984)

LAMONI'S FATHER IS SPARED

King Lamoni reigned over the land of Ishmael, which was only a part of the domain of the Lamanites. His father was king over the entire region, and Lamoni served under him.

After Ammon had established the church in Ishmael, Lamoni asked him to accompany him to the capital city of the entire land, so that his father, the chief king, could come to know him.

But "the voice of the Lord came to Ammon, saying: Thou shalt not go up to the land of Nephi, for behold, the king will seek thy life; but thou shalt go to the land of Middoni; for behold, thy brother Aaron, and also Muloki and Ammah are in prison."

Upon receiving this revelation, Ammon told Lamoni, "My brother and brethren are in prison at Middoni, and I go that I may deliver them."

Lamoni, now a loyal friend of Ammon, declared, "I know, in the strength of the Lord thou canst do all things. But behold, I will go with thee to the land of Middoni; for the king of the land of Middoni, whose name is Antiomno, is a friend unto me; therefore I go to the land of Middoni, that I may flatter the king of the land, and he will cast thy brethren out of prison. Now Lamoni said unto him: Who told thee that thy brethren were in prison?

"And Ammon said unto him: No one hath told me, save it be God; and he said unto me—Go and deliver thy brethren, for they are in prison in the land of Middoni."

Lamoni ordered his servants to make the horses and chariots ready. Then he said to Ammon, "Come, I will go with thee down to the land of Middoni, and there I will plead with the king that he will cast thy brethren out of prison."

As they traveled, they met Lamoni's father on the highway, and they all stopped to greet each other.

The father said to his son: "Why did ye not come to the feast on that great day when I made a feast unto my sons, and unto my people? . . . Whither art thou going with this Nephite, who is one of the children of a liar?"

Lamoni feared to offend his father, so he quickly explained where he and Ammon were going. He also told him briefly of the things that had happened since Ammon came into Ishmael.

"And now when Lamoni had rehearsed unto him all these things, behold, to his astonishment, his father was angry with him, and said: Lamoni, thou art going to deliver these Nephites, who are sons of a liar. Behold, he robbed our fathers; and now his children are also come amongst us that they may, by their cunning and their lyings, deceive us, that they again may rob us of our property.

"Now the father of Lamoni commanded him that he should slay Ammon with the sword. And he also commanded him that he should not go to the land of Middoni, but that he should return with him to the land of Ishmael.

"But Lamoni said unto him: I will not slay Ammon, neither will I return to the land of Ishmael, but I go to the land of Middoni that I may release the brethren of Ammon, for I know that they are just men and holy prophets of the true God."

So angry was the old king that he drew his sword to kill Lamoni, his own son. But Ammon quickly stepped forward and said:

"Behold, thou shalt not slay thy son; nevertheless, it were better that he should fall than thee, for behold, he has repented of his sins; but if thou shouldst fall at this time, in thine anger, thy soul could not be saved. And again, it is expedient that thou shouldst forbear; for if thou shouldst slay thy son, he being an innocent man, his blood would cry from the ground to the Lord his God, for vengeance to come upon thee; and perhaps thou wouldst lose thy soul."

The old king replied, "I know that if I should slay my son, that I should shed innocent blood; for it is thou that hast sought to destroy him."

Then he rushed at Ammon with his sword, but Ammon retaliated and wounded the king in the arm so that he could no longer fight. The old king, seeing that he was at the mercy of Ammon, began to beg for his life.

"But Ammon raised his sword, and said unto him: Behold, I will smite thee except thou wilt grant unto me that my brethren may be cast out of prison.

"Now the king, fearing he should lose his life, said: If thou wilt spare me I will grant unto thee whatsoever thou wilt ask, even to half of the kingdom.

"Now when Ammon saw that he had wrought upon the old king according to his desire, he said unto him: If thou wilt grant that my brethren may be cast out of prison, and also that Lamoni may retain his kingdom, and that ye be not displeased with him, but grant that he may do according to his own desires in whatsoever thing he thinketh, then will I spare thee; otherwise I will smite thee to the earth.

"Now when Ammon had said these words, the king began to rejoice because of his life.

"And when he saw that Ammon had no desire to destroy him, and when he also saw the great love he had for his son Lamoni, he was astonished exceedingly, and said: Because this is all that thou hast desired, that I would release thy brethren, and suffer that my son Lamoni should retain his kingdom, behold, I will grant unto you that my son may retain his kingdom from this time and forever; and I will govern him no more—

"And I will also grant unto thee that thy brethren may be cast out of prison, and thou and thy brethren may come unto me, in my kingdom; for I shall greatly desire to see thee. For the king was greatly astonished at the words which he had spoken, and also at the words which had been spoken by his son Lamoni, therefore he was desirous to learn them."

Ammon and Lamoni now continued on their journey to the city of Middoni, where Ammon's brothers were held in prison.

"And Lamoni found favor in the eyes of the king of the land; therefore the brethren of Ammon were brought forth out of prison."

Ammon was shocked when he saw his brothers. They had suffered severe hardships and persecution. They were naked and had deep sores where the ropes that bound them had cut into their flesh. They also had experienced both hunger and thirst, but, the record says, through it all "they were patient in all their sufferings." They had "fallen into the hands of a more hardened and a more stiffnecked people" than had Ammon.

Driven out of city after city, they finally arrived in Middoni, where they were "bound with strong cords, and kept in prison for many days" until they were delivered by Lamoni and Ammon. (Alma 20.)
