Mark E. Petersen, Sons of Mosiah ( 1984)

THE JOURNEY OF AARON

When Ammon and his brothers separated at the beginning of their missions to the Lamanites, Aaron went to a large city that the people named Jerusalem. Three different groups had joined in its construction—the Lamanites themselves, the Amalekites, and a third group known as the people of Amulon. All three groups continued to occupy the city. (Alma 21:1-2.)

The Amalekites, who were followers of a man named Amaleki, were among the most bitter apostates who had broken away from the Nephites. When they left the true church, they adopted the religion of a man named Nehor and went over to dwell with the Lamanites.

Nehor, a rebellious man who lived in the days of Alma, about 91 years B.C., first preached in the city where he lived. One day he met a faithful but elderly soldier of the Nephite army, named Gideon. When Gideon denounced Nehor's false doctrines, Nehor drew a sword and killed him. He was quickly arrested, tried for murder, and executed.

"Nevertheless, this did not put an end to the spreading of priestcraft through the land; for there were many who loved the vain things of the world, and they went forth preaching false doctrines; and this they did for the sake of riches and honor." (Alma 1:1-16.)

When Amaleki became an enemy to the Nephites, he adopted the religion of Nehor and built synagogues in which his followers practiced many false teachings. This apostate group flourished in several Nephite communities and then spread among the Lamanites. The bitterness of Amaleki's followers toward the Nephites was so strong that many of them wanted to raise an army and fight. It was this group that helped the Lamanites build the city of Jerusalem, which Aaron, as a missionary, now approached.

The other apostate group in the city was the Amulonites. They descended from one of the corrupt priests of the wicked King Noah, who had killed the prophet Abinadi.

When the Lamanites had come against King Noah, he and his entire group of priests had fled into the wilderness. Noah was killed, leaving the priests to themselves.

One day the priests saw a group of Lamanite girls dancing. They kidnapped the girls and took them to be their wives. The Amulonites were descended from this group and, therefore, were half-blooded Nephites and half Lamanites. However, their full allegiance was with the Lamanites.

"Now the Lamanites of themselves were sufficiently hardened, but the Amalekites and the Amulonites were still harder; therefore they did cause the Lamanites that they should harden their hearts, that they should wax strong in wickedness and their abominations." (Alma 21:3.)

When Aaron came to the city Jerusalem, he went to the synagogues of the followers of Nehor, where both the Amalekites and Amulonites worshipped. As he entered into one of the synagogues to preach one day, an Amalekite stood up and challenged him:

"What is that thou hast testified?" the Amalekite asked. "Hast thou seen an angel? Why do not angels appear unto us? Behold are not this people as good as thy people? Thou also sayest, except we repent we shall perish. How knowest thou the thoughts and intent of our hearts? How knowest thou that we have cause to repent? How knowest thou that we are not a righteous people? Behold, we have built sanctuaries, and we do assemble ourselves together to worship God. We do believe that God will save all men."

Aaron asked the man, "Believest thou that the Son of God shall come to redeem mankind from their sins?"

The man responded, "We do not believe that thou knowest any such thing. We do not believe in these foolish traditions. We do not believe that thou knowest of things to come, neither do we believe that thy fathers and also that our fathers did know concerning the things which they spake, of that which is to come."

Aaron quoted the scriptures to the congregation, telling them of the coming of the Savior and the resurrection of the dead. He stressed that there could be no salvation for anyone except through the atonement of Christ. As he did so, the people became angry and mocked him, refusing any longer to listen.

"Therefore, when he saw that they would not hear his words, he departed out of their synagogue, and came over to a village which was called Ani-Anti, and there he found Muloki preaching the word unto them; and also Ammah and his brethren. And they contended with many about the word. And it came to pass that they saw that the people would harden their hearts, therefore they departed and came over into the land of Middoni. And they did preach the word unto many, and few believed on the words which they taught."

Aaron and his brothers, who had joined him, were put in prison, where they remained until Lamoni and Ammon rescued them.

Ammon and Lamoni then returned to the land of Ishmael, but Aaron and his brothers, now refreshed from their imprisonment, decided to continue with their missionary work. "And they went forth again to declare the word, and thus they were delivered for the first time out of prison; and thus they had suffered.

"And they went forth whithersoever they were led by the Spirit of the Lord, preaching the word of God in every synagogue of the Amalekites, or in every assembly of the Lamanites where they could be admitted.

"And it came to pass that the Lord began to bless them, insomuch that they brought many to the knowledge of the truth; yea, they did convince many of their sins, and of the traditions of their fathers, which were not correct." (Alma 21:3-17.)
