Mark E. Petersen, Sons of Mosiah ( 1984)

THE OLD KING IS CONVERTED

The Spirit directed Aaron to go to the land Nephi, where Lamoni's father, the old king, lived. This king controlled the entire region, except that he had now given Lamoni freedom to govern the land of Ishmael by himself.

Aaron went directly to the palace and was admitted to the throne room. Bowing low, he said: "Behold, O king, we are the brethren of Ammon, whom thou hast delivered out of prison. And now, O king, if thou wilt spare our lives, we will be thy servants."

The king replied: "Arise, for I will grant unto you your lives, and I will not suffer that ye shall be my servants; but I will insist that ye shall administer unto me; for I have been somewhat troubled in mind because of the generosity and the greatness of the words of thy brother Ammon; and I desire to know the cause why he has not come up out of Middoni with thee."

Aaron declared to the king that the Holy Spirit had directed Ammon to return with Lamoni to Ishmael.

The old king replied: "What is this that ye have said concerning the Spirit of the Lord? Behold, this is the thing which doth trouble me."

Aaron then told him of the Creation and how God formed Adam in His own image, and of the fall of Adam. He explained the redemption through the Savior, saying, "And since man had fallen he could not merit anything of himself; but the sufferings and death of Christ atone for their sins, through faith and repentance, and so forth; and that he breaketh the bands of death, that the grave shall have no victory, and that the sting of death should be swallowed up in the hopes of glory."

After Aaron had expounded these things, the king said, "What shall I do that I may have this eternal life of which thou hast spoken? Yea, what shall I do that I may be born of God, having this wicked spirit rooted out of my breast, and receive his Spirit, that I may be filled with joy, that I may not be cast off at the last day? Behold, said he, I will give up all that I possess, yea, I will forsake my kingdom, that I may receive this great joy."

Aaron told him, "If thou desirest this thing, if thou wilt bow down before God, yea, if thou wilt repent of all thy sins, and will bow down before God, and call on his name in faith, believing that ye shall receive, then shalt thou receive the hope which thou desirest."

The king knelt down in prayer, then prostrated himself completely and cried out, "O God, Aaron hath told me that there is a God; and if there is a God, and if thou art God, wilt thou make thyself known unto me, and I will give away all my sins to know thee, and that I may be raised from the dead, and be saved at the last day. And now when the king had said these words, he was struck as if he were dead."

The king's servants ran in great fear to call the queen.

"And she came in unto the king; and when she saw him lay as if he were dead, and also Aaron and his brethren standing as though they had been the cause of his fall, she was angry with them, and commanded that her servants, or the servants of the king, should take them and slay them.

"Now the servants had seen the cause of the king's fall, therefore they durst not lay their hands on Aaron and his brethren; and they pled with the queen saying: Why commandest thou that we should slay these men, when behold one of them is mightier than us all? Therefore we shall fall before them.

"Now when the queen saw the fear of the servants she also began to fear exceedingly, lest there should some evil come upon her. And she commanded her servants that they should go and call the people, that they might slay Aaron and his brethren."

Aaron, seeing the queen's determination, and also "knowing the hardness of the hearts of the people, feared lest that a multitude should assemble themselves together, and there should be a great contention and a disturbance among them; therefore he put forth his hand and raised the king from the earth, and said unto him: Stand. And he stood upon his feet, receiving his strength.

"Now this was done in the presence of the queen and many of the servants. And when they saw it they greatly marveled, and began to fear. And the king stood forth, and began to minister unto them. And he did minister unto them, insomuch that his whole household were converted unto the Lord."

The queen had directed the servants to call in other people, "and there began to be great murmurings among them because of Aaron and his brethren.

"But the king stood forth among them and administered unto them. And they were pacified towards Aaron and those who were with him.

"And it came to pass that when the king saw that the people were pacified, he caused that Aaron and his brethren should stand forth in the midst of the multitude, and that they should preach the word unto them." (Alma 22:1-26.)
