Mark E. Petersen, Sons of Mosiah ( 1984)

AGGRESSION SPREADS

The attacking Lamanites regretted killing people of their own race, especially since they offered no resistance. They left the Anti-Nephi-Lehi converts in peace, but swore vengeance on the Nephite nation for sending missionaries to work among them. They had brought about this great conversion.

Lamanite armies now attacked a Nephite city called Ammonihah. The people of Ammonihah were very corrupt. It was they who had been so cruel to the prophet Alma when he tried to preach to them. The armies destroyed the city and its entire population.

Later the Lamanite army attacked the Nephites near Zarahemla but were beaten back. Then Aaron's good work produced still further fruit. Many other Lamanites began to remember his words, and "therefore they began to disbelieve the traditions of their fathers, and to believe in the Lord, and that he gave great power unto the Nephites; and thus there were many of them converted in the wilderness."

The Amulonites, however, caused many of the new converts to be put to death in the wilderness. This angered the Lamanites greatly, "and the Lamanites began to hunt the seed of Amulon and his brethren and began to slay them; and . . . they are hunted at this day by the Lamanites."

Finally, the remaining Lamanites returned to their own land. "Many of them came over to dwell in the land of Ishmael and the land of Nephi, and did join themselves to the people of God, who were the people of Anti-Nephi-Lehi.

"And they did also bury their weapons of war, according as their brethren had, and they began to be a righteous people; and they did walk in the ways of the Lord, and did observe to keep his commandments and his statutes.

"Yea, and they did keep the law of Moses; for it was expedient that they should keep the law of Moses as yet, for it was not all fulfilled. But notwithstanding the law of Moses, they did look forward to the coming of Christ, considering that the law of Moses was a type of his coming, and believing that they must keep those outward performances until the time that he should be revealed unto them.

"Now they did not suppose that salvation came by the law of Moses; but the law of Moses did serve to strengthen their faith in Christ; and thus they did retain a hope through faith, unto eternal salvation, relying upon the spirit of prophecy, which spake of those things to come." (Alma 25.)

Ammon and his brethren rejoiced over this. Ammon was so thrilled that he declared: "My brothers and my brethren, behold I say unto you, how great reason have we to rejoice; for could we have supposed when we started from the land of Zarahemla that God would have granted unto us such great blessings? And now, I ask, what great blessings has he bestowed upon us? Can ye tell?

"Behold, I answer for you; for our brethren, the Lamanites, were in darkness, yea, even in the darkest abyss, but behold, how many of them are brought to behold the marvelous light of God! And this is the blessing which hath been bestowed upon us, that we have been made instruments in the hands of God to bring about this great work.

"Behold, thousands of them do rejoice, and have been brought into the fold of God. Behold, the field was ripe, and blessed are ye, for ye did thrust in the sickle, and did reap with your might, yea, all the day long did ye labor; and behold the number of your sheaves! And they shall be gathered into the garners, that they are not wasted.

"Yea, they shall not be beaten down by the storm at the last day; yea, neither shall they be harrowed up by the whirlwinds; but when the storm cometh they shall be gathered together in their place, that the storm cannot penetrate to them; yea, neither shall they be driven with fierce winds whithersoever the enemy listeth to carry them. But behold, they are in the hands of the Lord of the harvest, and they are his; and he will raise them up at the last day.

"Blessed be the name of our God; let us sing to his praise, yea, let us give thanks to his holy name, for he doth work righteousness forever. For if we had not come up out of the land of Zarahemla, these our dearly beloved brethren, who have so dearly beloved us, would still have been racked with hatred against us, yea, and they would also have been strangers to God."

Aaron misunderstood his brother's exultation, thinking that he was taking credit to himself. He told Ammon, "I fear that thy joy doth carry thee away unto boasting."

Humble, but joyful, Ammon replied: "I do not boast in my own strength, nor in my own wisdom; but behold, my joy is full, yea, my heart is brim with joy, and I will rejoice in my God."

Still awed but overjoyed by the blessings of the Lord, Ammon reminded his brothers that when they first proposed undertaking this mission to the Lamanites, they were still in a state of repenting from their efforts to destroy the church.

He recalled also that their friends in Zarahemla had criticized them for supposing they could convert any Lamanites.

"For they said unto us: Do ye suppose that ye can bring the Lamanites to the knowledge of the truth? Do ye suppose that ye can convince the Lamanites of the incorrectness of the traditions of their fathers, as stiffnecked a people as they are; whose hearts delight in the shedding of blood; whose days have been spent in the grossest iniquity; whose ways have been the ways of a transgressor from the beginning? Now my brethren, ye remember that this was their language.

"And moreover they did say: Let us take up arms against them, that we destroy them and their iniquity out of the land, lest they overrun us and destroy us.

"But behold, my beloved brethren, we came into the wilderness not with the intent to destroy our brethren, but with the intent that perhaps we might save some few of their souls. . . .

"Now my brethren, we see that God is mindful of every people, whatsoever land they may be in; yea, he numbereth his people, and his bowels of mercy are over all the earth. Now this is my joy, and my great thanksgiving; yea, and I will give thanks unto my God forever. Amen." (Alma 26.)
