Mark E. Petersen, Sons of Mosiah ( 1984)

THE MOVE TO JERSHON

The defeated armies of the Lamanites, returning from their attack on the Nephites, mourned the heavy losses that they had suffered. Many of the Amalekites had also been killed, for they had joined the Lamanite army and had, in fact, urged the Lamanites to start this war. The defeat of their army and their own heavy losses encouraged them greatly to hate the Nephites more than ever.

When the Amalekites realized that it was useless to go again against Zarahemla, they again turned their anger upon the defenseless people of Anti-Nephi-Lehi. They made renewed attacks on them and killed many.

The people of Anti-Nephi-Lehi again refused to take their arms, and "they suffered themselves to be slain according to the desires of their enemies.

"Now when Ammon and his brethren saw this work of destruction among those whom they so dearly beloved, and among those who had so dearly beloved them-for they were treated as though they were angels sent from God to save them from everlasting destruction-therefore, when Ammon and his brethren saw this great work of destruction, they were moved with compassion, and they said unto the king: Let us gather together this people of the Lord, and let us go down to the land of Zarahemla to our brethren the Nephites, and flee out of the hands of our enemies, that we be not destroyed."

The king, who was afraid to live among the Nephites because of their cruelty in past wars, said, "Behold, the Nephites will destroy us, because of the many murders and sins we have committed against them."

As a prophet, Ammon knew he must seek revelation from God.

"And Ammon said: I will go and inquire of the Lord, and if he say unto us, go down unto our brethren, will ye go?

"And the king said unto him: Yea, if the Lord saith unto us go, we will go down unto our brethren, and we will be their slaves until we repair unto them the many murders and sins which we have committed against them.

"But Ammon said unto him: It is against the law of our brethren, which was established by my father, that there should be any slaves among them; therefore let us go down and rely upon the mercies of our brethren.

"But the king said unto him: Inquire of the Lord, and if he saith unto us go, we will go; otherwise we will perish in the land."

Ammon went to the Lord, who commanded him: "Get this people out of this land, that they perish not; for Satan has great hold on the hearts of the Amalekites, who do stir up the Lamanites to anger against their brethren to slay them; therefore get thee out of this land; and blessed are this people in this generation, for I will preserve them."

The king now agreed, "and they gathered together all their people, yea, all the people of the Lord, and did gather together all their flocks and herds, and departed out of the land, and came into the wilderness which divided the land of Nephi from the land of Zarahemla, and came over near the borders of the land."

When the people of Anti-Nephi-Lehi neared Zarahemla, Ammon said, "Behold, I and my brethren will go forth into the land of Zarahemla, and ye shall remain here until we return; and we will try the hearts of our brethren, whether they will that ye shall come into their land."

The main body of the people waited in the wilderness while Ammon and his brothers went to the city. As they traveled the highway, to their great surprise they met the prophet Alma on his way back from the land Gideon. (Alma 27:1-16.)

"Now these sons of Mosiah were with Alma at the time the angel first appeared unto him; therefore Alma did rejoice exceedingly to see his brethren; and what added more to his joy, they were still his brethren in the Lord; yea, and they had waxed strong in the knowledge of the truth; for they were men of a sound understanding and they had searched the scriptures diligently, that they might know the word of God." (Alma 17:2.)

What a joyful meeting! The sons of Mosiah had been preaching the word for fourteen years, and they were overjoyed to see Alma again after so long a time.

"Now the joy of Ammon was so great even that he was full; yea, he was swallowed up in the joy of his God, even to the exhausting of his strength; and he fell again to the earth. Now was not this exceeding joy? Behold, this is joy which none receiveth save it be the truly penitent and humble seeker of happiness. Now the joy of Alma in meeting his brethren was truly great, and also the joy of Aaron, of Omner, and Himni; but behold their joy was not that to exceed their strength."

The sons of Mosiah explained to Alma the purpose of their journey, and "Alma conducted his brethren back to the land of Zarahemla; even to his own house. And they went and told the chief judge all the things that had happened unto them in the land of Nephi, among their brethren, the Lamanites."

The response of the Nephites was all that Ammon could expect.

"The chief judge sent a proclamation throughout all the land, desiring the voice of the people concerning the admitting their brethren, who were the people of Anti-Nephi-Lehi.

"And it came to pass that the voice of the people came, saying: Behold, we will give up the land of Jershon, which is on the east by the sea, which joins the land Bountiful, which is on the south of the land Bountiful; and this land Jershon is the land which we will give unto our brethren for an inheritance.

"And behold, we will set our armies between the land Jershon and the land Nephi, that we may protect our brethren in the land Jershon; and this we do for our brethren, on account of their fear to take up arms against their brethren lest they should commit sin; and this their great fear came because of their sore repentance which they had, on account of their many murders and their awful wickedness.

"And now behold, this will we do unto our brethren, that they may inherit the land Jershon; and we will guard them from their enemies with our armies, on condition that they will give us a portion of their substance to assist us that we may maintain our armies."

Alma now joined Ammon in returning to the wilderness, where the people of Anti-Nephi-Lehi awaited them.

"And it came to pass that it did cause great joy among them. And they went down into the land of Jershon, and took possession of the land of Jershon; and they were called by the Nephites the people of Ammon; therefore they were distinguished by that name ever after.

"And they were among the people of Nephi, and also numbered among the people who were of the church of God. And they were also distinguished for their zeal towards God, and also towards men; for they were perfectly honest and upright in all things; and they were firm in the faith of Christ, even unto the end.

"And they did look upon shedding the blood of their brethren with the greatest abhorrence; and they never could be prevailed upon to take up arms against their brethren; and they never did look upon death with any degree of terror, for their hope and views of Christ and the resurrection; therefore, death was swallowed up to them by the victory of Christ over it.

"Therefore, they would suffer death in the most aggravating and distressing manner which could be inflicted by their brethren, before they would take the sword or cimeter to smite them.

"And thus they were a zealous and beloved people, a highly favored people of the Lord." (Alma 27:17-30.)
