Open PDF

Jordan hadn’t seen his sister Kirsi for over a year—it felt like forever! Soon she’d be coming home from her mission to have surgery. Jordan was sad that she was sick, but he was happy that they’d be together soon.

When he came home from school the next day, Kirsi was sitting on the couch. Jordan ran and hugged her.

“Hi, Jordan! I missed you!” Kirsi said.

Jordan smiled. “I missed you too! I’m sorry that you’re sick.”

“Thanks, buddy,” Kirsi said. She was holding the Book of Mormon in her lap.

“Can I read with you?” he asked.

“Why don’t you go get your Book of Mormon, and we can start at the beginning together.”

Jordan ran to his room and grabbed his copy. “Got it!” he yelled as he ran back. He scooted in next to Kirsi.

They opened to the title page. “The Book of Mormon: Another Testament of Jesus Christ,” Jordan read. They took turns reading.

“On my mission I studied the scriptures with my companion every day,” Kirsi said. “Would you be my study buddy until it’s time for me to go back to my mission?” Kirsi asked.

“Yeah!” he said.

A few days later, Kirsi had her surgery. She came home from the hospital to rest and heal for a few weeks. She and Jordan studied the Book of Mormon together every day.

Before she went back to her mission, Kirsi said, “Jordan, I want to challenge you to finish the Book of Mormon before you are baptized!”

Jordan thought about that. His eighth birthday was only a few months away. He would have a lot of reading to do. But he wanted to do it. “Yes,” Jordan said.

“As you read, will you pray and ask if it’s true?” Kirsi asked. “Moroni promised that if we do that, the Holy Ghost will tell us if it’s true.”

“OK,” Jordan said.

By the time Kirsi went back to her mission, they’d reached 2 Nephi together.

Jordan really missed Kirsi. He especially missed being her study buddy. But then he got a great idea!

At school the next day, he walked over to his best friend Jake’s desk.

“I’m going to read the whole Book of Mormon before I get baptized,” Jordan said. “Since we’re both getting baptized on the same day, do you want to do it too?”

“Yeah,” Jake said. “I’ve never read the whole Book of Mormon before.”

Every day at school, they asked each other the same question.

“How far along are you?”

“The end of Jacob. How far along are you?”

Soon they didn’t even have to ask the question anymore. They gave each other a look and they knew the question.

“I think we’ll finish just in time for our baptisms,” Jordan said.

Finally the day of their baptisms came.

“I finished last night,” Jordan whispered.

“Me too!” Jake said. “And I prayed to know if it was true, and I felt really warm and happy.”

Jordan smiled. “Same. I felt really happy when I prayed.” He was so thankful for Kirsi’s challenge. Now he was building his very own testimony.
