L. Tom Perry, Living with Enthusiasm ( 1996)

1

Living with Enthusiasm

I have always been fascinated by the story of Joseph in the Old Testament. Often I think about the obstacles placed in Joseph's way and how he always seemed to have the spirit and vitality to overcome them.

Joseph began life as the favored son of his father, Jacob. To show his love, Jacob gave Joseph a fine coat of many colors. Jacob had eleven other sons. He did not have twelve coats made—only one, which he gave to Joseph. You can imagine the feeling of Joseph's brothers when he was favored above the rest.

Joseph, of course, made matters worse when he told his brothers about a dream he had one night. Imagine the family sitting at the breakfast table. They are discussing their flocks and grain when Joseph announces, "Oh, by the way, I had a dream last night. We were out in the field and there were twelve shocks of grain. Eleven of them bowed down to the one. Guess who the one was?"

Joseph could not have been popular with his older brothers. In fact, they hated him and could not speak peaceably about him. And Jacob would often compound their resentments when he sent Joseph into the fields to check up on how well his older brothers were tending the flocks.

One day Joseph's older brothers saw him coming from afar and they conspired against him. One said, "Behold, this dreamer cometh. Come now therefore, and let us slay him, and cast him into some pit, and we will say, Some evil beast hath devoured him: and we shall see what will become of his dreams." His older brother, Reuben, persuaded them not to slay Joseph but to cast him into the pit, for then his blood would not be on their hands. But Judah said to his brothers, "What profit is it if we slay our brother, and conceal his blood? Come, and let us sell him to the Ishmeelites, and let not our hand be upon him; for he is our brother and our flesh" (Genesis 37:19-27).

So Joseph was pulled out of the pit and sold to a caravan of Ishmaelites that was on its way to Egypt. What a change in this young man's life! Once favored of his father, he was carried away into a strange land with a strange tongue and a strange religion to be sold as a slave. But Joseph did not become discouraged. He apparently decided that if he had to be sold as a slave, he would present himself the best way he could so perhaps he would be purchased by someone who would give him an opportunity to improve his position in life.

Joseph presented himself so well that the captain of Pharaoh's guard purchased him. In Genesis 39:1-4, we read:

And Joseph was brought down to Egypt; and Potiphar, an officer of Pharaoh, captain of the guard, an Egyptian, bought him of the hands of the Ishmeelites, which had brought him down thither.

And the Lord was with Joseph, and he was a prosperous man; and he was in the house of his master the Egyptian.

And his master saw that the Lord was with him, and that the Lord made all that he did to prosper in his hand.

And Joseph found grace in his sight, and he served him: and he made him overseer over his house, and all that he had he put into his hand.

So Joseph rose from the status of common slave to be the chief servant in Potiphar's house.

Joseph's enthusiasm and work ethic were soon noticed by everyone in Potiphar's household, including Potiphar's wife. One day Joseph was alone in the house performing his work. Potiphar's wife seized this opportunity and tried to seduce Joseph. She "caught him by his garment, " but Joseph ran from her, leaving his garment in her hand (Genesis 39:12).

Later, Potiphar's wife told her husband that Joseph had made inappropriate advances toward her (Genesis 39:17-19). Potiphar was so upset that he had Joseph cast into prison. Again, Joseph, through no fault of his own, was down—but not out.

Joseph refused to become discouraged or depressed. If he had to be a prisoner, he would be the best prisoner in all the prison. His enthusiasm found favor in the sight of the keeper of the prison. He became chief among all the prisoners. This meant Joseph was responsible for all the prisoners in the prison. Once again, he had made the best out of a bad situation.

One day Pharaoh's chief butler and chief baker were cast into the prison that housed Joseph. While they were there, they each had a dream. They were troubled over their dreams and made them known to Joseph, and he interpreted them. According to Joseph's interpretation, the chief butler would be released from prison in three days, and his position would be restored, but the chief baker would be hanged in three days.

Joseph had asked the butler to make mention of him to Pharaoh that he might be brought out of prison to serve him. But when the chief butler was freed from prison, he forgot about Joseph for two years, until Pharaoh had a dream that no one could interpret. Then the butler told Pharaoh that there was a man in prison who could interpret his dreams. Joseph was brought from prison and, of course, he interpreted Pharaoh's dream. Pharaoh immediately recognized Joseph's character. He knew him to be a man of God. He approved Joseph to be over his house. In Genesis we read:

And the thing was good in the eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of all his servants.

And Pharaoh said unto his servants, Can we find such a one as this is, a man in whom the Spirit of God is?

And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, Forasmuch as God hath shewed thee all this, there is none so discreet and wise as thou art:

Thou shalt be over my house, and according unto thy word shall all my people be ruled: only in the throne will I be greater than thou.

And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, See, I have set thee over all the land of Egypt.

And Pharaoh took off his ring from his hand, and put it upon Joseph's hand, and arrayed him in vestures of fine linen, and put a gold chain about his neck;

And he made him to ride in the second chariot which he had; and they cried before him, Bow the knee: and he made him ruler over all the land of Egypt. (Genesis 41:37-43)

I am sure that the same thing that impresses me about Joseph impresses you. It is the spirit with which he accepted every trial, then turned it to his advantage. He is the exemplar of what Ralph Waldo Emerson meant when he said, "Nothing great was ever achieved without enthusiasm." [^1]

In my early years, I developed something of an inferiority complex. After all, I was part of a family in which my brothers and sisters all had great abilities. My older sister had remarkable artistic talent. She was always writing a story or poem that was used in church or in other community gatherings. I determined that since I was her brother, I must possess some artistic talent too. So I analyzed myself and determined that I since I had a strong voice I could become a great singer. I launched a childhood singing career only to discover that although my voice was strong, my range was very limited. In fact, I was a monotone, and the supply of music written in one note is extremely limited. I had to give up my singing career.

My next sister had great athletic ability. She could run faster, hit the ball farther, and catch better than any of the other children on our block. Surely I must have some of her ability, I reasoned. So I stood in front of the mirror and analyzed myself to determine what sport would be most suited to my special athletic abilities. It was obvious. I was taller than most and had average speed. I would become a great basketball player. Once again, I launched a new career. Unfortunately, it was nearly as brief as my singing career. After being hit in the head several times by passes from my teammates, I discovered that my reflexes were too slow to excel at basketball.

My next sister and my brother who was just younger than I were blessed with great minds. They both skipped grades in school, and they still managed to be ranked number one in all their classes. I used to wonder what might happen if they were ever forced to take a class together. Of course, I made no effort to compete with them.

It is interesting to read what my father wrote in his life's history about each of his children. He wrote an entire page about each one of them, reporting their many accomplishments—that is, everyone except me. About me, the only thing my father wrote was "Tom surprised us." That is all the good he could say about me.

Before you feel sorry for me, you should realize that in spite of my lack of talent, I was enthusiastic. I learned from a very early age what an asset my enthusiasm could be. At the dinner table, I complimented my mother so enthusiastically that she consistently gave me the biggest piece of pie. At school, I would raise my hand enthusiastically before my teacher even finished asking a question; fortunately, she would never call on me. As with Joseph, my enthusiasm often helped me turn disadvantages into advantages.

The true test of my enthusiasm came during the years I was an Explorer Scout. The Explorers in our ward had developed quite a reputation for playing volleyball. The year before I became an Explorer, they had gone to the all-Church tournament and placed second.

The year I became eligible to play volleyball, we had another good team. I went to the tryouts and did poorly. My heart was broken, but much to my surprise they selected me for the team anyway. I learned the reason some time later. You see, my father was the bishop of our ward, and the team needed new uniforms. They decided that with the bishop's son on the team, they stood a better chance of receiving new uniforms.

As I sat on the bench that year, I fine-tuned my one talent. I had more enthusiasm than anybody else on the team. I could fire up the players and the crowd while just sitting on the bench. We went all the way to the Church finals and came in second again.

The next year my enthusiasm increased. I even played a little bit. Again, our team went to the all-Church finals, and for the third year in a row we came in second. The fourth year, my final year of playing with the Explorer Scouts, I had the great honor of being elected the team captain. We had lost all of our talented players, and there was not much of a nucleus left. We lost most of our preseason games. The members of the ward who had given the team such solid support began to stop coming to our games. As the season progressed, however, we began to improve. First we won the stake tournament. Then we won the regional tournament. We surprised our entire ward when we won the area tournament and, for the fourth year in a row, found ourselves in the all-Church finals.

In the first game of the all-Church finals double elimination tournament, surprisingly, we won the consolation championship, which allowed us to come back and compete in the championship bracket. Once again we made it to the final round to play for the Church championship.

We lost the first game 15 to 4. Our coach called me aside between the first and the second games. He reminded me that we didn't have a great deal of talent, but it wasn't talent that won tournaments—it was enthusiasm. He told me to go out on the court and use my enthusiasm to convince my teammates that we could win. My enthusiasm must have helped. We won the second game 15 to 10.

The third game was played very evenly, 1 to 1, 2 to 2, all the way up to 10 to 10. Then one of our players discovered the middle man on the back row couldn't handle his serve, and the score went 11 to 10, 12 to 10, 13 to 10, 14 to 10. We were just one point away from ending a string of second-place finishes and becoming the all-Church champions.

I called time-out and huddled with my teammates. I instructed our server to hit the same spot and we would be Church champions. This time, however, the player on the other team handled the ball. He made an excellent setup to their best player, who pounded a vicious spike over the net. Fortunately, the ball hit one of our players in the chest and bounded off him. I could see the ball was rising to the perfect place and at the perfect angle for my spike. With a short run and a jump, I struck the ball with my fist with all the power I could muster. The ball hit the floor on the other side of the net, and we were the all-Church champions. Enthusiasm had carried us through.

I have never forgotten the lesson of enthusiasm that we learned in winning the all-Church volleyball championship. Someone has written that "enthusiasm is a telescope that advances the misty, distant future into the radiant, tangible present." I believe it. I have found throughout life that my only real talent, the talent of living enthusiastically, has enabled me to accomplish much more than my modest talents would have led anyone to expect. I surprised even my father.

Note

---
Notas:
[^1] The Oxford Dictionary of Quotations, 2d edition (London: Oxford University Press, 1950), p. 200.
