L. Tom Perry, Living with Enthusiasm ( 1996)

2

"Serve God Acceptably with Reverence and Godly Fear"

I have been thinking about reverence. While I believe that reverence is often exhibited through reverent behaviors, this has not been the focus of my thoughts. I have been more concerned about attitude—an attitude of deepest respect and veneration toward Deity. If we can cultivate reverent attitudes among the members of the Church, reverent behaviors will follow.

The scriptures remind us constantly that goodness is centered in the heart. Those who put on an appearance only to receive the honors of men, but have unclean hearts, are called hypocrites. It is not enough to behave reverently; we must feel in our hearts reverence for our Heavenly Father and our Lord, Jesus Christ. Reverence flows from our admiration and respect for Deity. Those who are truly reverent are those who have paid the price to know the glory of the Father and his Son. As Paul admonished, we "serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear" (Hebrews 12:28).

The story of Alma the Younger provides a wonderful illustration of the reverence we feel in our hearts when we come to know God. As a young man, Alma chose to be sinful and worldly. He was so astonished when an angel appeared to him to call him to repentance that he became mute and so weak that he could not move.

After two days and two nights, when Alma's limbs received their strength, he stood up and began to speak unto the people about how he had been redeemed of the Lord. Alma was born again. He was a new creature. His heart had changed.

In chapter 27 of Mosiah, verse 29, Alma describes his marvelous transformation: "My soul hath been redeemed from the gall of bitterness and bonds of iniquity. I was in the darkest abyss; but now I behold the marvelous light of God. My soul was racked with eternal torment; but I am snatched, and my soul is pained no more."

Then in verse 31, we see evidence of Alma's deep reverence for God: "Yea, every knee shall bow, and every tongue confess before him. Yea, even at the last day, when all men shall stand to be judged of him, then shall they confess that he is God; then shall they confess, who live without God in the world, that the judgment of an everlasting punishment is just upon them; and they shall quake, and tremble, and shrink beneath the glance of his all-searching eye."

Alma's experience had enabled him to understand the glory of God, and also "godly fear." He held the deepest respect and veneration for God. Having seen "the marvelous light of God, " he recognized God's power and majesty.

Several years ago I had the opportunity of traveling with the president of the Church to attend a series of area conferences. I will never forget the contrast between two conferences that were held just a few days apart. The first area conference was held in a large arena, and as we sat on the stand we noticed continuous movement by the people. We saw individuals throughout the arena leaning over and whispering to family members and friends seated next to them. Giving the members the benefit of the doubt, we attributed the general lack of reverence to the nature of the facility.

A few days later, we were in another country attending another area conference in an arena much like the first. When we entered the arena, however, an immediate hush came over the congregation. As we sat through the two-hour general session, there was very little movement among the people. Everyone listened intently. Great attention and respect was shown all the speakers, and when the prophet spoke, it was so quiet in the arena that you could have heard a pin drop.

After the meeting was over, I asked the priesthood leaders what they had done to prepare the people for the conference. They told me that their preparations had been simple. They had asked priesthood holders to explain to the members of their families, and also the families they home taught, that at the area conference they would be hearing the words of the prophet and the apostles. The priesthood leaders explained that the reverence their people felt for God and his servants was the basis for their reverent behavior at the conference.

I remember as a young child being taught a valuable lesson by my bishop. President Heber J. Grant had just visited our community to dedicate our new meetinghouse. Our bishop was so impressed with the dedicatory prayer that the next Tuesday when we went to Primary, he attended with us. He wanted to teach us to have respect for the building because it had been dedicated as a place of worship.

The bishop took us on a tour of our new chapel and showed us the various features of the building to impress upon us that it was now a house dedicated to the Lord. First he pointed to the back of the hall, where the beehive emblem had been painted above the back exit doors. He explained that the beehive was the emblem of industry to the early pioneers. "The bees are ever busy bringing honey and sweetness into the hive, " he said. The beehive painted on our wall was to be a reminder of the importance of being industrious each day and gathering the good things of this world and bringing them with us to share as we worshipped in Sunday services.

Then he pointed to the large painting on the front wall depicting the arrival of the pioneers into the Salt Lake Valley. He spoke to us about the sacrifices the pioneers had made for us by coming west and building our cities and the first houses of worship so that we could partake of the Spirit of the Lord and be instructed in the Lord's ways.

The bishop directed our attention to two other paintings, one on each side of the large painting of the pioneers. The painting on the right was of the Prophet Joseph Smith, and the one on the left was of President Brigham Young. The bishop spent time telling us about the reverence we should have for the prophets, and he told us we should heed their words of counsel. Then he reminded us of President Grant's trip and described some of the sacrifices he had made in order to come and dedicate this building and commend it to the care and keeping of the Lord.

The bishop explained the motif that ran around the entire chapel. It was of a dart and an egg, repeated over and over again. He discussed why this motif was selected—the egg signifying new life, the dart signifying the end of life. The egg was a reminder of our mortal birth and the time we have on earth to be taught and trained in the ways of the Lord, to be obedient to his will, and to participate in the sacred ordinances that qualify us to return to his presence. The dart represented the time of transition from mortality to immortality. He reminded us that if we proved ourselves worthy, we would be blessed with the greatest gift of God, the gift of eternal life.

Finally, for a special emphasis, the bishop focused our attention on the sacrament table. He instructed us about the purpose of the sacrament, explaining that it was a time to renew our baptismal covenants and to remember the atoning sacrifice of our Lord and Savior. The bishop then concluded with an appeal to each of us to always be reverent in this house, which had been dedicated to the Lord.

Witnessing the dedication of our chapel by a prophet of God and attending the tour guided by my bishop impressed me greatly. I realized that every time I entered the chapel I was entering a holy place. It was not difficult for me to be reverent at church, because all around me there were reminders of the Lord, his servants, and his eternal plan for me. These reminders reinforced my reverent attitude, and reverent behavior followed.

Of course, today's meetinghouses are not constructed with the same design features as the building where I attended church as a boy. However, all Latter-day Saint meetinghouses center on the mission of our Savior. The chapels within these buildings are rooms dedicated for the purpose of worshipping him. Today's bishops may not be able to instruct the Primary as my former bishop did, because our chapels are usually occupied during Primary time. The responsibility to teach children about the chapel as a place of reverence may shift to parents. Perhaps the parents of the Church could find time to be alone with their children in the chapel and explain to them that it is a special place, dedicated to the Lord, wherein only reverent attitudes and behaviors are acceptable.

If reverence is an attitude toward Deity, then it is a private feeling. It is something we feel inside our hearts no matter what is going on around us. It is also a personal responsibility. We cannot blame others for disturbing our reverent attitudes.

Where, then, does developing a reverent attitude begin? The home is the key to reverence, as it is to every other godlike virtue. It is during personal and family prayer that little ones learn how to bow their heads, fold their arms, and close their eyes while our Father in Heaven is being addressed. Reverence is taught when a mother takes time to be certain that during each day there is a quiet period, devoid of the hustle and bustle of daily activities, during which just parents and children have time together in quiet solitude for reflection and teaching.

It is taught during family home evenings, which are a part of our home life, where children are taught that there are special times, not only at church but at home, when we learn of our Heavenly Father and when everyone needs to be on their best behavior. Behavior learned at home determines behavior in church meetings. A child who has learned to pray at home understands that he must be quiet and still during prayers in worship services.

One Sunday my granddaughter Diana, who was four years old at the time, was sitting next to her father at church. Diana sat reverently, enjoying the comfort of her father's arm holding her close to him. When the bishop stood up and announced the sacrament hymn, however, Diana gently lifted her father's arm from her shoulder and placed it in his lap. Then she sat up straight and folded her arms. She looked over at her father and encouraged him to do the same.

Diana's message to her father was perfectly clear. She was telling him to turn his complete and total attention to the Savior. This is the message a reverent attitude always conveys, and when reverent attitudes abound, reverent behaviors flourish. I pray that, like Diana, we may all strive to develop reverent attitudes so we may "serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear" (Hebrews 12:28).

Let us ever understand the value of our personal example of devotion and respect for him whom we call "Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace" (Isaiah 9:6). Let us begin with the development of reverent attitudes, then behave reverently as we honor him who is the bread of life.
