L. Tom Perry, Living with Enthusiasm ( 1996)

3

"Train Up a Child"

In Proverbs 22:6, we read, "Train up a child in the way he should go: and when he is old, he will not depart from it."

The Lord has been very specific in his instructions to parents in this day. In the Doctrine and Covenants we read:

And again, inasmuch as parents have children in Zion, or in any of her stakes which are organized, that teach them not to understand the doctrine of repentance, faith in Christ the Son of the living God, and of baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of the hands, when eight years old, the sin be upon the heads of the parents. . . .

And they shall also teach their children to pray, and to walk uprightly before the Lord. (D&C 68:25, 28)

The language of this scripture is direct, and it leaves no room for misunderstanding. The responsibility for training children rests squarely on the shoulders of their parents.

Many years ago, I had the great pleasure of serving as second counselor in the Sunday School presidency, with specific responsibility for what was then the Junior Sunday School. Each Sunday I would watch a particular father bring his son to Sunday School. The boy would be crying and screaming, begging not to be turned over to the teacher. I watched the father take him up to his classroom, push him through the door, and then hold the doorknob on the other side so the son could not leave, while inside the classroom the boy's teacher tried to comfort him. It was almost as if the father were saying, "I haven't the patience or the time to train this young man. I am turning him over to you, teacher, to teach him how to be reverent in his Sunday School class."

I had almost the same feeling some time ago when I spent a few hours with the president of Brigham Young University. I had asked for an appointment to discuss with him what the priesthood could do to help students live in accordance with the honor code at BYU. The honor code (which all BYU students agree to follow while attending the university) specifies acceptable and unacceptable behaviors for students at that institution. As I listened to the leader of that great university, I was reminded of my experience in Junior Sunday School many years ago. I had the feeling that many parents were bringing their children to the doorstep of BYU, pushing them through the door, then holding onto the doorknob, expecting the university to assume the responsibility for training up their children.

This same feeling comes to me occasionally when I interview missionaries who are experiencing difficulties in the mission field. Some parents must think, "If only we can send our child on a mission, it will make up for the many years we have neglected to teach him or her the principles of the gospel."

Of course, the large majority of the students entering Brigham Young University, as well as the young men and women serving missions throughout the world, have been trained in good homes. Their conduct is exemplary. However, a small percentage of both students and missionaries leave home with serious unresolved problems, and trends indicate the number is increasing. My message to the parents of these children—and in fact to the parents of all children—is this: the core work of shaping our children's beliefs and character cannot be delegated to an outside source. Parents must take the time and have the patience to ensure in a carefully planned, organized way that the foundation of gospel teachings is laid in their homes.

President Ezra Taft Benson said, "If we continue with present trends, we can expect to have more emotionally disturbed young people, more divorce, more depression, and more suicide. The family is the most effective place to instill lasting values in its members. Where family life is strong and based on principles and practices of the gospel of Jesus Christ, these problems do not as readily appear." [^1]

At the time I was a new parent, President David O. McKay presided over the Church. His counsel was clear and direct regarding parents' responsibilities to their children. He taught that the most precious gift a man and woman can receive is a child of God, and that the rearing of a child is basically, fundamentally, and exclusively a spiritual process.

He directed parents on the basic principles needed to teach their children. He emphasized that the first and most important inner quality a parent can instill in a child is faith in God, that the first and most important action a child can learn is obedience, and that the most powerful tool parents have as they teach a child is love. [^2] We will examine these three basic principles.

President Brigham Young instructed parents by saying, "If each and every one of us who are parents will reflect upon the responsibilities devolving upon us we shall come to the conclusion that we should never permit ourselves to do anything that we are not willing to see our children do. We should set them an example that we wish them to imitate." [^3]

The best way for parents to instill faith is to have faith. Children must see their parents on their knees daily, asking for God's blessings and expressing their gratitude to him. Children need to see fathers using their priesthood to administer to family members in need of a blessing. They need to see parents reverently worshipping in our sacrament meetings. They need to see parents cheerfully and willingly giving of their time and talents to the building of the Lord's kingdom here on earth. They need to see parents proving their faith by the payment of tithes and offerings. They need to see parents diligently studying and discussing the scriptures to increase their faith and understanding.

Recently I read an article about a study to determine the benefits of reading to children. It stated that when a mother or a father consistently reads to a child, the child performs at a much higher level in the early grades of school. Parents have many options from which to choose when they read to their children. Why not introduce the principles of the gospel through Bible and Book of Mormon stories, stories of latter-day prophets, and stories from family histories? Certainly, if parents will be faithful in teaching gospel ideals to their children, they will deepen the faith of their children.

The second principle President McKay recommended was for our children to learn obedience. President Joseph Fielding Smith said:

Of course there should be prayer and faith and love and obedience to God in the home. It is the duty of parents to teach their children these saving principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ, so that they will know why they are to be baptized and that they may be impressed in their hearts with a desire to continue to keep the commandments of God after they are baptized, that they may come back into his presence. Do you, my good brethren and sisters, want your families, your children; do you want to be sealed to your fathers and your mothers before you . . . ? If so, then you must begin by teaching at the cradle-side. You are to teach by example as well as precept. [^4]

I remember one time when I was especially impressed by the need to teach obedience to one of my children. I had just started a new job that required me to work long hours, and I admit I was somewhat neglectful of my family. My son seemed to crave more time and attention from me, and he was showing it by finding all sorts of ways to disobey. One day when I came home, his mother had him prepared to take me downstairs to show me the most recent damage from his mischief. As we descended the stairs, he sheepishly opened the door to our food storage room. There I found he had been practicing his marksmanship on our food storage with his dart set. He caught my attention all right! I realized he was looking to me to set expectations and standards for his behavior. We had a long talk. I laid down the law, but I also committed to be a better father. My son responded as most young children would: he became more obedient.

It is absolutely essential that we teach obedience early in the lives of our children, especially obedience to the commandments of God.

The third principle President McKay taught was the necessity of love. I have always been impressed that when the Lord was teaching his disciples at the Last Supper, he served them by washing their feet, and then he taught them about love. He said, "A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another" (John 13:34).

I once read a Reader's Digest article about enduring values. It stated:

The climate of our times tends to support the idea that love is like a seasonal monsoon: it comes, it blows fiercely; it goes by. That is too bad, because a child needs the kind of love that is as trustworthy as the rising of the sun. If a child is to grow up to truly join the human race, he needs to know how to keep love alive.

A child should learn not merely to love but to be a loving person, to make love his stance in the world. "Love" may come and go, but a loving person, like the sun itself, never loses his [or her] sustaining warmth. [^5]

I challenge the members of the Church to pause, ponder, and think of the value of an immortal soul, especially one entrusted to them as parents. Where are your priorities? Have you committed yourself to give necessary and sufficient time to train your children?

Professor Nick Stinnett of the University of Nebraska gave a most interesting talk at an annual meeting of the National Council on Family Relations. He discussed characteristics of strong families. His six points were:

We who have embraced the gospel of Jesus Christ ought to demonstrate the devotion and determination necessary to build strong family units. May God bless us that we may "organize [ourselves]; prepare every needful thing, and establish a house" that will provide the fundamental values of faith, obedience, and love for our children (D&C 109:8). May we train up our children in the ways that they should go, and may they never depart from them (see Proverbs 22:6).

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Spencer W. Kimball, Faith Precedes the Miracle (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1972), p. 256.
[^2] Spencer W. Kimball, The Miracle of Forgiveness (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1969), p. 8.
[^3] Conference Report, October 1937, p. 107.
[^4] Conference Report, April 1938, p. 103.
[^5] Harold B. Lee, "The Iron Rod," Ensign, June 1971, p. 7.
