L. Tom Perry, Living with Enthusiasm ( 1996)

5

Back to Gospel Basics

That they themselves may be prepared, and that my people may be taught more perfectly, and have experience, and know more perfectly concerning their duty, and the things which I require at their hands. —D&C 105:10

Until recently, part of my assignment included the country of Peru, an area of the world that is experiencing great turmoil. Inflation and internal strife have been robbing the Peruvian people of almost any hope of stability in their lives.

It has been difficult for the General Authorities to visit Peru regularly because of the dangers of traveling there. Therefore, it has been necessary for the Peruvian members to assume much more responsibility for priesthood and auxiliary leadership and for full-time missionary service.

The area presidency that oversees Peru recognized the need to fortify the members of the Church there, and after much prayer and fasting, they decided to emphasize just two basic teachings of the gospel. They prepared a letter to be delivered to every Peruvian family. The theme of their letter, in which they stressed family prayers and family scripture study, was "Being Converted to the Lord."

The area presidency taught these principles to stake presidencies, who, in turn, instructed their high councils and bishops. The bishops then instructed ward members, and the home teachers delivered to each family unit a follow-up letter in which family heads were encouraged to lead their families in daily prayer and scripture study.

The blessings that have come to the Peruvian Saints from daily prayer and scripture study have been most remarkable. It soon became evident that faith and testimony were increasing among members of the Church there. There has been a significant increase in sacrament meeting attendance, which has resulted in a greater sense of community and increased interest among the Saints in loving and caring for each other. Though travel to the temple has become increasingly difficult and dangerous, surprisingly, temple attendance has increased significantly.

The number of Peruvian full-time missionaries immediately began to increase. Now the seven missions in Peru fill nearly all their full-time missionary needs with native Peruvians, and they send missionaries out to serve in other nations as well. Full-time missionaries are arriving in the field better prepared to serve, which, of course, has resulted in an increase in convert baptisms.

A renewed emphasis on two basic gospel practices—daily prayer and scripture study—created a dramatic change and offered increased spirituality and works among the Saints.

The success of the Peruvian Saints should teach all of us the importance of adhering to the basics of a gospel-centered life. Let us consider again the blessings promised us if we faithfully practice daily family prayer and daily family scripture study.

The scriptures are filled with admonitions to stay close to the Lord and call upon his holy name in prayer. In the latter days of the ministry of Alma the Younger, he instructed his sons on how they should live. After Alma's remarkable conversion, he spent his life proclaiming the gospel and perfecting the Saints. Before he died, he wanted to instill in his sons a desire to be obedient to God's will. To Helaman he said:

O, remember, my son, and learn wisdom in thy youth; yea, learn in thy youth to keep the commandments of God.

Yea, and cry unto God for all thy support; yea, let all thy doings be unto the Lord, and whithersoever thou goest let it be in the Lord; yea, let all thy thoughts be directed unto the Lord; yea, let the affections of thy heart be placed upon the Lord forever.

Counsel with the Lord in all thy doings, and he will direct thee for good; yea, when thou liest down at night lie down unto the Lord, that he may watch over you in your sleep; and when thou risest in the morning let thy heart be full of thanks unto God; and if ye do these things, ye shall be lifted up at the last day. (Alma 37:35-37)

Prayer is the primary means of communication between God and man. Prayer is an important part of practically every religion, whether it be Christian or otherwise. The Prophet Joseph Smith, speaking on the subject of prayer, stated, "Seek to know God in your closets, call upon him in the fields. Follow the directions of the Book of Mormon, and pray over, and for your families, your cattle, your flocks, your herds, your corn, and all things that you possess; ask the blessing of God upon all your labors, and everything that you engage in." [^1]

When we pray to the Lord, we should remember who we are addressing and be prepared to give him our undivided attention as we humbly supplicate him. President John Taylor counseled us this way: "Do you have prayers in your family? . . . And when you do, do you go through the operation like the grinding of a piece of machinery, or do you bow in meekness and with a sincere desire to seek the blessing of God upon you and your household? That is the way that we ought to do, and cultivate a spirit of devotion and trust in God, dedicating ourselves to him, and seeking his blessings." [^2]

As parents, it is clearly our duty to teach our children to pray. Regular family prayers establish patterns that bless future generations. It is good to use the sacred pronouns of the scriptures, thee, thou, thy, and thine, when addressing Deity in prayer, instead of the more common pronouns you, your, and yours. By so doing, we show greater respect for our Heavenly Father.

It is so satisfying to know that God is mindful of us and ready to respond when we place our trust in him. Why should men and women fear when they humble themselves in seeking divine guidance from the Almighty through frequent and consistent prayer? Though difficulties may arise and reverses may come, in our prayers we can find reassurance as the Lord speaks peace to our souls.

On several occasions President Benson shared the poem "Prayer, " by Eliza M. Hickok, with the members of the Church. It is a poem he learned while he was in the Aaronic Priesthood:

I know not by what methods rare, But this I know, God answers prayer. I know that He has given His Word, Which tells me prayer is always heard, And will be answered, soon or late. And so I pray and calmly wait. I know not if the blessing sought Will come in just the way I thought; But leave my prayers with him alone, Whose will is wiser than my own, Assured that He will grant my quest, Or send some answer far more blest. [^3]

Among the Peruvian Saints, who live in a nation racked with heartache and despair, there has emerged a stronger faith and devotion to our Father in Heaven because they heeded the counsel of his servants to hold daily family prayer. And a special maturing in the gospel has developed among the members of the Church in Peru because they added to their daily family prayers the practice of having daily family scripture study. When the revealed words of the prophets found their way into the hearts of the Saints, these words of counsel brought about a mighty change in the way the people lived and believed. Questions, personal problems, and important concerns were resolved for them by the inspired counsel of the scriptures.

All the standard works of the Church instruct us to read and ponder the scriptures. From the Old Testament we read, "Seek ye out of the book of the Lord, and read" (Isaiah 34:16). From the New Testament, "Search the scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal life: and they are they which testify of me" (John 5:39). Nephi, in the Book of Mormon, observes, "My soul delighteth in the scriptures, and my heart pondereth them, and writeth them for the learning and the profit of my children" (2 Nephi 4:15). Counsel from the Pearl of Great Price promises, "And whoso treasureth up my word, shall not be deceived" (Joseph Smith— Matthew 1:37). And finally, in the Doctrine and Covenants we read, "First seek to obtain my word . . . ; study my word which hath gone forth among the children of men" (D&C 11:21-22).

The scriptures are some of our greatest treasures. They contain the Lord's instructions to his people from the beginning of time. In a world so full of the doctrines of men, we are grateful to have the sure anchor of the scriptures to secure our faith. Of the Book of Mormon, President Marion G. Romney said:

If our young folks are traditioned in the teachings of the Book of Mormon, they will not only be inspired with righteous courage to choose the right by the example of Nephi, the "two thousand sons of Helaman, " and other great characters of the book, they will also be so schooled in the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ that they will know what is right.

From almost every page of the book, there will come to them a moving testimony that Jesus is indeed the Christ, the Son of the Living God, our Redeemer and Savior. This witness alone will be a sustaining anchor in every storm. [^4]

In the Lord's instructions to his children, we find sublime consistency. What the Lord has declared to be right will always be right. What he has declared to be true will always be true. What he has declared to be sinful will always be sinful. Rest assured that when the so-called "enlightened" doctrines of men contradict the holy scriptures, these doctrines of the world bring only heartache, disappointment, and destruction to the souls of mankind.

President Benson counseled us concerning searching the scriptures: "Let us not treat lightly the great things we have received from the hand of the Lord! His word is one of the most valuable gifts He has given us. I urge you to recommit yourselves to a study of the scriptures. Immerse yourselves in them daily. . . . Read them in your families and teach your children to love and treasure them. Then prayerfully and in counsel with others, seek every way possible to encourage the members of the Church to follow your example." [^5]

My counsel to all members of this worldwide church is to recommit yourselves to these two basic practices that have been the source of so many blessings for the Saints in Peru. Never let a day go by without holding family prayer and family scripture study. Put this, the Lord's program, to the test, and see if it does not bless your home with greater peace, hope, love, and faith.

I promise you that daily family prayer and scripture study will build within the walls of your home a security and bonding that will enrich your lives and prepare your families to meet the challenges of today and the eternities to come.

May God grant unto us the desire to seek him reverently and humbly in prayer and in the earnest and sincere study of his word, as contained in his holy scriptures.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Orson F. Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1945), pp. 265-66.
[^2] John Taylor, in Journal of Discourses, 21:118.
[^3] Eliza M. Hickok, "Prayer, " The Best Loved Religious Poems, ed. James Gilchrist Lawson (New York: Fleming H. Revell Co., 1933), p. 160.
[^4] Conference Report, April 1960, p. 112.
[^5] Ezra Taft Benson, "The Power of the Word, " Ensign, May 1986, p. 82.
