L. Tom Perry, Living with Enthusiasm ( 1996)

6

"Be Familiar with All and Free with Your Substance"

The Book of Mormon, that great and ancient record of the Nephite nation, offers us the special perspective that comes only from studying what is roughly one thousand years of human history. We see the cycles of nations as they turn to and then away from righteousness. We see the unity that comes from a faith in God and a desire to build his kingdom. And we see the dissension that results when the hearts of the people turn to selfish wants and desires, to the pleasures of the flesh, to riches and worldly possessions.

One of the first warnings from a prophet to the ancient American people is found in the second chapter of Jacob. Jacob denounces his people's love of riches and the pride that has found a place in their hearts. He implores them to turn their hearts again to the Lord:

The hand of providence hath smiled upon you most pleasingly, that you have obtained many riches; and because some of you have obtained more abundantly than that of your brethren ye are lifted up in the pride of your hearts, and wear stiff necks and high heads because of the costliness of your apparel, and persecute your brethren because ye suppose that ye are better than they.

And now, my brethren, do ye suppose that God justifieth you in this thing? Behold, I say unto you, Nay. But he condemneth you, and if ye persist in these things his judgments must speedily come unto you. (Jacob 2:13-14)

Often the turning away from the Lord described in these verses of scripture accompanies prosperity. Those who are more prosperous become filled with pride, and they look down on their brothers and sisters who have less, thinking them inferior. Although Jacob does not say it, this process can also work the other way. Those who are less fortunate begin to feel deprived. They become consumed by what they do not have, blaming others for their predicament. Often, they will also blame the Lord, and turn their hearts away from him.

The important point to remember is this: the Lord is displeased with preoccupation with worldly possessions, for more often than not the result is a lack of occupation with building his kingdom. This undesired outcome is as likely to result from having too little as too much.

Jacob counsels further, "Think of your brethren like unto yourselves, and be familiar with all and free with your substance, that they may be rich like unto you" (Jacob 2:17).

What we see in this scripture is a direct application of the second great commandment to love our neighbors as ourselves. Jacob tells his people not to discriminate against their brothers and sisters who have less than they do but to share what they have with them. He continues:

But before ye seek for riches, seek ye for the kingdom of God.

And after ye have obtained a hope in Christ ye shall obtain riches, if ye seek them; and ye will seek them for the intent to do good—to clothe the naked, and to feed the hungry, and to liberate the captive, and administer relief to the sick and the afflicted. (Jacob 2:18-19)

Often it is the order of things that is fundamental in the Lord's instructions to us. The Lord is not telling us that we should not be prosperous. This would be inconsistent with the many records we have of his blessing his people with prosperity. But he is telling us that we should seek prosperity only after we have sought and found him. Then, because our hearts are right, because we love him first and foremost, we will choose to invest the riches we obtain in building his kingdom.

As we have been told by our prophets, one of the important reasons the Book of Mormon record was kept and, through miraculous circumstances, placed into the hands of Joseph Smith to be translated was to serve as a warning to the people of this generation. Accordingly, we need to take Jacob's counsel to his people to heart. We should read this scripture as though it were written expressly for us in these days, because it was. His words should cause us to ask soul-searching questions of ourselves. Is the order of things right in our own lives? Are we investing, first and foremost, in things that are eternal in nature? Do we have an eternal perspective? Or have we fallen into the trap of investing in the things of this world first, and then forgetting the Lord?

These are difficult questions to answer. Let me propose a simple tool to direct our thinking. Many businesses will measure their activities against those of businesses considered to be the best in their class. These comparisons set a standard that, while difficult to attain, inspires continuous striving and improvement. In a similar manner, stories of the early leaders of the Church have always been helpful to me as examples of what it means to place the kingdom of God first. Perhaps the characters in these stories are the people against whose lives we should measure our own.

The stories of our early Church leaders really began to live for me when I was a young missionary. In those days, missionaries were not blessed with the many teaching aids that we have today. We had our scriptures and a big, black box that contained a record player and a set of records entitled "The Fulness of Times." These records presented an account of the early history of the Church from the First Vision to the Nauvoo period.

There was one episode depicted on the records that would always bring tears to my eyes as my companions and I listened to it. It was the account of Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball, who left their wives, children, and humble homes to journey to Great Britain in response to their calls to serve in that faraway land. Elder Orson F. Whitney quotes Heber C. Kimball's record of the event:

"September 14th, " says Heber, "President Brigham Young left his home at Montrose to start on the mission to England. He was so sick that he was unable to go to the Mississippi, a distance of thirty rods, without assistance. After he had crossed the river he rode behind Israel Barlow on his horse to my house, where he continued sick until the 18th. He left his wife sick with a babe only three weeks old, and all his other children were sick and unable to wait upon each other. Not one soul of them was able to go to the well for a pail of water, and they were without a second suit to their backs, for the mob in Missouri had taken nearly all he had. On the 17th, Sister Mary Ann Young got a boy to carry her up in his wagon to my house, that she might nurse and comfort Brother Brigham to the hour of starting.

"September 18th, Charles Hubbard sent his boy with a wagon and span of horses to my house; our trunks were put into the wagon by some brethren; I went to my bed and shook hands with my wife who was then shaking with a chill, having two children lying sick by her side; I embraced her and my children, and bade them farewell. My only well child was little Heber P., and it was with difficulty he could carry a couple of quarts of water at a time, to assist in quenching their thirst.

"It was with difficulty we got into the wagon, and started down the hill about ten rods; it appeared to me as though my very inmost parts would melt within me at leaving my family in such a condition, as it were almost in the arms of death. I felt as though I could not endure it. I asked the teamster to stop, and said to Brother Brigham, 'This is pretty tough, isn't it; let's rise up and give them a cheer.' We arose, and swinging our hats three times over our heads, shouted: 'Hurrah, hurrah for Israel.' Vilate, hearing the noise, arose from her bed and came to the door. She had a smile on her face. Vilate and Mary Ann Young cried out to us: 'Goodbye, God bless you.' We returned the compliment, and then told the driver to go ahead. After this I felt a spirit of joy and gratitude, having had the satisfaction of seeing my wife standing upon her feet, instead of leaving her in bed, knowing well that I should not see them again for two or three years." [^1]

I have often wondered how these brethren, as valiant as they were, could do what they did. Truly they were willing to make any sacrifice asked of them to build the kingdom of God. Truly they were laying up "treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt" (Matthew 6:20).

There is something else about this story, however, that has always intrigued me. As Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball left on their missions to Great Britain, there appeared to be a lot of support from their brethren to help them on their way. Israel Barlow assisted Brigham Young as he traveled to Heber Kimball's house. Several days later, Charles Hubbard sent his son with a wagon to the Kimball home to assist the two missionaries as they began their long journey. Many other good Saints assisted them, offering food and housing, medical care, transportation, and even cash donations.

If we look carefully at this story, we catch a glimpse of the unity that must have existed among the Saints in those early days. As husbands and fathers would leave for missionary service, their departure was made easier because they knew that brothers, sisters, priesthood leaders, and friends would step in to help fill the void created by their absence.These brethren were able to invest in building the kingdom of God in faraway lands because they knew that others would be investing in building the kingdom at home, by offering their loved ones whatever assistance was needed. There was a unique bonding, a special faith in the community of Saints, who were dedicated to a common goal, a common purpose. If we return to Jacob's counsel to his people, we see the same message communicated as he instructs them to be familiar with all and to share freely of their substance (see Jacob 2:17).

What this suggests to me is that if we look at how we treat our brothers and sisters in the Church, we can tell whether or not we put the kingdom of God first. Is there a special bond uniting us? Is there an absence of envy and backbiting? Do we rejoice in the success of a brother or sister as much as our own? Do we share of our substance so all may be rich like unto us? Ultimately, are we our brothers' and sisters' keepers?

As I travel throughout the Church I marvel at all the positive things that are occurring, yet I never feel that we, as a people, are living up to all of our potential. My sense is that we do not always work together, that we are still too much consumed by personal aspirations for the honors of men, and that we show too little interest in the common goal of building the Lord's kingdom.

When we look at all the Lord asks of us, it can sometimes seem overwhelming. Of course, where much has been given, much is expected. I believe it is helpful when faced with an enormous challenge to view it as a step-by-step process. We begin by taking the first step, then continue by taking one step at a time. I am certain that the Lord is pleased even with our small beginnings, because in his infinite wisdom he knows that small things often become great things.

The first step is for us to deepen our commitment to the Lord and his glorious work. Again, this is a commitment to place his work first in our hearts and minds. Our subsequent steps are guided by this initial commitment but can, of course, take several directions.

We can help by serving our brothers and sisters in the Church. We can go to those who have not yet received the gospel and convert them to its truth. We can go to the temple and perform this same redeeming work for the dead. As we engage in the work of the Lord, he will increase our capacity as we increase our desire. We will pull closer together as a people engaged in a common effort. Through sacrifices we make for one another and for God, we will realize our potential as Heavenly Father's children and prepare the way for the eventual, glorious return of the Savior.

May each of us accept this challenge to seek the kingdom of God before and above anything else, and by so doing may we draw closer together as a people until we are of one heart and one mind.

Note

---
Notas:
[^1] The breakdown of the family and rapid increase of divorce. See Will Durant, The Foundation of Civilization (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1936), pp. 9-10; Will and Ariel Durant, The Lessons of History (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1968), pp. 87-94.
