L. Tom Perry, Living with Enthusiasm ( 1996)

7

"Consider Your Ways"

Some time ago, I read an article that addressed the question of differences in wealth among various nations. The article's author asked why certain nations succeed at developing wealth-creating economies while others fail. This is a complex question, and no single answer can explain everything; but according to the article, a lot can be explained by differences in national cultures. The countries that are successful at creating wealth stress education, freedom, delayed gratification, mutual trust, and hard work.

Let me posit an alternative hypothesis: The success of a nation depends on its people's knowledge of God and their obedience to his commandments. The relationship is as simple and straightforward as the Lord's words to Joseph Smith: "I, the Lord, am bound when ye do what I say; but when ye do not what I say, ye have no promise" (D&C 82:10).

There is a strong correlation between the success of nations and their knowledge and obedience to God's commandments. His commandments stress education (see D&C 88:118); freedom and agency (see D&C 58:28); delayed gratification and an emphasis on matters of eternal, not worldly, value (see Matthew 6:19-21; Luke 16:20-31); trust in the Lord (see 2 Nephi 4:34); and hard work (Moroni 9:6).

In the first chapter of Haggai, we read:

Now therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts; Consider your ways.

Ye have sown much, and bring in little; ye eat, but ye have not enough; ye drink, but ye are not filled with drink; ye clothe you, but there is none warm; and he that earneth wages earneth wages to put it into a bag with holes.

Thus saith the Lord of hosts; Consider your ways. (Haggai 1:5-7)

The context of these verses of scripture is interesting. The people of Israel were delaying the construction of the temple of Zerubbabel. The Lord spoke through his prophet, Haggai, and warned the people to reorder their priorities and build the temple. When he told the people to consider their ways, he reminded them that blessings are not entitlements but rather are contingent on obedience to his word. He threatened to withhold his blessings unless the people commenced work on his house. Fortunately, the people did consider their ways, and "they came and did work in the house of the Lord of hosts, their God" (Haggai 1:14).

Will Durant, the noted historian, summarized the reasons for the fall of the Roman Empire as follows:

In other words, the fall of the Roman Empire resulted from breakdowns of the nuclear family, of financial discipline, of morality, and of religious traditions.

Are we not simply repeating history? While these problems may manifest themselves in different ways, they are as prevalent today as they were at the time immediately preceding the fall of Rome. Moreover, they all represent direct violations of God's commandments. Isn't it time that we consider our ways? Shouldn't we contemplate our roles as spouses and parents, battle the worldliness and immorality that surrounds us, and work to deepen our religious beliefs?

Consider your family. Among the first instructions given to man and woman was this injunction: "Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife: and they shall be one flesh" (Genesis 2:24).

God, in his divine plan, ordained marriage to bring about his basic organizational unit, the family. The roles of husband and wife were clearly defined from the beginning. In the Lord's plan, these roles are unchanged and eternal.

The Lord has given to men the responsibility to be providers and protectors. If the Lord's plan is to work, men must learn how to perform the leadership role he has designed for them. Husbands, could I remind you of some of your leadership requirements?

First, the Lord's warnings about the practice of "unrighteous dominion" (see D&C 121:39-44) apply equally as well to husbands as to Church leaders. Your wives are not your subordinates. They are not your counselors. They are your eternal companions and equals. Always remember, the presidency of an eternal family is a shared presidency.

Second, in most cases, a husband should be the primary provider for the family. Often, sacrifice is required of husbands to prepare themselves to provide adequately for their families. Moreover, husbands should assist members of their families in distinguishing between wants and basic needs. Families do not need everything they want. Often, the unchecked fulfillment of wants places unnecessary financial burdens on families.

Third, husbands have a twenty-four-hour-a-day job showing appreciation and consideration for their wives. A prophet has said of womanhood, "A beautiful, modest, gracious woman is creation's masterpiece." [^2] A husband has the responsibility to safeguard this masterpiece, who is his wife.

The examples of our most recent prophets—from President McKay to President Hinckley—define the way husbands should treat their wives. A righteous husband's greatest concern should be his wife's happiness.

Second only in importance to being an eternal companion is being an eternal parent. Fathers and mothers, consider your ways. My children taught me a great lesson many years ago. Our family had just moved from California to New York City, where I had accepted a position with a new company. We began the process of finding a new home by looking in the communities closest to the city. Gradually, however, we moved farther away from the city to find a home and neighborhood more suited to our needs. In New Canaan, Connecticut, we found our dream home. It was a beautiful one-story house nestled in the lovely, dark, and deep woods of New England.

The final test before purchasing the home was for me to ride the commuter train to New York City to check how long it took. I made the trip and returned quite discouraged. The trip was one and a half hours each way. I returned to the motel where my family was waiting for me and presented my children with a choice. "You can either have this new home or a father, " I said.

Much to my surprise, they responded, "We'll take the home. You're never around anyway."

I was devastated. If what they were telling me was true, I needed to repent fast. My children needed a father who was home more. Eventually, we reached a compromise. We bought a home in Scarsdale, New York, a community only a forty-five-minute train ride from New York City. I stopped working on Saturdays and began to take more seriously my role as father.

President David O. McKay said, "I have but one thought in my heart for the young folk of the Church, and that is that they be happy. I know of no other place than home where more happiness can be found in this life. It is possible to make home a bit of heaven; indeed, I picture heaven to be a continuation of the ideal home." [^3]

When I considered my ways, these words of a prophet penetrated my very soul. Creating the ideal home described by President McKay became my goal as a husband and father.

Consider how much time you spend in pursuit of material possessions. Our uncontrolled appetites and consuming drive for material gain are sending our nation on a downward spiral, and many members of the Church are going along for the ride. What has happened to the values of thrift, industry, economy, and frugality? When was delayed gratification displaced by instant gratification? One writer has noted that in the 1950s people were interested in exporting and investing; in the 1990s they are interested in importing and in leveraging credit to enhance their speculative capacity.

In Lehi's dream, the great and spacious building represented "the pride of the world" (1 Nephi 11:36). The current cries we hear coming from the great and spacious building tempt the Saints to base their self-esteem on how many material possessions they own. We think we need a larger home with at least a three-car garage. We want a boat and a large recreational vehicle to pull it. We set our hearts on designer clothing, multiple televisions and VCRs, the latest model computers, and the newest car. We think that our children's summers would be empty without cheerleader and basketball camps. Often, we borrow money to provide these so-called "necessities." The result of this all-too-instant gratification is overloaded bankruptcy courts and two-career families. Consider your ways.

President J. Reuben Clark fearlessly and repeatedly counseled the members of the Church to avoid unnecessary debt. He said, "Once in debt, interest is your companion every minute of the day and night; you cannot shun it or slip away from it; you cannot dismiss it; it yields neither to entreaties, demands, or orders; and whenever you get in its way or cross its course or fail to meet its demands, it crushes you." [^4]

Remember Jacob's instructions to his people to seek the kingdom of God before they sought riches. Then, if riches were obtained, the money would be put to use in building the kingdom of God (see Jacob 2:18-19).

Elder James E. Talmage taught the Saints this about material possessions: "Material belongings, relative wealth or poverty, physical environment—the things on which we are prone to set our hearts and anchor our aspirations, the things for which we sweat and strive, ofttimes at the sacrifice of happiness and to the forfeiture of real success—these after all are but externals, the worth of which in the reckoning to come shall be counted in terms of the use we have made of them." [^5]

Remember the story of the rich young man. He lived the commandments as he understood them, but when the Savior asked him to sell his possessions and give to the poor, the young man went away sorrowing because he could not relinquish his great wealth (see Matthew 19:16-22). Where our treasures are, there will our hearts be also (see Matthew 6:21). Consider your ways.

Consider your moral character. Before receiving my call as a General Authority, I was employed for twenty-one years by some of the great department stores in America. My life was blessed by close associations with some of the most talented leaders the retail industry ever produced. Nevertheless, when I compare those early associations with my current associations with the leadership of the Church, there is no comparison. The difference is not necessarily ability, but virtue. I have found that the brethren with whom I have associated in the Church over the last two decades represent the fulfillment of the promise given to the Prophet Joseph Smith: "Let virtue garnish thy thoughts unceasingly; then shall thy confidence wax strong in the presence of God; and the doctrine of the priesthood shall distil upon thy soul as the dews from heaven. The Holy Ghost shall be thy constant companion" (D&C 121:45-46).

I have watched my brethren, strengthened by the Holy Ghost as their constant companion, shoulder enormous workloads at an age when most men would be confined to rocking chairs. They are subjected to strenuous travel schedules but remain undeterred as they enthusiastically engage in building the kingdom of God. Recently, the realization came to me that the great spirit that attends my brethren, helping them magnify their assignments, is available to all the members of the Church. Everyone who earnestly seeks the Holy Ghost can be lifted and guided. As Elder James E. Talmage taught, "The special office of the Holy Ghost is to enlighten and ennoble the mind, to purify and sanctify the soul, to incite to good works, and to reveal the things of God." [^6]

Consider your ways. Isn't the Holy Ghost a constant companion you need in your life? Consider what you need to do to receive the full and rich blessings of the Spirit. Commence the inner cleansing—now!

I have always been grateful that I had the opportunity to serve for a time with President N. Eldon Tanner, who assumed much of the responsibility for the financial affairs of the Church. President Tanner was a man noted for his integrity and honesty. His immaculate moral character meant he could be trusted without question. Many times I sat next to President Tanner in meetings in which significant advantages were offered to the Church if it would only compromise on a little principle. President Tanner's voice would always speak passionately for what was right. He would never allow the Church to participate in anything that was not completely honest, legal, and ethical. President Tanner said, "There is far too much immorality, dishonesty, and lack of integrity in the lives of those who are leading and guiding the affairs of our nations, our schools, and our communities. Somehow we must get back to the lofty ideals . . . of those who fought and died for truth, religion, and freedom." [^7]

Consider your ways.

Consider your religious practices. The words of James define pure religion. The brother of Christ wrote, "Pure religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this, To visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world" (James 1:27).

Consider your ways. Is religion an active, vital part of your life? Are you looking for or hiding from opportunities to serve? Are you anxiously engaged in good works?

Several years ago, I visited a high priests group meeting in a small community in southern Wyoming. The lesson that week was about losing one's life in service to others. As the lesson developed, it was evident that the teacher was well prepared to instruct his brethren. Then a comment by one of the brethren changed the whole tenor of the lesson. The brother said, "I have listened with great interest to the lesson today. The thought just crossed my mind that the information presented will soon be lost if we do not find applications for it." This brother proposed a course of action. The night before, a good citizen of the community had passed away. His wife was a member of the Church, but he was not. The brother had visited the widow to offer his sympathies. As he left the home, his eyes wandered over their beautiful farm. The alfalfa was ready to cut, and the grain would soon be ready to harvest. He asked himself, "How will this poor sister cope with all her new responsibilities?" Certainly, she would need more time than her waiting crops would allow her. The course of action he proposed was for the high priests to help this widow operate her farm until a more permanent solution could be found. The balance of the group meeting was spent in organizing to assist her. The principle of the lesson had found immediate application.

Consider your ways. Do you pray daily? Do you study your scriptures consistently? Do you hold weekly family home evenings?

A home we purchased several years ago had a unique feature: a small study was equipped with a large closet, about one-fourth the size of the entire room. At first, we thought the closet was a design flaw, but it soon became one of my favorite places. There I could shut myself off from the cares of the world and earnestly communicate with my Heavenly Father. I took the opportunity to ask him what I needed to do to become more like him, and he took the opportunity to tell me. I found meaning in the Savior's instructions: "But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret; and thy Father which seeth in secret shall reward thee openly" (Matthew 6:6).

Consider your ways. Wouldn't your life be blessed by more open communication with your Heavenly Father? Couldn't you strive harder to learn his will for you and your family? If you were consistently to ask yourselves the question "What would the Savior do?" wouldn't it significantly change the way you look at life? Wouldn't it change your heart? Wouldn't you be born again?

Consider your ways. I know that Jesus Christ directs the affairs of this, his Church. If you have not yet received this same witness, isn't now the time to seek it? Consider your ways. Are they his ways?

Notes

---
Notas:
[^2] Become thoroughly acquainted by learning their names and other important things about them, being a good listener, and discussing their interests. Show interest in them, their hobbies, their work, their children. As quoted in Conference Report, April 1963, p. 32.
[^3] Be unselfish.
[^4] Show brotherly love and concern for them. Meet their needs by giving them helpful service.
[^5] Graciously let them be of service to you when they offer.
[^6] Smile and be positive.
[^7] 7. N. Eldon Tanner, "Remember Who You Are, " Ensign, January 1983, pp. 3-4.
