L. Tom Perry, Living with Enthusiasm ( 1996)

8

Friendship

In Proverbs we read, "A friend loveth at all times" (Proverb 17:17). One of the great blessings of mortal life is good friends. President David O. McKay said:

Among life's sweetest blessings is fellowship with men and women whose ideals and aspirations are high and noble. Next to a sense of a kinship with God comes the helpfulness, encouragement, and inspiration of friends. Friendship is a sacred possession. . . . One of the principal reasons which the Lord had for establishing His Church is to give all persons high and low, rich and poor, strong and feeble an opportunity to associate with their fellowmen in an atmosphere of uplifting, religious fellowship. This [association] may be found in Priesthood quorums, Auxiliaries, Sacrament meetings. He who neglects these opportunities, who fails to take advantage of them, to that extent starves his own soul. [^1]

President McKay also said, "True friends enrich life. If you would have friends, be one." [^2] The friends with whom we choose to associate are major contributors to the formation of our character. We form social habits by association with our friends. Good social habits can be useful and become the bases of wholesome personalities, but bad social habits can lead to antisocial attitudes and behaviors. Gradually, bad social habits tarnish our characters and severely limit our potential as sons and daughters of our Heavenly Father.

We can make friends by welcoming newcomers, deepening relationships with longtime acquaintances, and being more worthy friends to others. Friendships develop in different ways during different times in our lives, but each stage of life brings with it unique opportunities to make friends.

Our earliest friendships are often developed through family relationships. I was blessed to be a member of a loving family. I had three older sisters and two younger brothers as I was growing up. They were my best friends. We had a large backyard, a swing, a tree house, and a very large sandpile. All of these gave us places to play and enhance our family relationships. In times of stress, there was always the family to rely upon. At times of disappointment, the family offered comfort. In times of success, the family celebrated together.

Even today my brothers and sisters are my dearest and closest friends. I have the privilege of having two sisters living in the same condominium building where I live. One lives above me, and the other lives next door. One of our greatest joys is sitting on the balcony and watching the sunset while sharing fond memories of the past.

My school days offered significant opportunities to build friendships. Growing up in a Mormon community sometimes presented conflicts when choosing friends. School boundaries were usually much larger than ward boundaries, so on occasion I had to choose between school friends and Church friends. I was blessed to have both kinds of friends, but I usually found that Church friends were more reliable. They had the same ideals I was trying to maintain in my life. As I have attended some of my class reunions and renewed my acquaintance with my former schoolmates, I have found that friends who have maintained the Church standards have had richer, fuller, and happier lives than those without the light of the gospel in their lives.

The next friendships in my life were those with my missionary companions. We developed a real closeness from working together for a common purpose and being on our knees together so many times during the day. There is something special about friendships that develop from engaging in service. Do you remember the example of the Savior as he met with the apostles at the Last Supper? He wanted to serve them, so he girded himself with a towel and went to each of them and washed their feet. Then after washing their feet, he said, "Ye call me Master and Lord: and ye say well; for so I am. If I then, your Lord and Master, have washed your feet; ye also ought to wash one another's feet. For I have given you an example, that ye should do as I have done to you" (John 13:13-15).

After my mission came service in the U.S. Marine Corps. During the weeks I was in basic training, some of the marines in my unit encouraged me to go on weekend leaves with them. I resisted because I knew how they acted and what kind of language they used around the camp. Finally, after a few weeks, they persuaded me one Saturday evening to go into Los Angeles with them. We rode the bus into the city and then planned to take a streetcar to a dance hall.

As we boarded the streetcar, my companions began to flirt with girls that I found unattractive because of the way they dressed and acted. I knew right then that I had made a major mistake. I started to move away toward the rear of the car. I sat down next to a group of young people who looked more wholesome. I asked where they were going, and they said, "To a dance." "Where?" I asked. They said, "You probably don't know much about this place. It's the Adams Ward of the LDS Church. Would you like to join us?" Were they surprised when I told them I was a member of the Church. I got off the streetcar with them at the Adams Ward and shared a delightful time with the new friends I made that evening—friends who shared the same values that I did.

My next set of friendships I made in college. Here again I was presented with a choice—I could either join a fraternity or participate in activities at the Latter-day Saint institute. After carefully considering both, I selected the institute. It was through the LDS institute in Logan, Utah, that I met Virginia Lee, who would become my wife. There is not a friend as close and loving, as caring, and as fun to be with as the one the Lord gives to you as an eternal companion. The right friendships in college helped me establish an eternal friendship and form an eternal companionship.

Professional life is another area that provides opportunities for friendships. When I was working in Sacramento, California, I was offered an exciting job in New York City. My current employers tried to talk me into staying in California and used the argument that I would be unhappy on the East Coast. They said I would not like the unfriendliness of easterners. They told me that people there would push and shove and try to walk all over you if you allowed them to do it. It was every man for himself without any thought for his neighbors.

Being a small-town Utah boy, I couldn't believe that people could live the way they described. It made me want to go to New York City all the more just to prove they were wrong.

After only six months of working in New York, however, I was ready to concede that my California friends were right. But then I realized that I hadn't made much of an effort at extending myself. I started on a planned and systematic effort to determine whether the people in New York City really deserved their reputation.

My first thought was to start with the commuters with whom I rode into the city each day. I lived in Scarsdale, which was about a forty-five-minute train ride from downtown New York. Because the train always ran exactly on schedule, I realized my behavior followed a rather predictable pattern. I started noticing the habits of the other commuters. They would leave home at exactly the same minute each morning, walk to the station, buy a New York Times, walk down to a certain board on the platform, fold their newspapers a certain way, stand on that board until the train arrived, get on the same car each morning, try to find the same seat on the train, and read their newspapers the same way all the way into Grand Central Station. They would never speak to one another or show any signs of friendliness.

I decided that the only way to get to know anybody was to break his routine. I selected a man with whom I thought I would like to get acquainted, and after observing his routine for a few days, I initiated a counter-routine. I arrived at the train station at about the same time he did, watched him put his dime on the tray to purchase a newspaper, and as soon as he started to walk down to his favorite board on the platform, I broke into a run, just beating him there, and firmly planted myself. You should have seen the look on his face. He came up to me and stood just as close to his spot as he could without stepping on my toes. As the crowd gathered and started to push and shove, he tried to move me away from the position I had established. Fortunately, I was pretty good sized and didn't budge an inch. This unnerved him so that he didn't even take time to unfold his newspaper. I just didn't take any notice of him, firmly holding my ground.

When the train arrived, I quickly jumped on and took his favorite seat. He was forced to sit in the middle of a three-seater just in front of me. He rode all the way into the city visibly disturbed. I could see the red, flushed condition on the back of his neck. I believe I ruined the entire day for him. The next morning I repeated the same process. His neck was scarlet this time; it brightened up the whole car.

The most remarkable thing happened the third morning. When I arrived at the train platform, he was already there with two feet firmly planted on his favorite board, reading his newspaper. I couldn't help but laugh out loud when I saw him. He gave me a scowl, and then he couldn't hold back either. I introduced myself as a new arrival from California, determined to break up the routine of a New York commuter. We had an enjoyable visit on the train platform that morning. We got on the train and sat together all the way into New York and had a delightful ride.

From then on, breaking up each other's routine became a game. Each morning we would race down the platform trying to beat the other one to that favorite spot. Soon others on the platform started to notice what we were doing, and before you knew it, there were three, then four, then five, then ten, all racing for that particular board each morning. It almost got out of hand, as we noticed some men in the back exchanging dollar bills with another man. We asked what was going on, and they said they were betting who would be on the board first the following morning.

The great friendships I made with my fellow commuters endured for many, many years. The so-called cold New Yorker was just as friendly and warm as anyone else. All I had to do was break through a thick, inner-city shell to enjoy warm, close friendships.

I have found that the right friends have a powerful influence on our lives. Choose your friends wisely! Make certain they will complement your life goals and help to build within you the right values and standards. How do we develop better friendships? A Church tract printed many years ago gives us several ideas. It lists the following helps:

The Book of Mormon tells us about Alma and his friends, the sons of Mosiah, and the joy that came to them when they met after many years of separation. As you remember, Alma and the sons of Mosiah were quite the rascals in their younger years; and then through a marvelous visitation, their lives changed. From then on, they lived lives of service to others. Alma served the Church, and the sons of Mosiah went on missions to carry the good news of the gospel to their Lamanite brothers and sisters.

In the book of Alma, chapter 17, we read of their reunion after many years of separation:

And now it came to pass that as Alma was journeying from the land of Gideon southward, away to the land of Manti, behold, to his astonishment, he met with the sons of Mosiah journeying towards the land of Zarahemla.

Now these sons of Mosiah were with Alma at the time the angel first appeared unto him; therefore Alma did rejoice exceedingly to see his brethren; and what added more to his joy, they were still his brethren in the Lord; yea, and they had waxed strong in the knowledge of the truth; for they were men of a sound understanding and they had searched the scriptures diligently, that they might know the word of God.

But this is not all; they had given themselves to much prayer, and fasting; therefore they had the spirit of prophecy, and the spirit of revelation, and when they taught, they taught with power and authority of God. (Alma 17:1-3)

Do you see what had happened? They remained true and faithful to their friendship by living up to the standards they had set for each other. Because they were still brethren in the Lord, the joy of their reunion was great.

True friends do indeed enrich one's life, as President McKay stated. I thank the Lord for the friends who have blessed my life. I urge you to make an effort to cultivate friendships with those around you who can become your brethren and sisters in the Lord.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Gospel Ideals (Salt Lake City: Improvement Era, 1953), p. 5.
[^2] Become thoroughly acquainted by learning their names and other important things about them, being a good listener, and discussing their interests. Show interest in them, their hobbies, their work, their children. As quoted in Conference Report, April 1963, p. 32.
