L. Tom Perry, Living with Enthusiasm ( 1996)

9

Being in the World

From the teachings of the Savior, the members of the Church have adopted a common expression: we talk of being in the world but not of the world (see John 17:14-16). Normally, we say this to emphasize our need to remain free from the sin and materialism so prevalent in the world in which we live. The importance of not being of the world cannot be overstated. We should continually remind ourselves to keep our lives in harmony with the Lord's teachings. However, I choose to discuss the first part of the expression: being in the world.

It is in the world where we have been privileged to come and enjoy a mortal experience. It is in the world that we are to be tested and tried. It is in the world where we have opportunities to participate in sacred, saving ordinances that will determine our postmortal life. It is in the world where we have an opportunity to serve and make our contributions to mankind. It is to this world the Savior must come.

Our prophets have encouraged us to be mindful of our obligations while we are here in the world. President David O. McKay said:

The responsibility of showing to the world that the gospel of Jesus Christ will solve its problems rests upon the men who make the claim. . . . I believe . . . that every world problem may be solved by obedience to the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ. . . .

The solution of the great world problems is here in the Church of Jesus Christ. Ample provision is made not only for the needs of individuals, but also for nation and groups of nations. I realize that it is a great claim. . . . It is simply the application of God's plan to the world problems. You who hold the priesthood have greater responsibility today, now that you live in this creative moment in the world's history, than ever the Church has had before. I repeat it. If we make the claim to hold the truth, it is obligatory upon every Latter-day Saint so to live, that when the people of the world come, in answer to the call, to test the fruit of the tree, they will find it wholesome and good.

The Lord help us to be able to prove to the world that we possess just what the world today is longing for, and when they see it, may they know, as you know, as I know, that the everlasting gospel is a light to the world. [^1]

In the Old Testament, I found a classic example of someone who lived in the world but not of the world, influencing it through his righteous living. The birth of this young man came at a time when Israel was a conquered nation. The Israelites were doomed to lives of servitude, yet this man rose above his adverse circumstances to rule over those who had been his conquerors.

After the death of King Solomon in 975 b.c., the ten tribes revolted and separated themselves from the tribe of Judah. A divided Israel was not able to defend itself against the other powers in the region. Egypt and Assyria took turns conquering the lands of Israel. In the year 607 b.c., Assyria proper and the northern provinces fell into the hands of the Medes, while Syria lay open to be seized by the Babylonians.

In the midst of this struggle, it seemed an appropriate time for Egypt to attack Palestine. The king of the Babylonians sent his son, Nebuchadnezzar, to drive the Egyptians back. While the battle raged against the Egyptians, the king passed away and Nebuchadnezzar became the ruler of Babylonia. He was successful against the Egyptians and became ruler over all of Syria to the Egyptian border. He ruled by terror, crushing his enemies by fire and sword and weakening them with wholesale deportations to other parts of his empire.

This was the time during which Daniel was born. As a youth, he and certain other Hebrews were taken to be trained for service in the court of Nebuchadnezzar. They were chosen because of their wisdom and knowledge and ability to learn. Thus, Daniel was brought into a strange land with strange customs, a strange environment, and a very different religious heritage.

Daniel's first test in being "in the world" came when the servant of Nebuchadnezzar ordered him to drink of his wines and eat of the "king's meat." Daniel "purposed in his heart that he would not defile himself with the portion of the king's meat, nor with the wine which he drank" (Daniel 1:8).

The servant argued that the king had made him responsible for the training of these young men and had commanded that they should eat and drink the same as the others. If they did not, the king would see that they were growing weak and thin and would surely have his servant killed. Then Daniel begged that he and his friends be allowed to follow the health habits their people had received through revelation. He requested a test: for ten days they would feed upon grains and drink water, then see if they were as healthy as the rest.

Daniel's strategy was most interesting. He did not challenge the beliefs of the Babylonians. Instead, he volunteered to participate in a test to determine which way was the best. The servant agreed to the test, and for the next ten days, Daniel and those who were with him ate and drank only the things they knew they should. At the end of ten days, Daniel and his friends were found to be healthier and stronger than all the rest. Daniel's beliefs were verified. He did not need to adopt different standards of the world even though he was in the world.

As a young executive many years ago, part of my job involved attending dinners sponsored by different business groups. Each dinner was preceded by a social hour. I felt uncomfortable in these settings. After the first one or two dinners, I started coming late to miss the social hour. My boss thought this was not a good practice, because I would be missing some valued time associating with business leaders. Still, I felt awkward visiting in groups where I was the only one without a drink in my hand. I kept wondering what to do with my hands. You can always put one hand in your pocket, but you look foolish with both of them there. I tried holding a glass of 7-Up, but it had the same appearance as an alcoholic beverage.

I finally went over to the bartender and asked if he had any drink that was distinctively different in appearance from an alcoholic beverage. He went into the kitchen and came back with a half gallon of milk and poured me a glass. Drinking a glass of milk at a cocktail hour was a unique practice. It seemed to attract everyone's attention, and I became the target of a lot of jesting. It embarrassed me at first, until I discovered that I was meeting more business leaders than I had at any previous gathering. I found that I did not have to violate Church standards to become a viable, contributing member in my chosen profession. It was more the case that success came because I did adhere to my values.

As the word spread, it soon became a standard practice to have a carton of milk at the bar. I was amazed, as time passed, by how many of my associates were joining me for a glass of milk during the social hour. I found, just as Daniel did, that although being different in the world brought some interesting reactions, obedience to the Lord's law is always associated with his blessings.

Isn't this the same message as the revelation contained in the Doctrine and Covenants? It reads, "There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated—and when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated" (D&C 130:20-21).

In addition to being obedient to the word of the Lord, we have been instructed in our responsibilities to declare the gospel to all of our Father in Heaven's children. In the Doctrine and Covenants we read:

Remember the worth of souls is great in the sight of God. . . .

And how great is his joy in the soul that repenteth!

Wherefore, you are called to cry repentance unto this people.

And if it so be that you should labor all your days in crying repentance unto this people, and bring, save it be one soul unto me, how great shall be your joy with him in the kingdom of my Father!

And now, if your joy will be great with one soul that you have brought unto me into the kingdom of my Father, how great will be your joy if you should bring many souls unto me! (D&C 18:10, 13-16)

I don't know how we can experience this joy if we are not willing to reach out beyond our own circle of church friends. We live in the world during our mortal experience. The Christian principles the gospel teaches are needed in all we do and among all peoples.

The influence we radiate as we uphold righteous principles can make worthwhile contributions in the world. A righteous example can attract others to living standards established by the Lord for the conduct of his children here in mortality. A righteous example can bring souls to the light of the gospel, encouraging some to join the Church. Embracing the gospel is a personal decision, and we always respect and understand the agency of individuals, but how can we expect our brothers and sisters in the world to embrace righteous principles if we do not extend our influence outward to make them aware of those principles?

Our governments need standards of integrity. Our communities need yardsticks for measuring decency. Our neighborhoods need models of beauty and cleanliness. Our schools need continued encouragement and assistance in maintaining high educational standards. Rather than spend time complaining about the direction in which these institutions are going, we need to exert our influence to point them in the right direction. A small effort by a few can result in so much good for so many.

Sometimes I think we fear participation because of the opposition we may face. In the example of Daniel, we also see a later instance in which he met head-on the challenge of being in the world and in which he was able to influence those around him for good. As Daniel's talents were recognized by the king, he became a trusted counselor. Many were jealous of the position this outsider had gained, and they sought to do away with him. They devised a new law that would prevent Daniel from praying to God, the Eternal Father. The penalty for breaking the law was to be cast into the lions' den. Daniel was discovered praying, and the penalty was executed. But because of Daniel's faith in God, the lions did not harm him.

Daniel was able to rise above the many challenges presented him by his enemies and still live his religion. The Lord blessed and protected him in his righteousness.

Not only did Daniel's service benefit the king; the faith Daniel had in the Lord affected an entire kingdom. The king sent forth a decree "that in every dominion of [the] kingdom men tremble and fear before the God of Daniel: for he is the living God" (Daniel 6:26). Great was the service of one righteous man, serving in the world of his captors. Great will be the results as we serve, each in our own personal way, in the world in which we live.

May we have the necessary faith to place our trust in the Lord. May we not worry about the forces that will surely oppose righteousness. May we have the courage to move forward in the cause of truth.

As we live in the world, may we contribute by making it a better place through our righteous living, our service in causes that are just, and our faith that good will always triumph over evil.

Note

---
Notas:
[^1] Discourses of Brigham Young, sel. John A. Widtsoe (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1954), p. 128.
