L. Tom Perry, Living with Enthusiasm ( 1996)

10

Stand Firm in Your Convictions

Brigham Young once counseled us to use the scriptures as follows: "Do you read the Scriptures, my brethren and sisters, as though you were writing them a thousand, two thousand, or five thousand years ago? Do you read them as though you stood in the place of the men who wrote them? If you do not feel thus, it is your privilege to do so, that you may be as familiar with the spirit and meaning of the written word of God as you are with your daily walk and conversation." [^1]

The Book of Mormon has many special accounts with lessons that can be applied to all ages of time. It is a book of great passion and feeling. Let us take Brigham Young's advice and imagine we are standing in the place where Moroni, the last of the great Nephite prophets, stood. The assignment his father gave him to complete the record entrusted to his care was very difficult.

He must have mourned as he described how his people had been hunted by the Lamanites until they were all destroyed. Imagine the loneliness he experienced as he reported that his father was among those who were killed. We sense that after that great destruction, the only thing Moroni was living for was to complete the record. He wrote, "Therefore I will write and hide up the records in the earth; and whither I go it mattereth not" (Mormon 8:4).

All that sustained Moroni is the faith that the Lord would preserve him long enough to complete the record and the knowledge that someday that record would be found by one chosen of the Lord. He realized that the record would be a voice of warning to nations of the consequences of turning away from the teachings of the Lord.

It is from the depths of his heart that Moroni cries out to those who will eventually receive this record. He wants to spare those who read his account the heartache and misery that come from disobedience to God's laws.

Moroni writes, first, to the members of the Church, and then to those who have not embraced the gospel of Jesus Christ. His last words to the members of the Church are words of warning. He writes as one who sees the social forces that destroyed his people repeating themselves in the future:

Behold, the Lord hath shown unto me great and marvelous things concerning that which must shortly come, at that day when these things shall come forth among you.

Behold, I speak unto you as if ye were present, and yet ye are not. But behold, Jesus Christ hath shown you unto me, and I know your doing.

And I know that ye do walk in the pride of your hearts; and there are none save a few only who do not lift themselves up in the pride of their hearts, unto the wearing of very fine apparel, unto envying, and strifes, and malice, and persecutions, and all manner of iniquities; and your churches, yea, even every one, have become polluted because of the pride of your hearts.

For behold, ye do love money, and your substance, and your fine apparel, and the adorning of your churches, more than ye love the poor and the needy, the sick and the afflicted.

O ye pollutions, ye hypocrites, ye teachers, who sell yourselves for that which will canker, why have ye polluted the holy church of God? Why are ye ashamed to take upon you the name of Christ? Why do ye not think that greater is the value of an endless happiness than that misery which never dies—because of the praise of the world? (Mormon 8:34-38)

I guess one of the greatest mysteries of human history is why people fail to learn from the past. In the case of the Church, why do those who profess to be true followers of Christ repeatedly become victims of the enticements of the world? The evidence is strong regarding the blessings that accrue to those who trust in land follow the ways prescribed by the Lord, yet so many members of the Church fail to heed the evidence.

Many of us are more concerned about our fine apparel, the size of our houses, and our luxury cars than we are about assisting the poor and the needy. The forces promoting legalized abortion, gambling, pornography, and banning of public prayer also threaten the values that bind us together as a community of Saints.

Clearly, the members of the Church face tremendous challenges in the latter days. We must not only resist but mount a counteroffensive against the temptations and teachings of the world if we are to remain a distinctive people.

Despite the challenges we face, I plead with each of you to stand firm in your convictions. There is no escape from the whirlwind of judgments God will unleash on the heads of his children who choose to pursue a course that is against his will. We need to heed Moroni's warning to avoid the fate that destroyed his people.

Part of what Moroni was feeling should also be translated into a renewed desire to do missionary service. Moroni witnessed the wickedness and destruction that come from unbelief, when men's and women's souls are not anchored to the teachings of the gospel. After warning the believers, he pleads with the unbelievers:

And now, I speak also concerning those who do not believe in Christ.

Behold, will ye believe in the day of your visitation—behold, when the Lord shall come, yea, even that great day when the earth shall be rolled together as a scroll, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, yea, in that great day when ye shall be brought to stand before the Lamb of God—then will ye say that there is no God?

Then will ye longer deny the Christ, or can ye behold the Lamb of God? Do ye suppose that ye shall dwell with him under a consciousness of your guilt? Do ye suppose that ye could be happy to dwell with that holy Being, when your souls are racked with a consciousness of guilt that ye have ever abused his laws? . . .

O then ye unbelieving, turn ye unto the Lord; cry mightily unto the Father in the name of Jesus, that perhaps ye may be found spotless, pure, fair, and white, having been cleansed by the blood of the Lamb, at that great and last day. (Mormon 9:1-3, 6)

Who can ignore a voice of warning from one who witnessed so much heartache and misery? Is it any wonder that his words declare that there is a better, happier, more fulfilling way to live? Moroni's words are not just a voice of warning but also a voice of hope. He reminds us that every one of God's children are precious to Him. Our Heavenly Father desires that every soul enjoy immortality and eternal life.

Continuing with Moroni's counsel, we read:

Because of the redemption of man, which came by Jesus Christ, they are brought back into the presence of the Lord; yea, this is wherein all men are redeemed, because the death of Christ bringeth to pass the resurrection, which bringeth to pass a redemption from an endless sleep, from which sleep all men shall be awakened by the power of God when the trump shall sound; and they shall come forth, both small and great, and all shall stand before his bar, being redeemed and loosed from this eternal band of death, which death is a temporal death.

And then cometh the judgment of the Holy One upon them; and then cometh the time that he that is filthy shall be filthy still; and he that is righteous shall be righteous still; he that is happy shall be happy still; and he that is unhappy shall be unhappy still. (Mormon 9:13-14)

The restored gospel of our Lord and Savior is available to bless all the children of our Father in Heaven. Members of the Church should be anxious to share the gospel and all its saving principles. President Spencer W. Kimball declared, "Our objective is to bring the gospel to all the world. . . . This is an ambitious project we have, but as you know, we are but planning to do what the Lord has already seen and [that] which he has charged us with." [^2]

Today we find ourselves surrounded by so much depression, despair, lack of confidence, and loss of hope. I ask myself: for what purpose is all this gloom? Consider with me for a moment the great blessings we have been promised in a covenant with the Lord. He has entered into a binding and solemn contract with each of us to give us all that he has, according to our faithfulness. He has declared, "I, the Lord, am bound when ye do what I say" (D&C 82:10).

By solemn covenant, the Lord will fulfill his part of the agreement. The opportunity to receive these great blessings is based on our individual worthiness. What is required of us?

First, we need to be obedient to the laws of the Lord. This is one of the first lessons taught to Adam and Eve: Obedience brings faith. It brings forth the blessings of heaven. Disobedience brings forth heartache and despair.

Following the law of obedience comes the requirement to give of ourselves in service to our Heavenly Father's children. Sacrificing what we have to benefit our brothers and sisters is the crowning test of the gospel. One of the purposes of this mortal experience is to see if we will follow the Savior's counsel to "seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness" (Matthew 6:33).

We live in the most glorious era in the history of mankind. The opportunity to reap the blessings of the Lord is greater than ever before, as is the opportunity to serve him and experience the the eternal satisfaction that accompanies that service.

Let the words of Moroni and the voices of all the prophets fill our hearts and our souls. Let us learn from history that "wickedness never was happiness" (Alma 41:10). Let us remember that it is in our power to enjoy the fruits the Lord has promised us—if we meet the requirements of being obedient to his law and rendering unto him what he requires of us in service and sacrifice.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Wall Street Journal, 23 April 1986, p. 39.
[^2] Richard L. Evans, Jr., Richard L. Evans—The Man and the Message (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1973), p. 304.
