L. Tom Perry, Living with Enthusiasm ( 1996)

11

Staying Power

John Wooden, the legendary UCLA basketball coach, was a man who understood what it takes to succeed. In his forty years of coaching, he worked at UCLA for twenty-seven years, during which his teams never had a losing season. In fact, he led his teams to ten national championships in his last twelve years at UCLA.

Coach Wooden cited some of the reasons for his "staying power": "I emphasized constant improvement and steady performance. I have often said, 'The mark of a true champion is to always perform near your own level of competency.'"

The well-known coach commented that he probably scouted opponents less than any other coach he knew—less, in fact, than most high school coaches. Instead he taught his players the basics, because he recognized that sound offensive and defensive principles would serve them well no matter what style of play they encountered.

He was as concerned with a player's character as he was with the player's ability. "While it may be possible to reach the top of one's profession on sheer ability," he said, "it is impossible to stay there without hard work and character." Wooden looked for athletes who played a clean game and who were constantly trying to improve themselves in order to strengthen the team. "Then, if their ability warranted it," he explained, "the championships would take care of themselves." [^1]

Coach Wooden identified some important principles that were the bedrock of his championship teams. Perhaps we can apply those same principles as we work to better ourselves as a community of Saints. First, consistently do your best with the talents your Father in Heaven has given you. Second, concentrate on the basics, because they are appropriate in any situation or season of life. Third, worry more about developing sound character than about building reputation.

Consistently do your best. One of my favorite scriptures is found in the eighth chapter of Psalms:

O Lord our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth! who hast set thy glory above the heavens. . . .

When I consider thy heavens, and the work of thy fingers, the moon and the stars, which thou hast ordained;

What is man, that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man, that thou visitest him?

For thou hast made him a little lower than the angels, and hast crowned him with glory and honour. (Psalm 8:1, 3-5)

I like to think of myself as a junior angel with the power and potential of an eternal being.

I am absolutely amazed as I watch the growth and development of my grandchildren. I marvel at how different they are in appearance and personality, even though they come from a common heritage and similar environments.

Let me describe the oldest sons of my three children. The son of my eldest daughter is a serious student. He ranks number one in his class; he is very disciplined; he schedules himself very carefully. When I baby-sit at his house, this is a common source of frustration. The children gather around me for a story before they retire to bed. I am just getting to the good part of the story when the clock strikes the hour. My grandson then announces to his brother and sister that it is time to go to bed. He does not allow me to finish the page, not even a sentence. The established bedtime has arrived—end of story.

My son's eldest boy is a great debater. He has a sound argument, supported by numerous facts, against everything he doesn't want to do. His reasoning is often brilliant. He also has an attention span that is most uncommon for a child his age. He is unusually fascinated by animal and insect life. Once I watched him sit for hours watching a spider consuming a fly entrapped in its web.

The son of my youngest daughter is fascinated by anything mechanical. When he had just learned to walk, I took him on a tour of Temple Square to show him the beautiful flowers, trees, and buildings. He had no interest in them. He spent his time finding all the sprinkler heads on the grounds, testing them to see if they were screwed in tightly.

Three boys springing from the same family tree—how different each of them is in appearance and talent!

All of us are endowed with abundant talent, beauty, and ability. Our lack of productivity can never be blamed on a lack of raw material. Richard L. Evans once wrote:

We know of no one in life who isn't an Important Person. We know of no man on the street (or in the gutter, for that matter) who isn't a child of God with the same rights and with the same relationship to his Father in heaven as all the rest of us have.

We know of no one, young or old, from infants to elderly individuals, whose past or whose potential we would want to appraise as being unimportant. We know of no one we might see in any public place—on subways or buses, or walking in shabby shoes—or any boy selling papers . . . who doesn't have an inestimable, unknown potential, here and hereafter. [^2]

I was thrilled with the talk Peter Vidmar gave in the priesthood session of general conference after he had successfully won his gold medals in the Olympics. His theme was that the Lord had blessed him with a talent. It was his responsibility to make himself a champion. Brother Vidmar's formula was simple. He spent fifteen minutes longer each day perfecting his routines than anyone who competed against him. The multiplication of those extra fifteen minutes daily gave him the edge and prepared him for his goal of becoming an Olympic champion. He consistently did his best with his God-given talents, and he was blessed with the success he sought.

Concentrate on the basics. Coach Wooden taught basic principles to his players, guidelines like "Never give the outside to any forward who tries to drive around you." The game of life is also governed by some basic principles. Two of the more important principles we live by are integrity and honesty.

The Lord loves those who have integrity. He said about the Prophet's brother, Hyrum Smith, "Blessed is my servant Hyrum Smith; for I, the Lord, love him because of the integrity of his heart, and because he loveth that which is right before me, saith the Lord" (D&C 124:15).

What is the meaning of integrity? We can find several definitions in the dictionary: rigid adherence to a code or standard of values; moral soundness, especially as it relates to steadfastness to truth, purpose, responsibility, or trust; moral and ethical strength; or the quality of being whole, complete, undivided.

The Lord described Job as a man who was perfect and upright. As Job was suffering untold trials and tribulations, his wife said to him, "Does thou still retain thine integrity?" (Job 2:9). Even with all his problems and challenges, Job "sinned not" (Job 1:22). And the Lord said, "There is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that feareth God, and escheweth evil . . . and still he holdeth fast his integrity" (Job 2:3).

When Job's friends falsely accused him of sin, he said:

All the while my breath is in me, and the spirit of God is in my nostrils;

My lips shall not speak wickedness, nor my tongue utter deceit.

God forbid that I should justify you: till I die I will not remove mine integrity from me.

My righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go. (Job 27:3-6)

Job invited judgment from God so "that God may know mine integrity" (Job 31:6). Job's conscience was clear, for he knew he was honest and upright in all of his endeavors, and he would never compromise his integrity.

Many years ago when the railroad was just beginning to cross the country regularly, President Brigham Young said to a group of Church members:

We want the Saints to increase in goodness, until our mechanics, for instance, are so honest and reliable that this Railroad Company will say, 'Give us a Mormon elder for an engineer, then none need have the least fear to ride, for if he knows there is danger he will take every measure necessary to preserve the lives of those entrusted to his care.' I want to see our elders so full of integrity that they will be preferred by this Company for their engine builders, watchmen, engineers, clerks and business managers. [^3]

Abraham Lincoln said, "I am not bound to win, but I am bound to be true. I am not bound to succeed, but I am bound to live up to what light I have." [^4] Lincoln is remembered for what he did but also for what he was—a forthright man of integrity.

The principle of honesty is a close relation to that of integrity. Our thirteenth article of faith begins with the statement "We believe in being honest." We do not believe in honesty merely as a matter of policy. Honesty is a principle of salvation in the kingdom of God.

Moses gave us the following counsel: "If a man vow a vow unto the Lord, or swear an oath to bind his soul with a bond; he shall not break his word, he shall do according to all that proceedeth out of his mouth" (Numbers 30:2).

I learned early in my business career that dishonesty is like a disease. It requires a strong antidote to effect a cure. It seemed that every time I was compassionate and gave a dishonest person a second chance, I lived to regret it. It seemed that once they lost their honesty, they had to hit bottom and suffer severe consequences before there was any hope for a permanent cure.

It was Brigham Young who said, "Simple truth, simplicity, honesty uprightness, justice, mercy, love, kindness, do good to all and evil to none, how easy it is to live by such principles! A thousand times easier than to practice deception!" [^5]

Develop sound character. President David O. McKay related the experience of standing in a sculptor's yard in Florence, Italy. There he observed broken, irregular pieces of granite from which the sculptor created works of art. In the yard he also observed a magnificent figure, a statue of David, carved more than four hundred years ago from pieces of stone as crude as those around the yard. He compared the carving of stone to the carving of a soul and asked the question "Is it going to be a deformed one, or is it going to be something admired and beautiful for time and throughout eternity?"

President McKay's account reminds us that it is our responsibility to carve out our own lives, to carve out the character we would like to have. Our tools are our ideas and thoughts.

Charles Reade said, "Sow an act, and you reap a habit. Sow a habit, and you reap a character. Sow a character, and you reap a destiny." [^6]

We become what we think and do. Habits mold our character. Good habits are not acquired from good intentions only; they are developed in the workshop of our daily lives. They are fashioned in the often uneventful, commonplace routines of life and strengthened by practice.

Brigham Young University president Ernest L. Wilkinson once said, "Good character is not something to be obtained by ease and indulgence, or by something socially agreeable. It cannot be acquired by absorption or by proxy, or on the auction block. It is a reward derived from honest trial in overcoming difficulties. We grow by mastering tasks which others consider to be impossible."

This very day you are forming habits that will be part of your life forever. Samuel Johnson, one of England's famous authors, wrote, "The chains of habits are generally too small to be felt until they are too strong to be broken." [^7]

Positive habits are as difficult to make as negative habits are difficult to break. It takes desire, repetition, and time to form them.

The prophets through the ages have counseled and encouraged each of us to develop a sound character. Paul's warning to the Galatians applies to all of us:

Be not deceived; God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap.

For he that soweth to his flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption ; but he that soweth to the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting.

And let us not be weary in well doing: for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not. (Galatians 6:7-9)

If we sow seeds of decency and goodness, the fruits of our honest labors will be blessings in heaven.

Hold fast to those basic principles that are tried and true. Consistently develop your talents, protect and preserve your honesty and integrity, and build a sound character. This is the secret of real staying power, for these are principles that will not depreciate with time. Why? Because they are God-given principles founded on eternal truths.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] That one-half of the debt of members to the Perpetual Emigration Fund be released. This amounted to more than $800, 000 in debt. The International Dictionary of Thoughts, comp. John P. Bradley et al. (Chicago: J. G. Ferguson Publishing Co., 1969), p. 362.
[^2] That the poor be released from the back tithing they owed. This represented nearly $76, 000. Geoffrey W. Bromley, ed., The International Standard Bible Encyclopedia (Grand Rapids, Mich.: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1968), 2:1142.
[^3] That the Church raise a herd of one thousand milk cows to be distributed to the poor and needy. The Church was to contribute three hundred cows, and the rest would be gathered from the stakes of the Church. Conference Report, April 1880, p. 61.
[^4] That the Relief Society gather bushels of wheat to be loaned to the poor to be used as seed. Then after the harvest, the loan could be repaid, thus establishing a perpetual store of seed wheat. (Someone asked President Taylor if the wheat was to be loaned without interest. He replied, "Of course it is; we do not want any nonsense of that kind; it is the time of jubilee.") [^4] Ibid., p. 64; see also pp. 62-63.
[^5] Discourses of Brigham Young, sel. John A. Widtsoe (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1954), p. 232.
[^6] The Oxford University Press Dictionary of Quotations, 2d ed. (London: Chancellor Press, 1985), p. 406.
[^7] The International Dictionary of Thoughts, comp. John P. Bradley et al. (Chicago: J. G. Ferguson Publishing Co., 1969), p. 348.
