L. Tom Perry, Living with Enthusiasm ( 1996)

12

Meaningful Celebrations

Every year, all peoples and all nations celebrate special events in their histories. Christians throughout the world observe Christmas and Easter to celebrate, but more especially to remember the birth and glorious resurrection of Jesus Christ. In the United States, celebrations are also held on Independence Day, July 4, commemorating the declaration of political sovereignty of this great nation. All members of the Church, but especially those residing in Utah, celebrate July 24, or Pioneer Day, the day the Mormon pioneers arrived in the Salt Lake Valley.

Meaningful celebrations focus our thoughts on history. They afford us an opportunity to review the past. We glean perspective and wisdom from the experiences of the past as we anticipate the future. Cicero wrote this of history: "Not to know what has been transacted in former times is to be always a child. If no use is made of the labors of past ages, the world must remain always in the infancy of knowledge." [^1]

Recent events have rekindled in me an interest in our church heritage and history. I have become especially fascinated by the similarities between the Hebrew nation and our own church history.

The man prepared by Heavenly Father to free and lead the nation of Israel was Moses. The Lord revealed through Moses the feasts and events the Israelites should hold as perpetual reminders of their deliverance from slavery and the birth of their new nation. These celebrations took two forms. First were the celebrations of actual historical events, such as the Passover, to remind the people of the Lord's hand in delivering them. In addition, there were traditions tied to periods of time determined by various multiples of the number seven.

Of course, the seventh day was the Sabbath, a day of rest. The seventh month was a time of harvest. Then, as we read in chapter 25 of Leviticus, there were special instructions pertaining to the seventh year and the fiftieth year:

Six years thou shalt sow thy field, and six years thou shalt prune thy vineyard, and gather in the fruit thereof;

But in the seventh year shall be a sabbath of rest unto the land, a sabbath for the Lord: thou shalt neither sow thy field, nor prune thy vineyard. . . .

And thou shalt number seven sabbaths of years unto thee, seven times seven years; and the space of the seven sabbaths of years shall be unto thee forty and nine years.

Then shalt thou cause the trumpet of the jubile to sound on the tenth day of the seventh month, in the day of atonement shall ye make the trumpet sound throughout all your land.

And ye shall hallow the fiftieth year, and proclaim liberty throughout all the land unto all the inhabitants thereof: it shall be a jubile unto you; and ye shall return every man unto his possession, and ye shall return every man unto his family. (Leviticus 25:3-4, 8-10)

Every fiftieth year, the land was to be returned to the original owners or their descendants; all Israelites sold into slavery for debt were to be freed; and the land, as in the seventh or sabbatical year, was to lie fallow.

Even in our day, the tradition of the sabbatical year is perpetuated by universities that encourage faculty members to go on sabbaticals, roughly every seventh year. The word jubilee is derived from a Hebrew word meaning "ram's horn, " no doubt referring to the horn used to proclaim the beginning of the jubilee year, or the fiftieth year.

Four purposes for the celebrations and traditions of ancient Israel could be applied to celebrations in our day to guide and influence the way we celebrate and the meaning we give to our celebrations.

First, meaningful celebrations preserved the religious faith and strengthened the spiritual fiber of the people of Israel. This is clear from the messages associated with the celebration of the jubilee year. An excerpt from The International Standard Bible Encyclopedia states:

The fiftieth year was to be a time of proclaiming liberty to all the inhabitants of the land. God had redeemed His people from bondage in Egypt; and none of them was again to be reduced to the status of . . . slave. . . . God's chosen child was not to be oppressed. . . . Indeed, as citizens of the theocratic kingdom, masters and servants had become brothers together. . . . Thus, as seen in its widest application, only through its loyalty to God could Israel as a nation ever hope to be free and independent of other masters.

A second feature of the Jubilee was that of the restitution of all real property. The purpose was to demonstrate that the earth is subject basically to God's law, and not to man's desires. . . . God's specific legislation concerned the inalienability of Israel's land titles. It required the reversion of all hereditary property to the family that originally possessed it and the reestablishment of the initial arrangement regarding God's division of the land. It did not teach either the socialistic economic theory that a person is entitled to ownership of goods on the basis of his need . . . or the free-enterprise system that allows an unlimited expansion of private property. On the contrary, it established a fixed title to the property assigned by God. [^2]

What powerful messages these are—the Israelites were God's chosen children, all they possessed was God's, and only he could grant permanent title to the land. Truly, these messages, couched in the tradition of the jubilee year, reminded the people of Israel of their spiritual genealogy and their indebtedness to the Lord.

Second, Israel's celebrations and traditions also had a political component. These were times of uniting the tribes, of forming a closer union. Similarly, celebrations that commemorate important events in our native lands should receive our support and attention.

We declare in the twelfth article of faith, "We believe in being subject to kings, presidents, rulers, and magistrates, in obeying, honoring, and sustaining the law." We find that this counsel is continually needed in the Church today. Members of the Church should be committed to obeying and honoring the law of the land in which they live. We should be exemplary in our obedience to the laws of our local and national governments. As the Savior taught, we should render "unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's" so that the hearts of the leaders of nations are softened toward us, allowing us to render "unto God the things that are God's" (Matthew 22:21).

After the Savior's ministry, the apostles urged the Saints to be orderly and law abiding. Writing to Titus, Paul declared, "Put them in mind to be subject to principalities and powers, to obey magistrates, to be ready to every good work" (Titus 3:1).

As Church members, we live under many different national flags. How important it is that we understand our place and our position in the land in which we live! We should be familiar with the history, heritage, and laws that govern our land. In those countries that allow citizens the right to participate in the affairs of government, we should use our God-given agency and be actively engaged in supporting and defending the principles of truth, right, and freedom.

A third element of Israel's celebrations was their cultural impact on the people. Feasts and festivals were a time for sharing talents and accomplishments. They were a time of sharing practical knowledge associated with advancements in the arts and sciences.

Likewise, an important part of our pioneer heritage is an appreciation for all the cultural arts. Many of our pioneer forebears danced and sang as they crossed the plains. These simple entertainments helped them keep their spirits high in the face of tremendous hardship.

As the pioneers settled communities, they built theaters, organized bands and choruses, and sent artists on missions to gain the experience and training necessary to develop their talents fully. Certainly, we honor our pioneer heritage by placing unique and beautiful aspects of our culture at the center of our celebrations. And by so doing, are we not also praising the Lord through the beautiful creations of our hands and minds?

Finally, the celebrations and traditions of ancient Israel held deep social significance. They were a time of building a sense of community, a time to reaffirm the brotherhood and sisterhood shared by everyone, and a time for the bonding of families.

In a general conference of the Church in 1880, President John Taylor announced a jubilee year for the Church. Then he proposed to the members several ways to celebrate the jubilee year, ways that would draw the community of Saints more closely together. President Taylor said, "It occurred to me that we ought to do something, as they did in former times, to relieve those that are oppressed with debt, to assist those that are needy, to break the yoke off those that may feel themselves crowded upon, and to make it a time of general rejoicing." [^3]

President Taylor then proposed the following:

What a marvelous effect President Taylor's proposals must have had on the social structure of the Church. By recasting the traditions of ancient Israel in a way that responded to present-day needs, President Taylor showed the members of the Church how to be true latter-day Saints.

Celebrating important historical events and perpetuating traditions does not replace our study of history. Rather, it encourages it by building bridges between the present and the past and bringing relevance and interest to the study of history. When we celebrate, we remember. Sometimes we reenact what has gone on before us. When we honor traditions, we are more likely to retain the righteous spiritual, political, cultural, and social values our ancestors worked to pass along to their posterity.

I hope that as we continue to commemorate historical events and reclaim our traditions, we always celebrate with a purpose. I pray that we will make our celebrations more meaningful by reaffirming significant spiritual, political, cultural, and social values. As members of this great church, we share a rich heritage. We stand on the shoulders of the great people who preceded us and who were giants of faith, vision, and spirit. When we honor them and their many sacrifices, we preserve their achievements and the principles and values for which they stood.

We learn from ancient Israel that there is a place for commemorative events. Let us build in our families, communities, and nations those traditions that will consistently remind us of the Lord's eternal truths and of our forebears who preserved them for our day.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] That one-half of the debt of members to the Perpetual Emigration Fund be released. This amounted to more than $800, 000 in debt. The International Dictionary of Thoughts, comp. John P. Bradley et al. (Chicago: J. G. Ferguson Publishing Co., 1969), p. 362.
[^2] That the poor be released from the back tithing they owed. This represented nearly $76, 000. Geoffrey W. Bromley, ed., The International Standard Bible Encyclopedia (Grand Rapids, Mich.: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1968), 2:1142.
[^3] That the Church raise a herd of one thousand milk cows to be distributed to the poor and needy. The Church was to contribute three hundred cows, and the rest would be gathered from the stakes of the Church. Conference Report, April 1880, p. 61.
