L. Tom Perry, Living with Enthusiasm ( 1996)

13

Worthy to Enter

I have always been grateful I grew up in a community where the holy temple was a prominent feature. From almost anywhere in Cache Valley, I could look to the east, and there on the hill was the majestic Logan Temple. I have always appreciated its beauty, but more than that, I have appreciated its sacred purpose.

I also appreciated growing up in a home where my parents taught me what a great privilege it is to attend the temple. Some of my fondest memories are of watching my mother press temple clothes. It was done frequently in our home, and always with tender, loving care.

When my siblings and I were younger, we would anxiously anticipate (probably for the wrong reason) the times our parents went to the temple. Before Mother would leave, she would tie a few mints in the corner of her handkerchief so that if she had a problem with coughing while in the temple, she could quickly slip a mint into her mouth to avoid any disturbance during the session. She used the mints infrequently, so when she returned home from the temple, the mints were usually still in her handkerchief. Those of us who had been good while she and Father attended the temple were rewarded with a mint.

As I grew older, I gained a deeper appreciation of the blessings of temple attendance. My parents showed a special radiance as they returned from a temple session. The only way to describe their love for each other is to say it became more celestial after their visits to the temple.

At the time when I was approaching the age to be called to serve a full-time mission for the Church and to receive my temple endowments, my father was the bishop of our ward. Dad and I worked together frequently out in the backyard, hoeing the garden, cutting the hay, mending a fence, and milking a cow. He could have taken any of many occasions to give me a temple worthiness interview while we were out in the field or in the barn. But that is not the way my dad chose to approach this sacred event.

One day I received a call from my father at his office. He invited me to come to the chapel for a temple recommend interview. I thought it very strange at the time that he made the appointment in such a formal way. Mother had been notified and she helped me prepare for the interview. I dressed in a suit and tie before I went to meet with my father, the bishop, for my first temple recommend interview.

When I arrived at my father's office, the setting was very different than other times I had been there. There were no papers piled on the table, no reports. The desk was clear, and only the scriptures were in evidence as I walked in. Father greeted me and asked me to sit down. Then he commenced to interview me for my first temple recommend.

My father did not start the interview by asking questions. Instead he opened certain scriptures, and we read together. Then he commented about the scripture. I believe the first scripture we read was from the book of Moses, chapter 5, verse 5, when the Lord instructed Adam and Eve: "And he gave unto them commandments, that they should worship the Lord their God, and should offer the firstlings of their flocks, for an offering unto the Lord. And Adam was obedient unto the commandments of the Lord."

We discussed what it means to be obedient, to be familiar with the doctrines of the Church, not to belong to any apostate group or have leanings toward those who are unfriendly toward the gospel of our Lord and Savior. It was a lifting and learning experience to discuss the law of obedience.

The next scripture we turned to is found in First Corinthians, chapter 3: "Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you? If any man defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy; for the temple of God is holy, which temple ye are" (1 Corinthians 3:16-17).

Then we discussed what it means to be a temple of God, and how we defile that holy temple if we drink alcohol, use tobacco, or take any substance into our body that would cause us to be addicted and enslaved by repeated use.

This was followed by a discussion of moral cleanliness and the importance of keeping ourselves clean and not defiling our body through immoral acts. It was inspiring and humbling to listen to what it meant to be a temple of God.

The next scripture we turned to was section 119 of the Doctrine and Covenants, verse 4: "Those who have thus been tithed shall pay one-tenth of all their interest annually; and this shall be a standing law unto them forever, for my holy priesthood, saith the Lord."

This was followed by my father's own testimony of how tithing had continually blessed our family. Although times had not always been easy, the first part of all earnings he received from his legal practice, the source of income, was deposited to the Church account in the bank where his office was located. It was a ritual with him. First, the tithing was paid, and then other expenses were met with what remained. His burning testimony of the law of tithing had a profound influence on me as I listened to his witness of how the Lord had blessed us as a family for his faithfulness in giving the Lord a tenth of his annual increase.

We then turned to section 21 of the Doctrine and Covenants:

Behold, there shall be a record kept among you; and in it thou shalt be called a seer, a translator, a prophet, an apostle of Jesus Christ, an elder of the church through the will of God the Father, and the grace of your Lord Jesus Christ,

Being inspired of the Holy Ghost to lay the foundation thereof, and to build it up unto the most holy faith. . . .

Wherefore, meaning the church, thou shalt give heed unto all his words and commandments which he shall give unto you as he receiveth them, walking in all holiness before me. (D&C 21:1-2, 4)

We then had an opportunity to talk about what it means to sustain a prophet of the Lord. My father recounted some of his experiences with the prophets during his lifetime.

After these scriptures were read and discussed, the questions were posed to me: Do you live the Word of Wisdom? Are you morally clean? Are you obedient to the will of the Lord? Do you pay your tithes and offerings to the Lord? Do you sustain the prophet? All of these are familiar questions that we answer many times in our lives, whether we are renewing our temple recommends or being called to positions of responsibility in the Church.

After the interview was over and I had answered the questions to my father's satisfaction, he completed the temple recommend form and had me sign it. Then he signed it and got up from behind his desk. He threw his arms around me as he presented me with a little piece of paper signifying that I was worthy to enter the house of the Lord. Since that day, I have considered it a special, personal challenge in my life to always be able to sit in front of a priesthood leader and certify to him that I am worthy to hold a temple recommend and enter the Lord's house.

I don't think I have ever been more impressed with what a temple recommend means than when I served as a stake president. In the Boston stake, we had a dear widow who lived in one of the poorer sections of Boston. She had been struggling to sustain herself and sometimes even required a little of our assistance. She could not afford to move out of the apartment she had lived in for many years, but as the neighborhood deteriorated around her, it became almost a prison for her. When she went to the grocery store, she found the streets very unfriendly. One time she was knocked to the ground by an attacker who took her money.

After that terrifying experience, she requested that a priesthood bearer accompany her to the grocery store once a week. She had a system of unlocking the door for us when we arrived. We would rap on the door of her apartment, and we would hear her voice through the door, asking, "Who is it?" We would repeat our names, and then she would say, "Slide your temple recommend under the door so I can be certain it is you." After our recommends were pushed under the door, she would unlock the door and permit us to come in.

I have often thought about the significance of that experience. Because of all that is required to attain a temple recommend, a little piece of paper attests to our trustworthiness and integrity. That little piece of paper also opens the doors to our personal sanctification as we use it to draw closer to the Lord in his holy house.

The Lord declared in his instructions to Moses, "For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39). Immortality is to live forever in a resurrected state, with body and spirit inseparably connected. Immortality is a gift of God to his children through his grace. Eternal life is the name given to the kind of life our Heavenly Father lives. Only those who obey the fulness of the gospel law will inherit eternal life.

We have received this promise: "If you keep my commandments and endure to the end you shall have eternal life, which gift is the greatest of all the gifts of God" (D&C 14:7). Eternal life has no limits; we never stop in our eternal growth and increase. It comes to us only by entering into the new and everlasting covenant, being married for time and eternity by the power of the holy priesthood in the temple of the Lord.

May we always be worthy of holding a temple recommend. May it be one of our objectives in life to consistently and regularly sit before our priesthood leaders and declare our worthiness to receive this little piece of paper that, if we remain worthy to hold it, opens the door to the house of the Lord.
