L. Tom Perry, Living with Enthusiasm ( 1996)

14

The Joy of Honest Labor

In Proverbs we read, "Train up a child in the way he should go: and when he is old, he will not depart from it"(Proverbs 22:6).

From the very beginning, one of the great challenges of life for parents has been the task of rearing children. This formidable responsibility seems destined to bring the greatest joys and some of the greatest sorrows of mortal life.

Every child, of course, is different, and what works for one may not elicit the desired response from another. However, I believe that second only to ensuring that each child receive an understanding of the gospel of Jesus Christ is teaching them the joy of honest labor.

I was taught this blessing by goodly parents. How grateful I am for a father who had the patience to teach me how to work. I remember that when I was only seven years old, we were remodeling our house, which involved tearing out the walls. In those days, two-by-sixes were used as studding. To the studs was nailed the lathe, and over the lathe came the plaster. When tearing out walls, the slats and the plaster were easy to knock off, but of course this left the nails in the two-by-sixes.

Each night after the workers had finished, I had the responsibility of gathering up the two-by-sixes and taking them to the back lawn, where there were two sawhorses. There I was to make a pile of the heavy boards and then, one at a time, put them on the sawhorses and with a crowbar remove all the nails. After the nails had been retrieved, I was told to straighten them. Finally, I threw the straightened nails into a large green bucket and stacked the two-by-sixes in a neat pile.

There was much in this project that was of value to me in my young life. First, I was taught to be productive, to be busily engaged, and not to waste my time in idleness.

From the very beginning, the Lord commanded Adam to till the earth and have dominion over the beasts of the field (see Moses 2:26), to eat his bread by the sweat of his face (see Moses 4:25). I am impressed at how often the scriptures admonish us to be productive in all of our labors, to cease to be idle. King Benjamin in his final address noted his example before the people: "I say unto you that as I have been suffered to spend my days in your service, even up to this time, and have not sought gold nor silver nor any manner of riches of you; . . . and even I, myself, have labored with mine own hands that I might serve you, and that ye should not be laden with taxes, and that there should nothing come upon you which was grievous to be borne—and of all these things which I have spoken, ye yourselves are witnesses this day" (Mosiah 2:12, 14).

The joy of honest labor is one of the great lessons we can teach our children. I am convinced that one of the reasons for the breakup of so many couples today is the failure of parents to teach and train sons in their responsibilities to provide and care for their families and to enjoy the challenge this responsibility brings. Many of us also have fallen short in instilling within our daughters the desire of bringing beauty and order into their homes through homemaking.

Oh, how essential it is that each child be taught early in life the joy that comes from starting and fashioning a job that is the workmanship of her or his own hands. Teach children the joy of honest labor. Provide a foundation that brings confidence and fulfillment to each life. "Happy is the man who has work he loves to do. Happy is the man who loves the work he has to do." [^1]

Second, as a boy doing the job my father had assigned me, I was taught not to waste; to conserve resources where possible. When the nails were pulled from them, the two-by-sixes could be used again—and we did use them.

I have always enjoyed reading some of the counsel that Brigham Young gave to the Saints in the early days of the Church. His counsel was always so practical. Listen to what he said about waste: "Pick up everything, let nothing go to waste. . . . Never consider that you have enough bread around to suffer your children to waste a crust or a crumb of it. . . . Remember it, do not waste anything, but take care of everything. . . . If you wish to get rich, save what you get. A fool can earn money; but it takes a wise man to save and dispose of it to his own advantage." [^2]

I wonder what kind of signals we are sending to our children when we purchase homes that are status symbols. We waste space and resources when we buy a larger home than we need, a larger home than is practical for us to afford. We encumber ourselves with mortgages so large they require the income of both husband and wife to make payments. Then we build consumer debt to the point of completely absorbing all our disposable income, leaving no margin of safety for the rainy days that come into everyone's life. Such examples from parents only feed the philosophy of "I want it now" in their children. Lost to the next generation is the discipline associated with delayed gratification.

Some members of the Church have even arrived at the mistaken impression that after turning their ears away from the counsel of the prophets to avoid unnecessary debt, they can then turn to their bishops to bail them out of their foolishness. All the poor bishops can do is weep with them, help them move to more affordable housing, and suggest ways they can cut their losses.

As I reflect back on my life, I do not believe there was any difference in the degree of happiness I enjoyed when my two brothers and I shared a single bedroom as compared to the time when we had a home large enough for each of us to enjoy our own bedroom. Great lessons were taught me by wise parents who believed that what they spent should be dictated by what they could afford, not by what they wanted.

The third principle I learned from the experience with the nails and the two-by-sixes is hard to put into words. I will never forget my consternation as I watched the workmen using new nails as they built the walls back up and completed the remodeling of our home. The pile of nails I had straightened and put in the green bucket grew and grew and was never used. I went to my father and said, "Wouldn't it be better to save the new nails and use the ones I have straightened?" I was proud of the work I had accomplished.

My father showed me something very important. He took a new nail and turned it at an odd angle to drive it into a board. He was able to drive it straight and true. Then he took one of the nails I had straightened so carefully and, turning it at the same odd angle, hit the old nail with the hammer. It soon bent and was impossible to drive into the board. So I learned that a used or bent nail is never as strong as a new one. But then why had my father asked me to straighten all those nails?

As a boy, I never remember receiving a satisfactory answer to that question. It was not until I had a son of my own that I started to understand. When my son was about three years old, I would take him out to the garden to help me weed. I assumed that he, being so low to the ground at the time, would have a real advantage at weeding. Unfortunately for my garden, he had a difficult time distinguishing between the weeds and the young plants.

I then tried Lee at milking a cow we jointly owned with a neighbor. He quickly developed the hand action of a fine milker, but sadly his aim was not very good. Whenever I checked on him, he was always surrounded by a white puddle and the milk bucket was nearly empty. He would look up at me and smile proudly, and my initial inclination to be angry would quickly disappear. But I was frustrated. I expected him to help me, but he only seemed to create more work.

It was at such a moment of frustration that I remembered straightening nails for my father, and I began to understand. Work is something more than its final end result. It is a discipline, something we must learn to do, and do well, before we can expect to receive tangible rewards for our labors. My father must have known that if he focused on the outcome of my labors, he would only become frustrated with how inadequately I performed. So he found tasks that were difficult and would challenge me, and thus he taught me the discipline of hard work. He was using the straightened nails not to remodel our home but to build my character.

The fourth thing I learned from my childhood work project was to finish the tasks I started. I was instructed to stack the used two-by-sixes neatly in a pile so the workmen could use them the next day. My work was never finished until this was done and the tools I had used were put away.

Let us also teach our children to see that their assigned work is carried to its completion and to take pride in what they have accomplished. There is a special satisfaction that comes from finishing a task, especially when it is the best work we know how to do.

These lessons instilled in me a sense of joy and appreciation for honest labor and prepared me for that time in my life when I would have the responsibility of providing for my own family. The principles I was being taught—of honest labor, conservation, discipline, and seeing a task to its completion—were basic to many of my successes in life. These lessons prepared me to meet the challenges of an ever-changing world.

Is this not the same lesson Paul preached? He declared, "Neither did we eat any man's bread for nought; but wrought with labour and travail night and day, that we might not be chargeable to any of you: not because we have not power, but to make ourselves an ensample unto you to follow us" (2 Thessalonians 3:8-9).

An event occurred in my life recently that again impressed upon me the blessings that accrue from good, early childhood training. When I arrived at the Salt Lake airport following a weekend assignment, I was delivered a note that one of my very best friends had passed away and that her funeral would be held in just an hour and a half in a community about fifty miles from the airport. I quickly found my car and started the drive to the funeral.

My friend had been my Primary teacher for three years when I was a Trail Builder. I had been nine, ten, and eleven years old when she taught me. As I drove to the funeral that morning, my mind was flooded with pleasant memories of my early childhood.

I especially remembered the powerful example of early childhood training. I remembered goodly parents who were always there to teach, inspire, and love and to give strong encouragement to help me chart the right course in my life. I remembered a kind aunt, who lived next door and who reinforced, with her words and example, the teachings of my parents.

Then I remembered my friend, Sister Call, who extended herself much beyond her call as a teacher. Her lessons included many field trips to teach us what life, labor, and the joy of friendships were all about. Her special way of weaving her lessons into our lives gave us an understanding of our personal worth.

As I drove along the highway, my heart was filled with overwhelming gratitude for parents, extended family, and Church members who had the patience, love, and concern to build a firm foundation in my life during those critical early years. All children need the same patience, love, and concern. The important lessons of life, lessons like the joy of honest labor, are taught by example. I leave this challenge with the adult members of the Church: May your examples be worthy of emulation by the children. If they are, I am confident that your examples will also be pleasing to the Lord.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Discourses of Brigham Young, sel. John A. Widtsoe (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1954), p. 293.
[^2] "Address, " Relief Society Magazine, October 1937, p. 627.
