L. Tom Perry, Living with Enthusiasm ( 1996)

15

Becoming Self-Reliant

After Lehi and his family had wandered in the wilderness for eight years, they came to a land they called Bountiful because it was a place of much fruit and also wild honey. They came to a great sea, and they rejoiced unto the Lord because he had preserved them. After they had been in the land of Bountiful for the space of many days, the Lord spoke to Nephi and said, "Arise, and get thee into the mountain" (1 Nephi 17:7).

Nephi obeyed the Lord; he went into the mountain and prayed. And the Lord commanded Nephi, "Thou shalt construct a ship, after the manner which I shall show thee, that I may carry thy people across these waters" (1 Nephi 17:8).

Then Nephi asked, "Lord, whither shall I go that I may find ore to molten, that I may make tools to construct the ship after the manner which thou hast shown unto me?" (1 Nephi 17:9).

The Lord instructed Nephi where he could find ore, but then Nephi was left on his own to make the tools:

And it came to pass that I, Nephi, did make a bellows wherewith to blow the fire, of the skins of beasts; and after I had made a bellows, that I might have wherewith to blow the fire, I did smite two stones together that I might make fire. . . .

And it came to pass that I did make tools of the ore which I did molten out of the rock. (1 Nephi 17:11, 16)

This is one of the more interesting stories in the scriptures because it tells of an instance in which the Lord provided help but then stepped aside and allowed one of his sons to exercise his own initiative. I have sometimes wondered what would have happened if Nephi had asked the Lord for tools instead of a place to find ore to make the tools. I doubt the Lord would have honored Nephi's request. You see, the Lord knew that Nephi could make tools, and it is seldom that the Lord will do something for us that we can do for ourselves.

The Lord does help when we go to him in times of need, especially when we are committed to his work and responding to his will. But the Lord only helps those who are willing to help themselves. He expects his children to be self-reliant to the degree they can be.

Brigham Young instructed the Saints, "Instead of searching after what the Lord is going to do for us, let us inquire what we can do for ourselves." [^1]

Independence and self-reliance are critical to our spiritual and temporal growth. Whenever we get into a situation that threatens our self-reliance, we will find our freedom threatened as well. If we increase our dependence on anything or anyone except the Lord, we will find an immediate decrease in our freedom to act. As President Heber J. Grant declared, "Nothing destroys the individuality of a man, a woman, or a child as much as the failure to be self-reliant." [^2]

Self-reliance has become even more necessary in recent years. We live in a time of rapid change. Governments are rising and falling. Industries are booming and then, all too soon, becoming obsolete. New discoveries in science soon are overshadowed by newer discoveries. Unless we are continuously expanding our understanding and vision, we too will become out-of-date. Research tells us that individuals entering the labor market today will be forced to find three to five different career paths during their productive years.

What must we do to become more self-reliant? My parents established a family tradition in our home that was fun for me in my early years and has become even more meaningful as I have reflected back on it with the passing of years. On the first birthday of each child, the family would gather in the living room. In the center of the living room floor, our parents would place articles for the one-year-old child to select. The selection to be made might indicate an interest the child would pursue in life. The articles were a Bible, a child's bottle filled with milk, a toy, and a savings bank filled with coins. The child was placed on one side of the room and the family on the other side. Family members would encourage the child to crawl toward the objects and make a selection. This was all in fun, of course.

I was told that I selected the bank, and I went into finance as a profession. I watched my brother Ted select the scriptures, and he pursued law as his chosen profession. Over the years he has relied on the scriptures as a basis for his judgments. My youngest brother, Bob, was the well-rounded member of the family. He crawled over, sat down on the Bible, put the bottle of milk in his mouth, and held the toy in one hand and the bank in the other.

I now propose to you that in this entertaining family activity we can find some of the most fundamental principles of self-reliance. First, the scriptures represent our need for spiritual nourishment. In the scriptures the Lord reveals his will to his children. From the beginning of time, he has instructed his prophets to record his communications with them for the benefit of his children. The holy scriptures declare eternal values; they are the firm foundation on which we can build a successful mortal experience. We become more self-reliant when we study the holy scriptures, which teach the principles that provide a divine center to our lives here in mortality.

We should be comforted by the fact that we have the best text that has ever been written or ever will be written for our guide. We can turn to Second Kings, chapter 5, to learn about obedience. We can study the life of Job to learn integrity. King Benjamin's words in Mosiah chapter 2, verse 14, teach industry. The life of Joseph, as told in Genesis 39, tells us what to do when our standard of morality is being tested.

These are just a few examples of the lessons that can be learned from the holy scriptures. They are lessons that have stood the test of time. Our challenge is to make them come alive in the hearts and minds of our families as we assume the responsibility to teach them.

Second, the bottle filled with milk symbolizes the physical body's need for nourishment. Our Welfare Services program has taught us by using the spokes of a wheel to define the essential elements of temporal self-reliance. The elements contained in the wheel are education, physical health, employment, home storage, resource management, and social, emotional, and spiritual strength.

Recently my wife Barbara and I had an opportunity to visit with an eighty-year-old man who certainly demonstrates those elements in his life. He was born in a small Idaho town and worked long hours on the farm to finance his education. He spent his professional life teaching English and Spanish in a small high school. To set aside funds for missions and the education of his large family, he grew strawberry and raspberry crops to be picked and sold to local markets. This labor occupied his summers.

Because producing these fruits was so labor-intensive, few people had the ambition to grow them. Nevertheless, they were much-wanted crops. The demand was always there for as many berries as he could produce. He was never satisfied with current levels of productivity, so he studied new varieties of bushes in an attempt to find the best producers. His backyard was literally an experimental farm for testing the variety of bushes that produced the sweetest and most abundant fruit in his particular climate. His studies yielded increased productivity. The labor kept him in good physical health. The field of berries furnished automatic employment for his children each summer. The berries delivered to the market could be exchanged not only for cash but also for commodities to be used in the family's home storage. He managed his resources to build a beautiful home and supply the needs of his family.

This man loves to watch the Lord's system of multiplying and replenishing the earth, and he draws emotional and spiritual strength from his work. Now retired from active teaching, he continues to grow his berries, not for profit but for satisfaction. Six mornings each week during the berry harvest season, you will see him leading a parade of ten to twelve cars out of the city toward his berry patch. Families come to add to their home storage by picking the berries. I asked him the price per case if we supplied our own labor. He answered, "I don't know. My pay is seeing the look on people's faces as they leave the field holding the fruits of their labors in their arms."

I am convinced there are thousands of ways for families to build self-reliance by working together in productive pursuits. Perhaps a good family home evening discussion could produce some ideas to help make your family unit more temporally self-reliant.

Third, the toy I mentioned earlier represents the acquisition of things of the world. We are bombarded today with powerful media messages to "acquire now and pay later" in what are purported to be painless monthly installments. We live in an impatient world where everybody wants everything now. The acquisition of worldly goods seems to foster an appetite for more rather than any kind of lasting satisfaction.

Using our resources and worldly goods wisely and extending their life through preventive maintenance will help us become more self-reliant. I watched a young family move this summer, and I was intrigued by the labels on the boxes coming out of the storage room. They read, "Clothing—girls—2 years old, " "Clothing—girls—3 years old, " and so on up. Clearly, this family had a well-conceived plan for maximizing the usage of purchased items of clothing.

We live in a world blessed with so much abundance. Let us be certain that the resources with which we are blessed are never wasted.

Finally, the fourth item, the bank. It is a symbol of our financial well-being. I learned a great lesson early in my business career. My new boss called me into his office, and I could tell he had something on his mind. He said, "Give me a definition of interest." Of course, I reached back to my college training and gave him the definition I had learned from a textbook. He said, "No, no, no, that's not the one I want. You listen to this one: Them that understands it, earns it; and them that don't, pays it."

Now, it doesn't take a genius to understand that before you can collect interest you must first have some savings. Having a savings fund while continuing to increase one's standard of living requires understanding of one simple practice and then religiously applying it. After paying your tithing of ten percent to the Lord, pay yourself a predetermined amount directly into savings. That leaves you the balance of your income to budget for taxes, food, clothing, shelter, transportation, etc. It is amazing to me that so many people work all of their lives for the grocer, the landlord, the power company, the automobile salesman, and the bank and yet think so little of their own efforts that they pay themselves nothing.

Be prudent, wise, and conservative in your investment programs. It is by consistently and regularly adding to your investments that you will build your emergency and retirement savings. This will add to your progress in becoming self-reliant.

The principle of self-reliance is spiritual as well as temporal. It is not a doomsday program; it is something to be put into practice each and every day of our lives. Consider your ways. Develop a plan, and begin to work to become more self-reliant. The Lord does help those who have learned to help themselves.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Relief Society Courses of Study 1977-78 (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1977), p. 2.
[^2] Masterpieces of Latter-day Saint Leaders, comp. N. B. Lundwall (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1953), p. 78.
