L. Tom Perry, Living with Enthusiasm ( 1996)

16

"Therefore I Was Taught"

"I, Nephi, having been born of goodly parents, therefore I was taught somewhat in all the learning of my father" (1 Nephi 1:1). What a different world this would be if the personal journals of each of our Father in Heaven's children could begin with a similar phrase—about having goodly parents and being taught by them.

We live in a unique time in history, a time when the Lord's gospel has been restored in its fulness. Our missionary force is increasing in quality and quantity; thus, the gospel is being taught in more languages, to more nations, and to greater numbers of listening ears than ever before. As wards and stakes are being established in most parts of the world, creative minds have been inspired to develop communication instruments that can bring the instructions of the prophets to the ears of these people. The good news of the gospel can now spread more rapidly to bring the hope of everlasting peace to the hearts and minds of all mankind.

One of the great messages of the gospel is the doctrine of the eternal nature of the family unit. We declare to the world the value and importance of family life, and we recognize that much of the confusion and difficulty existing in today's world can be traced to the deterioration of family life. Positive home experiences in which children are taught and trained by loving parents are diminishing.

Family life, with children and parents communicating together in study, play, and work, has been replaced by a microwaved individual dinner and an evening in front of the television set. In 1991 the National Association of Counties concluded that the lack of home influence had become a crisis in our nation, and it spent time in meetings discussing relevant concerns. The association identified five basic concepts that, if they were implemented, could increase every family's chances for success: first, strengthen relationships through family activities; second, establish reasonable rules and expectations; third, build self-esteem; fourth, set achievable goals; and fifth, periodically evaluate family strengths and needs.

Suddenly the urgent, warning voices of ancient and latter-day prophets have special relevance. Frequently and consistently, the prophets have encouraged and counseled us to be attentive to our own families. They have also encouraged the members of the Church to accelerate their missionary efforts to bring others to a knowledge of the eternal importance of the family unit.

In the very beginning, the Lord's instructions to Adam and Eve made clear their responsibilities as parents. The roles of the first parents were well defined. After Adam and Eve had received instructions from the Lord, we find them responding to his counsel:

And in that day Adam blessed God and was filled, and began to prophesy concerning all the families of the earth, saying: Blessed be the name of God, for because of my transgression my eyes are opened, and in this life I shall have joy, and again in the flesh I shall see God.

And Eve, his wife, heard all these things and was glad, saying: Were it not for our transgression we never should have had seed, and never should have known good and evil, and the joy of our redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedient.

And Adam and Eve blessed the name of God, and they made all things known unto their sons and their daughters. (Moses 5:10-12)

From the very beginning, parents were expected to learn the ways of God; then they were given the responsibility to teach their children.

Latter-day revelations also admonish parents to teach and train their children. In section 93 of the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord chastised some of the brethren for not paying attention to their family responsibilities:

I have commanded you to bring up your children in light and truth. . . .

You have not taught your children light and truth, according to the commandments; and that wicked one hath power, as yet, over you, and this is the cause of your affliction.

And now a commandment I give unto you—if you will be delivered you shall set in order your own house, for there are many things that are not right in your house. (D&C 93:40, 42-43)

Years ago, the Church established the family home evening program. Today, that program is woven into the fabric of many members' homes. Monday night has been set aside as an evening for the families to be together. No Church activities or social appointments are scheduled on this night. Great blessings are promised to those families who make a conscientious effort to hold a weekly family home evening.

President Lee once counseled us:

Now [keep] in mind this; that when the full measure of Elijah's mission is understood, that the hearts of the children will be turned to the fathers, and the fathers to the children. It applies just as much on this side of the veil as it does on the other side of the veil. If we neglect our families here in having family home [evenings] and we fail in our responsibility here, how would heaven look if we lost some of those through our own neglect? Heaven would not be heaven until we have done everything we can to save those whom the Lord has sent through our lineage. So, the hearts of you fathers and mothers must be turned to your children right now, if you have the true spirit of Elijah, and not think that it applies merely to those who are beyond the veil. Let your hearts be turned to your children, and teach your children; but you must do it when they are young enough to be properly schooled. And if you are neglecting your family home evening, you are neglecting the beginning of the mission of Elijah just as certainly as if you were neglecting your research [in family histories]. [^1] I've often thought of the happy times we had when our family was young and our children were at home. In my mind I have reviewed those early years and considered the changes I would make to our family organization if we could live that period again. There are two areas I would definitely improve if that privilege were granted me.

The first would be spending more time with my wife in family executive committee meetings in order to learn, communicate, plan, and organize our respective roles as parents.

The second wish would be to spend more family time. This includes more consistent, meaningful family home evenings.

The full burden of planning and preparing for family home evenings should not be left to the parents alone. The most successful ones I have witnessed are those where children assume an active role.

I call on you great children of the Primary, you deacons, teachers, and priests of the Aaronic Priesthood, and you young women of the Church to make major contributions to your family home evenings. In many homes you can be the conscience of the family. After all, you have the most to gain from the experience. Imagine how the knowledge and testimonies you gain from excellent family home evenings can add to the peace, security, and excellence of the world you will someday lead.

An example of how a righteous child can influence a family to do good occurred one year when our extended family had an outing on New Year's Eve. In order to have a real togetherness experience, we had arranged for a van so we could travel together. In the van were Grandpa and Grandma, my son, and his three older children. My son's wife had stayed at home with the younger children. I was driving, and my wife was seated next to me, acting as my navigator. From the rear of the van, I heard Audrey, my son's eldest child, counseling with her father. She was saying, "Dad, one of our family goals this year was to finish the Book of Mormon. This is the last day of the year. Why don't we complete it now so that we will reach our goal?"

What a special experience it was to listen to my son and his three children each take turns reading aloud the final chapters of Moroni to complete their goal of reading the entire Book of Mormon. Remember, it was one of the children who made this suggestion, not a parent.

The youth of the Church are a chosen generation, saved for this critical time in the history of mankind. You have so much to add to the growth and development of your families. I challenge you to step forward with your special, youthful enthusiasm and make the gospel really come alive in your homes. Remember the counsel of President Joseph F. Smith:

I would like my children, and all the children of Zion, to know that there is nothing in this world that is of so much value to them as the knowledge of the gospel as it has been restored to the earth in these latter days through the Prophet Joseph Smith. There is nothing that can compensate for its loss. There is nothing on earth that can compare with the excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ. Let, therefore, all the parents in Zion, look after their children, and teach them the principles of the gospel, and strive as far as possible to get them to do their duty—not mechanically, because they are urged to do it, but try to instill into the hearts of the children the spirit of truth and an abiding love for the gospel, that they may not only do their duty because it is pleasing to their parents, but because it is pleasing also to themselves. [^2]

Family home evenings are for every family, whether a two-parent home, a single-parent home, or the home of a single member. Along with my challenge to the youth of the Church, I challenge the home teachers to encourage the families they visit to hold regular and meaningful family home evenings.

President Ezra Taft Benson reminded the Saints of the necessity of holding family home evenings, and he listed the ingredients that constitute a successful one. He said:

Designed to strengthen and safeguard the family, the Church's [family] home evening program establishes one night each week that is to be set apart for fathers and mothers to gather their sons and daughters around them in the home. Prayer is offered, hymns and other songs are sung, scriptures are read, family topics are discussed, talent is displayed, principles of the gospel are taught, and often games are played and homemade refreshments served. [^3]

It is my hope that you will write down and consider each of these suggestions made by a latter-day prophet about what an effective family home evening should be.

President Benson continued:

Now here are the blessings promised by a prophet of God for those who will hold weekly [family] home evenings: "If the Saints obey this counsel, we promise that great blessings will result. Love at home and obedience to parents will increase. Faith will be developed in the hearts of the youth of Israel, and they will gain power to combat the evil influences and temptations which beset them." [^4]

Families of the Church, consider your ways. Are you holding regular and meaningful family home evenings? I give you my promise that this inspired program can be a shield and protection to you against the evils of our time and will bring you, individually and collectively, greater and more abundant joy.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Hymns, no. 239.
[^2] Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 2d ed. rev., ed. B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 5:134-35.
[^3] President Kimball Speaks Out (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981), p. 94.
[^4] Linda Gay Perry Nelson, 1993.
