L. Tom Perry, Living with Enthusiasm ( 1996)

17

"Choose the Right"

The chorus of James L. Townsend's stirring hymn text provides timeless advice about what to do when deciding between right and wrong. We should

Choose the right! Choose the right! Let wisdom mark the way before. In its light, choose the right! And God will bless you evermore. [^1]

On a recent trip to New Zealand, I met with a mission president who wore a lovely silver and turquoise tie tack with the inspiring CTR, or "Choose the Right, " emblem etched on it. I had the impression that there must be a story behind his unique CTR pin. When I returned home, I wrote him a thank-you letter and asked him about his tie tack. I received this answer:

You are very perceptive. Yes, there is a story behind the tie tack I'm wearing. . . . A few weeks before coming to New Zealand as a mission president, I was in the Kayenta Ward in Kayenta, Arizona. As I was saying some tender farewells to many of my Navajo friends, a remarkable young Navajo bishop gave me a big hug and then removed his tie tack and pinned it on my tie. As he did so, he asked me not to forget him.

Now here in New Zealand, the last thing I do every morning as I dress for this great calling is to pin my tie tack with this beautiful silver and turquoise CTR emblem on my tie. I love it! I know it helps this old boilermaker make right choices throughout the day. I know also that it helps fulfill a prophetic promise made to my wife and I from President Gordon B. Hinckley as he laid his hands on our heads and set us apart.

He said words to this effect: "You will have an instant bonding of love for every missionary in your mission." I can't tell you how many times that a missionary, during a visit, has said something like this: "President Gardner, I love your tie tack." And then he or she will show me their CTR ring.

I believe that Navajo bishop was inspired to give me the tie tack and that I make the right decision every day when I choose to wear it. And the blue and silver CTR pin is helping to bond me to a royal army of missionaries in the New Zealand Wellington Mission.

This letter from this special mission president has caused me to think about the "Choose the Right" motto of the Primary. Primary teachers instruct the youth of the Church in gospel principles that will help them always choose the right.

The Book of Mormon is filled with accounts of what happens to people who make both right and wrong choices. Let me refer to two examples:

During Alma's first year in the judgment seat, a large and strong man by the name of Nehor was brought before him to be judged. According to the scriptures, Nehor was going about among the people creating trouble and dissension:

And he had gone about among the people, preaching to them that which he termed to be the word of God, bearing down against the church; declaring unto the people that every priest and teacher ought to become popular; and they ought not to labor with their hands, but that they ought to be supported by the people.

And he also testified unto the people that all mankind should be saved at the last day, and that they need not fear nor tremble, but that they might lift up their heads and rejoice; for the Lord had created all men, and had also redeemed all men; and, in the end, all men should have eternal life. (Alma 1:3-4)

Nehor's words appealed to many of the people; they were easy words because they required neither obedience nor sacrifice. As we face many decisions in life, the easy and popular messages of the world will seem appealing. But when these worldly messages con tradict gospel teachings and the still, small voice of the Spirit, we can be 100 percent confident they are wrong. Still, it will take great courage to choose the right.

Now the second example: In the land of Ammonihah, Amulek and Alma also found a people following false teachings. Amulek, speaking first, attempted to convert them again to the true and living gospel. Zeezrom, a man who was expert in the devices of the devil, challenged the teachings of Amulek. Zeezrom asked Amulek, "Shall [Jesus Christ] save his people in their sins?" Amulek answered and said, "I say unto you he shall not, for it is impossible for him to deny his word" (Alma 11:34).

Zeezrom taunted Amulek, but Amulek refused to waver in his faith. He chose the right by bearing testimony of the plan of redemption:

And I say unto you again that he cannot save them in their sins; for I cannot deny his word, and he hath said that no unclean thing can inherit the kingdom of heaven; therefore, how can ye be saved, except ye inherit the kingdom of heaven? Therefore, ye cannot be saved in your sins. . . .

And he shall come into the world to redeem his people; and he shall take upon him the transgressions of those who believe on his name; and these are they that shall have eternal life, and salvation cometh to none else.

Therefore the wicked remain as though there had been no redemption made, except it be the loosing of the bands of death; for behold, the day cometh that all shall rise from the dead and stand before God, and be judged according to their works. (Alma 11:37, 40-41)

In this case, as it usually does, right prevailed. After considerable tribulation and a healing blessing, Zeezrom joined the Church.

The Prophet Joseph Smith taught: "Happiness is the object and design of our existence; and will be the end thereof, if we pursue the path that leads to it; and this path is virtue, uprightness, faithfulness, holiness, and keeping all the commandments of God." [^2] True happiness comes only when we choose the right.

We live today in a world filled with choices. Television offers both good and bad. Bookstores are full of publications offering right and wrong. Because of the profanity, violence, and immorality that fill most movies, very few of them are worthy to be seen. Advertising is full of enticements to lead us to violate the Word of Wisdom. Music with its monotonous rhythms beats illicit thoughts into our heads.

Consider this counsel given by President Spencer W. Kimball:

Now may I make a recommendation? Develop discipline of self so that, more and more, you do not have to decide and redecide what you will do when you are confronted with the same temptation time and time again. You need only to decide some things once. How great a blessing it is to be free of agonizing over and over again regarding a temptation. To do such is time-consuming and very risky.

Likewise, my dear young friends, the positive things you will want to accomplish need be decided upon only once—like going on a mission and living worthily in order to get married in the temple—and then all other decisions related to these goals can fall into line. Otherwise, each consideration is risky, and each equivocation may result in error. There are some things Latter-day Saints do and other things we just don't do. The sooner you take a stand, the taller you will be! [^3]

To offset the worldly messages that entice us to choose the wrong, the Lord has blessed us with symbols of purity to keep us on the right course to choose the right. I was reminded of one of these symbols at a recent baptism of one of my granddaughters. In the little program that preceded her baptism, my granddaughter read this poem which had been written by her mother for this special occasion.

MY THREE WHITE DRESSES My mom bought me a white dress, Not red or pink or blue. She said it was a special dress Like very other few.

There has been just one before, A dress now put away, That I wore some time ago Upon my blessing day.

As a little baby clothed

In my first white dress, My dad held me in his arms, There to name and bless. So pure and clean was I just then,

With time to grow and learn About the Father's plan for me. My glory I must earn.

Now I've reached the age to judge The wrong road from the right, And I am here to be baptized In this dress of white.

So once again I'm free from sin. The path is clear to me. I'll grasp the rod and hold on tight, I vow with certainty.

Just as mud would stain my dress, Sin would stain my soul. The key is to repent or bleach, For whiteness is my goal.

And if I try my very best, Then richly blessed I'll be, Wearing inside God's holy house White dress number three.

So today I make this pledge: I'll strive to choose the right Through this sacred baptism ordinance In my second dress of white. [^4]

We are at a time in the history of the world when Satan is marshaling all his forces to lead people away from the strait and narrow path. Fortunately, most of the members of the Church are clear about who it is they will serve. Like Joshua of old, they proclaim, "As for me and my house, we will serve the Lord" (Joshua 24:15).

I hope and pray that you will have the courage to consistently choose the right. Moreover, I suggest that each of you find or create reminders to help you or your loved ones to choose the right when a choice is placed before you. There is power in a tie tack, a CTR ring, or a white dress hanging in the closet if we associate them with our desires for purity and righteousness. Even more important than physical reminders is the conviction deep down in our hearts to live the kind of life that will lead to right choices, not only for peace and happiness right now but also for eternity. All of us have been promised that we will receive everlasting happiness if we consistently choose the right.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] The New Dictionary of Thoughts, comp. Tyron Edwards (n.p.: Standard Book Co., 1959), p. 521.
[^2] Ibid.
[^3] Ibid.
[^4] Conference Report, October 1974, p. 7.
