L. Tom Perry, Living with Enthusiasm ( 1996)

18

Thy Speech Reveals Thee

Peter is a character in the New Testament who has always held a special fascination for me. He had to struggle so hard to overcome the things of the world and prepare himself to be a true witness and teacher of the gospel of Jesus Christ. There is an intriguing lesson to be learned from the interactions between the Savior and Peter during the final hours before the Savior's trial and crucifixion.

The scriptures tell us that the Savior and his disciples met together for the Last Supper, then sang a hymn and went out to the Mount of Olives. It is recorded:

Then saith Jesus unto them, All ye shall be offended because of me this night: for it is written, I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock shall be scattered abroad.

But after I am risen again, I will go before you into Galilee.

Peter answered and said unto him, Though all men shall be offended because of thee, yet will I never be offended.

Jesus said unto him, Verily I say unto thee, That this night, before the cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrice.

Peter said unto him, Though I should die with thee, yet will I not deny thee. (Matthew 26:31-35)

Peter drew strength from the Savior, and his courage was evident when he was in the company of the Savior. If Peter could have seen the Savior, perhaps made eye contact with him, he may not have denied him thrice. But Peter was alone and therefore more vulnerable to fear.

Out of this love for the Savior, Peter followed him to the palace of Caiaphas. As Peter sat outside the palace, he was approached and questioned first by a servant girl, then by another woman (see Matthew 26:69-72). He denied the Savior twice. Then individuals from a group of curious onlookers said to Peter:

Surely thou also art one of them; for thy speech bewrayeth thee.

Then began he to curse and to swear, saying, I know not the man. And immediately the cock crew.

And Peter remembered the word of Jesus, which said unto him, Before the cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrice. And he went out, and wept bitterly. (Matthew 26:73-75)

In verse 73, the Greek translation of "bewrayeth thee" is "reveals you." Just as a passport photo, a signature, or a thumbprint identifies each of us, our speech reveals who we are, as well as where and how we were raised. As with Peter, our speech reveals us. Others can classify us, place us in certain categories, after hearing us speak only a few words.

My Fair Lady has always been one of my favorite musicals. In the opening scene, Professor Henry Higgins brags to a colleague that he can identify a person's station in life and their country of origin by the way they speak. As you remember, Professor Higgins accepts the challenge of taking a lowly street person, a young lady named Eliza Doolittle, and, through demanding preparation and training, refining her speech so she may be mistaken for a woman of nobility. The many struggles encountered by Professor Higgins and Eliza Doolittle show that changing speech patterns is nearly as difficult as changing lifestyle. Moreover, changes in speech patterns often invoke changes of lifestyle.

The way we speak reflects the kind of person we are, exposing our background and our way of life. It describes our thinking, as well as our inner feelings. Unfortunately, in many people's minds, profanity and vulgarity are socially more acceptable than they used to be. This concerning trend seems to be influenced by what we watch on television and at the movies. Many of these so-called forms of entertainment are filled with language that can only defile the minds of men and women.

My wife Barbara had a birthday some time ago. I suggested to her that we celebrate this event by going to a movie together. We scanned the movie advertisements in the newspaper to find one that would be comfortable for us to watch. We chose a movie with a PG rating, assuming it would not offend us. Unfortunately, we were wrong. Just a few minutes into the movie, we got up and left. We could not tolerate the foul language. As I left the movie theater, I felt embarrassed. I did not want anyone to see me coming out of a movie with such vulgar language.

An experience in my life taught me that using the wrong word can disappoint even people whose standards are lower than your own. I was in boot camp in the U.S. Marine Corps during World War II. Of course, the language of my fellow marines was not what anyone would describe as exemplary. Being a recently returned missionary, however, I determined that I needed to be an example. I endeavored to keep from saying even the simplest and most common of swearwords.

One day, I was firing at the rifle range to earn my final score. I had done well in the 100-, 200-, and 300-yard positions. Now I was back at the 500-yard position. All I needed was a reasonable score, and I would make Expert Rifleman. I was excited. If my buddies do as well as I have, we should have the top platoon, I thought. But I tensed up, and on my first shot I threw my shoulder into the rifle. Of course, the flag waved—I had missed the target. And likewise, I missed the opportunity of being named an Expert Rifleman.

At that moment of frustration and disappointment, out of my mouth came a four-letter word that I had resolved never to use. Much to my chagrin, everyone at the range stopped firing. They turned and looked at me with their mouths open in astonishment. Any other marine firing from that position that day could have used the word I used without anyone paying attention. Because I had determined that I would carry the standards of the mission field into the Marine Corps, everyone was disappointed when I allowed my words to misrepresent me.

People from all ages have been strong in their criticism of those who use vulgarity and profanity in their speech. It was S. H. Cox who said, "Of all the dark catalogue of sins, there is not one more vile and execrable than profaneness. It commonly does, and loves to cluster with other sins; and he who can look up and insult his Maker to his face, needs but little improvement in guilt to make him a finished devil." [^1]

Shakespeare said, "Ill deeds are doubled with an evil word." [^2]

George Washington observed, "The foolish and wicked practice of profane cursing and swearing is a vice so mean and low, that every person of sense and character detests and despises it." [^3]

Church leaders have implored and pleaded with the Saints to use the right language. President Spencer W. Kimball said, "When we go to places of entertainment and mingle among people, we are shocked at the blasphemy that seems to be acceptable among them. The commandment says, 'Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain.' (Exodus 20:7.) Except in prayers and proper sermons, we must not use the name of the Lord. Blasphemy used to be a crime punishable by heavy fines. Profanity is the effort of a feeble brain to express itself forcibly." [^4]

President Stephen L Richards wrote, "How regrettable it is that man, seemingly oblivious to this honorable and sacred relationship, should profane his [God's] holy name and blaspheme Christ. Do you think that a son can damn his father and love him?" [^5]

The Savior himself said, "Not that which goeth into the mouth defileth a man; but that which cometh out of the mouth, this defileth a man" (Matthew 15:11).

Many times in our effort to control our speech, we employ other words as substitutes. Sometimes, however, these substitute worlds are so close to vulgar and profane words that they remind the people who hear them of the words we want to avoid. I have been appalled at times as I have listened to missionaries give their homecoming addresses and have heard some of the phrases, sentences, or words they have learned in the mission field. It was obvious to me and everyone else that these words were really substitutes for profanity and vulgarity. The use of these words demon strated the missionary's inability to master a proper vocabulary and gave the wrong impression of what the missionary had been doing in the mission field.

To anyone who uses profanity or vulgarity and would like to remove the habit, could I offer this suggestion? First, make the commitment to erase such words from your vocabulary. Next, if you slip and say a swearword or a substitute word, mentally reconstruct the sentence without the offensive word and repeat the new sentence aloud. Eventually you will learn to speak in a way that will reveal you for what you are: a true follower of Christ.

I think the instructions Paul gave to the Ephesians apply to all of us: "Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace unto the hearers. And grieve not the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the day of redemption (Ephesians 4:29-30).

I encourage you to have the resolve, discipline, and courage to keep your words clean and wholesome. Improve your speech, and others will immediately recognize your commitment to serve the Lord.

In conclusion, let me quote the words of him we serve. The Savior said, "A good man out of the good treasure of his heart bringeth forth that which is good; and an evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart bringeth forth that which is evil: for of the abundance of the heart his mouth speaketh" (Luke 6:45).

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Daniel H. Ludlow, ed., Encyclopedia of Mormonism (New York: Macmillan, 1992), 3:1164.
[^2] Evidences and Reconciliations, arr. G. Homer Durham (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1960), p. 257.
[^3] Discourses of Brigham Young, sel. John A. Widtsoe (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1954), p. 137.
[^4] Conference Report, October 1948, p. 80.
[^5] Where Is Wisdom? (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1955), p. 238.
