L. Tom Perry, Living with Enthusiasm ( 1996)

19

Heed the Prophet's Voice

April 6, 1830, is a significant date for Latter-day Saints. It is the day The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was organized. The translation and printing of the Book of Mormon had been completed, the priesthood had been restored, and the Lord directed that his church should again be organized here on the earth.

Prospective members of the Church gathered at the home of Peter Whitmer, Sr., in Fayette, New York, for this special occasion. The meeting was simple. Joseph Smith, then twenty-four years of age, called the group to order and designated five associates to join him in satisfying New York's legal requirements for the incorporation of a religious society. After kneeling in solemn prayer, Joseph Smith proposed that he and Oliver Cowdery be called as teachers and spiritual advisers to the newly organized Church. All raised their right arms to the square, and the pattern of sustaining Church leadership was established.

At that meeting, the revelation contained in section 21 of the Doctrine and Covenants was received. In that revelation, the Lord said to the Prophet Joseph Smith, "Behold, there shall be a record kept among you; and in it thou shalt be called a seer, a translator, a prophet, an apostle of Jesus Christ, an elder of the church through the will of God the Father, and the grace of your Lord Jesus Christ, being inspired of the Holy Ghost to lay the foundation thereof, and to build it up unto the most holy faith" (D&C 21:1-2).

I would like to use this scripture as a stepping-stone to consider what it means to sustain the president of the Church as a seer and prophet.

First is the title of seer. Moses, Samuel, Isaiah, Ezekiel, and many others were seers. They were seers because they were blessed with a clearer vision of divine glory and power than other mortals.

Perhaps the best description we have of a seer is in the Book of Mormon account of Ammon's arrival in the land of Lehi-Nephi. There was much rejoicing in the land over the arrival of Ammon. King Limhi addressed his people and called on Ammon to rehearse what had happened to their brethren since they had been separated. Then King Limhi sent his people to their homes and requested that the plates containing a record of his people from the time they had left Zarahemla be brought before Ammon that he might read them. As soon as Ammon had read the record, the king inquired of him to know if he could interpret languages from other records he had in his possession, and Ammon told him he could not. Then Ammon said:

I can assuredly tell thee, O king, of a man that can translate the records; for he has wherewith that he can look, and translate all records that are of ancient date; and it is a gift from God. . . .

And the king said that a seer is greater than a prophet.

And Ammon said that a seer is a revelator and a prophet also; and a gift which is greater can no man have, except he should possess the power of God, which no man can; yet a man may have great power given him from God.

But a seer can know of things which are past, and also of things which are to come, and by them shall all things be revealed, or, rather, shall secret things be made manifest, and hidden things shall come to light, and things which are not known shall be made known by them, and also things shall be made known by them which otherwise could not be known. (Mosiah 8:13, 15-17)

Ammon explains that a seer is both a revelator and a prophet, so he is greater than a prophet. This may explain why through the ages of history there have been more prophets than seers. Joseph Smith, of course, was the great seer of the latter days. He was acting in the role of seer when he translated the Book of Mormon.

What does it mean to be a prophet? The word prophet comes from a word in the Greek language that means "inspired teacher." [^1] In Hebrew, the word for prophet means "one who announces or brings a message from God." According to Elder John A. Widtsoe:

A prophet is a teacher. That is the essential meaning of the word. He teaches the body of truth, the gospel, revealed by the Lord to man; and under inspiration explains it to the understanding of the people. He is an expounder of truth. Moreover, he shows that the way to human happiness is through obedience to God's law. He calls to repentance those who wander away from the truth. He becomes a warrior for the consummation of the Lord's purposes with respect to the human family. The purpose of his life is to uphold the Lord's plan of salvation. All this he does by close communion with the Lord, until he is "full of power by the spirit of the Lord." [^2]

While my father attended LDS High School he worked and lived in the home of President Joseph F. Smith. In his life history, Father wrote this of President Smith:

Most great men that I have known have been deflated by intimate contact. Not so with the prophet Joseph F. Smith. Each common every day act added inches to his greatness. To me he was prophet even while washing his hands or untying his shoes.

My father tells of one experience in which the prophet taught him a practical lesson late one night as he entered the Beehive House. Again I quote from my father's life history:

I walked with guarded steps through the office, then into the private study to the door at the foot of the steps that led to my bedroom. But the door would not open. I pushed and I pushed to no avail. Finally, I gave up and went back to a rug that I had noticed in the hall with the intention of sleeping there until morning.

In the darkness I bumped against another partially opened door and the collision awakened the prophet. He turned on the light and, seeing who it was, came down the stairway and inquired concerning my difficulty.

"The door is locked that leads to my room, " I explained. He went to the door and pulled instead of pushed and the door opened. Had he been disturbed by my foolish blunder I would not have been surprised, for I had robbed him of a precious night's sleep by a thoughtless act. He only smiled and stopped to inquire of a strange stable boy what I had stumbled into. I pointed to the half open door at the other end of the hall.

"Let me show you something." He took time at midnight to explain, "When in the dark never go groping with hands parted and outstretched, that permits doors to get by your guard and hit you. Keep your arms in front, but hands together, then you will feel with your hands and not your head." I thanked him and moved to my quarters. He waited until I reached the rear stairway and then he retired.

Isn't a prophet someone who teaches us to open doors we thought we could not open ourselves—doors to greater light and truth? Isn't a prophet like a pair of hands clasped together in front of the body of the Church helping the members navigate through the dark corridors of the world? Isn't a prophet someone who watches and waits for us patiently while we get to where we need to be?

Never has there been a time when the written and spoken word can descend upon us from so many different sources. Through the media, we find analysts analyzing the analysts, almost overwhelming us with opinions and diverging views.

What a comfort it is to know that the Lord continues to keep a channel of communication open to His children through the prophet! What a blessing it is to know we have a voice we can trust to declare the will of the Lord! As the prophet Amos taught: "Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets" (Amos 3:7).

The Lord surely understood the need to keep his doctrine pure and to trust its interpretation to only one source. Of course, we are all admonished to study and gain as much knowledge as we can possibly obtain in this life. We are encouraged to discuss and exchange ideas one with another to further our understanding. However, the Lord has only one source for the declaration of his basic fundamental doctrines. Even as General Authorities of the Church, our instructions are clear: "In order to preserve the uniformoty of doctrinal and policy interpretation, you are asked to refer to the Office of the First Presidency for consideration and response to any doctrinal or policy questions which are not clearly defined in the scriptures or in the General Handbook of Instructions."

In this way, conflict and confusion and differing opinions are eliminated.

President Brigham Young assured us that we can have complete confidence in the prophets. He said, "The Lord Almighty leads this Church, and he will never suffer you to be led astray if you are found doing your duty. You may go home and sleep as sweetly as a babe in its mother's arms, as to any danger of your leaders leading you astray, for if they should try to do so the Lord would quickly sweep them from the earth. Your leaders are trying to live their religion as far as they are capable of doing so." [^3]

When I was just seven years old, I had my first experience meeting a prophet of God. President Heber J. Grant came to our home for dinner before he dedicated our new ward chapel. We were living in Logan at the time, and my father was the bishop. Of course, as children we were not allowed to eat dinner with the prophet. Our manners were not ready for that type of company. So my sisters, brothers, and I took turns looking through the keyhole in the kitchen to watch President Grant eat.

After dinner, before my mother had finished cleaning up the kitchen, she sent me to the chapel to save a seat for her. She soon arrived, and we waited together for the meeting to start. When the time came to start the meeting, however, President Grant and my father had still not arrived. My mother looked worried. She told me both President Grant and my father had decided to take a short nap before the meeting. She wondered if they had overslept. Finally she told me, "You'd better run home and wake them up."

I ran home as fast as I could. I chose to wake my father first, hoping he would wake up the prophet and tell him they were late for the meeting. My father, however, was too embarrassed to awaken the prophet. He asked me to go into the adjoining bedroom and wake up President Grant.

Hesitantly, I approached President Grant. Gently I shook his shoulder. Meekly I told the prophet of the Lord that he had overslept. I remember how kind and considerate he was to me during those few minutes we were alone together. Instead of rushing, he took time to have me sit on the bed with him. He patted my shoulder and thanked me for the small service I provided. He asked me about my relationship with my father, mother, sisters, and brothers. Finally, we stood up and made our way to the chapel. I will never forget the experience of sitting alongside the prophet of God with his arm around my shoulder. I was just a boy of seven, but I recognized a prophet's voice. The thought never occurred to me to question any of his kind counsel. I drank in every word.

During my lifetime, I have been blessed on several occasions by close, intimate contact with the Lord's chosen servant, the prophet. I recognize that many members of the Church will never have the opportunity to meet the prophet face-to-face. Nevertheless, we can all drink in the prophet's words. We can all take to heart his wise counsel. We can all be touched by the spirit of the prophet of God.

The members of this church are blessed to have a prophet, the Lord's mouthpiece, at its head. We can trust the prophet never to lead the members of the Church astray. We should listen, consider, and follow his counsel to us. As President J. Reuben Clark observed, "We do not lack a prophet; what we lack is a listening ear by the people and a determination to live as God has commanded." [^4] I pray that all the members of the Church will recognize that there is safety when we follow the prophet and strictly heed his voice.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Thomas L. Kane, as quoted in Memoirs of John R. Young, Utah Pioneer 1847 (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1920), pp. 31-33.
[^2] Robert Coles, The Call of Service: A Witness to Idealism (New York: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1993), pp. 3-4.
[^3] Ibid., pp. 4-5.
[^4] Ibid., p. 5.
