L. Tom Perry, Living with Enthusiasm ( 1996)

20

"The Peaceable Followers of Christ"

Colonel Thomas L. Kane, who was not a member of the Church, spoke to the Historical Society of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. He told the audience that during his travels a few years before, he had passed through a very unusual city, Nauvoo, Illinois, on the banks of the Mississippi River. He explained that after traveling up the river for some time, he left the steamer and began to travel on land because of the rapids in the river.

While on the road, he had seen only unimproved country where idlers and outlaws had settled. Then he saw Nauvoo. Let me quote Colonel Kane:

I was descending the last hillside upon my journey, when a landscape in delightful contrast broke upon my view. Half encircled by a bend of the river, a beautiful city lay glittering in the fresh morning sun. Its bright new dwellings [were] set in cool green gardens ranging up around a stately dome-shaped hill, which was crowned by a noble marble edifice, whose high tapering spire was radiant with white and gold. The city appeared to cover several miles, and beyond it, in the backgrounds, there rolled off a fair country chequered by the careful lines of fruitful husbandry. The unmistakable marks of industry, enterprise and educated wealth everywhere, made the scene one of singular and most striking beauty. . . . No one met me there. I looked and saw no one. I could hear no one move, though the quiet everywhere was such that I heard the flies buzz and the water ripples break against the shallow beach. I walked through the solitary streets. The town lay as in a dream, under some deadening spell of loneliness, from which I almost feared to wake it, for plainly it had not slept long. There was no grass growing up in the paved ways, rains had not entirely washed away the prints of dusty footsteps, yet I went about unchecked. I went into empty workshops, rope walks and smithies. The spinner's wheel was idle, the carpenter had gone from his work bench and shavings, his unfinished sash and casings, fresh bark was in the tanner's vat, and fresh chopped light wood stood piled against the baker's oven. The blacksmith's shop was cold; but his coal heap and ladling pool and crooked water horn were all there, as if he had just gone for a holiday. . . .

Fields upon fields of heavy headed yellow grain lay rotting ungathered upon the ground. No one was at hand to take in their rich harvest. [^1]

Colonel Kane could not understand why such a beautiful city had been abandoned. He was unaware that the Saints had been driven from their city by the mobs. His curiosity caused him to search for the people who had left the city. When he found them, he observed that even though they were suffering and dying of hunger and exposure, they were peaceful and wholesome. He asked, "Why were such harmless people so persecuted?"

In some ways the situation has not changed a great deal today. The Church still faces some situations that, in many ways, are similar to the Nauvoo period. There is not, of course, the same degree of antagonism manifest against us as in our early history. But we still must wonder, as Colonel Kane did, why certain individuals and groups feel it is their duty to persecute the Church, both its doctrine and its people.

Mormon began his great speech about faith, hope, and charity by addressing the members of the Church as "the peaceable followers of Christ" (Moroni 7:3). What does it mean to be a peaceable follower of Christ? Some of our more profound examples are our pioneer ancestors, who after enduring continuous persecution turned the other cheek instead of fighting back. Of course, we also have stories in Church history of individuals and groups who became vindictive and sought revenge from the enemies of the Church. The reason these stories are remembered is that they stand out in sharp contrast against the standard, peaceful responses of our pioneer forefathers. Aggression and revenge were the exceptions, not the rule.

The story of the people of Anti-Nephi-Lehi provides a scriptural account of what it means to become a peaceable follower of Christ. The people of Anti-Nephi-Lehi were the Lamanite converts of Ammon and his brethren. They came from seven lands and cities and numbered in the many thousands (see chapter head, Alma 23). Once they were converted to the gospel of Jesus Christ, the Anti-Nephi-Lehies covenanted to never return to the bloodthirsty traditions of their forebears. Even when their Lamanite brethren, aroused by the wicked Amalekites and Amulonites, prepared to make war against them, the Anti-Nephi-Lehies refused to lift up their weapons to defend themselves:

Now when Ammon and his brethren and all those who had come up with him saw the preparations of the Lamanites to destroy their brethren, they came forth to the land of Midian, and there Ammon met all his brethren; and from thence they came to the land of Ishmael that they might hold a council with Lamoni and also with his brother Anti-Nephi-Lehi, what they should do to defend themselves against the Lamanites.

Now there was not one soul among all the people who had been converted unto the Lord that would take up arms against their brethren; nay, they would not even make any preparations for war; yea, and also their king commanded them that they should not. (Alma 24:5-6)

The king of the Anti-Nephi-Lehies instructed his people to bury their weapons deep in the ground that they might not be tempted to use them when their Lamanite brethren came to do battle against them. The people followed their king's instructions, viewing their actions as "a testimony to God, and also to men, that they never would use weapons again for the shedding of man's blood" (Alma 24:18). When the Lamanites attacked, the Anti-Nephi-Lehies "went out to meet them, and prostrated themselves" on the ground before their attackers (Alma 24:21). The Lamanites killed a thousand and five of the Anti-Nephi-Lehies before the slaughter stopped. Why did the slaughter stop, and what were its consequences? From the account in Alma we learn the answers to these questions:

Now when the Lamanites saw this they did forbear from slaying them; and there were many whose hearts had swollen in them for those of their brethren who had fallen under the sword, for they repented of the things which they had done.

And it came to pass that they threw down their weapons of war, and they would not take them again, for they were stung for the murders which they had committed; and they came down even as their brethren, relying upon the mercies of those whose arms were lifted to slay them.

And it came to pass that the people of God were joined that day by more than the number who had been slain; and those who had been slain were righteous people, therefore we have no reason to doubt but what they were saved. (Alma 24:24-26)

The message of this story is not that all members of the Church should conscientiously object to war. There is also a Book of Mormon story about Captain Moroni raising the "title of liberty" as the leader of the true believers in Christ (see Alma 46:11-14). Moroni made impassioned speeches and wrote spirited letters to his Nephite brethren about protecting their liberty, lands, wives, children, and peace (see Alma 48:10). It was the Anti-Nephi-Lehies' unique history that caused them to make a unique covenant with the Lord that they felt an obligation to honor. When they honored their covenant they were blessed, and their brethren, the Lamanites, were also blessed.

While the message of the story is not to insist on universal pacifism, we do learn that by not returning aggressions from others we can have a profound effect on them. Literally, we can change their hearts when we follow Christ's example and turn the other cheek. Our examples as peaceable followers of Christ inspire others to follow him.

Stephen, one of the "seven men of honest report" chosen to assist the ancient apostles, was a man filled with the Holy Ghost, a man who also followed Christ's example of peace (see Acts 6:3, 5). His last words, as he was being stoned to death by the Jews, were "Lord, lay not this sin on their charge" (Acts 7:60). Stephen's words are reminiscent of Christ's appeal while hanging from the cross: "Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do" (Luke 23:34).

Recently, I read a book by Robert Coles, a pediatrician and child psychologist, with an intriguing title: The Call of Service. He told the story of a six-year-old girl named Tessie, who was one of the three black children involved in the desegregation of McDonogh 19 School in New Orleans during the fall of 1961. Every day the federal marshals would arrive at Tessie's house at about 8:00 a.m. to escort her to school. Walking into school, she was forced to pass by a mob of angry parents and children, who yelled obscenities and threats at her. Robert Coles, at the time involved in a study on psychoanalytic threatening, provided emotional support to Tessie. He was intrigued by her stoic courage and had a great desire to understand it.

According to Robert Coles, at the heart of the passive resistance movement for racial equality was Christian faith and love. On a day when Tessie's resolve was weakening, her maternal grandmother lectured her about her service. She said, "You belong in that McDonogh School, and there will be a day when everyone knows that, even those poor folks—Lord, I pray for them!—those poor, poor folks who are out there shouting their heads off at you. You're one of the Lord's people; He's put His Hand on you. He's given a call to you, a call to service—in His name!" [^2]

Later, Coles asked Tessie if she knew what her grandmother had meant. Tessie replied, "If you just keep your eyes on what you're supposed to be doing, then you'll get there—to where you want to go. The marshals say, 'Don't look at them; just walk with your head up high, and you're looking straight ahead.' My granny says that there's God, He's looking too, and I should remember that it's a help to Him to do this, what I'm doing; and if you serve Him, then that's important. So I keep trying." [^3]

For Tessie, service meant service to Heavenly Father. Her call from Heavenly Father was to change the hearts of her enemies in this battle over racial equality. It was her faith in God and in the importance of her call to serve that sustained her through several months of the bitterest of trials. She could do as the Savior instructed—"Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you" (Matthew 5:44)—because, in her words, "if I can help the good Lord and do a good job, then it'll all be okay, and I won't be wasting my time." [^4]

Not only did Tessie's service bless the lives of blacks who lived in the South; it also blessed the lives of their white enemies. Two months into the ordeal, a woman, one of the protestors, wrote Tessie an anonymous letter. It read:

Dear little girl,

I stand there with them and sometimes I've shouted, along with everyone else, but I feel sorry for you, and I wish all this trouble will end, soon. You're good to smile at us, like you do sometimes, and I want you to know I'm praying this will be over, and my kids will soon be back in school with you and the other two. [^5]

Tessie's love for her enemies had penetrated a milieu of hate and redefined the relationship between enemies. The woman who wrote the letter was the first of many protestors to realize that they could not win a battle against a six-year-old girl who refused to fight back.

The Anti-Nephi-Lehies, Stephen, and young Tessie are all examples of what it means and what it takes to become one of "the peaceable followers of Christ." At the heart of the matter is the heart—a heart somehow changed by the love of God and an understanding that even our enemies are our brothers and sisters and, therefore, part of his eternal family.

The path to becoming a peaceable follower of Christ is long and difficult, requiring innumerable changes. I hope these examples will help keep your eyes pointed in the right direction so you can get where you want to go. In conclusion, let me offer a little suggestion to help fortify your resolve.

Sometimes in our enthusiasm for the gospel, we cast our pearls indiscriminately, and we might even been tempted to enhance the luster of the gospel, our pearl of great price, by placing it in a much too attractive setting. This may only detract from the true value of our pearl. Our pearl will stand on its own, with all of its beauty and simplicity. We do not need to enhance it with the bright and flashy things that will bring only antagonism and conflict to the Church. We need to speak less about our accomplishments, and by our actions we need to show which kingdom we seek.

Place on your refrigerator doors the scriptures that will continually remind you, as you go about your daily duties, who you are and what you represent. Could I suggest just a few of these scriptures as starters?

The first is Luke 6:35: "Love ye your enemies, and do good, and lend, hoping for nothing again; and your reward shall be great, and ye shall be the children of the Highest: for he is kind unto the unthankful and to the evil."

The second is James 1:27: "Pure religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this, To visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world."

Finally, display one of the great scriptures from the Book of Mormon, Moroni 7:47: "Charity is the pure love of Christ, and it endureth forever; and whoso is found possessed of it at the last day, it shall be well with him."

I love the gospel of our Lord and Savior. It has brought into my life the greatest peace of mind, joy, and happiness I could ever hope to imagine. I pray that we might all be willing and able to become peaceable followers of Christ.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Thomas L. Kane, as quoted in Memoirs of John R. Young, Utah Pioneer 1847 (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1920), pp. 31-33.
[^2] Robert Coles, The Call of Service: A Witness to Idealism (New York: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1993), pp. 3-4.
[^3] Ibid., pp. 4-5.
[^4] Ibid., p. 5.
[^5] Ibid., p. 51.
