Richard O. Cowan, Answers to Your Questions About the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1996)

Preface

It has been my privilege to teach classes on the Doctrine and Covenants at Brigham Young University for more than a third of a century. During that time I have become well acquainted with the questions most frequently asked by the students and also with how they might be answered. Because you may have many of the same questions, this volume has been prepared in the hope that it might help you. Unlike more lengthy works that provide commentary on all Doctrine and Covenants passages, this book attempts only to give concise answers to about three hundred of the questions raised most often.

During the past decade I have collected into a computerized data bank thousands of statements by the General Authorities of the Church relative to specific Doctrine and Covenants passages. This book features some of these statements from the Brethren, which provide clear and authoritative answers to our questions.

This volume also draws material from a variety of published sources, some of which have been long out of print. President Joseph Fielding Smith's Church History and Modern Revelation, for example, has been a valuable source for historical and doctrinal insights. Likewise, a dictionary published in 1828 allows us to understand what words meant at the time the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants were being recorded.

Answers in this volume have been arranged in the numerical order of the sections of the Doctrine and Covenants and are intended to accompany your study of that book of scripture. Similar questions may arise at several different points in the Doctrine and Covenants. In such cases, when you look up the reference to the passage you are studying, you will find either a full answer or a brief response and a cross-reference to the more complete answer. Those cross-references are enclosed in braces and appear in bold type: {See D&C 35:3}.

Quotations have been kept as brief as possible. If you wish to read more extensively from a particular statement, you will find its bibliographical data at the end of this book.

The index, which emphasizes doctrinal concepts, will assist you in finding material to answer your questions. Look under similar or related terms until you find what you are seeking.

Of course, you may have questions on the Doctrine and Covenants that are not answered in this volume. But you can follow certain guidelines to find your own answers.

First, the scriptures themselves set forth the basic principles of the gospel. They are called the standard works because they provide the guidelines by which to judge all concepts and ideas. Hence, a particular passage should be examined in both the broader context of all the scriptures as well as the immediate setting. Knowing the specific circumstances can add meaning to a statement. {See D&C 19:20.}

Second, Church leaders provide valuable insights into how scriptural principles apply in today's world. We should recognize the special stewardship of those whom we sustain as prophets, seers, and revelators. {See D&C 1:38.}

Third, personal revelation is the only way we can ultimately know the truth. {See D&C 5:6-12.} Because scriptures were written under the guidance of the Spirit and because our inspired leaders speak by that same power, we must have the influence of the Spirit ourselves to truly understand their words (see D&C 18:34-36; 50:21-22).

All three of these guidelines should be followed in seeking answers. And sometimes, "I don't know" is the only answer there is for now. The answers in this volume have been prepared with these guidelines in mind.
