Richard O. Cowan, Answers to Your Questions About the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1996)

1

The Lord's Preface

Doctrine and Covenants 1

Doctrine and Covenants 1 is placed first in that book of scripture because it was designated by the Lord as his "preface" to the revelations (D&C 1:6). A preface, of course, is where a book's author sets forth his purposes in writing and explains what the reader should expect to gain. Chronologically, however, section 1 was received in November 1831 after section 66 and before section 67.

Doctrine and Covenants 1:1-4

What is the basic message of the Doctrine and Covenants and to whom is it directed?

The Lord, the author of the Doctrine and Covenants, sets forth in his "preface" (1:6) that the book's message is "a voice of warning" for "all people." The thrust of his warning is set forth in verse 12: Prepare for the Master's glorious advent, which "is nigh." The need for such a warning is made clear by the description in this revelation of the wicked condition of the world.

Doctrine and Covenants 1:16,

Why can today's world be called Babylon or Idumea?

The ancient kingdoms of Babylon and Idumea (or Edom) were noted for their hedonistic wickedness. Hence their names are apt labels for today's sinful society, often contrasted with Zion, which is made up of the "pure in heart" (D&C 97:21).

Doctrine and Covenants 1:19

Why shouldn't we counsel one another?

The meaning of the phrase "man should not counsel his fellow man" can best be understood in its context. The Lord is reviewing some of the consequences of his having given the revelations contained in the Doctrine and Covenants: the spiritually blessed yet "weak things" (from the world's point of view) will confound the "mighty and strong" (again from the world's viewpoint). Inspired counselors should not rely solely on human wisdom, or, to use Jeremiah's phrase, trust in the arm of flesh (see Jeremiah 17:5). Rather than depending on their own judgment, they can and should "speak in the name of God" (D&C 1:20). Nephi taught this same truth (see 2 Nephi 28:31).

Doctrine and Covenants 1:30

In the eyes of the Lord, what is the status of the restored Church and its members?

The Master affirmed that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is his "only true and living church." It is unique in having priesthood authority and in teaching the fulness of the gospel. That is why it remains aloof from the ecumenical movement—the increasingly frequent practice of churches to overlook doctrinal or structural differences so they can merge into larger bodies.

"This Church was not formed on man's initiative," taught Elder James E. Talmage; "it was not called into being because of some brilliant leader who stepped forward with a new plan; and therefore we cannot, we have not the power nor the authority, to make any kind of affiliation with any other church; and let me say with equal earnestness, no other denomination, no church, no sect can ever affiliate as such with this, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. There have been overtures made by some religious bodies to find out the terms under which they probably could come in with us; and the answer has been: Come in as every member of this Church has come in—through . . . the door of baptism, that ye may receive the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands" (in Conference Report, Apr. 1920, 104).

Still, much good is done by other churches and their members. {See D&C 35:3.} Latter-day Saints on a growing number of occasions have cooperated with these groups to bless the lives of our Father's children in many parts of the world.

The Savior put all this in perspective when he stressed that he was pleased with his Saints "collectively" but not "individually." He explained why, by declaring that he "cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance." But he added the welcome assurance that those who repent will be forgiven. (D&C 1:31-32). He chastened his Saints on a later occasion as well, but once again he did so "collectively but not individually" (D&C 105:2).

Doctrine and Covenants 1:35

Is it futile to work for peace?

The Lord has warned that "the day speedily cometh . . . when peace shall be taken from the earth" (D&C 1:35), but we still have the responsibility to promote the cause of peace. {See D&C 98:16.} The gospel must be preached worldwide before the Savior's second coming (see Matthew 24:14), and experience has shown that that can best be accomplished during peacetime.

Even though an ultimate goal cannot be realized immediately, we should not overlook ways to do good in the meantime. Elder Glen L. Pace instructed: "We know the prophecies of the future. We know the final outcome. We know the world collectively will not repent and consequently the last days will be filled with much pain and suffering. Therefore, we could throw up our hands and do nothing but pray for the end to come so the millennial reign could begin. To do so would forfeit our right to participate in the grand event we are all awaiting. We must all become players in the winding-up scene, not spectators. We must do all we can to prevent calamities, and then do everything possible to assist and comfort the victims of tragedies that do occur" (Ensign, Nov. 1990, 8).

Doctrine and Covenants 1:37

What does it mean to "search" the scriptures?

More is involved in searching the scriptures than merely reading or even studying them. We must seek the Spirit so we can more fully understand their meaning (see D&C 18:34-36; 50:21-22).

"As I have read the scriptures," reflected President Marion G. Romney, "I have been challenged by the word ponder. . . . The dictionary says that ponder means 'to weigh mentally, think deeply about, deliberate, meditate.' . . . Pondering is, in my feeling, a form of prayer" (in Conference Report, Apr. 1973, 117).

Our searching of the scriptures is still not complete until we put their precepts into practice in our daily lives (see 1 Nephi 19:23; Matthew 7:24-27).

Doctrine and Covenants 1:38

How should we regard the statements of Church leaders?

The scriptures are the standard works, by which the correctness of other statements or concepts can be judged, and the inspired words of our living prophets apply gospel teachings to our present circumstances.

"The most important prophet, so far as we are concerned," affirmed President Ezra Taft Benson, "is the one who is living in our day and age. This is the prophet who has today's instructions from God to us today. God's revelation to Adam did not instruct Noah how to build the ark. Every generation has need of the ancient scripture plus the current scripture from the living prophet. Therefore, the most crucial reading and pondering which you should do is of the latest inspired words from the Lord's mouthpiece. That is why it is essential that you have access to and carefully read his words in current Church publications" (in Korea Area Conference Report, 1975, 52).

President J. Reuben Clark Jr. explained which of our Church leaders may add to the standard works: "Only the President of the Church, the Presiding High Priest, is sustained as Prophet, Seer, and Revelator for the Church, and he alone has the right to receive revelations for the Church, either new or amendatory, or to give authoritative interpretations of scriptures that shall be binding on the Church, or change in any way the existing doctrines of the Church." No other person may do any of these things "unless he has special authorization from the President of the Church." President Clark explained that the counselors in the First Presidency and the members of the Twelve are also "sustained as prophets, seers, and revelators, which gives them a special spiritual endowment in connection with their teaching" (Church News, 31 July 1954, 9-10).

President Harold B. Lee emphasized that in general conferences we hear "more inspired declarations on most every subject and problem about which [we] have been worrying. If you want to know what the Lord would have the Saints know and to have his guidance and direction for the next six months, get a copy of the proceedings of this conference, and you will have the latest word of the Lord as far as the Saints are concerned" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1973, 168).
