Richard O. Cowan, Answers to Your Questions About the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1996)

2

Joseph Smith Begins His Ministry

Doctrine and Covenants 2 through 12

The latter-day restoration of the gospel began in the early spring of 1820. Although the First Vision is not recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants, it provides an essential foundation to the revelations that are included in that book. Among the other things Joseph Smith learned in that vision are that God lives and answers prayers, that the Father and the Son are distinct glorious beings, that the fulness of the gospel needed to be restored, and that Satan's opposing power is real. An account of this significant experience is included in the Pearl of Great Price in Joseph Smith-History 1:15-20.

The revelations recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 2 through 12 begin with Moroni's appearance in 1823 and continue with other revelations received by 1829. Several are related to the coming forth of the Book of Mormon. In these revelations we are introduced to such key figures of the Restoration as Martin Harris, Oliver Cowdery, the Prophet's father, and the Prophet's brother Hyrum.

Doctrine and Covenants 2

Why is the wording of Malachi's prophecy not the same here as it is in the Bible?

As Moroni told Joseph Smith about the Book of Mormon record, he cited several prophecies of latter-day events to emphasize that it was important for the gospel to be preached in preparation for the Lord's second coming (see Joseph Smith-History 1:36-41). Because he did not quote Malachi 4:5-6 exactly, some have supposed that Moroni was correcting errors in biblical translation; however, when the Savior visited ancient America, he quoted Malachi's prophecy about Elijah just as it reads in the Bible (see 3 Nephi 25:5-6). Moroni's paraphrase of Malachi's words emphasized certain concepts: Elijah would restore priesthood authority, promises had been made to the fathers, and Elijah's coming was vital.

Doctrine and Covenants 2:1

What authority did Elijah restore?

Elijah appeared personally in 1836 and restored the sealing keys of the priesthood by which all earthly ordinances, not just those in the temple, are recognized in heaven. {See D&C 110:13-16.}

Doctrine and Covenants 2:1

What is "the great and dreadful day of the Lord"?

President Joseph Fielding Smith was convinced that "the great and dreadful day of the Lord" will be at the beginning of the Millennium: "This great and dreadful day can be no other time than the coming of Jesus Christ to establish his kingdom in power on the earth, and to cleanse it from all iniquity. It will not be a day of dread and fear to the righteous, but it will be a day of fear and terror to the ungodly" (Doctrines of Salvation, 1:173).

Doctrine and Covenants 2:2

What "promises" were made to the "fathers"?

President Joseph Fielding Smith taught concerning the promises made to the fathers:

"This expression has reference to certain promises made to those who died without a knowledge of the gospel, and without the opportunity of receiving the sealing ordinances of the Priesthood in matters pertaining to their exaltation. According to these promises, the children in the latter days are to perform all such ordinances in behalf of the dead" (Improvement Era, July 1922, 829; see also Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 2:127-28).

"Why is it that sometimes only one of a city or household receives the gospel?" asked Elder Melvin J. Ballard. "It was made known to me that it is because of the righteous dead who had received the gospel in the spirit world exercising themselves, and in answer to their prayers elders of the Church were sent to the homes of their posterity that the gospel might be taught to them, and through their righteousness they might be privileged to have a descendant in the flesh do the work for their dead kindred. I want to say to you that it is with greater intensity that the hearts of the fathers and mothers in the spirit world are turned to their children than that our hearts are turned to them" (in Hinckley, Sermons and Missionary Services of Melvin Joseph Ballard, 249).

Elder Ballard further testified: "The spirit and influence of your dead will guide those who are interested in finding those records. If there is anywhere on the earth anything concerning them, you will find it" (in Hinckley, Sermons and Missionary Services of Melvin Joseph Ballard, 230).

President Harold B. Lee suggested another way of looking at Malachi's prophecy as it is recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 2: "Today that scripture undoubtedly has a more significant meaning. Unless the hearts of the children are turned to their parents and the hearts of the parents are turned to their children in this day, in mortality, the earth will be utterly wasted at His coming. There was never a time when so much was needed as today in the homes of the Latter-day Saints and the world generally. Most of the ills that afflict youth today are because of the breakdown in the homes. The hearts of the fathers must be turned to their children, and the children to their fathers, if this world is going to be saved and the people prepared for the coming of the Lord" (Teachings of Harold B. Lee, 283).

As we become aware of these promises, our thoughts naturally turn to our own ancestors, whom it is our privilege and responsibility to help. The resulting interest in family history has appropriately been called "having the spirit of Elijah."

Doctrine and Covenants 3:2

How can God's paths be "straight" and at the same time "round"?

Just as a wedding ring symbolizes eternity because it has no beginning nor end, so God's purposes are eternal in scope, and he consistently moves "straight" toward achieving them.

Doctrine and Covenants 3:17

Weren't all the Nephites killed at Cumorah?

Although the Nephites as a nation were destroyed by the Lamanites in this final great battle, not all of the descendants of Nephi were killed. There had been an extensive mixing of the posterities of Nephi and Laman before Christ's appearance after his resurrection (see, for example, Alma 2; 23-24; 46-47; Helaman 4-6). There was an even more thorough mixing during the two centuries of peace after the Savior's visit when there were no Nephites, Lamanites, "nor any manner of -ites" (4 Nephi 1:15-17). Hence both groups at Cumorah included descendants of both Nephi and Laman.

Doctrine and Covenants 4:1

What is the "marvelous work" prophesied to come forth in the latter days?

The ancient prophet Isaiah looked forward to the latter days when God would accomplish "a marvellous work and a wonder" (Isaiah 29:14). President Joseph Fielding Smith explained: "This marvelous work is the restoration of the Church and the Gospel with all the power and authority[,] keys and blessings which pertain to this great work for the salvation of the children of men" (Church History and Modern Revelation, 1:35).

Joseph Smith was only twenty-three years old when he received the revelation recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 4. "Unknown, untaught, with no reputation, he should have been forgotten in the small hamlet, almost nameless, in the backwoods of a great state," declared Elder John A. Widtsoe, "but he dared to say that the work that he was doing, under God's instruction, was to become a marvel and a wonder in the world. . . . The truths set loose by the Prophet Joseph Smith have touched every man of faith throughout the whole civilized world, and measurably changed their beliefs for good" (in Conference Report, Apr. 1946, 21-22).

Doctrine and Covenants 4:2

How can we serve with all our "heart, might, mind and strength"?

Elder Sterling W. Sill explained that we must "coordinate all of our powers into one cooperative effort. This involves a joint action of heart, mind, might, and strength.

"To serve Him with all our hearts means that our love and devotion should be genuine and complete. To serve Him with all our might is to employ to the utmost our determination, commitment, and willpower. It does not mean to walk the irregular pathway of vacillation and procrastination. To serve Him with all our mind requires a strong, positive mental attitude. It means continual study, thoughtfulness, meditation, and firm, positive decisions on each of the questions involved. To serve Him with all of our strength requires vigorous, persistent, continuous physical activity.

"By this process of consolidation and joint action one may concentrate all of the elements of personal effectiveness into one united, fiery, and powerful effort" (New Era, Sept. 1985, 4-5).

"We cannot just be in the Church in a casual or disinterested way," emphasized Elder Mark E. Petersen. "Indifference has no place in the heart or mind of a Latter-day Saint. If we are going to be Latter-day Saints, we must do something about it" (Commitment to Temple Marriage, 3).

Doctrine and Covenants 4:3

Don't we need authority before we can serve God?

Doctrine and Covenants 4:3 does not specifically mention the need for authority, but this verse must be understood in the context of many other scriptures that do specify that priesthood is necessary when one performs ordinances or acts in any official capacity (see, for example, Hebrews 5:4; John 15:16; D&C 42:11). Not long after this scripture was given, the Lord cautioned: "You need not suppose that you are called to preach until you are called" (D&C 11:15).

Still, there is much that we can be and should be doing in unofficial ways without waiting to be commanded (see D&C 58:26-28). The Master taught a similar principle when he directed his disciples to go the second mile (see Matthew 5:41). We all have experienced the exhilarating satisfaction that comes from doing good on our own initiative.

Doctrine and Covenants 4:4

What is meant by the "field" being "white already to harvest"?

The Lord has compared his work on earth to harvesting crops in a field or a vineyard (see Matthew 9:37-38; John 4:35-36). The heads of grain in a field take on a white color when they are ready to be harvested. The field is not "all ready to harvest" but is "already to harvest"—that is, the harvest is not just about to begin but is now in progress. Hence our need to get involved is urgent. {See D&C 31:4.}

Doctrine and Covenants 4:4

How does sharing the gospel bring salvation to our own souls?

The muscles of our physical bodies weaken and atrophy if we go a prolonged time without using them. Vigorous exercise, on the other hand, strengthens our body. Similarly, we exercise and strengthen our testimony as we share it with others. We are more likely to keep the commandments if we are seeking to set a good example for the person we are teaching. Furthermore, being accompanied by those with whom we have shared the gospel will increase our own joy as we enter God's kingdom (see D&C 18:15-16).

"By reclaiming an erring brother, we save both him and ourselves," testified Elder Bruce R. McConkie. "Our sins are hidden (remitted) because we ministered for the salvation and blessing of another" (Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:279).

Doctrine and Covenants 4:5-7

What do these attributes mean?

President David O. McKay noted that the Lord listed "essential qualifications of those who were to participate in the bringing about of this marvelous work. These qualifications were not the possession of wealth, not social distinction, not political preferment, not military achievement, not nobility of birth; but a desire to serve God with all your 'heart, might, mind and strength'—spiritual qualities that contribute to nobility of soul" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1966, 86).

"Charity is the pure love of Christ" (Moroni 7:47). Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained: "It is love so centered in righteousness that the possessor has no aim or desire except for the eternal welfare of his own soul and for the souls of those around him" (Mormon Doctrine, 121).

Elder Hartman Rector Jr. affirmed: "The eye single to the glory of God is crucial. This means . . . instead of forever doing what we want to do, we must do what the Lord wants done" (Improvement Era, Dec. 1969, 81).

President Ezra Taft Benson declared that one who is patient "will be tolerant of the mistakes and failings of his loved ones. Because he loves them, he will not find fault nor criticize nor blame" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1983, 62).

Elder McConkie wrote: "Kindness embraces an interest in another's welfare and a disposition to be helpful" (Mormon Doctrine, 413-14).

President Benson also taught that a person who is temperate "is restrained in his emotions and verbal expressions. He does things in moderation and is not given to overindulgence. In a word, he has self-control. He is the master of his emotions, not the other way around" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1983, 61).

It is obvious how these attributes can help us in our Church assignments, in relationships at home, and in all the other aspects of our lives. Think of the opposite of each characteristic—fear rather than faith, lack of focus rather than an eye single to God's glory, and so forth—and consider how these negative traits thwart our effectiveness.

Doctrine and Covenants 5:6-12

How can we know the truth?

Over the centuries philosophers have debated how we can learn truth. Some have taught that our physical senses are the only means of knowing what actually exists—but the senses can be deceived. Others have insisted that reason is the only way to be sure our thinking is logically consistent—but our ideas might have no connection with reality. Still other philosophers have suggested that both the senses and reason must be employed together. Even this combined approach, however, falls short of giving us a sure knowledge of spiritual truths.

The Lord's revelations shed light on this age-old question. When Martin Harris asked to see the plates containing the Book of Mormon, the Lord replied that the unbelieving world would not be convinced even if Joseph Smith "should show them all these things" (D&C 5:7). Human sight and reason were not enough without the confirming witness of the Spirit. The Lord then specified that we must receive his word through the Prophet (see D&C 5:10). We can also rely on the testimony of other witnesses who have learned the truth by revelation from heaven (see D&C 5:11-12).

We must personally pay a price to know the truth. The Lord told Martin Harris that he needed to humble himself and repent of his sins to know the truth (see D&C 5:24-28). Oliver Cowdery learned that he needed to have his priorities in order (see D&C 6:7) and that he truly had to desire this knowledge (see D&C 6:8, 20, 22, 25). He also needed to ask in faith (see D&C 8:1; compare Moroni 10:4), and mental exertion must also be involved (see D&C 8:2; 9:7-9).

Doctrine and Covenants 6:1-6

Why is exactly the same wording repeated at the beginning of several different revelations?

The opening verses of Doctrine and Covenants 6, 11, 12, and 14 are identical, repeating many of the points revealed in section 4. The general ideas contained in these verses are a fitting preface to the specific assignments given to the brethren addressed in those revelations.

Doctrine and Covenants 6:7

Should we shun worldly wealth?

As the Lord counseled Oliver Cowdery about proper priorities, he admonished him to put spiritual goals ahead of temporal concerns (compare Matthew 6:33). The use of riches and our attitude toward them determine whether they are a positive or a negative force in our lives. {See D&C 56:16-18.} Jacob made a similar point in the Book of Mormon when he declared that after obtaining spiritual treasures we can seek temporal wealth because we would do so in the right way and for the right reasons (see Jacob 2:17-19).

Doctrine and Covenants 6:7

Shouldn't we leave the mysteries alone?

A mystery is something we cannot know through human resources alone but can learn only by divine revelation. {See D&C 5:6-12.} Where such "mysteries" as the exact date of the Second Coming or the precise meaning of symbols in the Revelation of John have not been revealed, we should follow Alma's example and leave them alone (see Alma 37:11). The "mysteries" that have been unfolded to the righteous include such gospel truths as the forgiveness of sins through Christ's atonement, life after death, and many others. {See D&C 84:19-22.} These can be understood only through obedience to God's law (see D&C 63:23).

"The Lord has promised to reveal his mysteries to those who serve him in faithfulness," explained President Joseph Fielding Smith. "There are no mysteries pertaining to the Gospel, only as we, in our weakness, fail to comprehend Gospel truth. The Gospel is very simple, so that even children at the age of accountability may understand it. Without question, there are principles which in this life we cannot understand, but when the fulness comes we will see that all is plain and reasonable and within our comprehension. The 'simple' principles of the Gospel, such as baptism [and] the atonement, are mysteries to those who do not have the guidance of the Spirit of the Lord" (Church History and Modern Revelation, 1:43).

Doctrine and Covenants 6:9

How can we "say nothing but repentance"?

President Joseph Fielding Smith pointed out: "When the Lord calls upon his servants to cry nothing but repentance, he does not mean that they may not cry baptism, and call upon the people to obey the commandments of the Lord, but he wishes that all that they say and do be in the spirit of bringing the people to repentance. Any missionary who fails to do this in his ministry is derelict in his duty" (Church History and Modern Revelation, 1:57). Even though we may teach a variety of topics, we should always do so in such a way that our listeners will want to repent and improve their lives.

Doctrine and Covenants 6:32

What is the significance of adding the phrase "as touching one thing" to the Lord's words in Matthew 18:20?

The addition of this phrase emphasizes that we must be united in a righteous purpose. Even if there are only two or three of us, with the Lord's help we cannot fail (see Genesis 18:14; Luke 1:37).

Doctrine and Covenants 7:2

What is the nature of "translated beings," and what is their purpose?

John the apostle became a "translated being." Joseph Smith observed that many have supposed that translated beings "were taken immediately into the presence of God and into an eternal fullness, but [that] is a mistaken idea. Their place of habitation is that of the terrestrial order." The Prophet explained that translated beings obtain "deliverance from the tortures and sufferings of the body" so that their service and existence may be prolonged until they can be resurrected and "enter into so great a rest and glory" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 170, 171).

The three Nephite disciples, for example, underwent one change—being quickened from their telestial state to a higher terrestrial level. A greater change would accompany Christ's second coming, equivalent to death and resurrection, resulting in their being moved from mortality to immortality "in the twinkling of an eye" (3 Nephi 28:8; see also vv. 7, 9, 36-40).

The three Nephite disciples were also promised that they would never "taste of death" nor "endure the pains of death." This promise did not mean they would never die. Compare this promise with a similar statement in Doctrine and Covenants 42:46 that the righteous who "die in me shall not taste of death, for it shall be sweet unto them."

Joseph Smith taught that "translated bodies are designed for future missions" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 191). For example, Moses and Elias (or Elijah) bestowed the keys of the priesthood on Peter, James, and John on the Mount of Transfiguration before Christ inaugurated the resurrection (see Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 158). Because this bestowal is done by the laying on of physical hands, Moses and Elijah had to be blessed in such a way that they might retain their mortal bodies much longer than the normal life span. Similarly, John the Revelator (see John 21:20-23) and the three Nephite disciples (see 3 Nephi 28) were translated so that they could remain on earth and labor to prepare the world for Christ's second coming.

Doctrine and Covenants 9:5-11

Did Oliver Cowdery realize his desire to translate?

While emphasizing that Oliver had to do more than simply ask, we often forget that he "began to translate" but "did not continue" (D&C 9:5). As had happened with Peter when he stepped out of the boat to walk on the water, Oliver "feared," and so he lost his gift (D&C 9:11; see Matthew 14:11, 26-31). Exactly how much Oliver Cowdery translated is not known.

Doctrine and Covenants 9:7-9

Must a burning witness always accompany answers to prayer?

A "burning in the bosom" may accompany answers to prayer, but it is by no means required. Perhaps even more often we may feel a calm assurance, as Oliver Cowdery did (see D&C 6:22-23).

President Marion G. Romney explained, "When confronted with a problem I prayerfully weigh in my mind alternative solutions and come to a conclusion as to which of them is best. Then in prayer I submit to the Lord my problem, tell him I desire to make the right choice, what is, in my judgment, the right course. Then I ask him if I have made the right decision to give me the burning in my bosom that He promised Oliver Cowdery. When enlightenment and peace come into my mind, I know the Lord is saying yes. If I have a 'stupor of thought,' I know he is saying no, and I try again, following the same procedure" (New Era, Oct. 1975, 35).

Elder Boyd K. Packer counseled: "Put difficult questions in the back of your minds and go about your lives. Ponder and pray quietly and persistently about them.

"The answer may not come as a lightning bolt. It may come as a little inspiration here and a little there, 'line upon line, precept upon precept' (D&C 98:12).

"Some answers will come from reading the scriptures, some from hearing speakers. And, occasionally, when it is important, some will come by very direct and powerful inspiration. The promptings will be clear and unmistakable" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1979, 30).

Doctrine and Covenants 10:6-7

In what way did Martin Harris seek to destroy Joseph Smith's work?

We usually think of Martin Harris as one of the Prophet's supporters. He had helped with the initial phases of translation and later provided substantial financial help for publishing the Book of Mormon. Nevertheless, his persistently asking to show the Book of Mormon manuscript to others even after the Lord had denied permission resulted in its being lost and in Joseph Smith's temporarily losing his gift to translate (compare Doctrine and Covenants 88:64-65). Similarly, we may not consciously choose to do wrong, but we sometimes persist in doing things that are unwise and whose ultimate negative consequences we do not even remotely comprehend.

Doctrine and Covenants 10:8-46

How did the Lord thwart Satan's plan to destroy the Book of Mormon?

Joseph Smith learned by revelation that his enemies planned to alter some portions of the lost manuscript to discredit his power to translate (see D&C 10:15-18). The ancient prophet Nephi testified that the Lord, knowing all things, had hundreds of years earlier provided the means to thwart this plot. Specifically, "for a wise purpose" known only to God, Nephi was directed to prepare two parallel records: the large plates, containing a secular history of the kings and their wars, and the small plates, containing an account of the prophets' ministry (see 1 Nephi 9:2-6). Both histories began with the colony's departure from Jerusalem in 600 b.c. and continued until about 150 b.c., when the small plates were filled. This same period was covered by the book of Lehi on the large plates. After this date, beginning with the book of Mosiah, the large plates were used to record an integrated secular and spiritual history. Later, Mormon abridged the history on the large plates of Nephi.

Joseph Smith began his translation with Mormon's abridgment of the book of Lehi; this was the 116 pages Martin Harris lost. Rather than having Joseph retranslate this same material (which had now been altered by those who had stolen the manuscript), the Lord directed him to substitute the parallel and superior spiritual account from the small plates (1 Nephi-Omni 1).

The revelation in Doctrine and Covenants 10 explained that the lost material was "engraved on the [large] plates of Nephi," but "a more particular account" of spiritual things was "upon the [small] plates of Nephi." Therefore "translate the engravings which are on the [small] plates of Nephi until you come to the reign of king Benjamin [introduced in the book of Omni] . . . and thus I will confound those who have altered my words. . . . Behold, there are many things engraved on the [small] plates of Nephi which do throw greater views upon my gospel." The "remainder" of the large plates also contains "all those parts of my gospel" (D&C 10:41-46). Hence none of the spiritual history recorded in the Book of Mormon was lost.

Doctrine and Covenants 10:19-22

What are Satan's objectives, and how does he go about achieving them?

After his rebellion against God's plan in the premortal councils (see D&C 29:36-38 and Moses 4:1-4), Satan and his followers were cast out of heaven and lost the privilege of obtaining physical bodies. Thus they could never become living souls composed of a spirit and a physical body (see D&C 88:15) capable of receiving "a fullness of joy" (D&C 93:33). Jealous that we have what he can never obtain, Satan wants to make us miserable, even as he is (see 2 Nephi 2:27). He seeks to destroy our souls as well as God's work on earth (see D&C 10:22-23).

Satan still uses the tactics described in Doctrine and Covenants 10:20, 24, and 25 and in 2 Nephi 28:20-22. Not only does he stir up open opposition but he more subtly tries to make us believe there are no absolute standards of right or wrong. By creating a false sense of security, he lulls us into spiritual apathy. Knowing what these tactics are can alert us to avoid them.

Doctrine and Covenants 11:30

Because we all are spirit sons and daughters of our Heavenly Father, in what other sense may we become his children?

Even as our earthly parents have given us physical birth, so our heavenly parents earlier gave us spirit birth. King Benjamin taught that as we repent, become truly converted, and receive saving gospel ordinances, we become "the children of Christ" (Mosiah 5:7; see also Moses 8:13). In a sense he becomes the father of our spiritual rebirth through the marvelous power of his atonement. As his adopted children we can properly inherit his kingdom.
