Richard O. Cowan, Answers to Your Questions About the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1996)

3

The Priesthood and the Church Restored

Doctrine and Covenants 13 through 22

During the eventful year from the spring of 1829 to the spring of 1830, the priesthood was restored, the Book of Mormon was published, and the Church was organized. In addition, the revelations recorded in sections 13 through 22 were accepted as "the church articles and covenants" (D&C 33:14). {See D&C 33:14.}

Doctrine and Covenants 13

What is meant by "the ministering of angels"?

Those holding the Aaronic Priesthood may receive the assistance of angels. For example, President Wilford Woodruff testified, "I had the administration of angels while holding the office of a priest. I had visions and revelations. I traveled thousands of miles. I baptized men, though I could not confirm them because I had not the authority to do it" (Discourses of Wilford Woodruff, 298). Nevertheless, President Woodruff cautioned, "The Lord never did nor never will send an angel to anybody merely to gratify the desire of the individual to see an angel. If the Lord sends an angel to anyone, He sends him to perform a work that cannot be performed [except] by the administration of an angel" (Deseret Weekly News, 55:21; in Otten and Caldwell, Sacred Truths, 1:63).

If we associate temporal affairs with the lesser priesthood and spiritual matters with the higher, we may wonder why such a remarkable manifestation as the "ministering of angels" is linked with the Aaronic rather than the Melchizedek Priesthood. As great as this blessing is, the higher priesthood makes possible an even greater one (see D&C 84:19-22; 107:19-20).

Doctrine and Covenants 13

Who are the "sons of Levi," and what is their offering?

The answer to this question may be understood on at least two levels. On the literal level, Joseph Smith explained that the Savior's atonement did not completely end blood offerings. "These sacrifices as well as every ordinance, belonging to the priesthood, will, when the Temple of the Lord shall be built, and the sons of Levi be purified, be fully restored and attended to" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 173).

President Joseph Fielding Smith explained why that must take place. "We are living in the dispensation of the fulness of times into which all things are to be gathered, and all things are to be restored since the beginning. . . . It will be necessary, therefore, for the sons of Levi, who offered the blood sacrifices anciently in Israel, to offer such a sacrifice again to round out and complete this ordinance in this dispensation" (Doctrines of Salvation, 3:94).

On a more figurative level, the Lord promised that faithful bearers of the Melchizedek and Aaronic Priesthood who magnify their callings "become the sons of Moses and of Aaron" respectively (D&C 84:33-34). Because Moses and Aaron were members of the tribe of Levi, faithful latter-day priesthood bearers become the "sons of Levi," and their "offering" is the faithful service they render (see, for example, D&C 128:24).

Doctrine and Covenants 13

Will the Aaronic Priesthood be taken from the earth again?

John the Baptist declared that the lesser priesthood must be on earth "until the sons of Levi do offer again an offering unto the Lord in righteousness" (D&C 13:1). The word until has several meanings. It may mean that something will cease to exist when a certain point is reached, but it does not necessarily have to mean that. The Lord affirmed that the Aaronic Priesthood will continue forever along with the higher Melchizedek Priesthood (see D&C 84:18). Oliver Cowdery recalled John's words slightly differently: "Upon you my fellow-servants, in the name of Messiah, I confer this Priesthood and this authority, which shall remain upon earth, that the sons of Levi may yet offer an offering unto the Lord in righteousness" (Pearl of Great Price, note following Joseph Smith-History 1:75). There is no suggestion that the priesthood will ever be taken away.

Doctrine and Covenants 13

After John the Baptist conferred the Aaronic Priesthood upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, he instructed them to baptize and ordain each other (see Joseph Smith-History 1:68-71). Why did he have them do that rather than perform these ordinances himself?

Baptism, confirmation, and ordination to the priesthood are earthly ordinances that must be performed by mortals living on the earth. Performing these ordinances under John's direction gave Joseph and Oliver valuable training and experience.

Doctrine and Covenants 18:9

Had the Melchizedek Priesthood already been restored when this revelation was received?

The Lord reminded Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer that they had the same calling as Paul the apostle. Although the record of Peter, James, and John restoring the Melchizedek Priesthood has been lost, many students of the Doctrine and Covenants believe this verse indicates that Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer did have the higher priesthood by the time this revelation was received in June 1829. The Melchizedek Priesthood was restored on the banks of the Susquehanna River in the "wilderness" between Harmony, Pennsylvania, and Colesville, New York (D&C 128:20). Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery left the Susquehanna River country and moved about one hundred miles to Fayette, New York, about 1 June 1829, "and there resided until the translation [of the Book of Mormon] was finished" (History of the Church, 1:48-49). Hence, the restoration of the higher priesthood had likely occurred before this move (see Porter, "Restoration of the Priesthood").

Doctrine and Covenants 18:20

What is "the church of the devil"?

Nephi was told that ultimately there are only two churches: "the one is the church of the Lamb of God, and the other is the church of the devil" (1 Nephi 14:10). In one of the first revelations given through Joseph Smith, the Lord declared that His church consists only of those who repent and come unto Him (see D&C 10:67-68). Thus anything or anyone that diverts us from the Lord or from keeping his commandments is of the church of the devil. {See D&C 1:30.}

"In other words," reasoned Elder Bruce R. McConkie, "the church of the devil is the world; it is all the carnality and evil to which fallen man is heir; it is every unholy and wicked practice; it is every false religion, every supposed system of salvation which does not actually save and exalt man in the highest heaven of the celestial world" (Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:551).

President Joseph Fielding Smith concluded, "When we are commanded to 'contend against no church save it be the church of the devil,' we must understand that this is instruction to us to contend against all evil, that which is opposed to righteousness and truth. . . . All who go forth to teach should do so in wisdom and not contend with the churches or engage in profitless debates, but teach in the spirit of kindness and try to persuade people to receive the truth" (Church History and Modern Revelation, 1:83).

The Master has directed us not to argue over tenets but rather to proclaim his gospel, which counters the forces of evil and brings people to him (see D&C 19:29-31).

Doctrine and Covenants 18:34-36

Why is it so important to study the scriptures by the power of the Spirit?

The scriptures were written by prophets "as they were moved by the Holy Ghost" (2 Peter 1:21; compare D&C 68:4) and hence must be understood by that same Spirit (see 1 Corinthians 2:11-14). The Doctrine and Covenants similarly teaches that those who speak (or write) and those who listen (or read) by the Spirit truly "understand one another, and both are edified and rejoice together" (D&C 50:21-22). By carrying God's ideas directly into our heart (see 2 Nephi 33:1), the Spirit enables us to bypass the barriers of imperfect language and thereby understand and feel the import of his teachings more fully.

Doctrine and Covenants 19:11-12

What is "endless" or "eternal" punishment?

Elder James E. Talmage explained that "any punishment ordained of God is eternal, for He is eternal. His is a system of endless punishment, for it will always exist as a place or condition prepared for disobedient spirits; yet the infliction of the penalty will have an end in every case of acceptable repentance and reparation." The duration of these punishments "will be graded according to the sin" (Articles of Faith, 60-61). Hence, God's system of punishment might be likened to a prison that continues to exist even though individual inmates come and go.

Doctrine and Covenants 19:13,

Of what did Martin Harris need to repent?

Mr. Egbert B. Grandin, who was printing the Book of Mormon in Palmyra, New York, stopped work on the nearly completed project when a group of townspeople issued a resolution declaring that none of them would purchase the book. Anticipating such an action, Martin Harris had agreed to pay in advance the publication price of three thousand dollars. He was now reluctant to do so, and the Lord admonished him to honor his earlier commitment (see D&C 19:25-26, 34-35). Martin heeded the admonition, mortgaged his farm, and eventually sold 151 acres at a great sacrifice (see Backman and Cowan, Joseph Smith and the Doctrine and Covenants, 24-25).

Doctrine and Covenants 19:18

What is the significance of this statement about the Savior's suffering?

The Savior's atoning sacrifice is the most important event in the history of our world. It is the necessary foundation for the gospel plan.

Elder Joseph Fielding Smith taught: "We get into the habit of thinking, I suppose, that his great suffering was when he was nailed to the cross by his hands and his feet and was left there to suffer until he died. As excruciating as that pain was, that was not the greatest suffering that he had to undergo, for in some way which I cannot understand, but which I accept on faith, and which you must accept on faith, he carried on his back the burden of the sins of the whole world . . . and so great was his suffering before he ever went to the cross, we are informed, that blood oozed from the pores of his body, and he prayed to his Father that the cup might pass if possible, but not being possible he was willing to drink" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1947, 147-48).

Some modern scholars have questioned whether Jesus actually bled from every pore. Doctrine and Covenants 19 confirms that the statements in the New Testament about the Savior's suffering are true.

Doctrine and Covenants 19:25

Why was Martin Harris told not to seek his neighbor's life or his wife?

Available historical sources do not shed light on the specific circumstances behind this admonition.

Doctrine and Covenants 19:27

How are the Lamanites a remnant of the Jews?

Even though the Lamanites' ancestor Lehi was of the tribe of Manasseh (see Alma 10:3), he and his family lived at Jerusalem, which was in the kingdom of Judah. They could therefore have been regarded as Jews by citizenship. Furthermore, the Lamanites were also descended from the "people of Zarahemla" who had accompanied Mulek from Jerusalem (Omni 1:13-19). {See D&C 3:17.} Hence, they also had the blood of Judah in their veins.

Doctrine and Covenants 20:1

By what name was the Lord's Church to be known?

In Doctrine and Covenants 20, the Lord's Church is referred to as "the Church of Christ." Other elements were later added to the Church's official title. {See D&C 115:4.} Nevertheless, the title "The Church of Jesus Christ" remains preeminent. {See D&C 1:30.}

Doctrine and Covenants 20:1

What do we know about the date of Jesus' birth, and why do we celebrate Christmas when we do?

Most biblical scholars agree that the Savior could not have been born in December because shepherds would not have been out at night with their flocks during that season of the year. Many suggest spring as a more probable time.

Evidence from the Book of Mormon confirms that Christ was born during the spring. The Nephites counted their years from the time when they saw the wondrous signs of his birth. Almost exactly thirty-three years later, on the fourth day of the first month in the thirty-fourth year, the sign of the Crucifixion was seen (see 3 Nephi 2:8; 8:5). This meant that the Lord was born and later died at the same time of year. The New Testament records that his crucifixion occurred at the time of the Passover, a Jewish holiday celebrated during the early spring. All this evidence points to the conclusion that Jesus Christ was born during the early spring and accords with the instructions in Doctrine and Covenants 20:1 that the Church should be organized on Tuesday, 6 April 1830, eighteen hundred and thirty years after the Savior had come in the flesh.

During the centuries after the Savior's birth, some Christians began to combine their celebration of that event with northern Europeans' observance of the winter solstice. Even though we know the Savior was born in April, it is appropriate to remember his life at any time of the year. Hence we join other Christians each December in celebrating the momentous event in Bethlehem.

Doctrine and Covenants 20:9

How can the Book of Mormon contain "the fulness of the gospel" when it does not discuss such important doctrines and practices as baptism for the dead or eternal marriage?

On several occasions the Savior has defined what his gospel is—faith in his atoning sacrifice, repentance of sins, baptism by immersion, receiving the Holy Ghost, and enduring to the end (see 3 Nephi 27:13-22; D&C 33:10-12; 39:6; 76:40-42).

President Ezra Taft Benson explained that when the Lord spoke of the Book of Mormon as containing the "fulness of the gospel," he did not mean that "it contains every teaching, every doctrine ever revealed. Rather, it means that in the Book of Mormon we will find the fulness of those doctrines required for our salvation. And they are taught plainly and simply so that even children can learn the ways of salvation and exaltation" (Ensign, Nov. 1986, 6).

The Book of Mormon powerfully proclaims to honest readers the gospel's most fundamental principles, testified Elder Marion G. Romney. "From almost every page of the book, there will come to them a moving testimony that Jesus is indeed the Christ, the Son of the Living God, our Redeemer and Savior. This witness alone will be a sustaining anchor in every storm. In the Book of Mormon, they will find the plainest explanation of Christ's divine mission and atonement to be found anywhere in sacred writ. . . . Don't be content with what someone else says about what is in it. Drink deeply from the divine fountain itself" (in Conference Report, Apr. 1960, 112).

If we have faith in Jesus Christ, live basic gospel principles, and endure to the end—doctrines clearly taught in the Book of Mormon— such other specific principles as baptism for the dead and eternal marriage would be (and now have been) made known to us.

Doctrine and Covenants 20:28

How are the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost "one God"?

"Correctly interpreted, God in this sense means Godhead," taught President Joseph Fielding Smith (Answers to Gospel Questions, 2:142). The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are one in purpose, glory, and power. The Savior prayed that we, too, might become one even as he and his Father are (see John 17:20-22).

Doctrine and Covenants 20:30-32

How do justification, sanctification, and grace fit into the gospel plan?

Justification is a "judicial act" by which the Lord grants remission of sins, releasing the individual from the punishments required by justice—upon condition of faith, repentance, and baptism (Smith and Sjodahl, Commentary, 104). This "preparatory gospel" is administered by the lesser priesthood (see D&C 84:26-27), preparing us for the greater change of sanctification.

"To be sanctified," explained Elder Bruce R. McConkie, "is to become clean, pure, and spotless; to be free from the blood and sins of the world; to become a new creature of the Holy Ghost, one whose body has been renewed by the rebirth of the Spirit. Sanctification is a state of saintliness, a state attained only by conformity to the laws and ordinances of the gospel. The plan of salvation is the system and means provided whereby men may sanctify their souls and thereby become worthy of a celestial inheritance" (Mormon Doctrine, 675).

Grace is the "divine means of help or strength, given through the bounteous mercy and love of Jesus Christ" (LDS Bible Dictionary, 697).

Doctrine and Covenants 20:37

Who are the parties to the covenant made at baptism?

We often speak of baptism as a covenant made between us and God, but we overlook that this verse, together with Alma's instructions (see Mosiah 18:8-10), clearly identifies the Church as another party to the baptismal covenant. A person who is converted and baptized truly does "join the Church." Candidates for baptism are to "witness before the church" that they are worthy to become members and that they are ready to "take upon them the name of Jesus Christ" and faithfully keep his commandments. Those who are baptized promise their fellow Church members that they will "bear one another's burdens . . . mourn with those who mourn . . . and comfort those who stand in need of comfort." They also promise to "stand as witnesses of God" in every aspect of their lives. God promises them remission, or forgiveness, of their sins and assures them that he will "pour out his Spirit more abundantly" upon them.

Notice how many of these commitments are specifically reflected in the sacramental prayers (see D&C 20:77, 79). In a very real sense we renew our baptismal covenants as we worthily and thoughtfully partake of the sacramental emblems each Sunday.

Doctrine and Covenants 20:38-59

What do the titles of these priesthood offices mean?

Four priesthood offices functioned in the Church at the time of its organization. The title deacon comes from the Greek word diakonos which means "servant or messenger"; deacons traditionally have functioned in such serving roles as passing the sacrament, helping widows, and so forth. Teacher aptly describes the responsibility of one who is to watch over and expound the gospel to Church members. Priest is the title for the minimum office required to perform such priesthood ordinances as baptism, administering the sacrament, and ordinations to the Aaronic Priesthood. Elder is a form of the word older and denotes those who are more mature. Elders have a greater spiritual and leadership role than do bearers of the Aaronic priesthood; significantly, young men receive this office at about the age many societies consider to be the beginning of adulthood.

Doctrine and Covenants 20:59

How can young deacons effectively "warn, expound, exhort, and teach, and invite all to come unto Christ"?

Paul counseled his young associate Timothy: "Let no man despise thy youth" (1 Timothy 4:12). Likewise today we should not minimize the good being done by faithful young men and young women. Elder Henry B. Eyring described how one young man returned to faithful activity when "the Savior had reached out through a twelve-year-old servant assigned by a thirteen-year-old quorum president" (Ensign, Nov. 1995, 38).

President Gordon B. Hinckley reminded the young bearers of the Aaronic Priesthood that they need to be worthy to teach and bless others effectively. He cautioned: "You cannot afford to partake of things that will weaken your minds and your bodies. These include cocaine, 'crack,' alcohol, tobacco. You cannot be involved in immoral activity. You cannot do these things and be valiant as warriors in the cause of the Lord in the great, everlasting contest that goes on for the souls of our Father's children" (Ensign, Nov. 1986, 44).

Doctrine and Covenants 20:60

In what sense are brethren ordained "by the power of the Holy Ghost"?

A priesthood bearer performing ordinations or any other priesthood ordinances does so in the name of Jesus Christ. He should seek the guidance of the Spirit to know precisely what the Savior would have him do and say. The Fifth Article of Faith affirms that "we believe that a man must be called of God by prophecy." In other words, we believe that his calling should be a result of inspiration. Finally, the priesthood and power of the Holy Ghost are simply two manifestations of the same power—the power of God.

"I believe that when the Presidency of this Church nominates a person for an office, it is not a personal nomination," testified Elder Marion G. Romney. "I have that confidence in the Presidency and that testimony of the divinity of this Church. I believe that the Lord Jesus Christ reveals to them through the Spirit of the Holy Ghost the men they should name to office, and I believe that same spirit will inspire and direct the presidents of stakes and the bishops of wards and the heads of other organizations in this Church, if they will live for such inspiration, so that when they name people for office they will name them under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1947, 40).

Doctrine and Covenants 20:61

What schedules has the Church followed in holding conferences?

Early Latter-day Saints usually met in conferences every three months. Only after Church membership had become larger and more scattered did a distinction emerge between general conferences and stake conferences. By the late 1830s general conferences were usually held in April (to commemorate the anniversary of the Church's organization) and October. Missions around the world often scheduled their main conferences at these same two times. Over the years stake conferences were held quarterly, but in 1979 their frequency was cut to two per year. In more recent years these conferences have been supplemented by occasional multistake, regional, or area conferences.

Doctrine and Covenants 20:63-64

What are certificates and licenses?

Certificates are documents stating that an ordinance such as baptism or ordination to an office in the priesthood has taken place. Licenses are authorizations for a person to act in a specific calling, such as serving as a missionary. Present-day examples of licenses are temple recommends and recommends to perform an ordinance, which may be used when a priesthood bearer performs an ordinance outside his own ward or branch.

Doctrine and Covenants 20:65

What is our role in sustaining Church leaders?

"The Lord will call whom He sees proper to call to His priesthood," explained Elder B. H. Roberts, "but when in the exercise of the functions of the priesthood or its offices it comes to presiding over the Church or any of the branches or departments thereof, that can only be with the consent of those over whom they preside" (History of the Church, 5:522 n).

President J. Reuben Clark Jr. pointed out that "the power of 'nominating' or calling to office" resides with inspired leaders. "When the presiding authority has so 'nominated' or chosen, or called any man to office, that man is then presented to the body of the Church to be sustained, in political language 'elected'.

"Thus the body of the Church has no calling or 'nominating' power, but only the sustaining, or politically speaking, the 'electing' power" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1940, 28).

Even as the calling of individuals to office should be guided by inspiration, so should we seek the same Spirit as we exercise our right to sustain those who have been called (see D&C 26:2). President Joseph Fielding Smith counseled, "I have no right to raise my hand in opposition to a man who is appointed to any position in this Church, simply because I may not like him, or because of some personal disagreement or feeling I may have, but only on the grounds that he is guilty of wrong doing, of transgression of the laws of the Church which would disqualify him for the position which he is called to hold" (Doctrines of Salvation, 3:124).

"If a man be a teacher, and I vote that I will sustain him in his position," stressed President John Taylor, "when he visits me in an official capacity I will welcome him and treat him with consideration, kindness and respect and if I need counsel I will ask it at his hand, and I will do everything I can to sustain him. . . . And then if anybody in my presence were to whisper something about him disparaging to his reputation, I would say, Look here! are you a Saint? Yes. Did you not hold up your hand to sustain him? Yes. Then why do you not do it?" (in Journal of Discourses, 21:207).

Doctrine and Covenants 20:66

What were "traveling bishops"?

Edward Partridge became the Church's first bishop in February 1831 (see D&C 41:9). Newel K. Whitney was called in December of that same year to be the second bishop. Bishop Whitney was given responsibility for the Saints in Ohio (see D&C 72), and Bishop Partridge was responsible for the Saints in Zion, or Missouri. Because the Saints were quite scattered, both bishops had to travel among several small congregations to perform their duties. Not until 1839, when the Saints settled in Nauvoo, were bishops associated with specific local congregations known as wards.

Doctrine and Covenants 20:68

Shouldn't converts be instructed before they are baptized?

A casual reading of Doctrine and Covenants 20:68 may leave the impression that converts are to be taught about the Church after they are baptized and before they are confirmed, but a closer reading gives us a better understanding. Section 20 was revealed as a summary of the Church's teachings and practices for the benefit of prospective members. The italicized phrases in verses 37, 38, and 68 can be thought of as subheadings that precede major divisions. Hence the first part of verse 68, which is in italics, introduces the rest of section 20, which treats "the duty of the members after they are received by baptism." The remainder of verse 68, which is not in italics, states that converts are to be instructed before they are confirmed—and also before they are baptized.

Doctrine and Covenants 20:73

What wording should be used in performing baptisms?

The words of the baptismal prayer revealed in the Doctrine and Covenants are slightly different from those in 3 Nephi 11:24-25, but the essential elements are identical. The variation may reflect differences between the Nephites' language and our own, or it may be that in the Book of Mormon the Savior was addressing brethren to whom he had personally given authority. In any case, we should use the wording revealed most recently and directly into our language—the version recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants.

Doctrine and Covenants 20:76

Is the congregation required to kneel when the priest blesses the sacramental emblems?

With may also mean "in the presence of," so the revelation requires the priest, not necessarily the congregation, to kneel.

Doctrine and Covenants 20:79

Why do we use water rather than wine in the sacrament?

At the time the Church was organized, wine was commonly used. Only a few months later, however, the Lord instructed that "it mattereth not" what emblems we use for the sacrament as long as we remember the Savior's body and blood. He specifically instructed Joseph Smith not to buy wine from those who might be the Saints' enemies (see D&C 27:2-4). Soon water became the most commonly used emblem. Though the red color of wine may remind us of the Savior's blood, water is also an appropriate symbol because it is essential to life and because its clearness reminds us of the Savior's cleansing power.

Doctrine and Covenants 20:81-84

Why and how should membership records be kept?

Doctrine and Covenants 20:81-84 illustrate the point that procedures may change whereas principles remain constant. Moroni wrote that a record of members was maintained so that "they might be remembered and nourished" by the Church (Moroni 6:4). The procedure of representatives of the various branches personally exchanging membership records at conferences was suitable for the small 1830 Church. During the early twentieth century, the best procedure was for records to be sent to a membership department at Church headquarters whenever members moved from one ward or branch to another. More recently, computers have facilitated the Church's keeping its membership rolls up to date. Even more efficient means may emerge in the future, but the purpose will still be the same: to make Church leaders and members aware of those whom we may strengthen through gospel teaching and Church activity.

Doctrine and Covenants 21

To whom was this revelation given?

Doctrine and Covenants 21, a revelation given at the meeting in which the Church was organized, seems to have been directed to at least three audiences: Joseph Smith (see v. 1), the Church (see v. 4), and Oliver Cowdery (see v. 10). Nevertheless, we should seek to apply the whole revelation to ourselves. Even though some sections of the Doctrine and Covenants are addressed to specific individuals (for example, sections 11 and 12 are addressed to Hyrum Smith and Joseph Knight Sr., respectively), the Lord emphasizes that he is speaking to all who have a desire to serve (see D&C 11:27; 12:7). He has declared, "What I say unto one I say unto all" (D&C 61:18, 36; 93:49).

Doctrine and Covenants 21:1

What is the meaning of the titles to be applied to the president of the Church?

Joseph Smith was to be known by various titles, each of which shed light on a different facet of his calling.

Elder John A. Widtsoe explained that a seer is "one who sees with spiritual eyes. He perceives the meaning of that which seems obscure to others; therefore he is an interpreter and clarifier of eternal truth. He foresees the future from the past and the present. This he does by the power of the Lord operating through him directly, or indirectly with the aid of divine instruments such as the Urim and Thummim" (Evidences and Reconciliations, 258).

Joseph Smith was called a translator because of his assignment to translate the Book of Mormon by the gift and power of God. Within a few years he likewise translated the book of Abraham.

A prophet is God's messenger or spokesman, "one who speaks before or in behalf of another." Elder Widtsoe pointed out that "the principal business of a prophet has mistakenly been thought to foretell coming events, to utter prophecies, which is only one of the several prophetic functions.

"In the sense that a prophet is a man who receives revelations from the Lord, the titles 'seer and revelator' merely amplify the larger and inclusive meaning of the title 'prophet'" (Evidences and Reconciliations, 258).

An apostle is a "special witness of the name of Christ in all the world" (D&C 107:23). {See D&C 107:23.} "The title 'Apostle' is . . . one of special significance and sanctity," taught Elder James E. Talmage. "By derivation the word 'apostle' is the English equivalent of the Greek apostolos, indicating a messenger, an ambassador, or literally 'one who is sent.' It signifies that he who is rightly so called, speaks and acts not of himself, but as the representative of a higher power whence his commission issued; and in this sense the title is that of a servant, rather than that of a superior. . . .

" . . . So great is the sanctity of this special calling, that the title 'Apostle' should not be used lightly as the common or ordinary form of address" (Jesus the Christ, 228-29 n. 2).

Elder is the title of one who bears the Melchizedek Priesthood "whether the individuals concerned are or have been ordained to the office of elder or not" (McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 215). The use of the title elder, explained President Joseph Fielding Smith, "makes it needless to use unnecessarily sacred terms as 'Apostle,' 'Patriarch,' 'High Priest,' etc. It is proper in general usage to speak of the apostles, the seventies and all others holding the Melchizedek Priesthood as 'elders.' Of course, the term President, in speaking of the First Presidency, is the proper designation" (Church History and Modern Revelation, 1:95).

Doctrine and Covenants 22

What is the "new and everlasting covenant," and what are the "old covenants" and "dead works" it superseded?

We often associate the phrase "new and everlasting covenant" with the covenant of eternal marriage, but it is actually far broader than that. It is the gospel of Jesus Christ (see D&C 66:2): "new" because it had just been restored and "everlasting" in its blessings.

"Every principle, key and authority, belonging to the Gospel of Jesus Christ," wrote President Joseph Fielding Smith, "constitute the new and 'everlasting covenant.' It is not, as some may believe, any one covenant which is everlasting, but the sum total of them all" (Church History and Modern Revelation, 1:244-45).

Elder Bruce R. McConkie distinguished between marriage, which is a new and everlasting covenant, and the gospel as a whole, which is the new and everlasting covenant (see Mormon Doctrine, 529-30).

The revelation recorded in section 22 was received when individuals questioned the need to be baptized again. The phrases "old covenants" and "dead works" referred to their earlier baptisms, which were not valid because they were performed without priesthood authority.
