Richard O. Cowan, Answers to Your Questions About the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1996)

4

Instructions to Early Laborers

Doctrine and Covenants 23 through 40

The revelations recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 23 through 40 were given during 1830 and 1831 after the Church was organized and had begun expanding its ministry in New York and Pennsylvania. In these sections we meet more early leaders of the Restoration, including Parley and Orson Pratt, Sidney Rigdon, and Edward Partridge. Through these revelations the knowledge of more doctrines and practices were unfolded to the Saints.

Doctrine and Covenants 23:3

What did the Lord mean when he told Hyrum Smith that his duty was "unto the church forever" because of his family?

The Lord told Hyrum and his father that it was their calling to strengthen the Church forever (see D&C 23:3, 5). "This could not refer to their personal ministry on Earth, but it has been fulfilled in the ministry of their descendants, and will, no doubt, come true, as the Revelations say, 'forever'" (Smith and Sjodahl, Commentary, 122). President Joseph Fielding Smith believed that this promise to the Smiths referred especially to their descendants holding the hereditary office of patriarch to the Church (see Doctrines of Salvation, 3:164).

Doctrine and Covenants 23:6-7

Why was Joseph Knight not told that his sins were forgiven?

The other four individuals addressed in this revelation had already been baptized and were assured that their sins were forgiven. Joseph Knight Sr., on the other hand, was directed to join the Church by being baptized, which he did the following June. Before he received this ordinance he could not qualify for the remission of his sins.

Doctrine and Covenants 24:3

What does it mean to "magnify thine office"?

Magnify means to enlarge, to make our calling more important because of the service we render to others. {See D&C 84:33-41.} Joseph Smith was specifically instructed to spend his full time in Church service and to forsake temporal labors (see D&C 24:7, 9). He was therefore promised that the Church would provide the support he and his family needed. {See D&C 42:70-73.}

Doctrine and Covenants 24:15

What is the meaning of the phrase "casting off the dust of your feet"?

The Lord has always instructed his people to share the gospel. Among the Nephites, Jacob and Joseph took this responsibility seriously: "We did magnify our office unto the Lord, taking upon us the responsibility, answering the sins of the people upon our own heads if we did not teach them the word of God with all diligence" (Jacob 1:18-19). The Master directed his ancient apostles to shake the dust off their feet when their message was rejected (see Matthew 10:14). The dust represented the sins of the people, and this act symbolized that the missionaries had faithfully discharged their responsibility, so that the burden of the sins of these people was off their shoulders. Jacob, for example, when he had finished teaching his people, shook off his garments, declaring that he had shaken their "iniquities from [his] soul" (2 Nephi 9:44).

When Paul was rejected at Corinth, he likewise "shook his raiment, and said unto them, Your blood be upon your own heads; I am clean" (Acts 18:6). This ritual, primarily for the benefit of the missionary, was normally to be performed in private (see D&C 60:15).

"The missionaries of the Church who faithfully perform their duty," explained President Joseph Fielding Smith, "are under the obligation of leaving their testimony with all with whom they come in contact in their work. This testimony will stand as a witness against those who reject the message, at the judgment" (Church History and Modern Revelation, 1:223).

Doctrine and Covenants 24:18

What does it mean to go without scrip or staves?

Scrip means "a small bag" or "wallet" or may refer to such substitutes for money as a bank certificate or share of stock (Webster, American Dictionary). Staves is an archaic plural of staff. These two items symbolize material preparation. In the early days of the Church, missionaries sometimes traveled "without purse or scrip," typically in rural areas, depending on the blessings of the Lord and the generosity of the people for food and lodging. In the present day, however, missionary work has increasingly shifted into urban areas. Vagrancy laws and other conditions have made the former practice impossible. President Charles W. Penrose acknowledged that he had performed all his missionary work "without purse or scrip" but added, "Now I do not say that this should be done now. I believe that as circumstances change, the Lord changes his commandments, to correspond therewith" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1921, 17).

Doctrine and Covenants 25:1

In what unique sense was Emma a daughter of God?

The Savior reminded Emma that "all those who receive [and live] my gospel are sons and daughters in my kingdom." {See D&C 11:30.}

Elder Bruce R. McConkie taught: "All women are the daughters of God because of their pre-existent birth as female spirits. However, the designation daughters of God, as used in the revelations, has a far more pointed meaning than this. Just as men who pursue a steadfast course toward exaltation become the sons of God while in this life, so women who walk hand-in-hand in obedience with them become the daughters of God. (D&C 25:1; 76:24; Mosiah 5:7.)

"The temple ordinances, including celestial marriage, precede attainment of that membership in the household of God which makes one a daughter. Those who are adopted as daughters in this life will, if they continue faithful, gain exaltation in the world to come" (Mormon Doctrine, 179-80).

Doctrine and Covenants 25:3

What is the meaning of Emma's being an "elect lady"?

Elect means "chosen" (Webster, American Dictionary) and is often used in connection with those who have qualified for exaltation in the celestial kingdom. In 1842, when the Relief Society was organized at Nauvoo, Joseph Smith referred to his wife's being an "elect lady" and explained that "elect meant to be elected to a certain work. &c., and that the revelation was then fulfilled by Sister Emma's election to the Presidency of the Society" (History of the Church, 4:552-53). {See D&C 25:7.}

Doctrine and Covenants 25:5-8

How do the instructions to Emma Smith shed light on the role of women today?

The first responsibility the Lord spoke of in this revelation to Emma Smith was to be a good wife to her husband (see D&C 25:5-6). Our latter-day prophets consistently have emphasized a woman's key role in the home. For example, President Harold B. Lee declared: "We say the prime role in life for a woman is to become a wife and a mother" ("Be Loyal to the Royal within You," 93).

Our prophets have just as strongly emphasized that a man's key role is also in the home. "Mothers play an important role as the heart of the home," declared President Ezra Taft Benson, "but this in no way lessens the equally important role fathers should play, as head of the home, in nurturing, training, and loving their children" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1987, 62). Speaking in a priesthood session of general conference, President Lee told the priesthood bearers, "The greatest of the Lord's work you brethren will ever do as fathers will be within the walls of your own home" (in Conference Report, Apr. 1973, 130). In another often-quoted statement, President David O. McKay affirmed, "No other success can compensate for failure in the home" (in Conference Report, Apr. 1964, 5).

A woman's role is not limited to the home, however. The Lord also assigned Emma Smith to serve in the Church and counseled her to devote more time to learning and writing (see D&C 25:7-8, 11). Elder Bruce R. McConkie taught: "A married woman's place is in the home, where she sustains and supports her husband; a woman's place is in the Church, where she expounds scripture, writes wise documents, and learns much; a woman's place is out rendering compassionate service to her fellow beings, in and out of the Church, a woman's place is in preaching the gospel and doing missionary work; her calling is to do good and work righteousness in every place and under all circumstances" (Ensign, Jan. 1979, 63).

Doctrine and Covenants 25:7

Why does this verse say that Emma would be "ordained"?

A dictionary published about the time of this revelation indicates that although the principal meaning of ordain is "to invest with a ministerial function or sacerdotal [priestly] power," the word also may mean "to set apart for an office; to appoint" (Webster, American Dictionary).

"The term 'ordain' was used generally in the early days of the Church in reference to both ordination and setting apart," explained President Joseph Fielding Smith. "Men holding the Priesthood were said to have been 'ordained' to preside over branches and to perform special work. Sisters also were said to have been 'ordained' when they were called to some special duty or responsibility. In later years we developed a distinction between ordain and setting apart. . . . This saying that Emma Smith was 'ordained' to expound scripture, does not mean that she had conferred upon her the Priesthood, but that she was set apart to this calling, which found its fulfillment in the Relief Society of the Church" (Church History and Modern Revelation, 1:126).

President John Taylor later recalled the organization of the Relief Society: "the Prophet called Sister Emma to be an elect lady." {See D&C 25:3.} "In compliance with Brother Joseph's request I set her apart, and also ordained . . . her counselors. Some of the sisters have thought that these sisters mentioned were, in this ordination, ordained to the Priesthood. And for the information of all interested in this subject I will say, it is not the calling of these sisters to hold the Priesthood, only in connection with their husbands, they being one with their husbands" (in Journal of Discourses, 21:367-68).

Doctrine and Covenants 25:12

How can music affect us for good or ill?

The First Presidency said: "Inspirational music is an essential part of our church meetings. The hymns invite the Spirit of the Lord, create a feeling of reverence, unify us as members, and provide a way for us to offer praises to the Lord.

"Some of the greatest sermons are preached by the singing of hymns. Hymns move us to repentance and good works, build testimony and faith, comfort the weary, console the mourning, and inspire us to endure to the end" (Hymns, 1985, ix).

"As we sing we should think about the messages of the words,"

Elder Dallin H. Oaks taught. "Our hymns contain matchless doctrinal sermons, surpassed only by the scriptures in their truth and poetic impact" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1994, 12).

Elder Boyd K. Packer warned the youth of the Church especially that music may also have negative influences on us: "You cannot afford to fill your mind with the unworthy hard music of our day. It is not harmless. It can welcome onto the stage of your mind unworthy thoughts and set the tempo to which they dance and to which you may act.

"You degrade yourself when you identify with all of those things which seem now to surround such extremes in music: the shabbiness, the irreverence, the immorality, and the addictions. Such music as that is not worthy of you" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1973, 25).

Doctrine and Covenants 26:2

How can we vote meaningfully when given the opportunity in Church meetings?

In the world, we are encouraged to study issues and candidates thoroughly before casting our vote. In the Church, we vote immediately when names are presented. To vote meaningfully we must be prepared spiritually so that we can be guided by the Spirit of the Lord (see D&C 26:2; 28:13).

"It may seem rather a dry and formal matter to some of the people to come together and lift up their hands to sustain the authorities of the Church," said Elder Charles W. Penrose, "but it is a necessary duty and, if we look at it properly, we shall take pleasure therein. . . . it was designed by the Almighty in the organization of this Church, that the voice of the people should respond to the voice of the Lord. It is the voice of the Lord and the voice of the people together in this Church that sanctions all things therein" (in Journal of Discourses, 21:45).

Elder Bruce R. McConkie asserted: "The Church (or kingdom) is not a democracy; legislation is not enacted by the body of people composing the organization; they do not make the laws governing themselves. The Church is a kingdom. The Lord Jesus Christ is the Eternal King, and the President of the Church, the mouthpiece of God on earth, is the earthly king. All things come to the Church from the King of the kingdom in heaven, through the king of the kingdom on earth. There is, of course, the democratic principle of common consent whereunder the people may accept or reject what the Lord offers to them. Acceptance brings salvation; rejection leads to damnation" (Mormon Doctrine, 416).

Doctrine and Covenants 27:2-4

Why don't we use wine in the sacrament?

After the Lord cautioned against buying wine from "enemies," and particularly after the Word of Wisdom (D&C 89) was revealed in 1833, the Church used water in the sacrament. President Brigham Young acknowledged that in biblical times people typically drank wine but emphasized that this was done because "they were not blessed so profusely as we are with the crystal streams from the mountains" (in Journal of Discourses, 19:92). Water is an appropriate emblem of Christ's cleansing blood. {See D&C 20:79.}

Doctrine and Covenants 27:6-7

Who is Elias?

The name or title Elias is used in the scriptures in at least three different senses.

First, Elias and Elijah are two forms of the same name, the former coming from the Greek and the latter from the Hebrew. Many references to Elias in the New Testament actually refer to Elijah. For example, it was Elijah who appeared with Moses on the Mount of Transfiguration (see Matthew 17:1-3). Joseph Smith used the two forms of this name in his discussion of the powers of the Aaronic and Melchizedek Priesthoods (see Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 335-41).

Second, Elias is the title of an individual messenger or forerunner, or of a group of persons sent to prepare the way (see Matthew 17:11). Perhaps John the Baptist is the best known of those who have come in the role of an Elias (see Luke 1:17). Doctrine and Covenants 27:6 uses Elias both as a general title and as a specific title of John the Baptist.

Three, Elias was a great prophet who lived in the days of Abraham. This prophet appeared in the Kirtland Temple in 1836 and restored the "dispensation of the gospel of Abraham" (D&C 110:12). {See D&C 110:12.}

Doctrine and Covenants 28:1-7

Who may receive revelation in the Church?

When Moses was told that certain individuals were prophesying, allegedly without authority, he replied that he wished all of God's people could be prophets (see Numbers 11:26-29). Similarly, all Latter-day Saints may receive revelation in answer to their prayers but only concerning their stewardship—each of us for our own lives, parents for their family, bishops for their ward members, and so forth. Only the prophet is entitled to receive revelation for the whole Church.

Elder Spencer W. Kimball instructed: "While inspiration and even revelation is available to every individual for himself, to every head of family for his family, to every bishop for his ward, to every stake president for his stake, yet none of these will receive revelations for the Church, and any revelations they receive for themselves will always parallel and never counter the major revelations to the prophets of the Lord" (That You May Not Be Deceived, 9).

In 1913 the First Presidency declared: "When visions, dreams, tongues, prophecy, impressions or any extraordinary gift or inspiration, convey something out of harmony with the accepted revelations of the Church or contrary to the decisions of its constituted authorities, Latter-day Saints may know that it is not of God, no matter how plausible it may appear. Also, they should understand that directions for the guidance of the Church will come, by revelation, through the head" (Joseph F. Smith, Anthon H. Lund, and Charles W. Penrose, Improvement Era, Sept. 1913, 1148-49).

Doctrine and Covenants 28:8

What did the mission to the Lamanites accomplish?

Oliver Cowdery was the first to be called to "go unto the Lamanites" (D&C 28:8). Peter Whitmer Jr., Parley P. Pratt, and Ziba Peterson were soon called to the same work (see D&C 30:5-6; 32:1-4). These missionaries left Fayette, New York, late in October 1830. They first visited the Catteraugus Indians near Buffalo, where they left copies of the Book of Mormon. Thus the first formal mission of the Church carried the message of the restored gospel to the Lamanites and gave them the record of their fathers.

In Church history, however, the primary importance of this mission was not in its work with the Indians. Parley P. Pratt wanted to take the Book of Mormon to his old friend Sidney Rigdon, who was a leading minister in the Campbellite movement (a forerunner of the Disciples of Christ Church), at Mentor, near Kirtland, Ohio. Many future Church leaders were converted as a result of this visit, and by the following spring, there were about one thousand members of the Church in the area.

Meanwhile, the missionaries continued their journey west during the winter of 1830-31. Because of sectarian jealousy, the Latter-day Saint missionaries were expelled from among the Native Americans west of the Missouri River, but they were successful in converting many non-Indians in the vicinity of Independence, Missouri. By the spring of 1831, therefore, there were sizable Church congregations in Kirtland and in Independence—two centers that would play important roles in subsequent Church history.

Doctrine and Covenants 28:11-13

Why was the Lord's counsel to Hiram Page given through Oliver Cowdery?

Oliver Cowdery and Hiram Page were good friends who became brothers-in-law when both married daughters of Peter Whitmer Sr. Because Oliver had supported Hiram's claim to have received revelations for the Church, he might have been more inclined to accept correction from Oliver. Furthermore, Oliver learned proper Church procedures as he was instructing his friend.

"It was very necessary that Oliver Cowdery should receive this admonition," explained President Joseph Fielding Smith, "for he was inclined to take issue with the Prophet even in regard to matters of revelation. Much good came out of this unpleasant incident, for the members were taught that there was order in the Church and only one appointed to receive commandments and revelations for their guidance, and he was the one God had called" (Church History and Modern Revelation, 1:135).

Doctrine and Covenants 29:7-8

Why are we no longer asked to gather into one place?

Initially the need was for the Saints to gather in one central place in order to have a strong nucleus from which the Church's influence could be radiated. The Saints could thereby strengthen one another and more directly enjoy the Prophet's personal influence.

Nonetheless, revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants (101:20-22; 115:17-18) anticipated the time when multiple gathering places would be established. Beginning in the 1890s and continuing into the twentieth century, the First Presidency directed people to stay in their homelands and build up the Church there. In 1921, for example, a Millennial Star editorial instructed: "The counsel of the General Authorities to the yet ungathered saints is not to flock Zionward under existing conditions; but to remain in the countries where they now dwell. . . . Such as have homes and employment, especially, should stay and help build up the Lord's work in the various missions and conferences and branches, strengthening the hands of the elders and other missionaries labouring among them" (Sept. 15, 1921, 585).

More than two thousand stakes have been established as gathering places worldwide. Not only are they places of refuge, but through their organization the Saints are better able to share the gospel with others by precept and example (see D&C 115:5-6). At the 1972 Mexico City Area Conference, Elder Bruce R. McConkie proclaimed: "The place of gathering for the Mexican Saints is in Mexico; the place of gathering for the Guatemalan Saints is in Guatemala; the place of gathering for the Brazilian Saints is in Brazil; and so it goes throughout the length and breadth of the whole earth. . . . every nation is the gathering place for its own people" (in Mexico and Central America Area Conference Report, 1972, 45).

At an area conference in Stockholm, Sweden, two years later, President Spencer W. Kimball counseled: "There is good reason for members of the Church who are isolated from the stakes and their benefits that they may wish to consider moving to central places, where all the blessings of the Church are available. Sometimes, of course, that is not feasible, and so we remain in the outskirts and build up the Church wherever we are. . . . Migration to America is not necessary any longer" (in Denmark, Finland, Norway, and Sweden Area Conference Report, 1974, 6).

Just before the Lord's second coming, there will once again be a need for the Saints to gather in one place to establish the center stake of Zion. In 1948, Elder Harold B. Lee cautioned: "The Lord has placed the responsibility for directing the work of gathering in the hands of the leaders of the Church to whom he will reveal his will where and when such gatherings would take place in the future. It would be well—before the frightening events concerning the fulfillment of all God's promises and predictions are upon us, that the Saints in every land prepare themselves and look forward to the instruction that shall come to them from the First Presidency of this Church as to where they shall be gathered and not be disturbed in their feelings until such instruction is given to them as it is revealed by the Lord to the proper authority" (in Conference Report, Apr. 1948, 55).

Doctrine and Covenants 29:12

Will Judas help to judge us?

"We have every reason to expect," wrote Elder Bruce R. McConkie, "that the saints and the world will be judged by the apostles and prophets sent to carry the message of salvation to them; and that the great hierarchal chain of judgment with Christ at the head, will include Adam and the prophets of all ages, Peter and the apostles of all ages, and all the elders of the kingdom of all ages who have kept their covenants" (Mormon Doctrine, 399).

Judas, however, will not be part of this great system of judges. He lost his standing among the Twelve and was replaced by Matthias (see Acts 1:25-26).

Doctrine and Covenants 29:32

What is the meaning of "first spiritual then temporal" and "first temporal then spiritual"?

Temporal, like temporary, comes from the Latin temporis, "pertaining to time." An 1828 dictionary defines this term as "pertaining to this life or this world"; it is opposed to that which is "spiritual concerns, which are far more important" (Webster, American Dictionary).

The scriptures teach that God created all things, including his own children, "spiritually, before they were naturally upon the face of the earth" (Moses 3:5). If we look back toward the beginning, we see that all things were "spiritual" before they became "temporal." After we leave this present life, we are taken into the spirit world. Even after the resurrection, our bodies of flesh and bone will be "spiritual" in character. "But they will not be blood bodies," Elder Joseph Fielding Smith clarified. "They will no longer be quickened by blood but quickened by the spirit which is eternal and they shall become immortal and shall never die" (in Conference Report, Apr. 1917, 63). If we look forward toward the end, we see that after our present "temporal" existence we will once again enter conditions that can best be described as "spiritual." Thus that which is "spiritual" is most enduring.

Doctrine and Covenants 29:34

Isn't the Word of Wisdom a "temporal commandment"?

Living the principles set forth in Doctrine and Covenants 89 obviously brings temporal blessings (see D&C 89:2). Nevertheless, the essence of this commandment is spiritual. Through compliance with this law, we learn the great spiritual principle of obedience. As we take care of our mortal body, it becomes a more fit instrument through which our spirit can operate. As we suppress our physical appetites, we give greater relative emphasis to our spirit.

"In our mortal, or carnal, way of thinking," explained President Joseph Fielding Smith, "many of the commandments the Lord has required seem to be temporal." But "the Lord does not think in temporal terms; his plan is to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man. In his eyes, therefore, all the commandments that have to do with our present welfare, are considered to be but steps on the way to his eternal salvation" (Church History and Modern Revelation, 1:307-8).

Doctrine and Covenants 29:46

Who is speaking in this revelation?

"In giving revelations," explained President Joseph Fielding Smith, "our Savior speaks at times for himself; at other times for the Father, and in the Father's name, as though he were the Father, and yet it is Jesus Christ, our Redeemer who gives the message. So, we see, in Doctrine and Covenants 29:1, that he introduces himself as 'Jesus Christ, your Redeemer,' but in the closing part of the revelation [v. 46] he speaks for the Father, and in the Father's name as though he were the Father, and yet it is still Jesus who is speaking, for the Father has put his name on him for that purpose" (Doctrines of Salvation, 1:27-28).

In 1916 the First Presidency declared: "In all His dealings with the human family Jesus the Son has represented and yet represents Elohim His Father in power and authority. . . . Thus the Father placed His name upon the Son; and Jesus Christ spoke and ministered in and through the Father's name; and so far as power, authority and Godship are concerned His words and acts were and are those of the Father" (in Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, 5:31-32).

Doctrine and Covenants 30:9

What is suggested by the directive to proclaim the gospel "as with the voice of a trump"?

The image of a trumpet calls to mind a herald proclaiming his message so all can hear. In his preface to the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord described his message as a "voice of warning" that all should prepare "for that which is to come, for the Lord is nigh" (D&C 1:4, 12). The directive to teach the gospel "as with the voice of a trump" requires us to proclaim it boldly and reminds us what our emphasis should be.

Doctrine and Covenants 31:4

What is the significance of the Lord's saying that the field is "already to be burned"?

Earlier the Lord had said the field was "white already to harvest" (D&C 4:4), but now it has reached a more advanced state when it must be burned. {See D&C 4:4.} "After the long night of apostasy," wrote President Joseph Fielding Smith, "the world was filled with tradition, false doctrine and practice" (Church History and Modern Revelation, 1:36). The Lord's reference to the "eleventh hour" (D&C 33:3) and his repeated warning, "I come quickly" (D&C 33:18; 34:12; 35:27; 39:24), should heighten our sense of urgency to become involved in God's work.

Doctrine and Covenants 31:10

How was Thomas B. Marsh a "physician" to the Church?

A dictionary published about the time of this revelation described a physician as "a person skilled in the art of healing; one whose profession is to prescribe remedies for diseases" (Webster, American Dictionary). The secondary definition may have applied even more directly: "In a spiritual sense, one that heals moral diseases; as a physician of the soul." In several instances Brother Marsh helped to resolve difficulties among the Saints. Historian A. Gary Anderson concluded: "These first recorded acts as a healer within the Church illustrate an ability in leadership and chronicle the fulfillment of his revelatory calling as 'physician'" ("Thomas B. Marsh," 139).

Doctrine and Covenants 33:10-12

What exactly is the "gospel"?

Our word gospel comes from the Old English word godspel, meaning "good news." Even though the gospel embraces all truth, the Savior himself has outlined its core in at least four places (see 3 Nephi 27:13-22; D&C 33:10-12; 39:6; 76:40-42).

"The gospel can be viewed from two perspectives," President Ezra Taft Benson pointed out. "In the broadest sense, the gospel embraces all truth, all light, all revealed knowledge to mankind. In a more restrictive sense, the gospel means the doctrine of the Fall, the consequences of the fall of man that brought into the world physical and spiritual death, the atonement of Jesus Christ which brings to pass immortality and eternal life, and the ordinances of salvation" (Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson, 30).

The heart of the gospel message is that through Christ's atonement we can overcome our sins and return once again into God's presence. Hence the gospel has been described as "glad tidings" (D&C 19:29).

Doctrine and Covenants 33:11

What is the baptism of fire?

"The Holy Ghost is a sanctifier," explained Elder Bruce R. McConkie, "and those who receive the baptism of fire have sin and evil burned out of their souls as though by fire" (Mortal Messiah, 2:50).

Doctrine and Covenants 33:14

What are "the church articles and covenants"?

The "church articles and covenants" consisted of what we now know as Doctrine and Covenants 20 and 22. At the first conference of the Church, held at Fayette, New York, on 9 June 1830, the "Articles and Covenants [were] read by Joseph Smith Jr., and received by unanimous vote of the whole congregation" (minutes taken by Oliver Cowdery; in Cannon and Cook, Far West Record, 1). The "Articles and Covenants" were an early guide for Church doctrines and procedures and thus were referred to at many Church meetings. They may be regarded as a forerunner to the later books of published revelations.

Doctrine and Covenants 34:3

How does this verse expand our understanding of the often-quoted "beloved" passage in John 3:16?

The passage in the Bible speaks of the great love God has for mankind, which led him to give his Only Begotten Son so that all might have eternal life. The revelation in Doctrine and Covenants 34 indicates that the Son shared this great love and thus was willing to endure the suffering required to accomplish his atoning sacrifice. We owe a great debt of gratitude to both the Father and the Son for the marvelous gift of the Atonement.

Doctrine and Covenants 35:3

How does the Lord regard the work being done by other churches?

In Doctrine and Covenants 35 the Lord assured Sidney Rigdon, a Campbellite minister, that He knew his deeds and was now calling him to a "greater work" (v. 3). The Lord told James Covill, a Baptist minister, essentially the same thing in a later revelation (see D&C 39:7, 11). Evidently the Master regarded the previous service of these two clergymen as a "great work." Still, with the priesthood and a knowledge of the fulness of the gospel, they could do more. {See D&C 1:30.}

Doctrine and Covenants 35:4

How did Sidney Rigdon prepare the way for the restored gospel?

Sidney Rigdon was a prominent minister in the Campbellite movement, which emphasized the need for a restoration of New Testament Christianity. Even though the Campbellites believed that could be accomplished simply by studying and following the pattern set forth in the Bible, Sidney Rigdon and his congregation were receptive to the Latter-day Saint missionaries' testimony that heavenly messengers had brought the ancient gospel and priesthood to earth once again.

Doctrine and Covenants 35:20

To what scriptural work does this verse refer?

The Prophet's inspired version of the Bible is generally referred to as the Joseph Smith Translation (JST). It is not a translation in the usual sense because no foreign-language texts were involved. The Prophet received through revelation revisions that clarified the meaning of the King James Bible, sometimes correcting errors or restoring

material that had been lost. The Joseph Smith Translation is more than a commentary on biblical passages. It is a clarifying restoration of the original scriptural message, or, more strictly speaking, an inspired English translation of that original message.

This project of translation began when the Prophet received the book of Moses by revelation between June 1830 and February 1831. By September of 1830, he had started his work of revising the Old Testament. In the following March, the Lord directed the Prophet to work on the New Testament (see D&C 45:60-61). He completed this phase of the project by 2 February 1833. About a month later, the Lord spoke to the Prophet about finishing "the translation of the prophets," that is, the Old Testament (see D&C 90:13) and counseled him not to revise the Apocrypha (see D&C 91). On 2 July 1833, Joseph Smith recorded: "We this day finished the translating of the Scriptures, for which we returned gratitude to our Heavenly Father" (History of the Church, 1:368).

The revisions in the Joseph Smith Translation help clarify biblical passages and gospel doctrines. The changes are most numerous in the books of Genesis and Matthew. Because the revisions were given by inspiration, this version is a most valuable work to study.

Joseph Smith's translation of the Bible contributes to our knowledge of gospel doctrines in still another way. The Prophet's questions about biblical passages led to several revelations now in the Doctrine and Covenants: sections 74, 76, 77, 86, 91, 93, 113, and 132. The Church included the most significant changes in the Joseph Smith Translation in the footnotes and appendix of the LDS edition of the King James Version of the Bible, first published in 1979 (see Matthews, "A Plainer Translation").

Doctrine and Covenants 38:1-4

Is Jesus Christ the same person as the God of the Old Testament?

Some students of the Bible erroneously view the God of the Old Testament as harsh and vindictive and so conclude that he cannot be the same person as Jesus Christ who taught the gospel of love. Doctrine and Covenants 38 clearly identifies the Savior as the one who created the world, dealt with the Prophet Enoch, and was known by Moses as "I Am." A comparison of the Old and the New Testament confirms that Jehovah is the same person as Jesus Christ. For example, Jehovah and Jesus Christ are identified as the Creator (Isaiah 45:11-12 and John 1:1-3, 14), as our only Savior (Isaiah 43:3, 11 and Acts 4:10-12), and as our Judge (Psalm 96:13 and John 5:22).

A careful reading of the Old Testament reveals God's tender mercies in the early dispensations. He was anxious to bless the obedient (see Deuteronomy 28), and he was likened to a loving shepherd (see Psalm 23; Isaiah 40:10-11). The commandment to love our neighbor is found not only in the New Testament but also in the record of Moses (see Leviticus 19:18).

Doctrine and Covenants 38:2

If God knows all things, can we really be free?

When we are told that God knows what will happen in the future, we may wonder if we really have the power to influence future events through our present choices and actions. A parent may come to know his child so well that he can accurately predict what the child will choose to do in a given set of circumstances, but the parent's knowledge in no way determines the child's choices. And because parents' knowledge is less than perfect, they may be surprised by their children's choices. God's knowledge of his children, however, is perfect. Still, his foreknowledge of what we will do in no way causes us to do it. He has made us free to make choices and then to be accountable for them.
