Richard O. Cowan, Answers to Your Questions About the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1996)

5

The Gathering in Ohio

Doctrine and Covenants 41 through 51

The mission to the Lamanites provided the Church's first contact with Ohio, where more Doctrine and Covenants revelations were received than in any other state. {See D&C 28:8.} Near the end of 1830, the Saints in New York and Pennsylvania were directed to move to "the Ohio" (D&C 37-38). Joseph Smith was one of the first to comply, arriving on a wintry 1 February 1831. During the next four months, as the Saints were gathering to Ohio, the revelations recorded in sections 41 through 51 brought forth such developments as the appointment of the first bishop. He administered the law of consecration, which was given in the revelation recorded in section 42 and in subsequent revelations.

Doctrine and Covenants 41:7

Why was the Church to build a house for Joseph Smith?

Because the Prophet was expected to devote all his time to the Church, building him a house was one practical way the Saints could provide for his needs. {See D&C 42:70-73.}

Doctrine and Covenants 42:11

Why is having recognized authority essential in the Church?

The need for priesthood authority is well understood, and Doctrine and Covenants 42 emphasizes that such authority must be acknowledged by the Church. The wisdom of the Lord's counsel has been demonstrated on various occasions over the years when apostates have arrived at Church headquarters claiming a commission—commission—known only to them—to take over. The falsity of their claims has been exposed by the fact that their supposed ordination was not "known to the church."

Doctrine and Covenants 42:12-13

What should be the sources of our gospel teaching?

Three main sources of gospel knowledge should guide what we teach. First is the written scriptures. Doctrine and Covenants 42 specifically refers to the Bible and the Book of Mormon—the two standard works then in existence. That latter-day revelations should also be considered is evidenced in the reference to "the covenants and church articles," a forerunner to the Book of Commandments and the Doctrine and Covenants. {See D&C 33:14.}

Second, our teaching should "be directed by the Spirit" because the Holy Ghost is a revealer of truth. {See D&C 42:14.}

Third, though it is not specifically mentioned in this passage, our teaching should also be guided by the words of our living prophets. {See D&C 52:9.}

Doctrine and Covenants 42:14

Why is it so essential to teach by the Spirit?

It is essential to teach by the Spirit because we want to teach the truth, and the Holy Ghost enables us to know what is true (see John 14:26; Moroni 10:5). Furthermore, the Spirit powerfully carries our teaching of the truth into the hearts of those who hear us (see 2 Nephi 33:1).

Three months after the revelation in Doctrine and Covenants 42 was given, the Lord again emphasized the importance of teaching by the Spirit: "If it be by some other way it is not of God" (D&C 50:18). "Now, what is the other way to teach than by the Spirit?" asked Elder Bruce R. McConkie. His answer: "Well, obviously, it is by the power of the intellect.

"Intellectual things—reason and logic—can do some good, and they can prepare the way, and they can get the mind ready to receive the spirit under certain circumstances. But conversion comes and the truth sinks into the hearts of people only when it is taught by the power of the Spirit" ("The Foolishness of Teaching," quoted in Millet and Dahl, Capstone, 51-52).

Doctrine and Covenants 42:18

Do all murderers become sons of perdition?

Most probably do not. Elder James E. Talmage explained that sons of perdition are only those who "having learned the power of God afterward renounce it; those who sin wilfully in the light of knowledge; those who open their hearts to the Holy Spirit and then put the Lord to a mockery and a shame by denying it" (Articles of Faith, 60). Most murderers never meet these qualifications and so cannot become sons of perdition. Perhaps most of them will inherit the telestial kingdom (compare D&C 76:103).

"Restoring what you cannot restore, healing the wound you cannot heal, fixing that which you broke and you cannot fix is the very purpose of the atonement of Christ," taught Elder Boyd K. Packer.

"When your desire is firm and you are willing to pay the 'uttermost farthing' [see Matt. 5:25-26], the law of restitution is suspended. Your obligation is transferred to the Lord. He will settle your accounts.

"I repeat, save for the exception of the very few who defect to perdition, there is no habit, no addiction, no rebellion, no transgression, no apostasy, no crime exempted from the promise of complete forgiveness. That is the promise of the atonement of Christ.

"How all can be repaired, we do not know. It may not all be accomplished in this life" (Ensign, Nov. 1995, 19-20; see also D&C 132:26-27).

Doctrine and Covenants 42:19

Does the Church believe in capital punishment?

The statement that those who kill shall die may be understood in at least two different senses. First, all who commit sin diminish God's influence in their lives—a condition known as spiritual death. Second, serious offenses, such as murder, may also result in one's life being forfeited. Doctrine and Covenants 42:79 specifies that such punishment is to be meted out only by the law of the land. President Wilford Woodruff wrote: "The revelations of God to this Church make death the penalty for capital crime, and require that offenders against life and property shall be delivered up to and tried by the laws of the land" (Deseret Weekly, 12 Dec. 1889).

Elder B. H. Roberts acknowledged "an accusation to the effect that we believe in what is called 'blood atonement.' So, indeed, we do; and so also do the Christian world. Is it not the belief of the Christian world that they will be saved through the atoning blood of Jesus Christ, the Son of God? Most assuredly; and so, too, do we believe in the atonement of the Christ. . . . But the reputation has gone out . . . that the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the 'Mormon' Church, arrogates to itself the right to take human life for apostasy from the Church, and for certain other sins. That is a slander; it is not true. We do not believe the doctrine; we do not claim for the Church that it has the right of capital punishment, or the right of executing vengeance" (Defense of the Faith, 2:452-53; see also Roberts, Comprehensive History, 4:129).

Doctrine and Covenants 42:22-26

Why is sexual sin so serious?

Whereas murder tampers with the process by which life ends, sexual sin degrades the process by which life is given.

The First Presidency declared: "The doctrine of this Church is that sexual sin—the illicit sexual relations of men and women stands, in its enormity, next to murder.

"The Lord has drawn no essential distinctions between fornication, adultery, and harlotry or prostitution. Each has fallen under His solemn and awful condemnation." Those who would excuse sexual sin by saying that it "is but a sinless gratification of a normal desire, like appeasing hunger and thirst, speak filthiness with their lips. Their counsel leads to destruction; their wisdom comes from the Father of Lies" (Heber J. Grant, J. Reuben Clark Jr., David O. McKay, in Conference Report, Oct. 1942, 11).

Elder Spencer W. Kimball emphasized that sexual sins "approach the unforgivable ones in seriousness but seem to come in the category of the forgivable. These are the diabolical crimes of sexual impurity. In varied form they run from aberrations involving self-abuse, sex stimulation, and self-pollution to abhorrent and unnatural practices involving others. Whether named or unnamed in scriptures or the spoken word, any sexual act or practice which is 'unnatural' or unauthorized is a sin" (Miracle of Forgiveness, 61).

"Sexual immorality is a viper that is striking not only in the world, but in the Church today," concluded President Ezra Taft Benson. "I know the laws of the land do not consider unchastity as serious as God does, nor punish as severely as God does, but that does not change its abominableness. In the eyes of God, chastity will never be out of date" (Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson, 279).

Doctrine and Covenants 42:30

How can we live the law of consecration today?

Living the law of consecration is still important to us now. Not only was it a key part of the restoration of all things but it was to acquaint us with what will be expected for us to build Zion. Furthermore, the Lord had commanded his people to be one (see D&C 38:27), for, as he explained, "If ye are not equal in earthly things ye cannot be equal in obtaining heavenly things" (D&C 78:6). Living the principles of the law of consecration is a great step toward achieving this unity.

Understanding how this law functioned when it was established in the 1830s can help us appreciate ways in which we can live it today. Recognizing that everything on this earth was truly the Lord's (see Psalm 24:1), the individual consecrated all his property by deed to the bishop, the Lord's authorized temporal representative. The bishop then assigned the consecrator his "stewardship" based not only on the individual or his family's "needs" but also on their "circumstances" (including abilities, talents, and so forth) and on their "just wants" (D&C 51:3; 82:17). Even though the property was regarded as the Lord's, the stewardship over it was given to the individual by formal deed (see D&C 51:4-5). The individual then felt both the usual economic pressures to make a profit and also a spiritual obligation to develop, or magnify, his stewardship to further the Lord's work and to benefit the whole group. The surplus he produced above his family's needs and "just wants" was transferred to the bishop's storehouse. From this source the bishop helped the poor, bought land, erected Church buildings, and took other steps to establish Zion on earth. The surplus could also be used to expand the existing stewardships of all in the order or to improve community living conditions.

Though some of these functions—such as making consecrations or receiving stewardships by formal deed—were suspended in the late 1830s, many principles of the law of consecration still apply today. The concept of stewardship is fostered as we account to priesthood leaders for our service in Church callings. The Church Welfare Program has encouraged members to establish and maintain economic independence, promoted habits of thrift, and created projects through which the Saints work together to help the poor. President J. Reuben Clark Jr. declared: "We have all said that the Welfare Plan is not the United Order and was not intended to be. However, I should like to suggest to you that perhaps, after all, when the Welfare Plan gets thoroughly into operation . . . we shall not be so very far from carrying out the great fundamentals of the United Order" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1942, 57).

In place of the residues and surpluses of the law of consecration, today Church members contribute tithes, fast offerings, and other donations to be used for similar purposes—aiding those in need and building the Church as the kingdom of God on earth. The bishop and his storehouse still play a key role. Elder Marion G. Romney taught: "We as bearers of the priesthood should live strictly by the principles of the United Order, insofar as they are embodied in present church practices, such as the fast offering, tithing, and the welfare activities. Through these practices we could as individuals, if we were of a mind to do so, implement in our own lives all the basic principles of the United Order" (Improvement Era, June 1966, 537).

"We must lay on the altar and sacrifice whatever is required by the Lord," counseled President Spencer W. Kimball. "We begin by offering a 'broken heart and a contrite spirit.' We follow this by giving our best effort in our assigned fields of labor and callings. We learn our duty and execute it fully. Finally we consecrate our time, talents, and means, as called upon by our file leaders and as prompted by the whisperings of the Spirit" (in Conference Report, Apr. 1978, 123-24).

Doctrine and Covenants 42:43

Is medical help necessary for those with sufficient faith?

Brigham Young chided those who expected to be healed solely by faith without doing anything themselves to help. "If we are sick, and ask the Lord to heal us, and to do all for us that is necessary to be done, according to my understanding of the Gospel of salvation, I might as well ask the Lord to cause my wheat and corn to grow, without my plowing the ground and casting in the seed" (in Journal of Discourses, 4:24).

"We must do all we can," affirmed Elder James E. Talmage, "and then ask the Lord to do the rest, such as we cannot do. Hence we hold the medical and surgical profession in high regard. . . . When we have done all we can, then the Divine Power will be directly applicable and operative" (Church News, 19 Feb. 1977, 16).

Doctrine and Covenants 42:46

Are the faithful promised that they will not die?

The righteous are not promised that they will not die. Reading Doctrine and Covenants 42:46 and 47 carefully shows that they will not "taste of death," meaning that death will hold no fear for them. Death is sweet for the righteous, but it is "bitter" to the disobedient.

Doctrine and Covenants 42:48

Does the concept that we may be "appointed unto death" affect our agency?

There is a time appointed when we enter and leave this mortal life. Elder Spencer W. Kimball believed that we may speed up the time of our death through our own careless acts but we probably cannot postpone it very much. He explained: "I believe that many people die before 'their time' because they are careless, abuse their bodies, take unnecessary chances, or expose themselves to hazards, accidents, and sickness. . . .

"God controls our lives, guides and blesses us, but gives us our agency. We may live our lives in accordance with his plan for us or we may foolishly shorten or terminate them" (Faith Precedes the Miracle, 103, 105).

"If we are appointed unto death," taught Elder Franklin D. Richards, "we . . . ought to want to go. Our prayers and supplications should be always conditional—that is, if not appointed unto death that he or she should be raised up. And if the heavens want a man to labor there in any sphere, there is where he should be. If a man is wanted to be on a mission in Europe, in Germany, or in the States, and he stays at home, he is not where he ought to be. He ought to be where God would have him, there the Holy Spirit will labor with him and help him. . . . Just so with us. Here we are on a mission in the world. The matter of death is a very small matter. It is a matter of life or death to be sure; but if the Lord does not want us here, and we are taken away, His will be done on earth as it is done in heaven" (in Journal of Discourses, 24:285-86).

Doctrine and Covenants 42:56-57

What is the status of the Joseph Smith Translation?

President Joseph Fielding Smith wrote: "It has been thought by some, that the Prophet went through the Bible beginning with the first chapter of Genesis and continued through to the Book of Revelation, but this was not the case. He went through the Bible topic by topic, and revising as the Spirit of the Lord indicated to him where changes and additions should be made. There are many parts of the Bible that the Prophet did not touch, because the Lord did not direct him to do so. Therefore, there are many places in the Scriptures where errors still are found. This work was never fully completed, but the Prophet did as much as the Lord commanded him to do before the days of Nauvoo. On February 2, 1833, he finished the revision of the New Testament, and on the second day of July that same year, he finished the Scriptures, as far as the Lord permitted him to go at that time" (Church History and Modern Revelation, 1:242; see also Smith, History of the Church, 1:324, 368). The Prophet hoped to resume this project in Nauvoo, "but persecution and difficulties prevented him from finishing this work" (Smith and Sjodahl, Commentary, 194).

Pursuant to the instructions given in Doctrine and Covenants 42, the Church has not published the entire text of the Joseph Smith Translation, although significant insights have been incorporated into the LDS edition of the King James Version of the Bible. {See D&C 35:20.}

Doctrine and Covenants 42:70-73

Why should Church leaders receive support from the Church?

On several occasions the Lord has directed that those who have been called to devote their full time to Church service should be supported by the Church (see D&C 24:3; 41:7; 43:12-13). Doctrine and Covenants 42:70-73 relates this principle of remuneration to the law of consecration. For a few individuals, their full-time Church assignment was their stewardship, the magnifying of which qualified them to receive a living, as was true of other stewardships. The Lord later explained that even though those who administer spiritual things may receive an abundance through the Spirit, they should be equal in temporal things with those whose stewardship is temporal (see D&C 70:12-14).

Thus, Latter-day Saints believe that those who are called to devote their full time to the Church should receive support from the Church. There are at least two major differences between this practice in the restored Church and the "paid ministry" in the churches of the world.

First, the Latter-day Saints cannot choose the ministry as a profession to earn a living because Church callings are made only through those in authority. Second, in contrast to most denominations in which a full-time professional clergy is the rule, among the Latter-day Saints relatively few (such as the General Authorities and mission presidents) are asked to devote all their time to Church work. Instead, most Saints are asked to give part of their time and thus many share in the blessings of Church service.

Doctrine and Covenants 42:80-92

What penalties for wrongdoing may the Church impose?

Doctrine and Covenants 42:80-92 distinguishes between the law of the land and religious authority. The procedures to be followed in Church disciplinary councils were outlined more fully in later revelations. {See D&C 102.} A declaration of belief approved in 1835 held that a religious body might take away membership or fellowship but may never deprive any individual of life, liberty, or property (see D&C 134:10).

Doctrine and Covenants 43:1-4

Why should a fallen prophet have power to name his successor?

The revelation in Doctrine and Covenants 43 was given at a time when the claims of various individuals professing to receive revelation for the Church caused confusion among the Saints. Specifically, a woman named Hubble announced that she had received by revelation a law for the Church—just as Joseph Smith had done in Doctrine and Covenants 42. To teach the Saints that only the prophet would receive revelations for the Church, the Lord specified that even if the prophet should fall, he would still retain the right to name his successor. Knowing that Joseph Smith would not fall (see D&C 90:3), the Lord was able to make such a startling commitment.

Still, there is a general way in which earlier prophets participate in the selection of their successors. The Lord's great revelation on Church government declared that the Twelve Apostles "form a quorum equal in authority and power" to the First Presidency (D&C 107:24). Thus, when the First Presidency is dissolved by the death of the president, the Twelve become the presiding quorum and their president the presiding officer of the Church. For example, when the First Presidency was organized three years after the death of the Prophet Joseph Smith on 27 December 1847, the senior apostle and president of the Council of the Twelve, Brigham Young, became the next president of the Church. Since then, whenever the First Presidency has been disorganized by death, the president of the Twelve has succeeded to the presidency of the Church.

The Lord knows who he wants to lead his Church. "The call of one to be President of the Church," instructed President Harold B. Lee, "actually begins when he is called, ordained, and set apart to become a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. Such a call by prophecy, or in other words, by the inspiration of the Lord to the one holding the keys of presidency, and the subsequent ordination and setting apart by the laying on of hands by that same authority, places each apostle in a priesthood quorum of twelve men holding the apostleship" (in Conference Report, Apr. 1970, 123).

"This is a wise procedure," reflected Elder John A. Widtsoe. "It places at the head of the Church the apostle who has been longest in service. He is known well to the people and trusted by them. He himself knows the procedure of Church affairs. He is no novice to be trained for the position. He can call to his assistance, in addition to his counselors, any helpers from among the priesthood of the Church. It eliminates the shadow of politics from the operations of the Council" (Evidences and Reconciliations, 264).

Doctrine and Covenants 43:8-9

What is the essential purpose of Church meetings?

We meet together to instruct and build up one another, giving emphasis to understanding and living the gospel. As King Benjamin concluded his great discourse, he challenged his listeners: "And now if you believe all these things see that ye do them" (Mosiah 4:10). Similarly, so that we might profit from what we receive in our meetings, the Lord admonishes us to "bind" ourselves to live according to what we have learned (D&C 43:9).

Doctrine and Covenants 43:13

Why were the Saints to provide food and clothing for Joseph Smith?

It is a privilege for the Saints to provide for the temporal needs of those who labor full-time in spiritual matters. {See D&C 42:70-73.}

Doctrine and Covenants 43:15-16

Why aren't missionaries to learn from others?

Missionaries do learn many things on their missions, of course, but that is not their purpose for going on a mission. They are commissioned to share with others the precious gospel truths that have been given to us through revelation from God. The broadening that comes to missionaries as they learn a new language or live among people of a different culture is wonderful but not nearly so significant as the spiritual blessings that come to those who teach and to those who are taught (see D&C 18:15-16).

Doctrine and Covenants 45:25

What is meant by the phrase "the times of the gentiles"?

First we must understand who the "gentiles" are. President Marion G. Romney taught: "Gentiles is the term used by the Book of Mormon prophets to refer to the present inhabitants of America and to the peoples of the old world from which they came" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1975, 54).

The "times of the gentiles" are when these people receive the gospel. In contrast to the meridian of time when the Jews received the gospel first, in the latter days the gentiles were to receive it first and the Jews afterwards (see D&C 90:9; 133:8).

President Joseph Fielding Smith taught: "Jesus said the Jews would be scattered among all nations and Jerusalem would be trodden down by the Gentiles until the times of the Gentiles were fulfilled. (Luke 21:24.) The prophecy in Section 45, verses 24-29, of the Doctrine and Covenants regarding the Jews was literally fulfilled. Jerusalem, which was trodden down by the Gentiles, is no longer trodden down but is made the home for the Jews. They are returning to Palestine, and by this we may know that the times of the Gentiles are near their close" (in Conference Report, Apr. 1966, 13).

Doctrine and Covenants 45:32

How can we "stand in holy places"?

The injunction to stand in holy places does not require us to remain in any particular location, but we can make wherever we are a holier place because we live the gospel.

"As one studies the Lord's commandments and attending promises upon compliance therewith," concluded Elder Harold B. Lee, "one gets some definite ideas as to how we might 'stand in holy places,' as the Lord commands. . . . It seems to be made crystal clear that the all-important thing is not where we live but whether or not our hearts are pure" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1968, 62).

Doctrine and Covenants 45:39

Why should we want to understand the signs of Christ's coming?

If we are to "prepare for that which is to come" (D&C 1:12), we need to understand what is ahead of us. Perhaps no other scripture gives a more comprehensive outline of the latter days than does Doctrine and Covenants 45. Important details are supplied elsewhere in the standard works (such as in Matthew 24; Joseph Smith-Matthew 1; D&C 29:7-30; 43:17-45:45; 87; 88:86-116; 101:22-34; 133:1-56) as well as in the teachings of our living prophets.

Doctrine and Covenants 45:43

What is "this place" to which the remnant is to gather?

Part of Doctrine and Covenants 45 is a review of the prophecy Christ made to his disciples on the Mount of Olives (compare the latter part of verse 16 with Matthew 24:1-3). Hence, "this place" refers to the Holy Land in the Eastern Hemisphere.

Doctrine and Covenants 45:60

To which chapter is the Lord referring?

The Savior's review of his Mount of Olives prophecy concluded with verse 59 of Doctrine and Covenants 45. Hence "this chapter" likely refers to Matthew 24. The manuscript of the Joseph Smith Translation indicates that the Prophet began working on the book of Matthew beginning with chapter 1 the day after Doctrine and Covenants 45 was received in March 1831. He probably completed his work on Matthew 24 before leaving for Missouri in mid-June the same year.

Doctrine and Covenants 46:14

Should we be content to base our testimony on the faith of others?

The Savior began his list of spiritual gifts by declaring: "To some it is given by the Holy Ghost to know that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and that he was crucified for the sins of the world" (D&C 46:13). The position of testimony at the head of the list suggests that personal knowledge or testimony of the Savior is the most fundamental gift for which we should strive. Many, however, have not yet attained this goal of knowing for themselves. Children usually base their faith on the teachings of their parents. New converts often draw strength from the lives of more seasoned Church members. Indeed, we all can and should strengthen one another (see D&C 46:12). The Lord affirmed that "to others it is given to believe on their words, that they also might have eternal life if they continue faithful" (D&C 46:14). One cannot remain at this plateau, however, but must "continue faithful" to the end. "This is a preparatory gift," wrote Truman G. Madsen. "It is not sufficient unto itself. You cannot live and endure and overcome simply on the basis of believing the word of another. Sooner or later, and preferably sooner, you too will come to firsthand and direct knowledge for yourself" (Joseph Smith the Prophet, 37).

President Heber C. Kimball warned: "To meet the difficulties that are coming, it will be necessary for you to have a knowledge of the truth of this work for yourselves. . . . If you have not got the testimony, live right and call upon the Lord and cease not till you obtain it. . . .

" . . . The time will come when no man nor woman will be able to endure on borrowed light. Each will have to be guided by the light within himself. If you do not have it, how can you stand?" (quoted by Harold B. Lee, in Conference Report, Oct. 1965, 128).

Doctrine and Covenants 46:15-16

What is meant by "differences of administration" and "diversities of operation"?

The phrases "differences of administration" and "diversities of operation" are also found in Paul's list of spiritual gifts (see 1 Corinthians 12:5-6). Understanding what Paul meant by them will help us better understand their significance in the Doctrine and Covenants. Dr. Sidney B. Sperry pointed out that referring to the Greek text of Paul's words clarifies their meaning: "Apparently by 'differences of administration' is meant the distinctive varieties of service and ministration by which things are accomplished in the Church" (Doctrine and Covenants Compendium, 196). The 1985 New International Version Study Bible notes that "the Greek word in its various forms is used to indicate service to the Christian community" and translates 1 Corinthians 12:5 as follows: "There are different kinds of service, but the same Lord."

Similarly, Dr. Sperry continues, "diversities of operations" refers to "the workings, results, or effects" of various spiritual gifts. "One who by the gift of the Holy Ghost has the gift of knowing the 'diversities of operation' is one who may correctly discern whether a given service is of God or not" (Doctrine and Covenants Compendium, 197). The NIV Study Bible notes: "The Greek word indicates power that is in operation. Spiritual gifts produce results that are obvious." Its translation of 1 Corinthians 12:6 reads: "There are different kinds of working, but the same God works all of them in all men."

The words of the revelation in Doctrine and Covenants 46 emphasize that the gift is to "know" or understand these things. Priesthood bearers represent the Lord Jesus Christ, and so they should seek his guidance in their service. The Lord has promised that he will direct his servants (see, for example, D&C 100:4-5).

Doctrine and Covenants 47:1

What is the value of keeping a history?

The Lord later directed that a history be kept "for the good of the church, and for the rising generations" (D&C 69:8). "The way to [develop faith in the Lord] is to recount the examples of faith that have happened in our history and in our heritage and with our people," declared Elder A. Theodore Tuttle. "That's the value of history." He stated that "we cannot go one generation without losing faith" if we do not keep a faithful history (Ensign, Nov. 1986, 73).

Elder Franklin D. Richards expressed appreciation to President Wilford Woodruff who had "from the beginning of his public career kept a journal and a history, and we are indebted in a great measure to his exertion, together with that of some others, for many great and powerful sermons which the Prophet Joseph delivered in the city of Nauvoo. . . . Some of the most important matters pertaining to the most sacred councils that were instituted by the Prophet Joseph are thus brought down to our present time, and by them we are made the happy recipients of many blessings and ordinances" (Collected Discourses, 4:272).

Most of us will not be called to keep a Church history, but we have been exhorted to write family or personal histories. These, too, bring blessings. "We may think there is little of interest or importance in what we personally say or do," said President Spencer W. Kimball, "but it is remarkable how many of our families, as we pass on down the line, are interested in all that we do and all that we say. Each of us is important to those who are near and dear to us—and as our posterity read of our life's experiences, they, too, will come to know and love us. And in that glorious day when our families are together in the eternities, we will already be acquainted" (Ensign, Nov. 1979, 5).

On another occasion, President Kimball admonished: "If you have not already commenced this important duty in your lives, get a good notebook, a good book that will last through time and into eternity for the angels to look upon. Begin today and write in it your goings and your comings, your deeper thoughts, your achievements, and your failures, your associations and your triumphs, your impressions and your testimonies. We hope you will do this, our brothers and sisters, for this is what the Lord has commanded, and those who keep a personal journal are more likely to keep the Lord in remembrance in their daily lives" (Ensign, Dec. 1980, 61).

Doctrine and Covenants 49:1-2

What were the results of the mission to the Shakers?

The Shakers, or United Society of Believers in Christ's Second Appearing, had a large community just a few miles southwest of Kirtland. It was to this group that the revelation in section 49 directed the missionaries to go. Ashbel Kitchell, the Shakers' leader, described that when the Latter-day Saint missionaries delivered the message that had been revealed in what we now know as Doctrine and Covenants 49, the Shakers replied that they were satisfied with their own religion.

"On hearing this Rigdon professed to be satisfied, and put his paper by; but Parley Pratt arose and commenced shakeing his coattail; he said he shook the dust from his garments as a testimony against us, that we had rejected the word of the Lord Jesus" (Backman and Cowan, Joseph Smith and the Doctrine and Covenants, 55-56).

There is no record that any of these Shakers accepted the restored gospel. Elder Pratt recorded that they "utterly refused to hear or obey the gospel" (Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, 61).

Doctrine and Covenants 49:5,

Who is speaking here?

Many assume the title "God" always refers to the Father and that "Lord" refers to the Son. These titles, however, are often used interchangeably. Hence, verse 5 does not clearly identify which one is speaking; verse 28 states that this revelation is from Jesus Christ. This is another example in which the Savior delivers words on behalf of his Father. {See D&C 29:46.}

Doctrine and Covenants 49:15-17

What is the place of marriage in God's plan?

The home and family play a central role in our mortal lives. In a historic proclamation Church leaders announced: "We, the First Presidency and the Council of the Twelve Apostles of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, solemnly proclaim that marriage between a man and a woman is ordained of God and that the family is central to the Creator's plan for the eternal destiny of His children.

"Husband and wife have a solemn responsibility to love and care for each other and for their children. 'Children are an heritage of the Lord' (Psalm 127:3). Parents have a sacred duty to rear their children in love and righteousness, to provide for their physical and spiritual needs, to teach them to love and serve one another, to observe the commandments of God and to be law-abiding citizens wherever they live. Husbands and wives—mothers and fathers—will be held accountable before God for the discharge of these obligations.

"The family is ordained of God. Marriage between man and woman is essential to His eternal plan. Children are entitled to birth within the bonds of matrimony, and to be reared by a father and a mother who honor marital vows with complete fidelity. Happiness in family life is most likely to be achieved when founded upon the teachings of the Lord Jesus Christ" (Ensign, Nov. 1995, 101).
