Richard O. Cowan, Answers to Your Questions About the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1996)

6

Looking toward Zion

Doctrine and Covenants 52 through 70

The missionaries to the Lamanites provided the Church with its first contact not only with Ohio but also with Jackson County, Missouri. {See D&C 28:8.} In June 1831, the Lord directed some thirty elders to journey to Missouri where he would identify the land to be consecrated for his people (see D&C 52:2). The Prophet and his associates reached Missouri the following month and learned by revelation where the latter-day Zion would be established (see D&C 57:1-3). The Saints' interest in going to Zion remained keen during the autumn, after Joseph Smith returned to Kirtland. The revelations recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 52 through 70 provide insights on this theme and on a variety of other gospel principles. Near the end of 1831, the year during which most of the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants were received, steps were underway to publish the first compilation of these revelations (see D&C 67 headnote).

Doctrine and Covenants 52:9

What is meant in the instruction to teach "that which the apostles and prophets have written"?

Although "that which the prophets and apostles have written" refers to the standard works, as Latter-day Saints we give special emphasis to the teachings of our living prophets. Elder Harold B. Lee admonished: "As the Latter-day Saints go home from this [general] conference, it would be well if they consider seriously the importance of taking with them the report of this conference and let it be the guide to their walk and talk during the next six months. These are the important matters the Lord sees fit to reveal to this people in this day" (in Conference Report, Apr. 1946, 68). {See D&C 1:38.}

Also in this verse the Lord again declares the importance of our teaching what we have received through the Holy Ghost. {See D&C 42:12-13.}

Doctrine and Covenants 52:10

Why should missionaries go "two by two"?

There are at least two reasons why missionaries go in pairs. First, the scriptures specify that "in the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established" (2 Corinthians 13:1). Missionaries' teaching is most effective when both companions participate, one bearing testimony to what the other has taught. The missionaries' serving in pairs is also a protection not only against physical dangers but also against the devil's temptations.

Doctrine and Covenants 52:10

Must confirmations always take place "by the water's side"?

Doctrine and Covenants 52:10 emphasizes that confirmation must follow baptism because the purpose of the laying on of hands is to bestow the gift of the Holy Ghost. Joseph Smith asserted, "You might as well baptize a bag of sand" as to baptize a person without conferring the Holy Ghost. "Baptism by water is but half a baptism, and is good for nothing without the other half—that is, the baptism of the Holy Ghost" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 314).

Confirmations are sometimes performed immediately after baptisms, but often they are performed in a sacrament meeting. Because converts are "joining the Church," their being confirmed in the presence of the congregation allows the other Saints to become acquainted with the new members and extend the hand of fellowship to them.

Doctrine and Covenants 53:4

What is the role of the agent?

Because the bishop administered the law of consecration, he was responsible for receiving consecrated properties, assigning stewardships, and supervising commodities being transferred in or out of his storehouse. The agent was appointed to assist him in these weighty temporal transactions. When these functions under the law of consecration were suspended, this office was no longer needed. Today, counselors, executive secretaries, and ward clerks assist bishops with their more varied responsibilities.

Doctrine and Covenants 54:4-6

What is our accountability when we are prevented from keeping the commandments by the actions of others?

The Lord does not regard us as guilty when we are prevented from keeping his commandments through no fault of our own. He knows our hearts—whether or not we really would willingly have been obedient if given the opportunity. He accepted the efforts of the Saints who had been thwarted in their attempts to build a temple in Missouri, but he gave them an opportunity to demonstrate their good faith by building a temple in Nauvoo (see D&C 124:49-55).

Doctrine and Covenants 56:4

If God is unchanging, why would he ever revoke his commandments?

Even though God does not change, our circumstances do. His purposes and gospel principles are unchanging, but the means of carrying out those purposes and principles may vary from one circumstance to another. For example, the principle of taking care of our physical bodies is unchanging, but specific dietary laws essential in ancient Israel are not necessary now and are not applicable today.

That the Lord made the seemingly routine matter of the reassignment of missionary companions a subject of revelation should remind us to keep ourselves receptive to his guidance even in what we may regard as the ordinary aspects of our lives.

Doctrine and Covenants 56:16-18

Is worldly wealth, as such, good or evil?

Money can be an instrument either for good or for evil. It is needed to construct temples and to support the Lord's work in many other ways. For example, we have been commanded to contribute funds to benefit the poor (see D&C 42:30) and to support the programs of the Church (see D&C 119:2). Nevertheless, when we make the acquisition of riches an end in itself, our life is diverted from following more important spiritual values. {See D&C 6:7.} Paul declared that "the love of money [rather than money itself] is the root of all evil" (1 Timothy 6:10; compare Matthew 19:16-24). In Doctrine and Covenants 56:16-18 the Lord made the same point—it is not the presence or the absence of wealth but rather our attitudes that may be good or bad.

Doctrine and Covenants 58:41

Shouldn't we seek to excel?

We should always strive to do our best, but our reasons for doing so must be considered. On one occasion, for example, the Prophet Joseph Smith admonished: "Let the Twelve be humble, and not be exalted, and beware of pride, and not seek to excel one above another" (History of the Church, 3:383). In another instance, Sidney Rigdon was directed to write a description of the land of Zion together with a statement of God's purposes concerning it (see D&C 58:50). Unfortunately, Sidney "exalted himself in his heart," and the Lord did not approve his document (D&C 63:55-56). Apparently William W. Phelps suffered from a similar problem because he not only sought "to excel" but also was "not sufficiently meek" (D&C 58:41).

Doctrine and Covenants 58:43

To whom should we confess our sins?

We are to confess all our shortcomings to our Heavenly Father through prayer. The more specific we can be, even in our private prayers, the more completely we can bring ourselves to recognize and acknowledge areas in which we need to repent. Alma described the peace we feel when we have obtained our Father's forgiveness (see Alma 36:17-21).

We should also confess our sins to those whom we have hurt or offended and humbly ask their forgiveness. In an earlier revelation (see D&C 42:88-92) the Lord instructed that only those affected by our transgressions need to be involved in our process of repentance. "Keep your follies that do not concern others to yourselves," cautioned President Brigham Young (Discourses of Brigham Young, 158).

Although we may acknowledge our weaknesses and shortcomings in a general way to our fellow Saints and ask their help in overcoming them, we have been counseled not to detail our sins inappropriately in public. Elder Theodore M. Burton observed: "Confessions to others—particularly confessions repeated in open meetings, unless the sin has been a public sin requiring public forgiveness—only demean both the confessor and the hearer" (Ensign, Aug. 1988, 9).

We should confess to Church leaders when our sins are such that our standing in the Church might be in question. {See D&C 102.} There may be other circumstances in which we might discuss our problems with a bishop or branch president to enlist his help. In no case do our leaders forgive on behalf of the Lord—he does that for himself; they can, however, extend forgiveness on behalf of the Church as an organization.

Doctrine and Covenants 59:9-12

How can we know which activities are appropriate for the Sabbath?

Rather than thinking of things we should not do on Sunday, we might more profitably consider the purposes of this holy day. Doctrine and Covenants 59 emphasizes two of them:

First, we should worship God, carry out our religious responsibilities, and promote our spiritual growth. "If we are not present at our meetings when we have the opportunity," said President Anthon H. Lund, "we deprive ourselves of great blessings; in fact, we will be starving spiritually. At our meetings we receive instruction, encouragement to do right, and we enjoy the influence of the Spirit of God" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1916, 10). President Spencer W. Kimball taught: "We may want to set aside time for our family to be together, for personal study and meditation, and for service to others. We might want to read the scriptures, conference reports, and Church publications; study the lives and teachings of the prophets; prepare church lessons and other church assignments; write in journals; pray and meditate; write to or visit relatives and friends; write to missionaries; enjoy uplifting music; have family gospel instruction; hold family council meetings; build husband-wife relationships; read with a child; do genealogical research, including the four-generation program and family or personal histories; sing Church hymns; read uplifting literature; develop our appreciation of the cultural arts; plan family home evening study and activities; plan other family activities; friendship nonmembers; fellowship neighbors; visit the sick, the aged, and the lonely; hold interviews with family members" (Ensign, Jan. 1982, 3).

Second, we should rest from our daily work. The Sabbath provides a break from our labors that may actually make us more productive in the long run.

On Sunday we avoid certain activities that are appropriate on other days, not because they are wrong but because we want a different emphasis on the Sabbath. The Lord taught that typical Sunday activities are also appropriate on other days (see D&C 59:11). Though there may be a shift in emphasis on the Lord's day, our lives should be such that there is not an abrupt break between the Sabbath and the rest of the week.

Doctrine and Covenants 59:12

What are the "oblations" we should offer?

A dictionary published in Joseph Smith's day defined oblation as "any thing offered or presented in worship or sacred service; an offering; a sacrifice" (Webster, American Dictionary). Not just tithes or other monetary offerings but all our appropriate Sabbath activities might well be regarded as "oblations."

Doctrine and Covenants 59:13-14

Why should "fasting" be equated with "rejoicing"?

Fasting should be a positive rather than a negative experience. By going without physical food, we remind ourselves that our spirit is ultimately more important. During our fast we should engage in activities that nourish the spirit—prayer, searching the scriptures, serving others, and so forth. The Savior has promised that as we turn our attention to him, he will impart the Spirit, which not only enlightens our minds but also fills our souls with joy (see D&C 11:13). Hence fasting truly is intertwined with joy and rejoicing.

Doctrine and Covenants 61

Should we always stay away from water?

After reading this revelation only casually, some have reached the erroneous conclusion that we should avoid water. Yet water is used in the ordinances of baptism and the sacrament, in which it represents a cleansing, specifically through the atoning blood of Jesus Christ.

The revelation in Doctrine and Covenants 61 warned the brethren against physical dangers on the waters and also reminded them that Satan had power over the waters (see vv. 4-5, 19). Nevertheless, the faithful are promised that they will be protected and that the Spirit will guide them (see v. 6). "Notwithstanding the great power of Satan upon the waters," testified President Joseph Fielding Smith, "the Lord still held command, and he could protect his people whether on land or by water as they journeyed" (Church History and Modern Revelation, 1:225).

Elder LeGrand Richards related an example of such protection.

Over the years, "it was considered as good as an insurance policy when a company of Latter-day Saints embarked on a vessel crossing the Atlantic. I recall reading in my grandfather's diary of a time when the boat upon which he was sailing was in great jeopardy, so much so that the captain of the boat came to him and pleaded with him to intercede with the Lord in behalf of the boat and her passengers; and Grandfather, remembering that he had been promised that he should have power over the elements, walked out on the deck of the boat and raised his hands to high heaven and rebuked the sea and the waves, and they were immediately calmed, and the appreciation of the captain of the boat was so great that he offered him the use of his private quarters during the balance of the journey" (in Conference Report, Apr. 1941, 84).

The Lord teaches us an important principle in this revelation. "It mattereth not" whether his servants travel by water or by land, "if it so be that they fill their mission" (v. 22). He admonishes all of us to be guided by the Spirit so that we might know what to do in any situation (see vv. 27-28).

Doctrine and Covenants 63:7-10

Why can't faith be based on signs? What about instances where people asked for miraculous proofs and received them?

The "signs" spoken of in Doctrine and Covenants 63 are external proofs. Because signs come through faith, the Master condemned those who demanded such proofs as a substitute for faith or for personal gratification (see Matthew 12:38-39). Nevertheless, on occasion the Lord has employed miraculous manifestations to bring about the conversion of individuals who would play key roles in his work. Examples include the apostle Paul (see Acts 9:1-18; 22:3-13) and Alma the Younger and the four sons of King Mosiah (see Mosiah 27:8-36; Alma 36:6-24). In a few instances the Lord has consented to help an individual whose faith was weak but whose potential was great; Gideon is one of these (see Judges 6:36-40). Korihor is clearly an example of the wicked who demanded a sign and received one—"but not unto salvation" (D&C 63:7; see also Alma 30:48-56).

We perceive signs through our human senses and judge their validity with human reason, yet our senses can be deceived, and our reason is fallible. Faith based on such an uncertain foundation cannot be secure. The scriptures and sacred history are full of examples of individuals who fell away after basing their faith on signs (see, for example, 1 Nephi 3:29-31).

The scriptures promise that "signs shall follow them that believe" (Mark 16:17). The purpose of these signs is to bless individuals and give miraculous help in spreading the Lord's work. With the gift of discernment, the faithful can know the divine source of such miracles. But the greatest of such signs is the witness through the Spirit. Unlike external wonders that must be experienced by our imperfect senses, the Spirit communicates his witness directly to our spirit, bypassing our human uncertainties.

Doctrine and Covenants 63:17

What are the "lake which burneth with fire" and the "second death"?

The "second death" is a spiritual death suffered permanently only by the sons of perdition (see D&C 29:41). When we sin, we bring a condition of spiritual death upon ourselves as we are estranged from God, who is the source of our spiritual life. Through the atonement of Christ, this estrangement will be overcome, at least temporarily, when we are brought back into God's presence to be judged. Those few who have become sons of perdition will then suffer a second spiritual death when they are cut off, this time permanently, from all contact with God's glory and influence (see Helaman 14:15-18).

The "lake of fire" is an allusion to Gehenna, a dreadful, sulfurous place just outside Jerusalem where rotting garbage was constantly being burned. Ancient prophets chose this place as a fitting representation of eternal torment. The Book of Mormon clarifies that references to the lake of fire and brimstone are only symbolic (see 2 Nephi 9:16; Alma 12:17). King Benjamin taught that the torment of the damned is actually the anguish of guilt (see Mosiah 2:38; 3:25-27).

Those who will ultimately inherit the telestial kingdom experience this torment as a temporary condition in the spirit prison (compare D&C 63:17 with 76:103-9). This torment, however, will be the eternal fate of those who become sons of perdition (see D&C 76:30-37). {See D&C 76:84.}

Doctrine and Covenants 63:20-21

When will the earth be transfigured?

Our earth has already passed through two major changes. First, at the time of Adam's fall, the earth itself—which originally was in a celestial condition, having been created spiritually in heaven (see Moses 3:5)—fell into a paradisiacal, or terrestrial, state. At the time of the Fall, the earth came into its present telestial condition.

Two more changes are future, and either of them might be the "transfiguration" spoken of in Doctrine and Covenants 63:20-21. Third, at the time of Christ's second coming, the "earth will be renewed and receive [once again] its paradisiacal glory" (Article of Faith 10). It will be cleansed by fire, the wicked being burned as stubble (see Malachi 4:1). During the thousand years of the Millennium the earth will again be in a terrestrial condition. Fourth, after the thousand years are ended, the earth will be completely consumed by fire. The old earth will pass away, and there will be a new heaven and a new earth (see 3 Nephi 26:3; Revelation 21:1). President Joseph Fielding Smith noted that like its inhabitants, the earth too shall die, pass through the resurrection, and be raised to an immortal, unchangeable condition as the eternal abode for such inhabitants as the Lord in his wisdom will place upon it (see Restoration of All Things, 293-97).

In its final celestial condition, the earth may be described as a "sea of glass," or a giant Urim and Thummim (see D&C 77:1; 130:8-9; see also D&C 137:2-4). Surely the faithful will have an inheritance as promised in Doctrine and Covenants 63:20-21, both during the Millennium and on the glorious celestialized earth.

Doctrine and Covenants 63:23

What are the "mysteries of the kingdom"?

Because a mystery is something we cannot know through human resources alone, it must be made known by revelation. {See D&C 6:7.} In Doctrine and Covenants 63:23 the Lord sets forth the truth that such revelations can come only to the obedient. He also suggests what kind of mysteries will be revealed—truths that will help us in our quest for exaltation, or eternal life.

Doctrine and Covenants 63:34

What is meant by the promise that the Saints will "hardly escape"?

Hardly meant "scarcely; barely; almost not," referring to something achieved only "with difficulty; with great labor" (Webster, American Dictionary). The Lord has promised that Zion and her stakes will be places of defense and refuge when the divine wrath will be "poured out without mixture upon the whole earth" (D&C 115:6). Still the faithful will not be totally shielded from these difficulties, and great effort will be required to maintain the righteous conditions that will spare them (see D&C 97:25-26).

Doctrine and Covenants 64:9-10

Why will God forgive only certain people whereas we must forgive everybody?

The statement "I, the Lord, will forgive whom I will" may seem arbitrary, but the scriptures repeatedly state that God will forgive those who repent (see D&C 1:31-33; 58:42-43, for example). Because of our imperfections, we cannot always know for sure who has repented; hence, we should always forgive without trying to judge. {See D&C 98:23-48.} Furthermore, this commandment was given to a people who, like us, were looking forward to establishing Zion. The willingness to forgive always is essential to the unity required for building Zion (see Moses 7:18; D&C 38:27).

Doctrine and Covenants 64:21

How long did the Lord's "strong hold" actually survive in Kirtland?

The weeks preceding the dedication of the Kirtland Temple in March 1836 were the peak of growth and development in Kirtland. In fact, this was one of the greatest spiritual seasons known in Church history. During the fall of that same year, however, the first signs of dissension and faithlessness appeared and soon grew into full-blown apostasy. Thus the Lord's "strong hold in the land of Kirtland" lasted almost exactly the five years he had decreed.

Doctrine and Covenants 64:23

What is the connection between paying tithing and not being burned?

On several occasions the Lord has made the connection between paying tithing and escaping the burning of the wicked (see Malachi 3:8-10; 4:1; D&C 85:3). Surely a wicked person cannot hope to escape the consequences of his general disobedience merely by honoring one commandment. Some attend church because of social motivations, others keep the Word of Wisdom to secure better health, and yet these outwardly righteous acts do not necessarily indicate general faithfulness. Tithe paying, on the other hand, is a very personal matter—more likely to be done for the right reasons. Therefore one who pays his tithing is apt to keep God's other commandments as well, earning the promised protection from prophesied latter-day burnings and judgments.

President Joseph F. Smith affirmed that through obedience to the law of tithing, "the loyalty of the people of this Church shall be put to the test. By this principle it shall be known who is for the kingdom of God and who is against it. By this principle it shall be seen whose hearts are set on doing the will of God and keeping his commandments" (Gospel Doctrine, 225).

"The man who does not learn how to give can never attain spiritual greatness," asserted Elder John A. Widtsoe. "A person who is so wedded to temporal things that he cannot part with some of them is not a fit candidate for any kingdom of God" (Message of the Doctrine and Covenants, 97).

On the positive side, Elder Howard W. Hunter testified: "The payment of tithing strengthens faith, increases spirituality and spiritual capacity, and solidifies testimony. It gives the satisfaction of knowing one is complying with the will of the Lord. It brings the blessings that come from sharing with others through the purposes for which tithing is used. We cannot afford to deny ourselves these blessings. We cannot afford not to pay our tithing" (in Conference Report, Apr. 1964, 36).

Doctrine and Covenants 65:2-6

What is the "kingdom of God"?

The phrase "kingdom of God" has been used in at least two different senses. "The kingdom of God is a preparation for the kingdom of heaven, which is yet to come," explained Elder James E. Talmage. "The expressions 'Kingdom of God' and 'Kingdom of Heaven' are ofttimes used synonymously and interchangeably." But "the light of modern revelation" clarifies "that there is a distinction between the kingdom of God and the kingdom of heaven. The kingdom of God is the Church of Christ; the kingdom of heaven is that system of government and administration which is operative in heaven, and which we pray may some day prevail on earth" (in Conference Report, Apr. 1917, 65).

Speaking of that millennial state, President Joseph Fielding Smith taught: "This government which embraces all the peoples of the earth, both in and out of the Church, is also sometimes spoken of as the kingdom of God, because the people are subject to the kingdom of God which Christ will set up; but they have their agency and thousands will not be members of the Church until they are converted; yet at the same time they will be subject to the theocratic rule.

"When our Savior comes to rule in the millennium, all governments will become subject unto his government" (Doctrines of Salvation, 1:229).

Elder LeGrand Richards viewed the establishment of the Savior's kingdom as one of the most significant fulfillments of prophecies concerning the last days: "If the inhabitants of this earth had the ability and the power to read the signs of the times, they would know that already the Lord has given far more than the darkening of the sun or obscuring the light of the moon or causing the stars to fall from heaven, for what he has accomplished in the establishment of his kingdom in the earth in these latter days, and the unseen power operating in the world for the accomplishment of his purposes, are greater signs than any of these phenomena that we read about—the signs of his coming" (in Conference Report, Apr. 1951, 41).

"The Church will not be taken from the earth again," testified President Ezra Taft Benson. "It is here to stay. The Lord has promised it and you are a part of that Church and kingdom—the nucleus around which will be builded the great kingdom of God on the earth. The kingdom of heaven and the kingdom of God on the earth will be combined together at Christ's coming—and that time is not far distant. How I wish we could get the vision of this work, the genius of it, and realize the nearness of that great event. I am sure it would have a sobering effect upon us if we realized what is before us" (Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson, 19).

Doctrine and Covenants 65:2-6

To what extent has the kingdom of God "filled the whole earth"?

In 1900, after the Church had been in existence for seventy years, it had just over a quarter of a million members. Estimates of Church membership by the end of the twentieth century are about 11.3 million, but at the same time there will be an estimated world population of about 6.7 billion—in other words, more than 500 other people for each Latter-day Saint.

Nevertheless, the Church's membership is becoming more widely distributed geographically. At midcentury more than nine of ten Latter-day Saints lived in the United States and Canada; by the end of the century they will represent less than half the membership of the Church.

Doctrine and Covenants 67:4-8

Was this challenge to duplicate a revelation accepted? What happened?

Doubts were raised at the conference that was considering publishing the collected revelations when certain brethren criticized Joseph Smith's language. Such criticisms should not have been taken seriously, because in a revelation received during that same conference the Lord had explained that these revelations "were given unto my servants in their weakness, after the manner of their language, that they might come to understanding" (D&C 1:24). Still, the Lord challenged the critics to "appoint him that is the most wise among you" and have him try to duplicate the "least" of the revelations given through the Prophet (D&C 67:6).

Joseph Smith recorded that in response to this challenge, William E. McLellin "as the wisest man, in his own estimation, having more learning than sense, endeavored to write a commandment like unto one of the least of the Lord's, but failed; it was an awful responsibility to write in the name of the Lord" (History of the Church, 1:226). The Lord fulfilled his promise that a "stupor of thought" would result from that which was wrong (see D&C 9:9).

Doctrine and Covenants 67:10

Can we really behold God's face in this life?

A few statements in the Bible have led people to believe that it is impossible to behold God's face. One of these is Exodus 33:20; nevertheless, only nine verses earlier, we read that "the Lord spake unto Moses face to face, as a man speaketh unto his friend" (Exodus 33:11). What then do these biblical passages mean?

Joseph Smith's inspired "translation" provides the following clarifications:

"And no man hath seen God at any time, except he hath borne record of the Son" (JST, John 1:19).

"No man hath seen God at any time, except them who believe" (1 John 4:12). {See D&C 35:20.}

Other latter-day revelation adds further insight: "For no man has seen God at any time in the flesh, except quickened by the Spirit of God" (D&C 67:11; compare Moses 1:11).

The promise in Doctrine and Covenants 67:10 that we can see God was repeated on other occasions (see D&C 93:1; 97:15-17; 110:7-8). The Prophet Joseph Smith taught: "After a person has faith in Christ, repents of his sins, and is baptized for the remission of his sins and receives the Holy Ghost, (by the laying on of hands), which is the first Comforter, then let him continue to humble himself before God, hungering and thirsting after righteousness, and living by every word of God, and the Lord will soon say unto him, Son thou shalt be exalted. When the Lord has thoroughly proved him, and finds that the man is determined to serve Him at all hazards, then the man will find his calling and his election made sure, then it will be his privilege to receive the other Comforter.

"When any man obtains this last Comforter, he will have the personage of Jesus Christ to attend him, or appear unto him from time to time, and even He will manifest the Father unto him" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 150-51).

We must pay a high price to be worthy to have this exalted experience. Although it may not come in this life, we should nevertheless strive to be worthy of receiving this blessing whenever the Savior should choose to extend it to us.

On special occasions Church leaders have testified that they have enjoyed the fulfillment of this promise. "I know that God lives," affirmed President George Q. Cannon. "I know that Jesus lives; for I have seen Him" (Deseret Weekly, 6 Oct. 1896).

Elder Melvin J. Ballard bore a similar witness: "I know, as well as I know that I live and look into your faces, that Jesus Christ lives. . . . For in the visions of the Lord to my soul, I have seen Christ's face, I have heard his voice. I know that he lives" (in Conference Report, Apr. 1920, 40).

Doctrine and Covenants 67:10-12

What is meant by "natural" and "carnal"?

Doctrine and Covenants 67:10 contrasts what is "carnal" and "natural" with that which is "spiritual." Other scriptures use these words in a similar sense (see, for example, Romans 8:6 and 1 Corinthians 2:14). Carnal literally means "pertaining to the flesh." We can sense the meaning of natural as we see how King Benjamin contrasted the "natural man" with one who "yields to the enticings of the Holy Spirit and putteth off the natural man and becometh a saint" (Mosiah 3:19). Thus, in the scriptures, carnal and natural mean "sinful, unspiritual, or worldly."

"We may see God by the quickened spirit," explained Elder John A. Widtsoe. "No man who lives merely in a carnal world can ever know God. There is power in man to lift himself out of the material world into the spiritual realm. So declares this revelation. It emphasizes that 'The flesh may be quickened.' It does not necessarily mean that we can see God with these mortal eyes. We do not fully know the procedure, but whatever it means it cannot be realized except as man rises out of his carnal manner of living" (Message of the Doctrine and Covenants, 47).

Doctrine and Covenants 68:16-18

Why do literal descendants of Aaron have a special right to the office of bishop?

In Old Testament times the descendants of Aaron were the priests; the firstborn or eldest among them presided as high priest. Today the responsibility of presiding over the lesser priesthood has been assigned to the bishop (see D&C 107:88).

President Joseph Fielding Smith explained: "As the office of bishop belongs to the Aaronic Priesthood, and since that Priesthood was conferred upon Aaron and his posterity after him, the descendants of Aaron have a legal right to this Priesthood. . . . The office of Presiding Bishop of the Church is the same as the office which was held by Aaron." President Smith continued, "It is the highest office, holding the presidency in the Aaronic Priesthood. . . . should it be shown by revelation that there is one who is the 'firstborn among the sons of Aaron,' and thus entitled by birthright to this presidency, he could 'claim' his 'anointing' and the right to that office in the Church" (Church History and Modern Revelation, 1:259).

Doctrine and Covenants 68:27

Why is eight years an appropriate age of accountability?

Individuals develop step by step. The Lord declared that as children grow, they "begin to become accountable before me" (D&C 29:47). Research has demonstrated that "between the ages of 6 and 11, . . . children become less dependent on their parents and more responsible for making their own decisions and governing their own behavior" (Berger and Thompson, Developing Person, 389). Specifically, between the ages of seven and eight, they "begin to understand the basic principles that underlie their behavior" (Compton's Encyclopedia, 4:327).

Doctrine and Covenants 70:6-13

Why was Joseph Smith to benefit from the sale of the published revelations?

Those like Joseph Smith who have been assigned a spiritual stewardship are to have support just as did those with the usual temporal stewardships. The Church therefore had a responsibility to provide for the Prophet and his family. {See D&C 42:70-73.} This revelation suggested a source for the funds needed to discharge that obligation.
