Richard O. Cowan, Answers to Your Questions About the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1996)

7

Translating the Scriptures

Doctrine and Covenants 71 through 76

During the winter of 1831-32, Joseph Smith continued his translation of the Bible. {See D&C 35:20.} This demanding task stimulated questions about the meaning of biblical passages. These questions resulted in revelations that, among other things, shed light on Paul's teachings about marriage (see D&C 74) and on the three degrees of glory (see D&C 76).

The Prophet's translating was interrupted when he was directed to respond to some early attacks against the Church (see D&C 71). Important organizational developments during this time included the calling of a second bishop (see D&C 72) and Joseph Smith's being sustained as president of the high priesthood (see D&C 75 headnote).

Doctrine and Covenants 71:1

Why should missionaries expound the mysteries?

A superficial reading of this directive may give the impression that the brethren were to delve into topics on which the Lord has not spoken. That could not be further from the truth. The context clarifies that the missionaries are to proclaim fundamental concepts that had been revealed—"my gospel, the things of the kingdom . . . out of the scriptures." {See D&C 6:7.}

Doctrine and Covenants 72:16-19

How does the Church presently recommend members when they move?

When a Church member moves from one location to another, his official record of membership is transferred from one ward or branch to another. The original method of making such transfers has been superseded by modern technology, but the purpose is still the same—to document one's standing in the Church. {See D&C 20:81-84.} Church leaders in the area where the member is moving are instructed to extend callings only after receiving the individual's records. These records in the past were often called "membership recommends."

Doctrine and Covenants 73:3

What was Joseph Smith to "translate" at this time?

The Prophet was to resume work on his inspired revision, or translation of the Bible. {See D&C 35:20.} Several sections in the Doctrine and Covenants are revelations received in response to questions Joseph had about biblical passages. These include sections 74, 76, 77, 91, and 113.

Doctrine and Covenants 74

What did Paul teach about interfaith marriages?

The apostle Paul pointed out in 1 Corinthians 7:12-14 how a faithful Church member could, through his or her influence and example, convert a nonmember spouse and bring the sanctifying blessings of the gospel into their family. They would thereby save not only themselves but also their children from being subject to false traditions. Paul did not advocate marrying an unbeliever, however; to the contrary, he recognized the inadvisability of being "unequally yoked together with unbelievers" (2 Corinthians 6:14).

After quoting 1 Corinthians 7:14 see D&C74:1), the Lord pointed out a pitfall in interfaith marriages: an "unbelieving" or non-Christian father, for example, could influence his children to follow the old Mosaic law rather than the gospel of Christ and thus deprive his family of the sanctifying blessings the gospel brings.

Doctrine and Covenants 75:20-21

Why should one be "filled with joy and gladness" despite knowing that others must be condemned?

The ceremony of shaking dust off the feet symbolized missionaries' having discharged their duty to teach and warn. {See D&C 24:15.} Knowing that we have fulfilled our duty should always be a source of satisfaction. The missionaries were to be "filled with joy" not because those who had rejected them would be condemned but because they themselves had faithfully done their duty.

Doctrine and Covenants 76:17

What is the significance of Joseph Smith's inspired revisions of John 5:29?

The Prophet's changes may not seem very significant when comparing Doctrine and Covenants 76:17 with John 5:29. They are, however, much more important than they may appear at first glance.

Many in Joseph's day believed that there were only two conditions in eternity: heaven and hell. The wording in the King James Version of John 5:29 seems to support the doctrine that all will be resurrected "unto" either "life" or "damnation." Yet having only these two conditions does not allow for the wide variety that exists among the earth's inhabitants. The Prophet's revision in Doctrine and Covenants 76 shifts the emphasis from two ultimate states to two major divisions in the resurrection itself: individuals will come forth in the "resurrection of the just" or of the "unjust." The remainder of this revelation explains that there will be four kingdoms with a variety of rewards based on how each person has lived his or her life.

Doctrine and Covenants 76:22-23

What is meant by the phrase "last of all"?

On the Brigham Young University campus certain guest speakers have been invited to deliver their "last lecture," setting forth what they would want to emphasize in the last message they ever gave. Perhaps that is the spirit in which the phrase "last of all" is used here. What was this significant "last" witness? "That he [Christ] lives!"

Over the centuries philosophers have debated the merits of various arguments for the existence of God. Alma is one of many who have advanced reasons for their faith in God (see Alma 30:44). Such skeptics as Korihor have rejected these arguments, claiming it is impossible to know there is a God (see Alma 30:13, 15, 28). Ultimately each of us can answer this crucial question only for ourselves, according to our own spiritual witness. Note the directness of the evidence Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon gave for their testimony of God's existence: they had seen him (see D&C 76:23).

Doctrine and Covenants 76:24

What do we know about the other worlds Christ created? How does the Atonement performed on this earth relate to them?

The prophet Moses learned that Christ was instrumental in creating "worlds without number" (Moses 1:33). Joseph Smith, in a poetic paraphrase of Doctrine and Covenants 76, wrote that Jesus Christ was not only the Creator but also the Savior of these worlds:

And I heard a great voice bearing record from heav'n, He's the Saviour, and only begotten of God— By him, of him, and through him, the worlds were all made, Even all that career in the heavens so broad, Whose inhabitants, too, from the first to the last, Are sav'd by the very same Saviour of ours; And, of course, are begotten God's daughters and sons, By the very same truths, and the very same pow'rs. (Times and Seasons, 1 Feb. 1843, 82-83)

By means of a parable about a "lord of the field" visiting various servants in succession, the Master taught that he would visit and bless the inhabitants of the several kingdoms he had created (see D&C 88:51-61). Concerning the universality of the Savior's work, Elder Marion G. Romney declared, "Except for his mortal ministry accomplished on this earth, his service and relationship to other worlds and their inhabitants are the same as his service and relationship to this earth and its inhabitants" (Improvement Era, Nov. 1968, 46).

Doctrine and Covenants 76:25-28

What do the adversary's various titles tell us about him?

Two of Satan's names in these verses refer to his high standing in the premortal councils. The name Lucifer is derived from the Latin lux (meaning "light") combined with the Latin ferre (meaning "to bring, carry, or bear"); hence this name literally means "light bearer." He was "a son of the morning," suggesting his preeminence as one of God's first spirit children to be born and as one "in authority in the presence of God."

The other titles describe his condition after his rebellion and fall. Devil comes from the Greek diabolos, meaning "slanderer," perhaps recalling his wanting to take God's honor. The name Satan comes from the Hebrew Saatan, meaning "an enemy or one who plots against."

Perdition is derived from the Latin verb perdere (meaning "to lose") so perdition literally means "loss." Satan and those who follow him lose the privilege of being in any of the kingdoms of glory.

Our appreciation for the Adversary's powers of persuasion must be enhanced when we remember that he was able in God's very presence to draw away one-third of the spirits after him. He still possesses these powers today.

Doctrine and Covenants 76:31-35

What are the actions a person takes to become a son of perdition, and what does it mean to deny the Holy Ghost?

A person who becomes a son of perdition must know the gospel is true and have experienced God's power and then deliberately and knowingly deny that certain knowledge (see Alma 39:6). Joseph Smith said it is like a person claiming that "the sun does not shine while he sees it" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 358). The Lord declared that one not only "denies" what he knows to be true but must also "defy" God's power (D&C 76:31). To defy God's power involves a willful opposition to him and his work. The Savior likens this unpardonable offense to knowingly participating in his crucifixion and exposing him "to an open shame" (D&C 76:35).

Some have wondered why we can be forgiven after blaspheming Christ but not for denying the Holy Ghost (see Matthew 12:31-32; Luke 12:10). The difference seems to be not the object of one's blasphemy but rather whether it involves repudiating the certain witness that comes from the Holy Ghost. "The testimony of the Spirit," affirmed President Joseph Fielding Smith, "is so great, and the impressions and revelations of divine truth so forcefully revealed that there comes to the recipient a conviction of the truth that he cannot forget. Therefore, when a person once enlightened by the Spirit so that he receives knowledge that Jesus Christ is the Only Begotten Son of God in the flesh, then turns away and fights the Lord and his work, he does so against the light and testimony he has received by the power of God. Therefore, he has resigned himself to evil knowingly. Therefore Jesus said there is no forgiveness for such a person.

"The testimony of the Holy Ghost is the strongest testimony that a man can receive" (Answers to Gospel Questions, 4:92). The Lord explained that the sons of perdition are those who "deny the Son after the Father has revealed him" through the Holy Ghost (D&C 76:43).

Doctrine and Covenants 76:36-39

What will be the state of the sons of perdition?

The Lord described the fate of the sons of perdition as a "lake of fire and brimstone" and called it a "second death." {See D&C 63:17.} The sons of perdition will be resurrected (see D&C 76:39 n. a), but they cannot be redeemed from the effects of their sins because they do not repent. Even though the Lord has not revealed the full extent of their torment (see D&C 76:45-46), what he has told us should be sufficient to warn us away from this fate.

Doctrine and Covenants 76:48

Who are "ordained" unto condemnation?

The idea that God has predestined some of his children to damnation is false. He has, however, "ordained" or decreed laws. Keeping them brings blessings (see D&C 130:20-21) and breaking them inevitably brings penalties, including condemnation (see Alma 42:22). The Savior has thus ordained a system in which we ourselves determine whether or not we must be condemned.

Doctrine and Covenants 76:53

What does it mean to be "sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise"?

The title "Holy Spirit of promise" refers to the "sealing and ratifying power of the Holy Ghost," taught Elder Bruce R. McConkie, "that is, the power given him to ratify and approve the righteous acts of men so that those acts will be binding on earth and in heaven" (Mormon Doctrine, 361). He places a stamp of approval on ordinances we receive worthily or when we become worthy of them later on.

The ultimate promise, which follows a faithful couple's sealing in the temple, is of eternal life in the celestial kingdom (see D&C 88:3-4). We can lie our way into the temple and receive sacred ordinances there, said Elder Melvin J. Ballard. "We may deceive men but we cannot deceive the Holy Ghost, and our blessings will not be eternal unless they are also sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise, the Holy Ghost, one who reads the thoughts and hearts of men and gives his sealing approval to the blessings pronounced upon their heads. Then it is binding, efficacious and of full force" (Three Degrees of Glory, 8).

Doctrine and Covenants 76:54

What is "the church of the Firstborn"?

All those who faithfully live the Savior's gospel are "begotten" of him and considered "the church of the Firstborn" (see Mosiah 5:5-7; D&C 93:21-22). Unfortunately, not all members of the earthly Church qualify to be included with those righteous souls who are worthy of the celestial kingdom.

Doctrine and Covenants 76:57

How was Melchizedek "after the order of Enoch"?

Joseph Smith's translation of Genesis 14 indicates how Melchizedek was "after the order of Enoch." Verse 34 indicates that Melchizedek followed Enoch's example, leading a Zion-like community that obtained a place in heaven. The Lord further explained that both Melchizedek and Enoch were "after the order of the Only Begotten Son" (D&C 76:57). This relationship was reflected in the original name of the higher priesthood (see D&C 107:3).

Doctrine and Covenants 76:58-59

What is the difference between "gods" and "God's" in these verses?

"They are gods" is an affirmation that all of our Father's children who qualify for exaltation may become like him (see D&C 76:94-95). Even though "all things are theirs," they have received this inheritance only through the merits of Christ, so they are truly his. The Savior, in turn, received his power and glory from the Father. Hence we depend on, or belong to, Christ, and he belongs to his Father—he is "God's" (v. 59).

"Those who have been born unto God through obedience to the Gospel," declared the First Presidency, "may by valiant devotion to righteousness obtain exaltation and even reach the status of Godhood. . . . Yet, though they be Gods they are still subject to Jesus Christ as their Father in this exalted relationship" (Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, 5:31).

Doctrine and Covenants 76:70-71

What do "celestial" and "terrestrial" actually mean?

Celestial means "heavenly" or "pertaining to the heavens." Terrestrial means "earthly" or "of the earth." The words do not refer to the location of these kingdoms but to their relative condition. Likewise Doctrine and Covenants 76 does not say that the celestial kingdom will be on the sun and the terrestrial on the moon but rather that the brilliance of the sun exceeds that of the moon, just as the glory of the celestial is greater than that of the terrestrial. A later revelation (see D&C 88:17-20, 25-26) clarifies that our celestial kingdom will be on this sanctified earth.

Doctrine and Covenants 76:72-74

Why should we do temple work for the dead if those who receive the gospel in the spirit world can inherit only the terrestrial kingdom?

Many of those who receive the gospel in the spirit world will likely inherit the terrestrial kingdom. Those who qualify for that kingdom are described as "honorable" but "not valiant" in living the gospel (D&C 76:75, 79). Unfortunately there are Church members today who fit that description.

Yet there will be exceptions to this generalization. A remarkable vision of the celestial kingdom tells us that "all who have died without a knowledge of this gospel, who would have received it if they had been permitted to tarry, shall be heirs of the celestial kingdom" (D&C 137:7). These individuals are among those who receive the gospel in the spirit world. What determines the kingdom one inherits, then, is not when the gospel is received but how it is lived.

Those who accept the gospel in the spirit world have been promised that someone among their posterity will receive the gospel on earth and perform needed ordinances in their behalf. {See D&C 2:2.} We are that posterity. Hence, among our ancestors are faithful individuals who are worthy of the celestial kingdom and who are depending on our help to reach it.

Doctrine and Covenants 76:77

Will Jesus live in the terrestrial kingdom?

As a member of the Godhead, Christ will dwell in the celestial kingdom (see D&C 76:62). The promise that the terrestrial "receive of the presence of the Son" means that he may visit there. Those in the telestial kingdom will have an even less direct relationship with the Godhead. {See D&C 76:86-88.}

Doctrine and Covenants 76:81

What is the origin of the name "telestial"?

In contrast to celestial and terrestrial, which have meanings commonly used in our language, telestial is found uniquely in writings relating to latter-day revelation. This name appears to be related to the Greek telos, meaning "end" or "completion." Paul explained that there will be an orderly sequence in resurrections, beginning with that of Christ and continuing until the telos, or "end" (see 1 Corinthians 15:21-24). Those individuals who have earned the right to live in the telestial kingdom will be the last going to a kingdom of glory to be resurrected.

The name telestial may also be related to the prefix tele-, meaning "far off" or "distant." The telestial kingdom will be the kingdom of glory most removed from the presence and glory of God.

Doctrine and Covenants 76:82

In what sense do the people of the telestial kingdom "receive not the gospel"?

Because all will have the opportunity to receive the gospel, the people of the telestial kingdom apparently choose not to do so. The scriptures testify that "every knee shall bow" and "every tongue shall confess" before the Lord (Romans 14:11; Isaiah 45:23). Even telestial inhabitants will have to acknowledge who Jesus Christ is (see D&C 76:110). But being basically sinful people (see D&C 76:103), they never make his gospel a part of their lives.

Doctrine and Covenants 76:84

Is the telestial kingdom the same place as perdition or hell?

Reading the context of a scripture often clarifies its meaning. In this case the preceding verse, Doctrine and Covenants 76:83, indicates that those going to the telestial kingdom have not committed the unpardonable sin of denying the Holy Ghost and hence are not sons of perdition. {See D&C 76:31-35.} The following verse, number 85, clarifies that the "hell" into which they have been cast is only a temporary condition from which they will eventually be released (compare D&C 76:105-6 and Alma 40:11-14). Writers in the Book of Mormon sometimes used the word hell in reference to the spirit prison (see 2 Nephi 9:11-13, for example). The temporary torment suffered by telestial candidates in the spirit prison foreshadows the torment to be experienced eternally only by the sons of perdition.

Doctrine and Covenants 76:86-88

How do those in the telestial kingdom receive the Holy Ghost "through the ministration of the terrestrial"?

Elder Orson Pratt explained that those in the terrestrial glory cannot ascend to the celestial kingdom. "Their intelligence and knowledge have not prepared and adapted them to dwell with those who reign in celestial glory, consequently they can not even be angels in that glory. They have not obeyed the law that pertains to that glory, and hence they could not abide it. But will there be blessings administered to them by those who dwell in celestial glory? Yes, angels will be sent forth from the celestial world to minister to those who inherit the glory of the moon, bearing messages of joy and peace and of all that which is calculated to exalt, to redeem and ennoble those who have been resurrected into a terrestrial glory. They can receive the Spirit of the Lord there, and the ministration of angels there" (in Journal of Discourses, 15:322).

Likewise, individuals from the terrestrial kingdom are permitted to minister to the telestial. Whereas those in the celestial world enjoy the fulness of the Father's glory, and those in the terrestrial may receive visitations from the Son, those in the telestial glory receive the influence of the Holy Ghost—and that, only indirectly—by means of visitors from the terrestrial degree.

Doctrine and Covenants 76:96-98

Aren't there variations of glory within each of the kingdoms?

Doctrine and Covenants 76:98 specifically tells us that there are variations in the telestial glory, and we are likewise told that there are three levels of glory within the celestial kingdom (see D&C 131:1-4). From this information we may suppose that variations also exist in the terrestrial glory. The statement that the glory of each kingdom "is one" means that it is of a nature or kind distinct from the others.

Doctrine and Covenants 76:99-100

Why do followers of these great religious leaders inherit only the telestial kingdom?

People may say that they follow Christ, but the following verses make clear that they "received not the gospel, neither the testimony of Jesus, neither the prophets" but actually are sinners (D&C 76:101-3). {See D&C 76:82.} Hence the telestial kingdom, the least of the degrees of glory, is a fit reward for them. One must do more than merely claim to be a follower of the Savior.

Doctrine and Covenants 76:112

Will there be progress from one kingdom to another?

The concept of eternal progression may imply the possibility of progressing from one kingdom to another. Doctrinal teachings, however, suggest otherwise.

First, those who do not enter celestial marriage (an ordinance that must be received either personally during mortality or vicariously in the spirit world) can never be exalted, though they may become ministering angels in the celestial kingdom (see D&C 131:1-4; 132:15-16).

Second, we are resurrected with the body suited specifically for the glory we are worthy to receive. We cannot endure a higher glory for which our body is not prepared.

Third, the Lord has decreed that heirs of the telestial kingdom can never go where God and Christ are (see D&C 76:112). Elder Melvin J. Ballard elaborated on that restriction: "Those whose lives have entitled them to Terrestrial Glory can never gain Celestial Glory. One who gains possession of the lowest degree of Telestial Glory may ultimately arise to the highest degree of that glory, but no provision has been made for promotion from one glory to another" (Three Degrees of Glory, 35).

Fourth, counting on the possibility of progressing from kingdom to kingdom may lead us to procrastinate our repentance. That would undermine the importance of this life as the time for preparing to meet God (see Alma 34:32-34).
