Richard O. Cowan, Answers to Your Questions About the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1996)

8

Instructions and Prophecies

Doctrine and Covenants 77 through 87

The revelations recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 77 through 87 were all given during 1832. They treat a variety of subjects, including the Revelation of John, the organization of the united order, the oath and covenant of the priesthood, and a prophecy on war.

Doctrine and Covenants 77:2

Is our physical appearance in the likeness of our spirit or does it reflect inherited family traits?

Just as our physical heredity can blend traits from our father's and mother's sides of our ancestry, so can all of this merge with our spirit heritage.

Doctrine and Covenants 77:12

When was man created, on the sixth or the seventh day?

The accounts in the Bible and the Pearl of Great Price record the creation of man as the crowning event of the sixth day (see Genesis 1:24-31; Moses 2:24-31; Abraham 4:24-31). Yet the revelation in Doctrine and Covenants 77 parallels mankind's creation with events that occur "in the beginning of the seventh thousand years."

One could argue that there is not much difference between the end of the sixth and the beginning of the seventh day. The book of Moses, however, may give a more satisfying answer. After giving an account of the six days of creation and of the Lord's resting on the seventh, this scripture reminds us that there were not yet living creatures on earth because they had only been created spiritually in heaven. At that point God "formed man from the dust of the ground" (Moses 3:5-7). That physical creation is probably the one spoken of by the Lord in Doctrine and Covenants 77:12. Note that the wording there is more like the description of the physical creation in Moses 3:7 than it is like the account of the earlier spiritual creation in Moses 2:27.

Doctrine and Covenants 77:12-13

What do these verses suggest about the time of the Lord's second coming?

Some have supposed that there is to be exactly six thousand years from the Fall to the Second Advent, but a careful reading of these verses suggests otherwise. Doctrine and Covenants 77:12 declares that "in [not at] the beginning of the seventh thousand years," Christ will complete his work, preparing the way "before the time of his coming." Verse 13 explains that events described in Revelation 9 are to occur after the seventh period of a thousand years begins but before Christ appears. Thus estimates of the time of his advent based on these verses must be more tentative and probably later than some have supposed.

Doctrine and Covenants 78:3-5

What was the united order?

In the revelation recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 78, the Lord called some of the leaders of the Church to unite by covenant to form what became known as the "united order" (D&C 104:1), or "united firm." This was an administrative body to coordinate and operate various business enterprises related to the law of consecration.

The phrase "united order" has also frequently been used as a synonym for "law of consecration." Cooperative ventures in Utah during the 1870s were also called "united orders" but were not the same as the law of consecration.

Doctrine and Covenants 78:16

Who is Michael?

Michael is Adam, "the ancient of days" (D&C 27:11), who, as the patriarchal head of the human family, holds "the keys of salvation" under the direction of the Lord Jesus Christ. The name Michael literally means "one who is like God."

Doctrine and Covenants 78:20

Who is "Son Ahman"?

"Ahman" is the name of the Father in the pure language of Adam, explained Elder Orson Pratt. "Son Ahman" is the name of the Son, and "sons Ahman" is the designation for the remainder of God's children (in Journal of Discourses, 2:342).

Doctrine and Covenants 79:1

Why can the gospel be described as "glad tidings of great joy"?

The word gospel literally means "good news," that through Christ's atonement we can overcome our sins and once again be worthy to live in God's presence. {See D&C 33:10-12.}

Doctrine and Covenants 82:3, 7-10

What will be taken into account when we are judged?

The Lord has decreed that obedience brings blessings and disobedience results in punishment (see D&C 82:10; 130:20-21; Alma 42:22). Other factors will also be considered in the Judgment. The Savior will take into account the level of our understanding (see D&C 82:3; Luke 12:47-48; Alma 9:23). Not all transgressions will result in punishment. The Lord has given the wonderful promise that if we repent of our sins, he will forgive them and "remember them no more" (D&C 58:42). The opposite, however, is also true. If a righteous person turns to sin, his former good deeds cannot save him (see D&C 82:7; Ezekiel 18:24; 33:12-16). It is not enough to be good now, but we must also endure in faithfulness to the end (see 2 Nephi 31:19-20).

Doctrine and Covenants 84:4-5

How can the prophecy be fulfilled that the temple in the New Jerusalem would be built "in this generation"?

The word generation may have different meanings. Often it refers to the time between the birth of parents and that of their children, but it sometimes refers to those born during a given period of time. The followers of Granville Hedrick, who owned the temple lot in Missouri, interpreted "generation" to mean one hundred years and so believed the temple had to be built before 1932, a century after the revelation in Doctrine and Covenants 84 was received.

President Joseph Fielding Smith cited the Savior's allusion to "an evil and adulterous generation" (Matthew 12:39) and concluded that "this did not have reference to a period of years, but to a period of wickedness." He therefore reasoned, "A generation may mean the time of this present dispensation" (Church History and Modern Revelation, 1:337). If that definition is correct, it would mean the temple must be built during "this generation," that is, the dispensation of the fulness of times.

Doctrine and Covenants 84:16

Why is the priesthood lineage here traced through Abel rather than through Seth as it is in Doctrine and Covenants 107:41-43?

Doctrine and Covenants 84 affirms that Moses' priesthood could be traced back to Adam. Verses 15-16 do not mention each individual in the early part of this priesthood line but simply testify that the priesthood was passed down "through the lineage of their fathers." Doctrine and Covenants 107 serves a different purpose, emphasizing that the office of patriarch was to be passed down from father to son. Because Abel had been killed, Seth was the person who actually ordained his fifth great-grandson, Lamech. That may explain why Seth, rather than Abel, is named in this priesthood lineage.

Doctrine and Covenants 84:19-22

What are "the mysteries of the kingdom" and "the power of godliness"?

In his two great revelations on priesthood, the Lord declares that the higher priesthood holds the "keys of the mysteries of the kingdom." These mysteries include sacred truths that are known only by revelation: to have "the knowledge of God" (D&C 84:19), "to have the heavens opened," and to "enjoy the communion and presence of God the Father and Jesus" (D&C 107:19). In an earlier revelation Jesus Christ indicated that other sacred mysteries include "my will concerning all things pertaining to my kingdom," the "wonders of eternity," and "things to come" (D&C 76:7-8). The "power of godliness"—the ability to acquire godlike attributes and qualify to be in his presence—is made fully available only through the ordinances of the Melchizedek Priesthood (D&C 84:20-21).

Doctrine and Covenants 84:21-22

How could Joseph Smith see God before receiving the priesthood?

"We cannot tie the hands of the Lord," President Joseph Fielding Smith taught. "The Father and the Son appeared to the Prophet Joseph Smith before the Church was organized and the priesthood restored to the earth. Under those conditions the Lord could appear to one who sought for light as he did in the case of Joseph Smith.

"Now that the Church is organized, and the power of the priesthood is here, no one can see the face of God, even the Father, without the blessings of the gospel and the authority of the priesthood" (Doctrines of Salvation, 1:4).

Joseph Smith declared: "Every man who has a calling to minister to the inhabitants of the world was ordained to that very purpose in the Grand Council of heaven before this world was. I suppose that I was ordained to this very office in that Grand Council" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 365). In a sense, then, the Prophet may have had the required authority through this foreordination.

Doctrine and Covenants 84:29

Isn't "bishop" an office in the Aaronic Priesthood?

The office of bishop is the presiding office of the Aaronic Priesthood. This entire priesthood, with the bishop at its head, may be regarded as an appendage to the Melchizedek Priesthood (see D&C 84:29; 107:5). The subordinate offices of teacher and deacon, on the other hand, are identified as appendages within the lesser priesthood (see D&C 84:30).

Doctrine and Covenants 84:31-32

Who are the sons of Moses and of Aaron, and what offering and sacrifice will they make?

Doctrine and Covenants 84:6-30 may be regarded as a long parenthetical explanation of the nature, history, and structure of the two orders of priesthood. Verse 31 then brings us back to the main flow of the revelation, and verse 32 picks up the thought originally introduced at the beginning of verse 6. The following verses then explain how those who faithfully magnify their calling become the "sons of Levi." {See D&C 84:33-41).} Those who honor their callings in the Melchizedek and Aaronic Priesthoods become in a figurative sense the sons of Moses and of Aaron, respectively.

Although literal members of the tribe of Levi will offer a sacrifice as a part of the "restitution of all things," the "offering" most commonly made by the sons of Moses and Aaron will be their faithful priesthood service. {See D&C 13.}

Doctrine and Covenants 84:33-41

Under the "oath and covenant of the priesthood," what promises do we and God make?

"There is no exaltation in the kingdom of God without the fullness of the priesthood," affirmed President Joseph Fielding Smith, "and every man who receives the Melchizedek Priesthood does so with an oath and a covenant that he shall be exalted.

"The covenant on man's part is that he will magnify his calling in the priesthood, and that he will live by every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth of God, and that he will keep the commandments.

"The covenant on the Lord's part is that if man does as he promises, then all that the Father hath shall be given unto him; and this is such a solemn and important promise that the Lord swears with an oath that it shall come to pass" (in Conference Report, Apr. 1970, 58-59).

Elder Marion G. Romney taught: "With . . . 'eternal life . . . the greatest of all the gifts of God' (D&C 14:7) depending upon it, it is of utmost importance that we keep clearly in mind what the magnifying of our callings in the priesthood requires of us. I am persuaded that it requires at least the following three things:

"1. That we obtain a knowledge of the gospel.

"2. That we comply in our personal living with the standards of the gospel.

"3. That we give dedicated service" (Improvement Era, June 1962, 416).

Doctrine and Covenants 84:45-46

What is the Spirit of Christ?

The Spirit of Christ is God's power by which the universe was created and by which "all things are governed." It emanates "from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space" (D&C 88:6-13). Like the more powerful and direct influence of the Holy Ghost, the light of Christ may be known as "the Spirit of God" or the "light of truth." Unlike the direct ministration of the Holy Ghost, which is more specific and is received only by certain worthy individuals, the spirit of Christ "enlighteneth every man through the world, that hearkeneth to the voice of the Spirit" (D&C 84:46). Specifically, the Spirit of Christ helps us discern good from evil (see Moroni 7:15-19) and is an important part of what the world calls "conscience." It helps prepare the honest in heart to receive the gospel and the confirming witness through the Holy Ghost.

Doctrine and Covenants 84:54-57

Why are we under condemnation if we neglect the Book of Mormon?

President Ezra Taft Benson cited Doctrine and Covenants 84 as he emphasized the importance of the Book of Mormon (see, for example, Ensign, May 1975, 65; May 1986, 82; Nov. 1986, 4). Because the chief mission of the Book of Mormon is to bear witness of Jesus Christ, our faith in the Savior might be weakened without the spiritual support of this volume of scripture. Then, as our devotion to the Lord and our determination to live his gospel are lessened, we deprive ourselves of spiritual blessings and thus bring upon ourselves a kind of condemnation.

Doctrine and Covenants 84:77-88

How can we develop the kind of relationship with the Lord described in these verses?

There should be a close relationship between the Lord and his servants. He regards us as his friends and is even aware of such an insignificant occurrence as a hair falling from our heads. The Master promises to inspire us with the right words to speak in any situation—if we have done our part to be prepared. His promise to go before our face, to be on our right and on our left, to bless us with his Spirit, and to place his angels round about us suggest a very close and personal working relationship. He has told us how to cultivate such a relationship: we must serve him and keep all his commandments (see D&C 42:29). We must make the effort to draw closer to him (see D&C 88:63). We must always be humble and prayerful (see D&C 112:10). The ultimate promise he makes to us is that we can behold his face and know that he lives. {See D&C 67:10.}

Doctrine and Covenants 84:78-84

Shouldn't we prepare for the future?

When the Savior gave a discourse in ancient America that was like the Sermon on the Mount he had given in the Old World, he carefully designated which portions were directed only to the Twelve and which were for the whole multitude. The command to be unconcerned with material preparations was given specifically to the Twelve (see 3 Nephi 13:25-34; 14:1). Those who are called into full-time Church service receive support from the Church. {See D&C 42:70-73.} Likewise, missionaries should be prepared so they need not worry about their financial support while serving. {See D&C 24:18.}

Doctrine and Covenants 84:107

How does this procedure work today?

Aaronic Priesthood youth, as well as Church members in general, can play an important role in helping missionaries do their work more efficiently. We can "friendship" our neighbors and associates and, when the time is right, arrange for them to receive the missionary discussions. After converts are baptized, we can play an equally significant role as we fellowship them and help them truly "join the Church."

Doctrine and Covenants 84:108-10

How have these verses influenced Church organization and activities?

Beginning in the 1960s, Church leaders emphasized what they called "priesthood correlation." After quoting Doctrine and Covenants 84:108-10, Elder Harold B. Lee declared: "This significant statement meant clearly that, first, each organization was to have its specific function, that it was not to usurp the field of the other which would be like the eye saying to the hand, 'I have no need of thee'; second, that each subdivision is of equal importance in the work of salvation, just as each part of the physical body is essential to the complete human being; . . . or in other words, that within the framework of the Lord's plan of organization for the salvation of his children, the Church will perform as a perfectly organized human body with every member functioning as it was intended" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1962, 72).

Today, priesthood executive committees and correlation councils meet at local and general levels to better coordinate programs and activities under priesthood direction and make sure they are meeting the needs of individual members and families.

Doctrine and Covenants 85:7

Was the "one mighty and strong" ever sent?

In Doctrine and Covenants 85:3-5, the Lord warned that individuals going to Zion (Jackson County, Missouri) who refused to live the law of consecration would not have their names recorded among the names of those worthy to receive blessings. Because Bishop Edward Partridge was lax in dealing with such individuals, the Lord threatened to send "one mighty and strong" to set his affairs in order (D&C 85:7).

Through the years many apostates have come forward, claiming the right to lead the Church as "the one mighty and strong" the Lord had promised. In 1905, however, the First Presidency noted that Bishop Partridge had repented and so the Lord's threat did not need to be carried out. "If, however, there are those who will still insist that the prophecy concerning the coming of 'one mighty and strong' is still to be regarded as relating to the future," the First Presidency instructed, "let the Latter-day Saints know that he will be a future bishop of the Church who will be with the Saints in Zion, Jackson County, Missouri" (Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, 4:118).

Some apostate groups profess to hold the "high priesthood" and, therefore, claim to be above the jurisdiction of the organized Church. Nevertheless, verse 11 in section 85 makes even those bearing the "high priesthood" subject to the Church's discipline.

Doctrine and Covenants 86:1-7

Why does this interpretation of the parable of the sower differ from that found in Matthew 13?

Doctrine and Covenants 86 places the Lord's parable of the wheat and tares (see Matthew 13:24-30, 36-43) in the context of the latter days (compare JST Matthew 13:41 with D&C 101:64-75). During the Savior's earthly ministry he himself was the sower of the good seed (see Matthew 13:37), whereas in the latter-days, this task is accomplished by his servants (see D&C 86:2). The Church being driven into the wilderness (see D&C 86:3) describes the apostasy; the Restoration is likened to "the Church being called forth out of the wilderness" (D&C 33:5). In Doctrine and Covenants 86:5-7, the Lord declared that he was holding his angels back from cleansing out the wicked because his kingdom was still young. Years later, however, President Wilford Woodruff wrote that the time had come for the gathering out of the tares and that the Lord had released his angels to "reap down the earth" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1896; quoted in Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, 365).

Doctrine and Covenants 87

Which aspects of this prophecy on war have been fulfilled?

Certain aspects of the prophecy in Doctrine and Covenants 87 saw one specific fulfillment with the civil war in the United States in the 1860s. That war began in South Carolina (see v. 1); the division was North against South (see v. 3) rather than the manufacturing Northeast against the agricultural Northwest and South—the division in the nation that prevailed at the time this revelation was received. The Confederacy called on Great Britain for help (see v. 3), and Southern slaves rebelled against their masters (see v. 4).

Other aspects of this prophecy are related to wars in general. World wars have characterized the twentieth century (see vv. 2-3), and oppressed peoples in many parts of the world have thrown off the yoke of totalitarian governments or other forms of dictatorship (see v. 4).

Descendants of Father Lehi, long oppressed by the Gentiles, have often fought back (see v. 5). Still other facets of the Lord's prophecy (see vv. 6-7) are yet to be fulfilled.

Doctrine and Covenants 87:8

In the midst of these wars, how can we "stand in holy places"?

Once again the Lord directs his people to stand apart from wickedness. {See D&C 45:32.} He has promised that by so doing the faithful will be blessed in the midst of prophesied latter-day tribulations (see D&C 63:34; 115:6).
