Richard O. Cowan, Answers to Your Questions About the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1996)

9

Spiritual and Temporal Matters

Doctrine and Covenants 88 through 96

The revelations recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 88 through 96 were given in 1832 and 1833. During this time the temporal concerns of the Church ranged from personal health (see D&C 89) to raising funds for the construction of sacred buildings in Kirtland (see D&C 94-96). At the same time the Lord sought to lift the Saints' thoughts to eternal spiritual matters. In the revelation recorded in section 88 he dealt with such topics as education, the Holy Spirit of promise, the last days, and the resurrection. Then, in section 93, he described how we can obtain a fulness of light and truth and be glorified even as he is.

Doctrine and Covenants 88

Why was this revelation called "the Olive Leaf"?

Doctrine and Covenants 88 was received when there had been contentions among some of the Latter-day Saints. Perhaps the Prophet hoped that the lofty concepts it contained might divert the Saints' thoughts from their insignificant passing differences to those great eternal truths that should unite them. In this way the "leaf . . . plucked from the Tree of Paradise" might truly become a "message of peace" and joy to the Church (Smith, History of the Church, 1:316).

Doctrine and Covenants 88:3-4

Why may the Holy Ghost be called "the Holy Spirit of promise"?

The Holy Ghost was the subject of an important promise the Savior made to his disciples just before his atoning sacrifice (see John 14:16-17, 26). The Spirit conveys to us the most significant promise we could hope to receive while in this life (see D&C 88:3-4). {See D&C 76:53.}

Doctrine and Covenants 88:14-16

Why is the resurrection "the redemption of the soul"?

Even though soul is often used as a synonym for spirit, Doctrine and Covenants 88:15 gives a more precise definition. The soul is actually composed of two elements: the spirit and the body. When the spirit and the body come together at mortal birth, the soul is created. Then, when they are parted by physical death, the soul is temporarily dissolved. The resurrection eventually reunites the spirit and the body, which never again will be separated (see Alma 11:45; 40:23). The resurrection is literally "the redemption of the soul."

Doctrine and Covenants 88:22

What exactly is the "celestial law"?

The celestial law spoken of in Doctrine and Covenants 88 includes the principles and ordinances of the gospel that prepare us to inherit celestial glory.

Doctrine and Covenants 88:25

How can such lifeless objects as our planet keep a celestial law?

Doctrine and Covenants 88:25 is not the only scripture that attributes lifelike actions to inanimate objects. Enoch learned that "the earth mourned" because of the sins of its inhabitants (see Moses 7:48-49), and the apostle Paul likewise declared that "the whole creation groaneth and travaileth" (Romans 8:22).

In 1909 the First Presidency explained that God also created lower forms of animal life "but He did not make them in His own image, nor endow them with Godlike reason and intelligence. Nevertheless, the whole animal creation will be perfected and perpetuated in the Hereafter, each class in its 'distinct order or sphere,' and will enjoy 'eternal felicity'" (Improvement Era, Jan. 1909, 81).

Elder John A. Widtsoe carried this concept further to include even inanimate objects: Joseph Smith suggested that "energy in the universe is a form of intelligence" not understood by man. "Some form of life resides in all matter, though of an order wholly different from the organized intelligence of men or higher living things. . . . Hence, everything in the universe is alive. The differences among rock, plant, beast, and man are due to the amount and organization of the life element" (Joseph Smith, 149-50). Elder Orson Pratt declared that there is "a degree of intelligence even in these materials. There does not seem to be any agency so far as we naturally comprehend it." If there is, "it seems to be very obedient" (in Journal of Discourses, 21:233). Nephi likewise acknowledged that natural objects obey God's commands but lamented that we are "even less than the dust of the earth" because of our frequent disobedience (see Helaman 12:8-17).

Doctrine and Covenants 88:27-32

What is the difference between celestial and other kinds of bodies?

All resurrected bodies will be physically perfect. Alma testified that "even a hair of the head shall not be lost; but all things shall be restored to their proper and perfect frame" (Alma 40:23; see also 11:44).

Nevertheless, our bodies will be suited for the degree of glory that we are qualified to inherit. If we have kept the celestial law, assured Elder Joseph Fielding Smith, "the Father has promised us that through our faithfulness we shall be blessed with the fulness of his kingdom. In other words we will have the privilege of becoming like him. To become like him we must have all the powers of godhood; thus a man and his wife when glorified will have spirit children" (Doctrines of Salvation, 2:48).

Doctrine and Covenants 88:34-35

Why does obedience to God's laws perfect and sanctify us?

Because we are God's children, our Father knows us perfectly and he understands what will bring us lasting happiness and joy. He knows the path we must follow and has given laws, or commandments, to help keep us on that path. The effect of his laws might be likened to a railroad track that follows the route surveyors previously determined to be the best course to a given destination. As long as the train stays on the rails, its forward motion is maintained; but if it jumps the track, its progress comes to a sudden halt.

Many in the world regard obedience to law as inhibiting or confining. The Lord, on the other hand, has equated righteousness with liberty and labeled sin as entangling (see D&C 88:86). Elder John A. Widtsoe testified: "Human experience forbids the thought that a settled purpose may be achieved under a hit or miss system. A progressive existence is derived from obedience to the laws of progress, and can be won in no other way. No candidate for salvation can escape obedience to the laws of progress which form the framework of the plan of salvation" (Program of the Church, 211).

Doctrine and Covenants 88:65

How can we avoid praying for the wrong things?

In the revelation in which the Savior outlined the gifts of the Spirit, he stated that the Holy Ghost can direct us to pray for the right things (see D&C 46:30; compare 50:30). "Therefore, we should not be too insistent" in demanding of the Father our own wishes, cautioned President Joseph Fielding Smith, "but should pray earnestly . . . to know the will of the Lord" (Church History and Modern Revelation, 1:371). If, like Nephi of old, we fearlessly and selflessly keep the commandments, the Lord might be able to give us the same remarkable promise made to him: "All things shall be done unto thee according to thy word, for thou shalt not ask that which is contrary to my will" (Helaman 10:4-5).

Doctrine and Covenants 88:76-80

Why is education important? What should we study? How?

Many in the world have justified obtaining education on the grounds that it enables us to earn higher incomes. The Lord, however, suggested a more lofty reason: that we might be better prepared to serve (see D&C 88:80). To this end he directed us to study a wide variety of subjects (compare v. 79 with 90:15 and 93:53). Nevertheless, Elder John A. Widtsoe acknowledged, "God does not require all His servants to become doctors, or professors, or even profound students of these subjects, but He expects them to know enough of these things to be able to magnify their calling as His ambassadors to the world" (Priesthood and Church Government, 55-56).

Our learning of these secular subjects, however, must be bathed in the light of the gospel. "Now, there's only one reason why this church is in the school business," asserted Elder Harold B. Lee. "We're not in the education field just to teach science and philosophy and athletics. We are in the educational world today because we want to teach the spiritual side along with the intellectual side, that when we have graduates from this institution [Brigham Young University], please God that they might come out with a degree in science, or philosophy, or languages, or whatnot, but still having faith in the living God" (Teachings of Harold B. Lee, 352).

The Lord put "the doctrine of the kingdom" first in his list of subjects we should study (D&C 88:77-78). President Brigham Young pointed out that "there are a great many branches of education: some go to college to learn languages, some to study law, some to study physic [medicine], and some to study astronomy, and various other branches of science. We want every branch of science taught in this place that is taught in the world. But our favourite study is that branch which particularly belongs to the Elders of Israel—namely, theology. Every Elder should become a profound theologian" (in Journal of Discourses, 6:317).

The Master instructed that we should learn "by study and also by faith" (D&C 88:76, 118). Regardless of what subject we are studying, we need to do all we can to gain an understanding of it and prepare ourselves to receive the additional insights available by revelation from our Father who knows all things. "The things of God cannot be learned solely by study and reason," Elder Dallin H. Oaks taught. "Despite their essential and beneficial uses, the methods of study and reason are insufficient as ways of approaching God and understanding the doctrines of his gospel" (Lord's Way, 56).

Doctrine and Covenants 88:93

What is the "great sign"?

"The sign of the coming of the Son of Man—what is it? We do not know," answered Elder Bruce R. McConkie (Millennial Messiah, 418). When that sign appears, Joseph Smith prophesied, the world "will say it is a planet, a comet, etc. But the Son of Man will come as the sign of the coming of the Son of Man, which will be as the light of the morning cometh out of the east" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 286).

In response to a report that a certain man had already seen this sign "in the clouds one morning about sunrise," the Prophet declared that it would not appear until after the calamities mentioned in Doctrine and Covenants 88:87 had occurred (History of the Church, 5:291). "When the sign appears, God will make its meaning known to the Prophet, Seer and Revelator who at that time may be at the head of the Church, and through him to His people and the world in general" (Smith and Sjodahl, Commentary, 560).

Doctrine and Covenants 88:97-102

Who are the various groups mentioned in these verses?

The "first fruits" of the resurrection mentioned in Doctrine and Covenants 88:97 and 98 are those worthy of the celestial kingdom. Those who receive the gospel in the spirit world and who are "Christ's at his coming" (v. 99) will inherit the terrestrial glory. Those described in verses 100 through 102 who are worthy only of the telestial kingdom or who became sons of perdition on earth will also appear to be judged, but they will not receive their resurrection until the end of the Millennium (Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, 1:369).

Doctrine and Covenants 88:118

What are the "best books"?

Certainly "the best books" include the standard works, but they also include much more. {See D&C 88:76-80.} Elder Richard L. Evans counseled, "Never become narrowly educated, but broadly so, feeding all sides of yourselves, reading and becoming acquainted with good books, with great minds and great men of the past; becoming acquainted with scripture and reading scripture itself" (in Conference Report, Apr. 1961, 75).

Doctrine and Covenants 88:119

What is the "house" referred to here?

In Doctrine and Covenants 88:127 the Lord clarified that in this passage he was speaking of a place where the school of the prophets should meet. Three years later, when the Kirtland Temple was completed, the instructions in this verse were applied to the temple (see D&C 109:6-10). We could well strive to live in such a way that the qualities listed in Doctrine and Covenants 88:119 might also more fully characterize our own homes.

Doctrine and Covenants 88:121

Is it really wrong to laugh?

The Lord has directed us to live the gospel and keep his commandments "with a glad heart and a cheerful countenance" (D&C 59:15; compare 19:39; 123:17; Proverbs 15:13; Revelation 19:7). Nevertheless, he cautioned us to do these things without "idle thoughts" or "excess of laughter" (D&C 88:69). The instructions in Doctrine and Covenants 88 were given as part of the Lord's directive to hold "solemn assemblies." In such sacred gatherings boisterous laughter is not appropriate.

"I do not believe the Lord intends and desires that we should pull a long face and look sanctimonious and hypocritical," counseled Elder Joseph Fielding Smith (in Conference Report, Oct. 1916, 70). Nevertheless, he declared, "amusement, laughter, [and] light-mindedness, are all out of place in the sacrament meetings of the Latter-day Saints" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1929, 62).

Doctrine and Covenants 89:1-2

Isn't the Word of Wisdom binding on Church members?

The introductory verses of Doctrine and Covenants 89 indicate that this revelation was to be sent out "not by commandment or constraint" (v. 2). "The reason undoubtedly why the Word of Wisdom was given as not by 'commandment or restraint,'" suggested President Joseph F. Smith, "was that at that time, at least, if it had been given as a commandment it would have brought every man, addicted to the use of these noxious things, under condemnation; so the Lord was merciful and gave them a chance to overcome, before He brought them under the law" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1913, 14). Nevertheless, "when members of the Church had had time to be taught the import of the revelation," noted President Boyd K. Packer, "succeeding Presidents of the Church declared it to be a commandment. And it was accepted by the Church as such" (Ensign, May 1996, 17).

Still, section 89 had always identified the "Word of Wisdom as a "revelation . . . showing forth the order and will of God" (v. 2). A few months earlier, the Master had decreed: "And now I give unto you a commandment . . . to give diligent heed to the words of eternal life. For you shall live by every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth of God" (D&C 84:43-44). There seems to be little practical distinction between a "commandment" and a revelation of God's will. Furthermore, the Lord explained that he was giving this revelation "for the benefit" of the Saints, describing it as a "principle with promise" (D&C 89:1, 3). The concluding verses of section 89 outline the beneficial results promised to those who faithfully observe the principles in this revelation.

"It isn't unusual—indeed, it is expected," observed Elder Richard L. Evans, "that the maker of any machine should send a set of instructions on how best to use it, how best to care for it; and this our Father in heaven has done for us, mentally, morally, physically, spiritually. In the gospel are instructions from our Maker on how to care for and keep ourselves at our best for the purpose for which we were brought into being.

"As to the physical side: More than a century ago, a prophet of God simply said that some things are not good for man. Now, knowledgeable and intelligent men of science and medicine also say so. . . .

"Some say there is no moral question on how we physically live our lives. But isn't it a moral question to abuse what God has given? And what a waste to abuse any useful creation of any kind. If someone were to give us a finely working watch, wouldn't it be foolish, indeed irrational, to put into it that which would corrode and defeat its purpose?

"We have only one body. It is irreplaceable, indispensable, sacred. It has to last a mortal lifetime. With it and the spirit within, we think, we plan, we work, we feel, we live our mortal lives.

"It is a miracle and most amazing: the housing for the spirit, the mind, the intelligence of man; the instrument through which we think and plan and pursue life's purpose.

"Don't dissipate it; don't impair any part of it. Keep it clean and functioning. Don't quibble about words, about what is counsel and what is commandment" (in Conference Report, Apr. 1967, 9-10).

Doctrine and Covenants 89:2

Isn't the Word of Wisdom a "spiritual" commandment?

Obviously, refraining from the use of liquor, tobacco, and other harmful substances has temporal benefits. Still, the Lord has declared that he has never given a law which is "temporal" only; hence, the Word of Wisdom is essentially spiritual. {See D&C 29:34.}

Doctrine and Covenants 89:9

Which "hot drinks" should we avoid?

The Prophet Joseph Smith declared that "tea and coffee are what the Lord meant when he said 'hot drinks'" (in Widtsoe and Widtsoe, Word of Wisdom, 85-86). The Lord has described as "slothful" servants those who wait to be "commanded in all things" (D&C 58:26). We could well seek to identify other harmful substances we should avoid. Concerning cola drinks, for example, Bishop Vaughn J. Featherstone reminded us: "The leaders of the Church have advised, and we do now specifically advise, against use of any drink containing harmful habit-forming drugs" (in Conference Report, Apr. 1975, 102).

"Members write in asking if this thing or that is against the Word of Wisdom," observed President Boyd K. Packer. "It's well known that tea, coffee, liquor, and tobacco are against it. It has not been spelled out in more detail. Rather, we teach the principle together with the promised blessings. There are many habit-forming, addictive things that one can drink or chew or inhale or inject which injure both body and spirit which are not mentioned in the revelation" (Ensign, May 1996, 17).

We should be cautious in sharing our own conclusions and opinions with others. Only the prophet has the stewardship to define what is or is not against the Word of Wisdom.

Doctrine and Covenants 89:13

Should we eat meat?

In an earlier revelation, the Lord declared that "the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air, and that which cometh of the earth, is ordained for the use of man for food and for raiment" (D&C 49:19). Doctrine and Covenants 89:12-15 clarified that meat should be eaten only sparingly. This counsel is consistent with recent research that has raised concerns about too much cholesterol and fat in our diets.

Doctrine and Covenants 90:6

Who holds keys, and what are they?

"Keys" are the right to preside and the power to direct in the Lord's work. Stake presidents, bishops, and elders quorum presidents—but not their counselors—hold keys. Each member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles receives all the keys, which are held "in suspension, pending a time when he might become the senior apostle and the President" (Spencer W. Kimball, in Conference Report, Apr. 1970, 118). The president of the Church is the only one who is authorized to exercise the keys in full (see D&C 132:7). The revelation in Doctrine and Covenants 90 explains that counselors in the First Presidency share to an extent in holding the keys, but they are still subject to the administration and direction of the prophet (see vv. 6-9).

Doctrine and Covenants 90:25

What is the meaning of the counsel to "let your families be small"?

The counsel to "let your families be small" has nothing to do with limiting the number of children, because the Lord was speaking of "those who do not belong to your families." The Lord in particular addressed his "aged servant," Joseph Smith Sr., who was sixty-one years old, well beyond the usual age of having children. In addition, the term family had been used among Sidney Rigdon's Campbellite congregation to mean a cooperative group consisting of several conventional families.

The practice had developed among the Saints to extend hospitality to the numerous visitors and newcomers arriving in Kirtland. Doctrine and Covenants 90:26 specifically warned them not to dissipate their goods on "those that are not worthy," who might take advantage of such hospitality.

Doctrine and Covenants 91

How can we apply the Lord's instructions about the Apocrypha?

The Apocrypha is a collection of fourteen books included in the Catholic Bible but not in most Protestant Bibles. Those books help bridge the four-hundred-year gap between the Old and New Testaments. The Lord declared that the Apocrypha contains many things that are true along with many other things which are not (see D&C 91:1-2). Because that description may be applied to almost every nonscriptural work we may read, we may profit generally from the Lord's admonition to read with the discerning power of his Spirit (see vv. 4-5).

Doctrine and Covenants 92:2

How can we be "lively" members?

A dictionary published about the time this revelation was received defines lively as "vigorous, active, strong, or energetic" (Webster, American Dictionary). Those are qualities all of us should take into our Church assignments. To increase our effect for good, we should take to heart such counsel as "let your light so shine" (Matthew 5:16), "be anxiously engaged" (D&C 58:27), "magnify" your calling (D&C 84:33), and so on.

Doctrine and Covenants 93:1

What is our responsibility to seek this extraordinary blessing?

The exalted blessing of seeing God's face may come to us in this mortal life or it may be realized after death. {See D&C 67:10.} "I have learned," gratefully acknowledged President Spencer W. Kimball, "that where there is a prayerful heart, a hungering after righteousness, a forsaking of sins, and obedience to the commandments of God, the Lord pours out more and more light until there is finally power to pierce the heavenly veil and to know more than man knows. A person of such righteousness has the priceless promise that one day he shall see the Lord's face and know that he is" (Ensign, Mar. 1980, 4).

Doctrine and Covenants 93:6-18

Is this the record of John the Baptist or of John the Apostle?

In the opening chapter of his gospel, John the Apostle bore witness of Christ's glorious role since the beginning (see John 1:1-14). He also quoted the testimony or "record" of John the Baptist (John 1:15, 19-34). Doctrine and Covenants 93 seems to be quoting from both John the Apostle (see vv. 8-10) and from John the Baptist (see vv. 15-16).

Doctrine and Covenants 93:12-13,

How do we receive "grace for grace" and then continue "from grace to grace"?

John testified that we have received of God's fulness "grace for grace" (John 1:16). That phrase may have several meanings. The dictionary in the LDS edition of the Bible defines grace as "divine means of help or strength." Perhaps John means that we receive this help "for," or because of, God's goodness and power. The Jerusalem Bible's translation states that "we have, all of us, received—one gift replacing another," the gospel of Christ replacing the law of Moses (p. 1243). The New International Version translates this message in John as, "We have all received one blessing after another" (p. 1593).

Latter-day Saint scholar Richard Draper has suggested another possibility. "To receive grace for grace is to receive assistance on the condition of giving assistance.

"Apparently, it was necessary for the Lord to grow through this process. In order to do so, he first received grace, or divine assistance from the Father. This grace he extended to his brethren. As he did so he received even more grace. The process continued until he eventually received a fulness of the glory of the Father" ("Light, Truth, and Grace," 37-38).

Significantly, we too must receive "grace for grace" (D&C 93:20). Once we have begun receiving God's gifts, our challenge is to ascend "from grace to grace," or from one gift to another. Through continued righteousness we progress from one level of holiness to another until we receive a fulness of Godlike attributes.

Doctrine and Covenants 93:29-33

What is the ultimate source of our agency?

Some theologians have insisted that God created all things ex nihilo (out of nothing). That would make him totally responsible for everything that exists—both good and evil. Doctrine and Covenants 93, however, affirms that the physical "elements are eternal" and that intelligence "is independent in that sphere in which God has placed it, to act for itself." Man likewise "was not created or made" and so is also eternal. Hence both matter and our intelligence have had an eternal, independent, existence. "Behold," declared the Lord, "here is the agency of man" (D&C 93:31).

Our Father's plan was based on our inherent agency. "The Lord gave to man his free agency in the pre-existence," testified President Joseph Fielding Smith. "This great gift of agency, that is the privilege given to man to make his own choice, has never been revoked, and it never will be" (Answers to Gospel Questions, 2:20). With agency comes responsibility and accountability. If we misuse it, we come "under condemnation" (D&C 93:32). If, on the other hand, we take advantage of its opportunities, our potential is limitless.

Doctrine and Covenants 93:36

What is the meaning of the often-quoted phrase "the glory of God is intelligence"?

Some have assumed that this phrase refers only to gaining an education. For Latter-day Saints, however, the word intelligence may have two distinct meanings: (1) academic ability or mental capacity, and (2) that part of our being that has existed from the beginning. The context of this scripture suggests that it refers to the second of these meanings. Notice how Doctrine and Covenants 93:36 equates God's glory with "light and truth," and verse 29 indicates that these were attributes of man "in the beginning." In other words, we had the same qualities that constitute God's glory, but we had them in only a small degree whereas he has them in full. The essential message of section 93 is that by keeping God's commandments we can receive "truth and light" until we have them in full and are glorified (vv. 20, 28). On the other hand, we are cautioned that Satan "taketh away light and truth through disobedience" (v. 39).

Even though this revelation describes a broad process of spiritual growth, seeking learning has an important part in the process. "Truth," one of the key attributes of God's glory, is defined as a "knowledge of things as they are and as they were, and as they are to come" (v. 24). In an earlier revelation the Master directed us to "seek learning, even by study and also by faith" (D&C 88:118). {See D&C 88:76-80; 88:118.} A later revelation emphasizes that "if a person gains more knowledge and intelligence in this life through his diligence and obedience than another, he will have so much the advantage in the world to come" (D&C 130:19).

Elder John A. Widtsoe distinguished between intelligence and mere learning. "It often happens that a person of limited knowledge but who earnestly and prayerfully obeys the law, rises to a higher intelligence or wisdom, than one of vast Gospel learning who does not comply in his daily life with the requirements of the Gospel. Obedience to law is a mark of intelligence" (in Conference Report, Apr. 1938, 50).

Doctrine and Covenants 94:3-9

What was the "house for the presidency"? Was it the Kirtland Temple?

At the heart of the city of Kirtland were to be the temple and two other sacred buildings. On the first lot south of the temple was to be a house for the presidency, and on the second lot was to be a house for the publication of God's word (see D&C 94:3, 10). All three of these buildings were to have the same dimensions (compare vv. 4, 11 with 95:15).

The latter two structures—the buildings for the presidency and the press—were not to be built until the Lord gave further instruction (see D&C 94:16). This direction was not given before the Saints were forced to flee from Kirtland. On the other hand, less than a month after Doctrine and Covenants 94 had been received, the Lord did give further instruction concerning the design and building of his temple (see D&C 95:8-17). Within a few weeks of these revelations the Prophet drew up his plat for the city of Zion, in which he called for not three but twenty-four sacred structures to serve as "houses of worship, schools, etc." at the city's center (History of the Church, 1:358).

Doctrine and Covenants 95:7

Who is the "Lord of Sabaoth"?

Sabaoth is the plural form of the Hebrew word Sabah, meaning "hosts or armies." The phrase "Lord of Sabaoth" emphasizes the power and majesty of the Lord Jesus Christ. This verse highlights his role as the Creator.

Perhaps the reason Sabaoth is not translated is that this title is used similarly to the way it was employed in two biblical passages that use this term in reference to Christ's role as judge. Compare Doctrine and Covenants 87:8; 88:2; and 95:7 with Romans 9:29 and James 5:4.
