Richard O. Cowan, Answers to Your Questions About the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1996)

10

Years of Trial and Triumph

Doctrine and Covenants 97 through 112

The difficulties the Saints experienced during the summer of 1833 culminated that fall in their being driven from their homes in Jackson County, Missouri. The next summer an expedition of more than two hundred men from Ohio and nearby areas failed to help their brethren regain their lost property. Nevertheless, great strides forward were taken with the organization of the first Quorum of the Twelve Apostles and the dedication of the Kirtland Temple. With keys restored at the Kirtland Temple, the Twelve opened the Church's first overseas mission in England. Doctrine and Covenants 97 through 112 records the revelations received between 1833 and 1837.

Doctrine and Covenants 98:16

Does the Lord's command to "renounce war" mean we should become pacifists?

Pacifism is the opposition to the use of force under any circumstances. A pacifist therefore refuses for reasons of conscience to participate in any kind of military action. In Doctrine and Covenants 98, in which the Lord commands us to "renounce war," he indicates there are circumstances in which we are justified in going to war (see vv. 33-36). The Nephites were instructed anciently that they should not start wars for selfish gain but to fight "even to the shedding of blood if it were necessary" in defense of their homes, their freedoms, and their religion (Alma 48:14; see also 43:45-47).

Only a few weeks after the outbreak of World War II, the First Presidency reminded the Church that we must obey constitutional law (see D&C 98:4-7): "When, therefore, constitutional law, obedient to these principles, calls the manhood of the Church into the armed service of any country to which they owe allegiance, their highest civic duty requires that they meet that call. If, harkening to that call and obeying those in command over them, they shall take the lives of those who fight against them, that will not make of them murderers, nor subject them to the penalty that God has prescribed for those who kill. . . . For it would be a cruel God that would punish His children as moral sinners for acts done by them as the innocent instrumentalities of a sovereign whom He had told them to obey and whose will they were powerless to resist" (in Conference Report, Apr. 1942, 94-95).

Doctrine and Covenants 98:23-48

How many times are we expected to forgive?

The Savior instructed Peter that he should forgive those who offended him "seventy times seven" (Matthew 18:21-22). Latter-day Saint scholar Sidney B. Sperry pointed out: "The Master's answer to Peter, uttered in the form of common Oriental overstatement, did not mean that one was to forgive his brother exactly four hundred and ninety times. The spirit of it was that a man should have a lot of forgiveness in his heart" (Doctrine and Covenants Compendium, 500). A latter-day revelation tells us that we should forgive always (see D&C 64:9-10). {See D&C 64:9-10.}

A superficial reading of Doctrine and Covenants 98, however, may give the impression that we are expected to forgive only three times. Verses 23 through 27 require that we forgive our enemies at least three times and emphasize that we should do so "patiently." If our enemy comes against us a fourth time, he is in our hands; but, even then, "if thou wilt spare him, thou shalt be rewarded for thy righteousness" (v. 30). Such forbearance would give offenders time to reconsider their actions and perhaps repent.

This revelation was given to the Saints at the time they were being violently driven from Jackson County, Missouri. Even though they would be blessed for maintaining an attitude of forgiveness, they were not expected to stand by without seeking to defend themselves. "If [thine enemy] has sought thy life, and thy life is endangered by him, thine enemy is in thine hands and thou art justified" (v. 31). Still, "the Lord counselled the Saints to seek redress, not revenge" (Otten and Caldwell, Sacred Truths, 2:167).

In the revelation in Doctrine and Covenants 98, the Lord likewise admonishes all of us not to limit the number of times we are willing to work with transgressors even when they are not seeking forgiveness (see vv. 39-45). When action must be taken against the unrepentant, it should be done in the Lord's way (see v. 44; compare 42:88-92).

Doctrine and Covenants 101:2-6

What caused the Saints' difficulties?

Historians have pointed out that there were various sources of tension between the Mormons and other Missourians, including the following: the Saints were often abolitionists from the North whereas other residents of Jackson County were slaveholders from the South; most Missourians considered faith in continuing revelation through a living prophet to be strange; and the Mormons patronized their own businesses and boasted that Jackson County was to become their Zion, and so forth.

There may be truth in such explanations, but the Lord pinpointed quite a different reason for the difficulties: the Saints themselves were guilty of transgressions, disunity, lustfulness, greed; and they were slow to hearken to the Lord (see D&C 101:2-6; 103:4; 105:3-4). These deficiencies were in marked contrast to the qualities required of those who would build Zion: they must be "of one heart and one mind" and dwell "in righteousness" (Moses 7:18), and they must also be pure in heart (see D&C 97:21). Hence, the Saints needed to be chastened to help them become worthy.

Doctrine and Covenants 101:20-21

Has this shift in the pattern of gathering taken place?

The Lord indicates in Doctrine and Covenants 101 that the gathering of his Saints is an important part of their preparation for his coming in glory. As anticipated in verses 20 and 21, the emphasis in the Church has shifted to establishing stakes where the Saints are living rather than gathering the Saints into just one place. This change came with the dawning of the twentieth century. {See D&C 29:7-8.}

Doctrine and Covenants 101:24-34

When will these wonderful conditions come to pass?

Doctrine and Covenants 101:24-34 is one of the best descriptions anywhere in scripture of the conditions that will prevail during the Millennium. Verses 24 and 25 refer to the time when "the earth will be renewed and receive its paradisiacal glory" (Article of Faith 10) and when those who are not worthy to live in this condition will be burned as stubble (see Malachi 4:1). {See D&C 63:20-21.} The peaceful conditions spoken of in Doctrine and Covenants 101:26 were beautifully described by Isaiah (see Isaiah 11:6-9). Because of the people's righteousness, the Lord makes the same promise to them that he made to Nephi of old (compare v. 27 with Helaman 10:4-5).

Doctrine and Covenants 101:28 testifies that Satan will be bound (compare Revelation 20:2-3). We have been taught that he will be bound because of the righteousness of the people and because Christ will reign in their midst (see 1 Nephi 22:26).

Doctrine and Covenants 101:29-31 explains that even though people will die during the Millennium, there will not be death as we know it. All will live until they are old (compare Isaiah 65:20-22 and D&C 63:50) and then not be buried in the ground but rather be "changed in the twinkling of an eye" from mortality to immortality. This promise is comparable to that given to those who become translated beings. {See D&C 7:2.}

Finally, Doctrine and Covenants 101:32-34 promises that the Lord "will reveal all things," including even how the earth was created. Knowing that this marvelous revelation is coming, we should now be patient and refrain from counterproductive speculation on such matters.

Doctrine and Covenants 102

What is the purpose of Church courts?

Elder Robert L. Simpson explained the purpose of Church courts, now called disciplinary councils: "Priesthood courts of the Church are not courts of retribution. They are courts of love." Their purpose is to help the transgressor to take "the first giant step back" (in Conference Report, Apr. 1972, 32, 33).

A second purpose of these councils is to protect the Church and its members. Those who would corrupt others by promoting false doctrines or sinful conduct may need to be removed from Church membership. To preserve its good name, the Church sometimes must take action against transgressors, particularly when their misdeeds have received widespread attention.

There are three principal disciplinary councils in the Church. First, at the ward level, the bishop and his counselors form the council having original jurisdiction in most cases. Second, the stake presidency and the high council may consider appeals from the bishop's court or they may initiate action in certain cases. Doctrine and Covenants 102:1-23 outlines how this judicial body is to function. Third, the First Presidency constitutes the earthly tribunal of final appeal. There are also special disciplinary councils in missions and others to meet unique circumstances (see D&C 102:24-34).

Church discipline has several forms. Probation may involve some restrictions in Church activity. Disfellowshipment means that the individual cannot hold a calling or be invited to pray or speak in meetings but is encouraged to attend. Excommunication is the ultimate penalty in which a person loses membership in the Church together with all priesthood and temple blessings; following thorough repentance the individual may be readmitted to the Church through rebaptism. In all cases the individual is encouraged to repent, and the Church reaches out to help in this process.

Doctrine and Covenants 103

What was the response to this call?

The Missouri Saints' difficulties culminated with their being driven out of Jackson County during the late fall of 1833. In February of the following year this revelation called for up to five hundred volunteers to help restore the refugees to their homes, and recruiting efforts were launched for what became known as "Zion's Camp." That group began its long march from New Portage, Ohio, on 8 May 1834. After it crossed the Mississippi River its numerical strength peaked at "207 men, 11 women, 11 children, and 25 baggage wagons" (Church History in the Fulness of Times, 143). By the time Zion's Camp reached Missouri, both Church leaders and the state's governor concluded that conditions were not favorable for calling out the militia to assist the Saints in returning to their lands in Jackson County.

Though the avowed purpose of the camp was not realized, "it was definitely not an exercise in futility, but rather served as the forge in which the Lord tempered the steel of many of his early leaders" (Doctrine and Covenants Student Manual, 258). Many future Church leaders demonstrated their faith and devotion to the cause of Zion during this difficult march. For several weeks, the Prophet personally instructed these men as they camped and marched together. Nine of the original Twelve Apostles and all of the original Quorum of Seventy were chosen from among those who had responded to the call to join Zion's Camp. Furthermore, this lengthy cross-country trek provided valuable experience to Church leaders who a dozen years later would have to direct the forced evacuation of men, women, and children from Nauvoo under much more difficult circumstances.

Doctrine and Covenants 105:31

How is the Lord's "army" measuring up?

Before Zion can be established, the Lord's "army," or Church, must have the necessary strength in numbers and in quality. The Church's worldwide growth means that it is rapidly becoming very great. {See D&C 65:2-6.} But just how many members the Lord requires has not been revealed, but the larger the Church grows, the closer it approaches the needed level.

To be "sanctified," the quality the Lord requires for his army, means being holy and worthy in every way. Because sanctification is a personal process, it is difficult to measure. Nevertheless, increased attendance at meetings, paying of tithes, and temple activity do reflect a person's greater faithfulness.

Doctrine and Covenants 107:19

What are "the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven"?

As he had done in his other great revelation on priesthood, the Lord again affirmed that the higher priesthood holds "the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God." {See D&C 84:19-22.}

Doctrine and Covenants 107:22

By what "body" is the First Presidency chosen?

President Harold B. Lee explained that "body" in Doctrine and Covenants 107:22 "has been interpreted to mean the entire Quorum of the Twelve" (Teachings of Harold B. Lee, 535). After the death of a prophet, the apostles meet fasting in the Salt Lake Temple and prayerfully consider who should become the new president of the Church. Since the martyrdom of Joseph Smith, the Quorum of the Twelve has consistently followed the pattern of nominating the senior apostle, the one who has served for the longest continuous time in the Quorum of the Twelve.

Doctrine and Covenants 107:22-26

How can the First Presidency, the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, and the Seventy be "equal in authority"?

The members of the First Presidency hold all the keys and direct the affairs of all other quorums and the Lord's kingdom throughout the world. The Quorum of the Twelve Apostles also holds the keys but functions "under the direction of the Presidency of the Church" (D&C 107:33).

"I want here to correct an impression that has grown up to some extent among the people," taught President Joseph F. Smith, "and that is, that the Twelve Apostles possess equal authority with the First Presidency in the Church. This is correct when there is no other Presidency but the Twelve Apostles; but so long as there are three presiding Elders who possess the presiding authority in the Church, the authority of the Twelve Apostles is not equal to theirs. If it were so, there would be two equal authorities and two equal quorums in the Priesthood, running parallel, and that could not be, because there must be a head" (Elders Journal, 1 Nov. 1906, 43).

Similarly, the Seventy function "under the direction of the Twelve" (D&C 107:34). They would become "equal in authority" only if both the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve were dissolved.

Doctrine and Covenants 107:23

What does it mean to be a "special witness"?

President Joseph Fielding Smith observed: "The question frequently arises, 'Is it necessary for the members of the Council of the Twelve to see the Savior in order to be an apostle?' It is their privilege to see him if occasion requires, but the Lord has taught that there is a stronger witness than seeing a personage. . . .

" . . . seeing, even the Savior, does not leave as deep an impression in the mind as does the testimony of the Holy Ghost to the spirit . . .

" . . . It is where Spirit speaks to spirit, and the imprint upon the soul is far more difficult to erase" (in Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants, 4:28-29).

Elder Boyd K. Packer likewise recalled: "Occasionally during the past year I have been asked a . . . curious, almost an idle, question about the qualifications to stand as a witness for Christ. The question they ask is, 'Have you seen Him?'

"I have not asked that question of others, but I have heard them answer it—but not when they were asked. They have answered it under the prompting of the Spirit, on sacred occasions, when 'the Spirit beareth record.' (D&C 1:39.)

"I have heard another testify: 'I know that God lives; I know that the Lord lives. And more than that, I know the Lord'" (in Conference Report, Apr. 1971, 123-24).

Not only is seeing the Lord in person unnecessary to being a special witness but it is also insufficient. Elder Dallin H. Oaks pointed out that even though the early apostles had personally associated with the Savior, "he cautioned them that their witnessing would be after they had received the Holy Ghost (see Acts 1:8; see also Luke 24:49).

"An eye witness was not enough. Even the witness and testimony of the original Apostles had to be rooted in the testimony of the Holy Ghost" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1990, 36).

Although the Twelve were described as "special witnesses" (D&C 107:23), the seventy were to be "especial witnesses" (v. 25). Special and especial are synonymous, and so no distinction is intended.

Doctrine and Covenants 107:36-37

In what sense are stake high councils "equal in authority" to the First Presidency and the Twelve?

Just as the Quorum of the Twelve functions under the direction of the First Presidency and the Seventy under the Twelve, so do stake leaders function under the direction of these General Authorities. The stake presidency and high council are charged to give spiritual leadership in their stake as do the presiding quorums for the whole Church.

On 3 July 1834, after organizing the Church's second high council in Zion (Missouri), the Prophet Joseph Smith instructed that through this council "the will of the Lord might be known on all important occasions, in the building up of Zion, and establishing truth in the earth" (History of the Church, 2:124).

This responsibility of the high council in Zion is carried out today by more than two thousand standing high councils in their respective stakes of Zion. {See D&C 124:133-40.}

Doctrine and Covenants 107:39

What are "evangelical ministers"?

"I am not sure that I know precisely why the words 'evangelical ministers' were used rather than the word 'patriarchs,'" said Elder Joseph Fielding Smith. "It seems, however, significant to me that the term here used suggests very definitely the spiritual nature of the patriarchal office" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1944, 110).

The word evangel means "gospel"; hence, an evangelist is one who proclaims the gospel. In a very real sense, patriarchal blessings are personal revelations of the gospel, emphasizing particular promises, cautions, and admonitions relevant to the individual recipient. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught: "An Evangelist is a Patriarch, even the oldest man of the blood of Joseph or of the seed of Abraham. Wherever the Church of Christ is established in the earth, there should be a Patriarch for the benefit of the posterity of the Saints, as it was with Jacob in giving his patriarchal blessing unto his sons, etc." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 151).

Doctrine and Covenants 107:41-43

Why is the priesthood lineage here traced through Seth rather than through Abel as it is in Doctrine and Covenants 84:16?

The two lineages serve different purposes. Here the emphasis is on who personally conferred the priesthood. {See D&C 84:16.}

Doctrine and Covenants 107:58

To what other revelation was the Lord referring?

A manuscript copy of a revelation dated November 1831 corresponds to Doctrine and Covenants 107:59-107, which seems to be the earlier revelation to which the Lord refers in verse 58. The references between verses 61 and 88 to literal descendants of Aaron and the bishopric and the material in verses 93 through 98 on the Seventy were added when this earlier revelation was merged into section 107 (Woodford, Historical Development of the Doctrine and Covenants, 1403). This means that the material on the duties of quorum presidencies was known as early as 1831, rather than 1835.

Doctrine and Covenants 107:93

What is the vision concerning the Seventy?

The precise content of this vision is not known, but it may have been alluded to in a history of the Seventy written by Joseph Young, the first senior president of that quorum. On Sunday, 8 February 1835, the Prophet Joseph Smith invited Brigham and Joseph Young to meet with him privately. After describing a vision "of the state and condition of those men who died in Zion's Camp, in Missouri," the Prophet instructed Brigham Young to have the brethren assemble the following Saturday when he would "appoint twelve special witnesses, to open the door of the gospel to foreign nations," indicating that Brigham would be one of them.

"He then turned to Elder Joseph Young with quite an earnestness, as though the vision of his mind was extended still further, and addressing him, said: 'Brother Joseph, the Lord has made you President of the Seventies'" (Young, History of the Organization of the Seventies, 1-2). The Quorum of the Twelve Apostles was organized on 14 February 1835, and the Seventy were chosen two weeks later.

Doctrine and Covenants 109:34

To whom was this prayer addressed?

The Savior taught that we should pray to the Father in his name (see John 16:23; 3 Nephi 18:19-20). Nevertheless, when Jesus was standing in the midst of his disciples, they appropriately "prayed," or addressed their praises, directly to him (see 3 Nephi 19:18).

The dedication of the Kirtland Temple was another such special situation. The revealed dedicatory prayer formally followed the usual pattern: "Now we ask thee, Holy Father, in the name of Jesus Christ . . ." (D&C 109:4). Still, verse 34 seems to be addressing the Lord Jesus Christ, to whom the house was being dedicated.

Elder Bruce R. McConkie suggested a slightly different interpretation: "We pray to the Father, and because our answers come from Jehovah, we sometimes give forth accolades of praise to him, in the language of prayer, which those untutored in the things of the Spirit might mistakenly interpret to be prayers to the Son and not the Father" (Promised Messiah, 337).

Doctrine and Covenants 109:79-80

To what exultant "shout" do these verses refer?

The sacred Hosanna Shout has been part of every temple dedication. The entire congregation stands and three times joyously shouts "Hosanna, Hosanna, Hosanna, to God and the Lamb! Amen, Amen, and Amen." These words are reflected in Doctrine and Covenants 109:79-80 as well as in William W. Phelps' hymn "The Spirit of God." Like the "Hosanna Shout" itself, this great hymn, written in anticipation of the Kirtland Temple's dedication, has been part of every temple dedication since.

Hosanna is the Hebrew for "save, we pray." In ancient times the shout was often rendered out of doors, accompanied with the waving of leafy branches from trees. One such occasion was Christ's triumphal entry into Jerusalem when throngs went out to meet him shouting "Hosanna!" and waving palm fronds (see John 12:12-13). Interestingly, the Kirtland Temple was dedicated on Palm Sunday, 27 March 1836, so the "Hosanna Shout" was given for the first time in this dispensation on the very day when Christians around the world were commemorating that ancient shout of "Hosanna!"

Doctrine and Covenants 110:11

How have the keys of gathering been exercised in the present dispensation?

On 3 April 1836 Moses bestowed "the keys of the gathering of Israel from the four parts of the earth" (D&C 110:11). Since that time Latter-day Saint missionaries have carried the gospel around the world, and the receptive descendants of Israel have been gathered into the Lord's Church. The first overseas mission, in Great Britain, was opened in 1837, the year after Moses' appearance. The Jews began their return to the Holy Land in the mid-nineteenth century, and in 1948 they organized the nation of Israel.

Moses also conferred the power to lead "the ten tribes from the land of the north." This grand event (see Jeremiah 16:14-15), which will closely precede the Lord's second coming, is still future.

Doctrine and Covenants 110:12

Who was Elias, and what authority did he restore?

"What prophet this Elias is that was sent to restore these keys is not definitely known," acknowledged President Joseph Fielding Smith (Church History and Modern Revelation, 2:49). The title Elias designates a forerunner commissioned to prepare the way, and it has been applied to several forerunners, most notably John the Baptist (see Luke 1:17; Matthew 17:11-13). The Elias who appeared in the Kirtland Temple restored "the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham" (D&C 110:12), so he likely lived in the days of that great prophet. Some have speculated that he was Melchizedek, but President Joseph Fielding Smith believed he was Noah. Joseph Smith taught that Noah was Gabriel, who stood second only to Adam in holding priesthood keys (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 157). Gabriel was the messenger who appeared to Zacharias (see Luke 1:5-17) and who was identified in a latter-day revelation (see D&C 27:7) as Elias. Thus Noah is Gabriel who is Elias. Concluded President Smith, "This is the same Elias who held the keys of the dispensation of Abraham and who came to the Prophet Joseph Smith" in 1836 and restored those keys (Answers to Gospel Questions, 3:139-40). Noah lived just before Abraham's day and so would have been a fitting forerunner, or Elias, to the glorious Abrahamic dispensation.

The authority brought by Elias is described as "the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham" with the promise that "in us and our seed all generations after us should be blessed" (D&C 110:12). This promise is similar to the promise the Lord made to Abraham that through him "shall all the families of the earth be blessed, even with the blessings of the Gospel, which are the blessings of salvation, even of life eternal" (Abraham 2:11). The precise nature and extent of the keys bestowed by Elias are yet to be made known.

Doctrine and Covenants 110:13-16

Why was Elijah chosen to restore certain keys? How have they turned the hearts of the children to their fathers?

The sealing keys restored by Elijah are the power by which actions performed on earth will be "bound," or recognized, in heaven (Matthew 16:19). During his earthly ministry Elijah exercised priesthood powers to a remarkable degree—including sealing the heavens so that no rain would fall, multiplying the widow's meal and oil, restoring her son from death to life, and calling down fire from heaven (see 1 Kings 17-18)—and he was taken into heaven without tasting death (see 2 Kings 2). Joseph Smith taught that "Elijah was the last Prophet that held the keys of the priesthood" before the meridian of time (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 172).

The restoration of the sealing keys was "to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers" (D&C 110:15; compare Malachi 4:5-6 and D&C 2:2). Before the coming of Elijah in 1836, said Elder Joseph Fielding Smith, "there was no endeavor of any import to search the records of the dead. . . . There were no organizations or societies on the face of the earth, as far as I can learn, gathering records of the dead, before the year 1836. In 1837, however, one year later, Great Britain passed laws providing for and compelling the preservation of records of the dead. In the year 1844, the New England Historical and Genealogical Society was organized in Boston, and I think this was the first organization of the kind in the world. . . . The Spirit has taken hold of the people, not only in the Church but also of many who are not of the Church, and they, too, are searching the records, and compiling them" (in Conference Report, Apr. 1948, 133).
