Richard O. Cowan, Answers to Your Questions About the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1996)

11

Exiles in Northern Missouri

Doctrine and Covenants 113 through 123

The Saints faced opposition both in Missouri and in Ohio. Difficulties in Kirtland culminated with Joseph Smith and other faithful Saints fleeing for their lives early in 1838. By spring that year they had joined the exiles from Jackson and Clay Counties and began establishing Far West and other settlements in northern Missouri. Unfortunately, the break from persecution did not last very long. On 27 October 1838 Missouri governor Lilburn Boggs ordered that the Saints be exterminated or driven from the state. The Haun's Mill Massacre and Joseph Smith's arrest followed within a few days. Doctrine and Covenants 121, 122, and 123 are extracts from a lengthy letter written by the Prophet while he was confined at Liberty Jail. During this time the Lord revealed such important matters as the complete name of his Church (see D&C 115:4) and the law of tithing (see D&C 119; 120).

Doctrine and Covenants 113:3-6

Who are the "root" and the "rod" of Jesse?

In his great chapter on the last days and the Millennium, Isaiah speaks of a "rod," "stem," and "root of Jesse" (Isaiah 11:1, 10). We know that Jesse was the father of King David, and we learn by revelation that the "stem of Jesse" is Jesus Christ (D&C 113:1-2), but the identity of the "rod" and "root" are not as clearly stated (D&C 113:3-6).

Comparing what the Lord said about the "rod" and "root of Jesse" (D&C 113:4, 6) suggests that both refer to the same person. Unto him, declared the Lord, "rightly belongs the priesthood" (D&C 113:6). Who better fits this promise than does the Prophet Joseph Smith? reasoned Dr. Sidney B. Sperry. As the "'servant in the hands of Christ,' . . . Joseph Smith fits naturally into Isaiah's prophecy, and it is easy to understand why Moroni quoted and explained Isaiah 11 to him" (Improvement Era, Oct. 1966, 869, 914). When Moroni appeared to Joseph Smith in 1823, he said that the prophecies in Isaiah 11 were "about to be fulfilled" (Joseph Smith-History 1:40). "That fulfillment began," suggested Dr. Kent Jackson of Brigham Young University, "at that very moment, when the Prophet began to receive the instruction and training that led to the restoration of all things. It will culminate in a glorious fulfillment—in the millennial reign of the Lord Jesus Christ" ("Revelations Concerning Isaiah," 333).

Doctrine and Covenants 115:4

Has the Church always been known by this name?

When the kingdom of God was organized in 1830, it was known as "the Church of Christ" (D&C 20:1) or as "The Church of Jesus Christ." By 1834 The Evening and Morning Star observed, "As the members of this Church profess a belief in the truth of the Book of Mormon, the world, either out of contempt and ridicule, or to distinguish us from others, have been very lavish in bestowing the title of 'Mormonite.'" The Star's editor was convinced that this "stigma" was the result of a "bitterness of feeling" and emphatically declared, "We do not accept the above title [Mormonite]" (History of the Church, 2:62-63 n).

Church members did not want to be guilty of being called by "the name of a man" (3 Nephi 27:8). Consequently, on 3 May 1834, the First Presidency and other Church leaders convened to seek inspiration on this matter. "After prayer, the conference proceeded to discuss the subject of names and appellations, when a motion was made by Sidney Rigdon, and seconded by Newel K. Whitney, that this Church be known hereafter by the name of 'The Church of the Latter-day Saints'" (History of the Church, 2:62-63). This name was consistent with the New Testament practice of referring to the early Christians as "saints" (see, for example, Romans 1:1-7; 1 Corinthians 1:1-2; Ephesians 1:1). This title suggests one who is holy—the word saint coming from the same root as sanctified. Nevertheless, one may be called a saint without one's being perfect, for as Paul explained, the central purpose of the Church is "for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ" (Ephesians 4:12).

Elder B. H. Roberts noted that the record of the 1834 council was headed "Minutes of a Conference of the Elders of the Church of Christ." Therefore, "while the conference adopted the title 'The Church of the Latter-day Saints,' and the Church was for some years called by that name, it was not the intention to regard the Church as any other than the Church of Christ" (Smith, History of the Church, 2:62 n). It seems clear that these early Saints were not trying to abandon the name "Church of Jesus Christ" but rather were inspired to adopt a means of referring to themselves as something other than "Mormonites."

The revelation given in 1838 declared what the true name of the Church was to be: "For thus shall my church be called in the last days, even The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" (D&C 115:4). In this way the inspired description "Latter-day Saints" was added as a suffix to the essential designation "Church of Jesus Christ." The capitalized "The" affirms the Church's unique standing among all other organizations. {See D&C 1:30.}

"The name thus conferred," explained Elder James E. Talmage, "is a self-explanatory and exclusive title of distinction and authority. It is an epitome of the cardinal truths and of the philosophical basis of the system commonly called 'Mormonism'" (Vitality of Mormonism, 40). Elder B. H. Roberts wrote: "It is the 'Church of Jesus Christ.' It is the Lord's; He owns it, He organized it. . . . but it is an institution which also belongs to the Saints. . . . They have a conjoint ownership in it with Jesus Christ, which ownership is beautifully recognized in the latter part of the title" (Smith, History of the Church, 3:24 n).

Doctrine and Covenants 116

What is the significance and meaning of "Adam-ondi-Ahman"?

Located in northern Missouri, the place called Adam-ondi-Ahman has been important during three distinct periods. First, just before his death, Adam gathered his righteous posterity together, blessed them, and gave them inspired instructions; the Lord also appeared and honored Adam as patriarch of the human family (see D&C 107:53-56). Next, during the later 1830s, Adam-ondi-Ahman was one of the Saints' larger settlements in northern Missouri. Finally, just before the Second Coming, another great council will be held at Adam-ondi-Ahman.

Elder Joseph Fielding Smith explained that the latter-day council at Adam-ondi-Ahman will be "of the greatest importance to this world. At that time there will be a transfer of authority from the usurper and impostor, Lucifer, to the rightful King, Jesus Christ. Judgment will be set and all who have held keys will make their reports and deliver their stewardships, as they shall be required. Adam will direct this judgment, and then he will make his report, as the one holding the keys for this earth, to his Superior Officer, Jesus Christ. Our Lord will then assume the reins of government; directions will be given to the Priesthood; and He, whose right it is to rule, will be installed officially by the voice of the Priesthood there assembled. This grand council of Priesthood will be composed, not only of those who are faithful who now dwell on this earth, but also of the prophets and apostles of old, who have had directing authority" (Way to Perfection, 291).

Concerning the meaning of Adam-ondi-Ahman, Elder Orson Pratt explained that "'Ahman' signifies God. The whole term means Valley of God, where Adam dwelt. It is in the original language spoken by Adam, as revealed to the Prophet Joseph" (in Journal of Discourses, 18:343). President Alvin R. Dyer suggested a slightly different interpretation. Because the keys of salvation were given through Adam, "we can understand the true meaning of the term 'Adam-ondi-Ahman'; or simply: from 'Ahman,' who is the Lord—'ondi,' meaning through Adam unto mankind" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1968, 109).

Doctrine and Covenants 119:1, 3

Should we contribute a surplus before beginning to pay tithing?

The recipients of the revelation recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 119 had been living the law of consecration, which required them to give their surpluses to the bishop. Therefore, meeting that obligation was for them "the beginning of the tithing" (D&C 119:3). "In more recent times the Church has not called upon the members to give all their surplus property to the Church, but it has been the requirement according to the covenant, that they pay the tenth," wrote President Joseph Fielding Smith (Church History and Modern Revelation, 2:92).

Doctrine and Covenants 119:2

Why should we pay tithing?

As is the case with other matters, there may be various levels of motivation. We should be eager to pay tithing simply because we love God and want to keep his commandments (see John 14:15; D&C 42:29).

We should regard tithing as an obligation. The Psalmist declared that "the earth is the Lord's" (Psalm 24:1). "We are not our own, we are bought with a price," asserted President Brigham Young. "We are the Lord's; our time, our talents, . . . and all there is on this earth that we have in our possession is the Lord's, and he requires one-tenth of this for the building up of his kingdom" (Discourses of Brigham Young, 176). President George Albert Smith put it this way: "He places all in our hands, authorizing us to retain for our own use nine-tenths of it, and then He asks that we put His tenth where He directs, where He knows it will accomplish the most good in developing His Church" (in Conference Report, Apr. 1941, 28). Elder Marion G. Romney concluded: "It is apparent that tithing is a debt which everyone owes to the Lord for his use of the things that the Lord has made and given to him to use. It is a debt just as literally as the grocery bill, or a light bill, or any other duly incurred obligation. As a matter of fact, the Lord, to whom one owes tithing, is in a position of a preferred creditor. If there is not enough to pay all creditors, he should be paid first" (Blessings of an Honest Tithe, 4).

Elder Howard W. Hunter thought of our obligation to pay tithing in a rather unique way. While in law school he thought of various visual images to represent different kinds of stealing. "To represent the theory of embezzlement I thought of a nontithepayer. The Lord's share came into his hands lawfully, but he misappropriated it to his own use" (in Conference Report, Apr. 1964, 34).

Tithing might be regarded as "the Lord's law of revenue." Doctrine and Covenants 119:2 suggests some uses to which tithes rightfully might be put. In our day these sacred funds are used for such purposes as building chapels and temples, supporting stake and ward budgets as well as missionary and temple activities, helping those in need, and so forth.

The Lord has promised great blessings to those who pay tithing: "Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house, and prove me now herewith, saith the Lord of hosts, if I will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it" (Malachi 3:10).

Elder Reed Smoot testified: "I believe that the man who pays his honest tithing to God will not only be blessed by God himself, but that the nine-tenths will reach farther than would the ten-tenths if he did not obey that law" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1900, 7-8). Elder James E. Talmage believed that even "the soil can be sanctified by the tithing of its products." He was convinced that there is a relationship between the "elements and forces of nature and the actions of men" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1929, 68). "The law of tithing is the law of inheritance," declared Elder Melvin J. Ballard. "No man may hope or expect to have an inheritance on this celestial globe who has failed to pay his tithing" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1929, 51).

Doctrine and Covenants 119:4

How should we calculate our tithing?

"Tithing means one-tenth," emphasized Elder John A. Widtsoe. "Those who give less do not really pay tithing; they are [only] lesser contributors to the Latter-day cause" (Evidences and Reconciliations, 285).

The Master stipulated that the Saints should "pay one-tenth of all their interest" (D&C 119:4). The First Presidency has explained that interest "is understood to mean income" (circular letter, 19 Mar. 1970). Elder Howard W. Hunter taught: "Interest means profit, compensation, increase. It is the wage of one employed, the profit from the operation of a business, the increase of one who grows or produces, or the income to a person from any other source" (in Conference Report, Apr. 1964, 35).

"When you are in doubt as to just how you should calculate your tithes," suggested Elder James E. Talmage, "reverse the terms as we sometimes do in solving complex mathematical problems, and suppose for the time being that the Lord had said this . . . : 'In order to show my love for my people, the faithful members of my Church, it is my will, saith the Lord, that each one shall receive from my storehouse, the storehouse of my Church, at regular intervals during the year, an amount equal to one-tenth of his income.' Now my dear brother, sit down and calculate how much the Lord owes you under that kind of law, and then go pay it to your bishop" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1928, 119).

Doctrine and Covenants 119:4

When should we pay our tithing?

The word annually in this verse does not mean just once a year but rather suggests our continuing responsibility to pay tithing. Church leaders have counseled us to pay it as we receive our income. We should pay the Lord first. Lamentably, the way some people pay tithing may be described as follows: the Lord offers us ten apples with the request that we return only one to him. We should hand it back to him immediately, but often we eat our nine apples first, then look at the remaining apple longingly, and take a bite or two before reluctantly handing it to the Lord. The advantages of paying the Lord first should be obvious.

Doctrine and Covenants 120

How does this council function today?

The Encyclopedia of Mormonism explains: "The Council on the Disposition of Tithes, consisting of the First Presidency of the Church, the Quorum of Twelve Apostles, and the Presiding Bishopric . . . meets regularly and oversees the expenditures of all Church funds worldwide. It approves budgets and financial strategy and establishes financial policy.

"Two subcommittees of the Council on the Disposition of Tithes are the Budget Committee and the Appropriations Committee. Both committees consist of the First Presidency, selected members of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, and members of the Presiding Bishopric.

"The Church Budget Office provides staff support to the First Presidency and gives overall administrative direction to the preparation of the annual Church budget. At the beginning of each annual budgeting cycle, budget guidelines are given to Church administrative department heads, international offices, missions, temples, and other units. Within these guidelines, budgets are constructed at the lowest levels of accountability and scrupulously reviewed through various levels of management and councils. The Budget Committee meets periodically to provide in-depth budget review and to formulate budget recommendations to the Council on the Disposition of Tithes" (Ludlow, Encyclopedia of Mormonism, 508).

Those who have been involved in these committees testify that the voice of the Lord has been sought diligently as directed by Doctrine and Covenants 120. Bishop Joseph L. Wirthlin, who served as a member of the Presiding Bishopric and was involved in these councils for nearly a quarter of a century, gratefully testified: "I have been inspired and thrilled by the careful appropriating of Church funds" (in Conference Report, Apr. 1953, 99).

Doctrine and Covenants 121:37

Are ordinances performed by unworthy priesthood bearers invalid?

"As a result of unrighteousness, it is 'Amen to the priesthood' of a man," taught Elder Bruce R. McConkie, "meaning that his priesthood comes to an end, as far as being a power which would assure the bearer of eternal life is concerned" (Mormon Doctrine, 32). Thus, if a man becomes unrighteous, his unmagnified priesthood will become a source of personal condemnation rather than blessing.

Unworthiness impairs a man's ability to bless others through his priesthood. Nevertheless, if an unworthy person is called upon unknowingly to perform an ordinance, the ordinance is valid because the individual performs it not so much by his own authority as by his having been duly appointed as an agent for the Church. Basing the validity of ordinances on the worthiness of the officiator would inevitably raise questions and create confusion. Hence the efficacy of ordinances depends on the worthiness of those receiving them rather than on the worthiness of those performing them.
