Richard O. Cowan, Answers to Your Questions About the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1996)

12

Nauvoo the Beautiful

Doctrine and Covenants 124 through 132

By the spring of 1839 the Saints were settling in Illinois at a bend of the Mississippi River. They named their new city Nauvoo, from a Hebrew word meaning "beautiful." Between 1841 and 1843 the Prophet received revelations that increased the Saints' understanding of temple blessings, including baptism for the dead, the endowment, and celestial marriage (D&C 124; 132). The Prophet's interest in the temple was evidenced in two letters he wrote on this subject (D&C 127; 128) while in hiding from his Missouri persecutors. Those two sections are not designated as revelations but contain the Prophet's inspired instructions on a wide variety of subjects.

Doctrine and Covenants 121:41-46

What is the meaning of certain archaic words in these beautiful and often-quoted instructions and promises?

Persuasion has taken on the sense of inducing a person to do something almost against his will, but in Doctrine and Covenants 121:41 the Lord specifies that our influence should be exerted only in the spirit of patience and love. Betimes in verse 43 means "in good season or time; before it is [too] late" (Webster, American Dictionary). In other words, we should respond promptly to the Spirit's direction. Bowels in verse 45 is understood to mean all the internal organs, including the heart, and represents "the seat of pity or kindness; hence, tenderness, compassion, a scriptural sense" (Webster, American Dictionary). The assurance of verse 45 that "the doctrine of the priesthood shall distill" upon us suggests that if we are worthy, we will be directed and feel comfortable as we act as God's representatives in blessing others. Similarly, the promise of verse 46 that our "dominion" will come "without compulsory means" suggests that our influence for good will be a natural result of our virtuous service.

Doctrine and Covenants 124:23

What was the "corner-stone" visitors were to contemplate?

In this revelation, the Lord directed that two buildings be erected in Nauvoo: an inn to be known as "the Nauvoo House" (see D&C 124:22-24, 56-83), and the Nauvoo Temple (see vv. 25-44).

The "corner-stone" that guests in the Nauvoo House were to contemplate was identified in verse 2 as the stake that had been established at Nauvoo. In an earlier revelation the Lord had challenged the Saints in Zion and in her stakes to live so their "light may be a standard for the nations" (D&C 115:5). Hence, while enjoying accommodations in the Nauvoo House, visitors could observe at close range the Saints' example. Because it was thus a kind of missionary project, the Lord required that those who invested in the Nauvoo House should have a testimony of the restored gospel (see v. 119).

Doctrine and Covenants 124:27-30

What functions do temples have other than being places where sacred ordinances are performed?

Not all latter-day temples have been designed primarily for ordinances. The Kirtland Temple, for example, served mostly other purposes. After decades of studying ancient Near Eastern religions, noted Latter-day Saint scholar Dr. Hugh Nibley concluded that these ancient peoples regarded temples as "meeting-places at which men at specific times attempted to make contact with the powers above" ("What Is a Temple?" 231).

Temples have served two main functions: as places of revelation or contact between heaven and earth, and as places for sacred priesthood ordinances. Elder James E. Talmage affirmed that a temple "is characterized not alone as the place where God reveals Himself to man, but also as the House wherein prescribed ordinances of the Priesthood are solemnized" (House of the Lord, 17).

The Kirtland Temple did not have a baptismal font or other facilities specifically designed for ordinances, and its dedicatory prayer spoke of only the first of the two purposes (see D&C 109:5). By the time the Nauvoo Temple was built, however, temple ordinances had been restored, so facilities for them were provided. Both purposes of temples are reflected in the Lord's instructions that the Nauvoo Temple should be a place where he might come to give revelations and that it should contain a font for vicarious baptisms (see D&C 124:27-30).

Doctrine and Covenants 124:59

Were Joseph Smith's descendants to preside over the Church?

Doctrine and Covenants 124:59 considers the rights of those who invested in the construction of the Nauvoo House and has nothing to do with succession in the First Presidency. This verse simply affirms that Joseph Smith's heirs were to inherit his stock in the house according to the pattern commonly followed in the world. Note how similar inheritances were promised to others (see D&C 124:69, 74, 77).

Revelations provide the key to the correct pattern of succession. {See D&C 43:1-4; 107:22-26.}

Doctrine and Covenants 124:124

In what sense do patriarchs hold the sealing keys? What does it mean to be "sealed up unto the day of redemption"?

President Joseph Fielding Smith taught that patriarchs' sealing power is only conditional: "The patriarch has a right to seal a member up to come forth in the morning of the first resurrection, based upon his or her faithfulness, and that is all" (Doctrines of Salvation, 3:171). This promise is essentially encouragement to live worthy of receiving exaltation in the celestial kingdom.

Doctrine and Covenants 124:133-40

What is the significance of "standing" and "traveling"?

As used in the revelations, the word standing seems to refer to functions within the Church while traveling denotes external responsibilities. For example, the Quorum of the Twelve is identified as a "traveling presiding high council" (D&C 107:33), whereas "standing high councils" function within stakes (v. 36). Similarly, high priests are called "standing presidents" (D&C 124:133-34), and elders are designated "standing ministers" (v. 137). On the other hand, the seventy, who are to be "especial witnesses unto the Gentiles and in all the world" (D&C 107:25), are designated "traveling ministers" (v. 97) or "traveling elders" (D&C 124:138-39).

Doctrine and Covenants 128:3

What is the origin of the "ward" as a local Church unit?

At the time the words in this section of the Doctrine and Covenants were written, ward meant "a certain district, division or quarter of a town or city" (Webster, American Dictionary). Nauvoo was divided into wards, and it was here that for the first time bishops were assigned to preside over these units.

Doctrine and Covenants 128:8-9

Can a clerk's failure to keep a written record deny us blessings we have earned?

A superficial reading of Doctrine and Covenants 128 may leave such an impression, but a closer look indicates otherwise. Verse 8 emphasizes the "power of the priesthood" and suggests that "whatsoever you record on earth shall be recorded in heaven" is just a variation of "whatsoever you bind on earth shall be bound in heaven."

According to verse 9, if an ordinance is to be binding, it must meet three requirements: (1) It must be done by proper authority and in the name of Jesus Christ; (2) it must be performed "truly and faithfully," or in other words, correctly; and (3) an accurate record must be kept.

As part of this last requirement, a "recorder or eye witness" must be present (v. 2). The Prophet Joseph Smith instructed: "It will be necessary, in the Grand Council, that these things be testified to by competent witnesses. Therefore let the recording and witnessing of baptisms for the dead be carefully attended to from this time forth" (History of the Church, 5:141). Assuming that these instructions are followed, the lack of a record suggests that the ordinance has not been performed—and it is the ordinance rather than the written record that binds in heaven.

President John Taylor suggested another possibility. Not all earthly records are kept with paper and ink. "Man himself is a self-registering machine, . . . all the various senses of the body are so many media whereby man lays up for himself a record which perhaps nobody else is acquainted with but himself; and when the time comes for that record to be unfolded all men that have eyes to see, and ears to hear, will be able to read all things as God Himself reads them and comprehends them" (in Journal of Discourses, 26:31).

Doctrine and Covenants 128:18

Why is a "welding link" to our fathers necessary? Why can't we be saved without them?

Paraphrasing the words of Paul (see Hebrews 11:40), Joseph Smith wrote that "the fathers" cannot be made perfect without us. They depend on us to perform necessary saving ordinances vicariously in their behalf. The Prophet also asserted that we cannot be made perfect without them. Those who are exalted in the highest degree of the celestial kingdom will be organized into a grand family structure with our Heavenly Father at the head. We need to be tied in with that great organization, and that is done along the lines of our family lineage. Hence we must establish a "welding link" from generation to generation, and that is done by means of sacred temple ordinances.

Elder Orson F. Whitney explained: "The Prophet says that there must be 'a welding link between the fathers and the children'—the fathers in heaven yearning over their children on earth; and therefore was Elijah sent. His keys empower the living to do saving work for the dead and seal them up to come forth in the first resurrection; 'to seal those who dwell on earth to those who dwell in heaven.' . . . The welding link is baptism for the dead, with other vicarious work now going on in the temples that God's people have erected. You brethren and sisters who labor in these temples may cherish in your souls the sweet conviction that you are helping to bind together the gospel dispensations and assisting to advance the mighty purposes of God" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1920, 35).

Doctrine and Covenants 128:19

What is meant by the reference to "the dews of Carmel"?

Unusually heavy dew falls on the Carmel mountain range near the coast of northern Israel—a fact Joseph Smith likely did not know by any means other than revelation. Just as these dews distill on the ground, even so will the glad tidings of the gospel envelop and bless the faithful.

Doctrine and Covenants 128:20-21

What more is known about the events referred to in these verses?

In Doctrine and Covenants 128:20-21 the Prophet exultantly reviews some of the great events of the Restoration. Additional information is provided about one of those events—the location where Peter, James, and John restored the Melchizedek Priesthood. "The chamber of old Father Whitmer" is the room in the Whitmers' log home where the Church was organized 6 April 1830; the revelation mentioned here is "unquestionably" the occasion in June of 1829 when the Lord instructed Joseph Smith concerning priesthood ordinations (History of the Church, 1:60-61). "The voice of Gabriel" may refer to the appearance of Elias in the Kirtland Temple. {See D&C 110:12.} Nothing further is known concerning the identity or appearance of Raphael. These verses are the only record we have of the appearances of Michael or Adam.

Doctrine and Covenants 129

Why will the various categories of messengers respond as described here?

Joseph Smith explained that there are two categories of messengers from heaven. One is angels, which are translated or resurrected beings with tangible bodies (see History of the Church, 4:425). These messengers are employed when priesthood authority is restored because this is done by the laying on of hands. Such beings of course would respond when invited to shake hands. The other is spirits, which may be either "unembodied" (still in their premortal existence) or "disembodied" (in the postmortal spirit world). Not having tangible bodies, they would not extend a hand we could not feel.

Only one category of messengers can come from Satan—spirits, because the resurrection of the unjust is yet future. {See D&C 76:17.} One might suppose that these devils would refrain from shaking hands to make us believe they come from God. But there is something, perhaps a divine law, that compels them to respond as verse 8 specifies. Or "perhaps he cannot help himself. He knows better, but he cannot pass up the opportunity to shock and deceive" (Preece, Learning to Love the Doctrine and Covenants, 375).

We may not need to use these keys to detect whether messengers come from God or from Satan. We are, however, almost constantly faced with discerning whether an idea or influence is of God or not. Fortunately we have the Holy Ghost to help us discern properly (see D&C 46:23; 50:15-22).

Doctrine and Covenants 130:13

Where may this earlier revelation be found?

This "earlier revelation" is a reference to the prophecy on war (see D&C 87).

Doctrine and Covenants 130:14-17

Isn't this a prediction that the Second Coming would occur in 1890?

Because the Second Coming did not occur in 1890, the year Joseph Smith would have turned eighty-five years of age, some critics have suggested that Doctrine and Covenants 130 is a false prophecy. Note, however, that verse 15 simply promises that Joseph Smith would "see the face of the Son of Man." Joseph himself wondered whether this "referred to the beginning of the millennium or to some previous appearing" (v. 16). An earlier revelation had made it clear that no one knows the exact time of the Lord's advent, "nor shall they know until he comes" (D&C 49:7). The Prophet correctly concluded that the Lord would not come before 1890 (see D&C 130:17).

Doctrine and Covenants 131:2

What is the difference between "the new and everlasting covenant" and "the new and everlasting covenant of marriage"?

Because in Doctrine and Covenants 131 the Lord is discussing the exalted state that can be inherited only by those who have worthily entered celestial marriage, he particularly emphasizes the importance of this "new and everlasting covenant of marriage." That covenant should not be confused with the "new and everlasting covenant" that is the gospel as a whole. {See D&C 22.} While "baptism is the gate to the celestial kingdom," affirmed Elder Bruce R. McConkie, "celestial marriage is the gate to an exaltation in the highest heaven within the celestial world" (Mormon Doctrine, 118).

Doctrine and Covenants 131:5

Why is it important to receive "the more sure word of prophecy" and how can we do so?

Receiving the assurance called "the more sure word of prophecy" (D&C 131:5) is essentially the same thing as being "sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise" (D&C 76:53) or making our "calling and election sure" (2 Peter 1:10). {See D&C 76:53.} Achieving this lofty spiritual goal prepares us to enjoy the further remarkable privilege of receiving the Second Comforter—meeting the Savior face to face. {See D&C 67:10.}

"The first great revelation that a person needs to get is to know the divinity of the work," explained Elder Bruce R. McConkie (How to Get Personal Revelation, 8). Then, building on this testimony, we should constantly strive to keep the commandments and grow spiritually to the point we are worthy to inherit eternal life. The ultimate revelation that we should seek to obtain from the Holy Ghost is the assurance that our calling and election has been made sure. Elder McConkie challenged us to live so that we might "have the whisperings of the Spirit in [our] heart and soul and, in addition, can see visions, entertain angels, behold the face of the Lord" (How to Get Personal Revelation, 1).

The apostle Peter recalled the marvelous experience on the "holy mount" when he and his brethren beheld the transfigured Lord and heard the voice of God from heaven. Now he declared that he had an even "more sure word of prophecy" (2 Peter 1:18-19). He challenges us to give diligence to make our calling and election sure by adding "to your faith virtue; and to virtue knowledge; and to knowledge temperance; and to temperance patience; and to patience godliness; and to godliness brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness charity" (vv. 5-7).

Reflecting on Peter's words, the Prophet Joseph Smith expounded: "Though they might hear the voice of God and know that Jesus was the Son of God, this would be no evidence that their election and calling was made sure, that they had part with Christ, and were joint heirs with Him. They then would want that more sure word of prophecy, that they were sealed in the heavens and the promise of eternal life in the kingdom of God. Then, having this promise sealed unto them, it was an anchor to the soul, sure and steadfast." The Prophet then exhorted: "Go on and continue to call upon God until you make your calling and election sure for yourselves, by obtaining this more sure word of prophecy, and wait patiently for the promise until you obtain it" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 298-99).

After defining "the more sure word of prophecy," Joseph Smith taught that "it is impossible for a man to be saved in ignorance" of this saving witness (D&C 131:6). "If a man be ignorant of the terms on which salvation is predicated," reasoned Elder James E. Talmage, "he is unable to comply therewith, and consequently fails to attain what otherwise might have been his eternal gain" (Vitality of Mormonism, 268).

The great gift of eternal life "may not, of course, be fully realized during earth life," pointed out Elder Marion G. Romney. "An assurance that it will be obtained in the world to come may, however, be had in this world. As a matter of fact, the blessings of the celestial kingdom are promised only to those who have such an assurance." This blessing may not be realized in mortality, but we should be striving for it. Elder Romney concluded that it "is within the reach of us all, because it is not to be paid in money nor in any of this world's goods but in righteous living. What is required is wholehearted devotion to the gospel and unreserved allegiance to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1949, 41, 43).

Doctrine and Covenants 132:24

What is meant by "eternal lives"?

Beginning in verse 19 of Doctrine and Covenants 132, the Lord outlines the remarkable blessings to be enjoyed by those who are exalted in the celestial kingdom. In verse 24 he paraphrases the well-known statement in John 17:3. President Charles W. Penrose explained that "eternal lives" means "more than life, more than mere existence, it means perpetual increase of posterity, worlds without end" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1921, 22). President Harold B. Lee reasoned that "if marriage then was for the purpose of the organizing of spirits before the world was formed and for 'multiplying and replenishing the earth' on which we now live, surely there must likewise be a divine purpose in its being continued after the resurrection. This purpose is declared by the Lord to be for 'a continuation of the seeds forever and ever' [D&C 132:19]" (Teachings of Harold B. Lee, 238).

Doctrine and Covenants 132:26

Does being married in the temple guarantee that we will be exalted?

"Verse 26, in Section 132, is the most abused passage in any scripture," asserted President Joseph Fielding Smith. "The Lord has never promised any soul that he may be taken into exaltation without the spirit of repentance. While repentance is not stated in this passage, yet it is, and must be implied" (Doctrines of Salvation, 2:95). Elder Harold B. Lee concurred: "Among us there are folks who are interpreting the twenty-sixth verse of the 132nd section of the Doctrine and Covenants to mean that if by some hook or crook we can get into the temple and be married, we are sure of an exaltation regardless of what we may do thereafter. . . . The Lord means that we can be forgiven of all kinds of sin except the unpardonable sin, if we truly repent, and shall be forgiven" (Teachings of Harold B. Lee, 111; emphasis in original).

"Those who have been married in the temples for eternity," pointed out Elder Bruce R. McConkie, "know that the ceremony itself expressly conditions the receipt of all promised blessings upon the subsequent faithfulness of the husband and wife. Making one's calling and election sure is in addition to celestial marriage and results from undeviating and perfect devotion to the cause of righteousness. Those married in the temple can never under any circumstances gain exaltation unless they keep the commandments of God and abide in the covenant of marriage which they have taken upon themselves" (Mormon Doctrine, 118).

Doctrine and Covenants 132:26 itself imposes some important restrictions. Not only must a couple be married in the temple by proper authority but they must also be "sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise." This means that they must have reached the point that they were judged worthy to receive the eternal blessings promised by this sacred ordinance. {See D&C 76:53.} In other words they must have made their calling and election sure. {See D&C 131:5.} Obviously this blessing requires a degree of faithfulness far beyond even the high requirements to receive a temple recommend.

Those who are to be exalted cannot "shed innocent blood." In verse 27 the Lord defines that those who commit this offense in effect "assent unto my death, after ye have received my new and everlasting covenant." They "crucified him unto themselves and put him to an open shame" (D&C 76:35).

Those who have committed sins must thoroughly repent. Part of the process may need to involve their being "destroyed in the flesh" and being "delivered unto the buffetings of Satan" (D&C 132:26). The exact nature of these sufferings may not be known, but concerning their extent the Lord declared: "How sore you know not, how exquisite you know not, yea, how hard to bear you know not" (D&C 19:15). Even though the reward of exaltation would make such terrible suffering worthwhile, it is far better to avoid it by keeping the commandments and receiving the peace that is promised by so doing (see D&C 59:23).

Doctrine and Covenants 132:38

Did God really authorize men to have concubines?

We may think of a concubine as a mistress with whom a man has illicit relations, but a dictionary published at the time Doctrine and Covenants 132 was written defined concubine as "a wife of inferior condition. . . . Such were Hagar and Keturah, the concubines of Abraham" (Webster, American Dictionary). The Lord affirms that he permitted David and Solomon to have wives and concubines and that they sinned only when they took what he had not authorized. Solomon had seven hundred wives and three hundred concubines! The vast majority of them undoubtedly were not given by the Lord, because they turned Solomon's heart from God (see 1 Kings 11:3-4). The Book of Mormon prophet Jacob denounced those who used Solomon's grossly unworthy example to excuse their own whoredoms (see Jacob 2:23-24).

Doctrine and Covenants 132:51

What was Emma's test?

"No indication is given here or elsewhere about what the Lord had commanded the Prophet Joseph to offer to his wife, but the context seems to suggest that it was a special test of faith similar to the great test of Abraham's faith when the Lord commanded him to sacrifice Isaac. Beyond that, it is useless to speculate, for the record is silent" (Doctrine and Covenants Student Manual, 334).
