Richard O. Cowan, Answers to Your Questions About the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1996)

13

Some Further Revelations

Doctrine and Covenants 133 through 138 and Official Declarations 1 and 2

The revelations recorded in the ending sections of the Doctrine and Covenants were received between 1831 and 1978. Section 133 is called the "Appendix," and section 134 is a declaration of beliefs about laws and governments. In section 135 we find an inspired appraisal of Joseph Smith's contributions. Section 136, the only revelation given through Brigham Young that has been included in the Doctrine Covenants, contains important practical instructions to the pioneers. Sections 137 and 138 were added to the canon of Latter-day Saint scripture in 1976. The two Official Declarations announce revelations ending the practice of plural marriage and extending priesthood blessings to worthy males of all races. These sacred communications provide an important foundation for the activities of the Church as it expands worldwide.

Doctrine and Covenants 133

Why is this revelation out of chronological order?

Being regarded as an appendix, Doctrine and Covenants 133 stands at the end of the revelations received through Joseph Smith. Like the "preface" (D&C 1), section 133 was received at the November 1831 conference that initially approved publishing the revelations in book form. Though given at the same time (between sections 66 and 68), these two revelations now stand at opposite ends of the Doctrine and Covenants. Both treat the same general theme—preparing for the latter days.

Doctrine and Covenants 133:4-14

Does the "gathering" always require moving from one place to another?

At first the Lord asked the Saints to congregate in one place but explained that the time would come when many other gathering places would be established. {See D&C 29:7-8.} In section 133 the Lord introduced the further concept of a spiritual gathering: "Go ye out from Babylon. Be ye clean. . . . Go ye out . . . from the midst of wickedness, which is spiritual Babylon" (vv. 5, 14). Thus wherever they lived, the Saints could stay in their homes while gathering out of the world into the Lord's Church.

Doctrine and Covenants 133:23-24

What evidence is there that the earth's continents and islands once were a single land mass?

In the mid twentieth century individuals increasingly pointed out how the earth's continents appear to be like giant pieces of a puzzle and might once have been parts of a single land mass. This "continental drift" theory was not generally considered seriously by most scientists. In more recent decades, however, studies of strata and magnetic patterns in rocks on opposite sides of oceans suggest that they once were together. Today "plate tectonics" is the name given to the concept that the earth's surface is made up of huge plates that are constantly moving against one another.

Doctrine and Covenants 134:9

Shouldn't our politics be influenced by the gospel?

Latter-day Saints believe in a separation of church and state in the sense that neither of these institutions should dominate the other. Still, there is not a total separation, because we as Church members are commanded to seek and uphold wise and good men (see D&C 98:10) and because religious groups may appeal to the state for protection. Doctrine and Covenants 134:9 concurs with provisions of the United States Constitution that one religion should not be supported by government while others are prohibited and that freedom of religion must not be infringed.

The gospel may be thought of as our complete way of life. Hence, it should influence our views on politics as well as on all other subjects. Church leaders have the responsibility to counsel the Saints on moral issues that affect our ability to live the gospel. Still, we are instructed to become involved in civic and political affairs as citizens rather than as representatives of the Church.

Doctrine and Covenants 135:3

What did Joseph Smith do "for the salvation of men in this world"?

President Joseph F. Smith, the prophet's nephew, summed up some of his accomplishments: "He opened up communication with the heavens in his youth. He brought forth the Book of Mormon, which contains the fullness of the Gospel; and the revelations contained in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants; restored the holy Priesthood unto man; established and organized The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." He established settlements of the Saints in New York, Ohio, Missouri and Illinois and directed the construction of temples at Kirtland and Nauvoo. Obviously the fulness of the gospel as restored through Joseph Smith together with the Church and its authoritative ordinances are essential to our salvation. As President Joseph F. Smith asked, "Where shall we go to find another man that has accomplished the one thousandth part of good that Joseph Smith accomplished?" (in Journal of Discourses, 24:14-15).

Doctrine and Covenants 137-38

What is significant about the time when these two revelations were added to the standard works?

The revelations in Doctrine and Covenants 137 and 138 were added to the standard works in 1976. They were placed in the Pearl of Great Price temporarily but became part of the new edition of the Doctrine and Covenants published in 1981.

Both sections provide scriptural support for the important doctrine of salvation of the dead. Section 137 includes the declaration that "all who have died without a knowledge of this gospel, who would have received it if they had been permitted to tarry, shall be heirs of the celestial kingdom of God" (v. 7). Section 138 sheds light on how the Savior launched the preaching of the gospel in the spirit world.

In 1976 there were only sixteen Latter-day Saint temples in service. Within the next ten years that total increased to forty-five. Developments in computer technology dramatically aided genealogical research. Hence these two revelations being placed in the standard works gave valuable impetus to this great expansion in temple service.

Official Declarations 1 and 2

Why are these two items not given numbers as previous sections were?

Both Official Declarations are inspired announcements that significant revelations had been received. For example, Official Declaration 1 is not the revelation that ended plural marriages. A careful reading indicates that this practice had already been suspended. President Wilford Woodruff subsequently described the earlier revelation that had brought the change. His accounts were added to the Doctrine and Covenants in the 1981 edition and are found on pages 291 through 293.

Similarly, the revelation extending priesthood blessings to men of all races was received during a remarkable experience in the Salt Lake Temple on 1 June 1978. For more than two hours the First Presidency and the Twelve considered this matter. "There was a marvelous outpouring of unity, oneness, and agreement in the council." President Spencer W. Kimball then led the group in prayer on this matter. "It was during this prayer that the revelation came," Elder Bruce R. McConkie recalled. "The Spirit of the Lord rested mightily upon us all; we felt something akin to what happened on the day of Pentecost and at the dedication of the Kirtland Temple" (in Priesthood, 128). The announcement known as Official Declaration 2 was released one week later.
