Susan Arrington Madsen, Leonard J. Arrington, Mothers of the Prophets ( 1987)

Preface

The close association that Joseph Smith enjoyed with his mother is well known. Lucy Mack Smith even wrote a history of her family and her son that has been widely circulated. The late President David O. McKay had good things to say about his mother, and there are frequent references to her in his sermons. But who ever heard of the mother of John Taylor? or Wilford Woodruff? or Lorenzo Snow? There have been splendid biographies of Latter-day Saint men—they were in the center of church action. And there is an increasing number of biographies of Latter-day Saint women, including Eliza R. Snow, Emmeline B. Wells, and Dr. Ellis Shipp. But what of the prophets' mothers? Don Corbett, a great-grandson, did a fine book-length biography of Mary Fielding Smith, the mother of Joseph F. Smith; and Ronald Walker wrote an excellent essay on Heber J. Grant's mother for Supporting Saints: Life Stories of Nineteenth Century Mormons. But the rest of the mothers come through primarily in scattered references in the biographies of their prophet-sons.

Convinced that their mothers must have had an enormous influence on the early lives and belief systems of our prophets, we have taken it as a challenge to find out more about these women. We have hunted for clues in the biographies and papers of their prophet-sons; we have gone to local histories and newspapers in the places they lived; and we have, of course, used general histories of the events in which they participated. We have also interviewed some of their descendants. Our own appreciation for these women has increased enormously, and our search for source material has deepened our understanding of their sons. This research and writing project has been highly rewarding to us, and we hope it will be interesting to readers as well.

Although limited by the oral and written materials available, we have tried to describe the many roles of the prophets' mothers: their activities as housekeepers, cooks, and interior decorators; as gardeners and landscapers; as managers of farms and livestock and business enterprises; as teachers in the home, in the Church, and in neighborhood schools; as nurses, midwives, and suppliers of comfort and assistance to those in need; as entertainers for family associates; as public speakers and party-givers; as Relief Society sisters and mission wives; and, above all, as mothers—their relationships with their children, and, in particular, with the son who eventually became prophet. We have tried to avoid romanticizing or idealizing these mothers. They undoubtedly provided moral standards for their children, but they were not always gentle or patient or angelic. Nor were all of the families in which the prophets were raised traditional. Not all were "faithful to the end," nor were all of them the epitome of worthiness. Nevertheless, the Lord blessed them.

Social scientists have published studies of superior peoples, using the techniques of the behavioral sciences to isolate the significant factors that explain the rise and fall of cultures and civilizations. They emphasize the role of the mother in implanting high achievement motives in children, who in turn become the leaders of a succeeding generation of leaders. High achievement, they suggest, exists when mothers encourage their children to be self-reliant at an early age, insist upon certain standards, demonstrate a warmth and respect for them, and encourage them to be independent and creative. Our study of the mothers of the prophets lends support to that contention. Each of the mothers of the thirteen men who have led The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in the 157 years of its history was supportive, provided stability and security, and encouraged self-confidence in the things of the Spirit as well as in the things of the world. This, despite angry mobs, forced removals, years of pioneering in the wilderness, large families, and the inevitably public nature of their later lives. They taught their sons of a loving God, manifested their own spiritual depth and strength, and inculcated good habits.

While some friends have chided us for publishing biographies of women who have achieved only because they were mothers of important men, we take the position that the men achieved in part because of their training by and association with the women described in these pages.

We are grateful to descendants of each of the women for their cooperation. We are also grateful to our spouses, Harriet and Dean, for their support and encouragement. We appreciate the courtesies extended by the LDS Church Historical Library-Archives, the libraries at Utah State University, Brigham Young University, University of Utah, and the city libraries of Salt Lake City and Logan, Utah. We express, in particular, our gratitude for the editing of Eleanor Knowles and the designs of Kent Ware; the lovely illustrations of Glen Edwards; the suggestions of Ronald W. Walker, Maureen Beecher, and Annette Rogers; and the typing assistance of Marilyn Rish Parks. Finally, we are grateful to those associated with the Joseph Fielding Smith Institute for Church History at Brigham Young University and to Jeff Simmonds of the Merrill Library at Utah State University for their expert and generous help.

I believe mothering is the loveliest of the arts: that great mothers are hand-maidens of the Spirit, to whom are entrusted God's avatars, that no prophet is greater than his mother. Will Levington Comfort
