Susan Arrington Madsen, Leonard J. Arrington, Mothers of the Prophets ( 1987)

Lucy Mack Smith

Blessed is my mother, for her soul is ever filled with benevolence and philanthropy; and notwithstanding her age, she shall yet receive strength and be comforted in the midst of her house. Thus saith the Lord, she shall have eternal life. (Joseph Smith Jr.)

Child of the frontier, nurse of two sisters who died lingering deaths, mother of four sons who died for their faith, and Mother in Israel to thousands who struggled to establish a latter-day kingdom of God, Lucy Mack Smith was a splendid exemplar of the family culture that permeated early America. Most of the schooling, especially for girls, was in the home. Girls devoted much of their time to housekeeping, sewing, and looking after livestock and poultry, and children were almost entirely under the influence of their family and the small circle of acquaintances in their neighborhood. They shared their feelings and experiences with their parents and brothers and sisters, and they took great pride in the accomplishments of family members.

For many children in those days, the only book they ever read was the Bible. Similarly, with the exception of occasional revivals, the only worship service they would attend was provided by the prayers offered and hymns sung within their family unit. This was the case with Lucy Mack; it was also the case with Joseph Smith Jr., who, backed by the rich family culture of his parents, Lucy Mack and Joseph Smith Sr., emerged to become the founding prophet of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Lucy was born in Gilsum, New Hampshire, on July 8, 1775, the last of eight children born to Solomon and Lydia Gates Mack. Solomon, a native of Lyme, Connecticut, fought in the French and Indian War (1754 to 1761), which finally culminated in the Treaty of Paris in which France ceded to Great Britain most of eastern Canada and all of the present United States east of the Mississippi except New Orleans. Solomon was also a soldier in the War of the Revolution, so he was away from home much of the time his children were growing up. An active enterpriser, he sold supplies to the army, bought and sold land, and developed properties for resale. As with many others of his day, however, he experienced several misfortunes that prevented him from prospering.

Lydia Mack, Lucy's mother, was a native of East Haddam (Millington), Connecticut. Because of her husband's prolonged absences and lack of income, she had to raise her family under the difficult conditions prevalent in the frontier villages in New Hampshire and Vermont where they settled. Described by Lucy as "pious and affectionate," Lydia was responsible for "all the religious instructions as well as most of the educational privileges" of her eight children, all of whom turned out to be persons of intelligence and courage. When she wrote her autobiography in her later years, Lucy devoted seven chapters to telling of her parents and grandparents and brothers and sisters. If her manuscript is an accurate reflection, the family was public-spirited, exhibited mutual caring, and cultivated the highest religious values. Lucy and her brothers and sisters seem to have accepted that God kept a warm, personal interest in his children and would hear and answer prayers.

Gilsum, where Lucy grew up, was still a frontier region, populated at the time of her birth by perhaps thirty young to middle-aged families. It was a rocky region, with only small acreages that could grow farm and garden crops, and no orchards. Most of the land was in pasture, and the families owned milk cows, oxen, horses, and beef cattle.

The Battle of Bunker Hill had taken place just before Lucy's birth, and George Washington took command of the revolutionary army shortly thereafter. Solomon enlisted and served for a year or two, until he became ill. Back home, he was an invalid much of the time. When Lucy was a little over two, he was struck by a falling tree and was almost killed. A little later he suffered from a fall and blow on the head that caused him to have periodic "fits." The family became destitute of property, and Solomon did not have the strength to furnish them a satisfactory livelihood. For a period, he and two teenage sons joined the crew of a privateer; in 1779, in a stroke of good fortune, they captured eight British vessels in Long Island Sound and received some prize money.

Solomon moved his family to Montague, Massachusetts, and remained home with them for four or five years. Then he spent four years at sea, with a fishing schooner and freighter. Shortly after he left, when Lucy was about eight, Lydia suffered a "severe fit of sickness" and became so ill that Lucy was placed in the care of her seventeen-year-old brother, Stephen. With little to show for his hard labor and enterprise, Solomon was back with his family in 1788, only to find that, through the underhanded dealing of a creditor, Lydia and the children had been evicted from their home. Solomon moved his family to Tunbridge, Vermont; but in 1792, when Lucy was seventeen, he moved them back to Gilsum, New Hampshire, where he operated a store.

Meanwhile, Lucy's married sister, Lovisa, came down with consumption (presumably tuberculosis), and during the next five years both Lovisa and Lovina, a year younger, became seriously ill with the disease. Lucy, from ages seventeen to nineteen, nursed Lovina, carrying her twenty-nine-year-old sister from bed to chair and from chair to bed. When Lovina died after two years of care, Lucy prepared to look after Lovisa, whose consumption had once more flared up. Solomon went to get Lovisa to take her to his home in Gilsum, but she died on the way. As she wrote her life history many years later, Lucy told very little of her childhood except for the illnesses and deaths that had consumed the energies of all the family. Lucy's youth was one not of happy experiences or childish adventures but of toil, frustration, sickness, and perseverance.

Depressed and melancholy after the deaths of her sisters, Lucy sought comfort in religion, seeking solace and understanding in Bible reading and prayer. There was one problem. "If I remain a member of no church," she said, "all religious people will say I am of the world, and if I join some one of the different denominations, all the rest will say I am in error." During the years she was growing up in Gilsum, there was a church, but the congregation could not afford a pastor. And whatever the religious situation in Montague, religious help was not accessible when she needed it, particularly after the deaths of her sisters.

Having been especially close to her brother Stephen, Lucy responded to his invitation to visit him in Tunbridge, Vermont, eighty miles north of Gilsum, after her sisters died. Stephen, now twenty-eight, was a partner in a mercantile and tinning establishment in Tunbridge. Among the new settlers there was Asael Smith, a selectman (county commissioner) of Tunbridge and close friend and supporter of Stephen. It was inevitable that Lucy, an attractive woman with clear blue eyes and light brown hair, should meet Joseph Smith, Asael's second son, a strong, tall, athletic young man of twenty-three. After a year in Tunbridge Lucy returned to her family in Gilsum, but not for long. In January 1796 she returned to Tunbridge and married Joseph Smith.

Joseph and Lucy Smith, ages twenty-five and twenty, respectively, began life under favorable circumstances. Asael gave them part ownership in a handsome farm, and Stephen Mack and his partner presented Lucy with one thousand dollars, money that she laid away as a cash reserve. They set to work on their farm. Their first child, a son, died in childbirth. Two years after their marriage Lucy bore a second son, Alvin, and two years later a third son, Hyrum.

In 1802, after six years of farming in Tunbridge, Joseph and Lucy rented their farmhouse and land and moved to Randolph, a larger village seven miles to the west, where they opened a store. As a part of this enterprise, Joseph heard that enormous profits could be made by freighting ginseng root to China, where it was prized for its ability to prolong life and restore virility. He set about collecting the root, probably buying or trading for it from local farmers. After the root was crystallized, he took it to New York and contracted to have it shipped to China on consignment. He stood to make $4,500. But the son of a Royalton, Vermont, merchant who sailed with the cargo apparently pocketed the entire proceeds and escaped to Canada. Joseph pursued him, but in vain. He was financially ruined. He could not cover the cost of the inventory for his store and was forced to sell his farm. Lucy contributed her thousand dollar wedding gift to keep the family going. As she described it, they had crossed the line from "embarrassment of debt" to "embarrassment of poverty."

As a propertyless family, the Smiths began a cycle of renting farms that were later sold and then having to move on to another. During the next fourteen years they moved seven times—at first to farms around Tunbridge, Royalton, and Sharon, Vermont, and then to Lebanon, New Hampshire, back to Norwich, Vermont, and finally to western New York State. During these years Lucy gave birth to Sophronia in 1803, Joseph Jr. in 1805, Samuel Harrison in 1808, Ephraim in 1810 (he died ten days after birth), William in 1811, Catherine in 1812, and Don Carlos in 1816. By the time the family moved to New York in 1816, Lucy was forty-one and had given birth to ten children, of whom eight were alive. She would bear an additional daughter, Lucy, in 1821 in New York.

During these years of farming and moving, Joseph Sr. taught school occasionally during the winter to bring in extra income. In addition, the family received help from both Joseph's and Lucy's parents, and especially from Lucy's brother Stephen. There was work, but there was also family caring. Lucy remembered these years as full of joy and satisfaction. As she wrote, "We looked around us and said what do we now lack? There is nothing which we have not a sufficiency of to make us and our children perfectly comfortable both for food and raiment as well as that which is necessary to a respectable appearance in society both at home and abroad." The family had morning and evening prayers and sang hymns together. The children went to school, and they all pitched in to work on winter nights, making their own clothing and small handicraft items to sell. Still, they were not able to accumulate enough to buy land or to provide security for the future.

In 1812, while they were in Lebanon, New Hampshire, a typhoid fever epidemic swept through the region, leaving six thousand dead. All of the Smith children were stricken. Sophronia, the worst affected, was ill for three months and was finally left motionless, with eyes fixed as if in death. Joseph and Lucy clasped hands, knelt, and uttered a desperate prayer. Then Lucy grabbed her up in a blanket, pressed her close, and paced back and forth until the child finally sobbed and began to breathe. None of the children died.

Nevertheless, Joseph Jr., seven years of age at the time, was left with an infection that refused to heal. At first the sore was in his armpit; then it moved down to his left shin and ankle. The local surgeon opened the wound to release the infection, and when the wound failed to heal, he made another incision. Finally he consulted surgeons at Dartmouth Medical College, and they proposed amputation. When seven doctors (perhaps some were medical students) descended on the Smith home to perform the operation, Lucy refused to permit amputation, being supported by young Joseph as well. She insisted that they could cut out the diseased portion of bone but must leave the healthy bone intact. This they reluctantly agreed to do. It was an agonizing operation, done without any kind of painkiller, with the boy held tightly in the arms of his father. Not able to bear the sight, Lucy walked out to the fields. Fortunately, the doctor who operated was the one professional in New England who could perform such an operation, and it was a success. After three months of constant pain the leg began to heal, but convalescence required three years, during which time Joseph was either in bed or on crutches. To the end of his life he had a slight limp.

As these episodes reveal, Lucy was a resolute and determined woman. She paced the floor with Sophronia, she carried Joseph back and forth from his bed to his chair in front of the fire or to the table in the kitchen, she covenanted with God to preserve her family, and she comforted her children in their sufferings and problems.

But Lucy, who had a high-strung temperament, had her own health problems. In 1803, when she was twenty-eight, and before Joseph Jr. was born, she had come down with a cold, then a fever, which the doctor diagnosed as consumption. She was very ill, fearful of death, and felt unprepared to meet God. She had not experienced the kind of conversion that born-again Christians of her day felt was an essential precursor of salvation. So ill that her husband and her mother, who was looking after her, despaired of her life, Lucy pleaded with God to spare her so that she might bring up her children and be a comfort to her husband. She wrote: "My mind was much agitated during the whole night. Sometimes I contemplated heaven and heavenly things; then my thoughts would turn upon those of earth—my babes and my companion. During this night I made a solemn covenant with God, that if He would let me live I would endeavour to serve him according to the best of my abilities. Shortly after this I heard a voice say to me, 'Seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. Let your heart be comforted; ye believe in God, believe also in me.'" A few minutes later, she wrote, "my mother came in and, looking upon me, said, 'Lucy, you are better.'"

As she recovered her health, Lucy still felt troubled about religion. She had conversations with visiting ministers and with religious neighbors, but she could not find the godliness or heavenly spirit that she sought. "I therefore determined to examine my Bible and, taking Jesus and His disciples for my guide, to endeavour to obtain from God that which man could neither give nor take away." Finally she was baptized, but not into any specific religious denomination.

Later, when the Smiths moved to Tunbridge, Lucy attended Methodist meetings, but she did not feel a desire to affiliate with them. Her husband had a dream in 1811 that he related to her, and which she took seriously enough to record verbatim. The dream was filled with symbolism, but Lucy wrote that her husband concluded from it that church members knew no more of the kingdom of God than did those who made no profession of religion whatever. Although she yearned for association with a church, she remained alienated, partly by her husband's skepticism. Although they had regular prayers and sang hymns, he joined no church until his own son organized the restored Church of Christ in 1830.

The medical bills from the operation and subsequent recovery of young Joseph kept the Smiths impoverished. They moved to Norwich, Vermont, where they rented a farm from Squire Moredock and operated a kind of store out of their home. Lucy learned to paint oil tablecloths to sell; her husband peddled homemade baskets and brooms, root beer, cakes, boiled eggs, gingerbread, fruit, and other items. But their crops failed for two successive years.

When, after the spring planting of 1816, the frost continued through a summer highlighted by snow and ice, Joseph Sr. felt that he had had enough; he decided to move the family south to New York State. Leaving Lucy behind to supervise the move, he looked for new land in the Genesee region. A Mr. Howard was going to Palmyra and offered to accompany the rest of the Smith family. With the help of her mother, Lucy and the older boys assembled the provisions and clothing they needed. As they were about to depart, some creditors, who had held back until this crucial time to get a better settlement, presented their claims. By the time she had settled with everyone, Lucy was left with less than eighty dollars.

Lucy and the eight children left Norwich in the late fall of 1816. Snow was on the ground, and they traveled by sleigh to Royalton, where they left Lucy's mother with her son. Unfortunately, Lydia Mack, who had been living with Lucy's family for some time, was injured by an overturning wagon and had a premonition that she would not live to see them again. Her first concern was that her daughter's family remain religious. She declared: "I must soon exchange the things of this world for those which pertain to another state of existence, where I hope to enjoy the society of the blessed; and now as my last admonition, I beseech you to continue faithful in the service of God to the end of your days, that I may have the pleasure of embracing you in another and fairer world above." She died two years later as a result of her injuries.

Transferring their goods from the sleigh to a wagon, Lucy and her children headed for Palmyra, three hundred miles to the west. They had trouble with Caleb Howard, their driver. He refused to allow Joseph Jr. to ride, preferring to have some girls in an accompanying family ride next to him. Since Joseph, now ten, had just discarded his crutches and was still lame, Alvin and Hyrum tried to intercede in his behalf, but Howard knocked them down with the butt of his whip.

When Lucy ran out of money near Utica, almost one hundred miles from their destination, Howard threw the Smiths' goods out into the street and drove off with their team and wagon. Lucy found him in a bar and, before a company of travelers, accused him of robbing and leaving her destitute with eight children. As Howard attempted to drive off, Lucy grabbed the reins, the children mounted the wagon, and they resolutely drove on with bystanders cheering. When she ran out of money near the end of the trip, Lucy paid innkeepers with clothing and yards of cloth. The family arrived in Palmyra, Lucy recalled, with "a small portion of our effects, and barely two cents in cash." Joseph Sr. was waiting for them. "We all now sat down," she wrote, "and counselled together relative to the course which was best for us to adopt in our destitute circumstances."

Palmyra was a booming town with perhaps three thousand inhabitants. Most of the trades and professions were represented, and there was a bookstore, a tannery, a harness shop, a distillery, and a drugstore, as well as four taverns. To obtain cash with which to buy land, Lucy once more painted oil tablecloths, members of the family sold refreshments from a small shop and peddled them by cart when crowds gathered for celebrations and revivals, and the older boys worked for farmers needing extra hands for harvesting, digging wells, and landscaping. After two years of this labor, Lucy and Joseph were able to buy a farm two miles south of Palmyra in what would later become the township of Manchester. There they built, to use Lucy's words, "a snug log-house, neatly furnished." The four-room home provided sleeping space for ten people: six boys from two to nineteen, two girls six and fifteen, and the parents.

Family members now devoted most of their effort to clearing the land and preparing it for the planting of crops. According to Lucy, the men's labor was prodigious—they cleared thirty acres the first year. This enabled them to sell potash and pearl ash from the burnt trees, considerable cordwood, and some maple sugar. They apparently grew corn for the family and animals on the first land they cleared. They also sold brooms, baskets, cakes, maple sugar, and molasses, and very likely they fished, trapped, and hunted. They were also making many friends. Lucy was proud of her family. She wrote, "We began to rejoice in our prosperity; our hearts glowed with gratitude to God for the manifestations of His favor that surrounded us."

The Smiths were not caught up with material concerns to the exclusion of spiritual anxieties. Joseph Sr. continued to have dreams and visions that were impressive enough for him to relate them to Lucy and the family. Each of the dreams dwelt on the search for healing, for salvation, for beauty. It is also apparent that the parents and the older children were affected by the enticements of the local Presbyterian, Methodist, Baptist, and Quaker churches and the frequent revivals in the area. Indeed, Lucy, Hyrum, Sophronia, and Samuel decided to join the Presbyterian church, but Joseph Sr. and the other sons held back. Among these was Joseph Jr., who in 1820 was so infused by religious feelings that he went to a clearing in the nearby woods to pray. "A pillar of light" came down and rested upon him, he later told his parents, and he was "filled with the Spirit of God." "I saw the Lord and he spake unto me," he said. The message he received in this vision was one of forgiveness and redemption; but in response to his question concerning which church to join, he was told he should join none of them. He must wait for the Lord to accomplish His purposes.

The round of work continued. The family cleared and fenced additional land and planted an orchard, and some of the sons worked for farmers in the vicinity. With the threat of losing their farm over their heads, they held school in their own house and, under Lucy's direction, studied the Bible. Alvin, who was now twenty-three, began to build a large wood frame house. This was rendered all the more necessary when a new baby, Lucy, was born to Lucy in 1821. But in November 1823, before the house was finished, Alvin died. Lucy wrote that he had been given an overdose of medicine by a drunken doctor.

Shortly before Alvin's death, Joseph Jr. had another experience that significantly altered the lives of the Smiths. On September 21, 1823, when he was seventeen, Joseph waited until the others had gone to sleep and then began an intense supplication to God. While he was praying, he felt the room growing lighter and lighter. Suddenly, a person appeared in the light, standing above the floor. Joseph recalled: "He had on a loose robe of most exquisite whiteness. It was a whiteness beyond anything earthly I had ever seen, nor do I believe that any earthly thing could be made to appear so exceedingly white and brilliant. His hands were naked, and his arms also, a little above the wrist; so also were his feet naked, as were his legs, a little above the ankles. His head and neck were also bare. I could discover that he had no other clothing on but this robe, as it was open so that I could see into his bosom. Not only was his robe exceedingly white, but his whole person was glorious beyond description and his countenance truly like lightning."

The being, who identified himself as Moroni, assured young Joseph that he (Joseph) enjoyed the acceptance of God, that God had a work for him, and that his mission would be quite unlike any that he had dreamed of. He told Joseph about a book "written upon gold plates, giving an account of the former inhabitants of this continent and the source from whence they sprang. . . . The fulness of the everlasting gospel was contained in it, as delivered by the Savior to the ancient inhabitants." He also told Joseph about two stones in silver bows: "The possession and use of these stones were what constituted seers in ancient or former times," Joseph later wrote, adding that "God had prepared them for the purpose of translating the book." More was said, and Joseph understood that he was destined to play an important role in preparing for the return of Christ.

After delivering the message, the angel disappeared. But while the startled Joseph was trying to grasp the meaning of it all, the room began to brighten again. Moroni reappeared, and he repeated every word he had said before. Then he ascended a second time, only to appear a third time to repeat the same message.

Dawn broke shortly after the third message, and the family began to stir to do the morning chores. That morning, as he and his older brother and father worked at harvesting the wheat, young Joseph stopped, as if in deep thought. Urged on by his brother, he resumed work, but he soon stopped again. Noticing Joseph's pallor, his father sent him back to the house; but while he was attempting to climb the fence, he fainted, and for a time he lay unconscious. As he came to, he saw Moroni standing over him once more. The angel repeated the message a fourth time, this time directing Joseph to tell his father. Joseph returned to the field and related to his father what had transpired. Joseph Sr. accepted his son's story and told him that he must be careful to follow the instructions of the angel.

The plates the angel had described lay in a hill about three miles southeast of the Smith farm. Having seen the hill in the vision the night before, Joseph Jr. knew just where to look for them. He dug away the earth and uncovered a stone box within which were the plates, the Urim and Thummim, and a breastplate. Considering the indigent circumstances of the Smith family, Joseph could hardly avoid thinking of their worth and what they would bring on the market. That this thought should occur to the young man angered Moroni, who once more appeared, rebuked him for impure motives, and told him that, as Joseph reported, "the time for bringing them forth had not yet arrived." Joseph was to go to the hill the next year for further instructions. According to Lucy, he had to wait "until he had learned to keep the commandments of God—not only till he was willing but able to do it."

That evening young Joseph told his family about the angel and the plates. They all believed, convinced that God was about to give them "a more perfect knowledge of the plan of salvation and the redemption of the human family. This caused us greatly to rejoice," Lucy added, "the sweetest union and happiness pervaded our house, and tranquility reigned in our midst."

In the winter evenings that followed, Lucy wrote, "Joseph would occasionally give us some of the most amusing recitals that could be imagined. He would describe the ancient inhabitants of this continent, their dress, mode of traveling, and the animals upon which they rode; their cities, their buildings, with every particular; their mode of warfare; and also their religious worship. This he would do with as much ease, seemingly, as if he had spent his whole life with them."

But the portents of the future were not happy ones. Lucy later remembered that Joseph warned the family after he first saw the plates that they must not mention them outside the home, for people "would try to take our lives; and . . . our names would be cast out as evil by all people." All of which proved to be true.

In the Smith household and on the farm, work went on. To raise money to help them complete a new frame house, Joseph, Lucy, and their children continued working for established farmers and businesses. Joseph Jr. married Emma Hale in January 1827. Finally, in September 1827, after four annual visitations of the angel, Joseph brought back to his parents' home a box containing the gold plates and placed it under the hearthstones in the west room. Lucy wrote that after he returned from the hill, her son said, "Do not be uneasy, mother, all is right—see here, I have got a key." Lucy said the "key," presumably the Urim and Thummim, consisted of "two smooth, three-cornered diamonds set in glass, and the glasses were set in silver bows, which were connected with each other in much the same way as old-fashioned spectacles." Joseph also showed her the breastplate, wrapped in a muslin handkerchief thin enough to allow the glistening metal to be seen. With metal straps for fastening to hips and shoulders, it was apparently made for a person of extraordinary size.

Because of the interference of neighbors—their insistence on seeing the plates, their repeated attempts to steal them, and their demands that the plates be sold and the revenue shared with them—Joseph Jr. later took them to Harmony, Pennsylvania, to the home of his wife's parents, where he began the systematic process of translation. During those months Lucy and Joseph Sr. took occasion to visit their son and daughter-in-law in Harmony. They remained for nearly three months, visiting not only their children but Emma Smith's parents as well.

In 1829 the manuscript of the Book of Mormon, described by Lucy as "a record of the origin of aborigines of ancient America," was copyrighted and submitted to a printer for publication. Lucy, in her history, devotes a whole chapter to describing the efforts of persons in the region to prevent the printing. In fact, she insisted on keeping one copy of the final manuscript in a chest under the head of her bed so that if the other copy were stolen or destroyed, no disaster would ensue. Then, confident that the printing would proceed without interruption, she relaxed and became pensive. She wrote:

When I meditated upon the days of toil, and nights of anxiety, through which we had all passed for years previous, in order to obtain the treasure that then lay beneath my head; when I thought upon the hours of fearful apprehensions which we had all suffered on the same account, and that the object was at last accomplished, I could truly say that my soul did magnify the Lord, and my spirit rejoiced in God my Savior. I felt that the heavens were moved in our behalf, and that the angels who had power to put down the mighty from their seats, and to exalt them who were of low degree, were watching over us; that those would be filled who hungered and thirsted after righteousness, when the rich would be sent empty away; that God had helped his servant Israel in remembrance of his promised mercy, and in bringing forth a Record, by which is made known the seed of Abraham, our father. Therefore, we could safely put our trust in him, as he was able to help in every time of need.

The book was published by the end of March 1830.

On April 6, 1830, the Smiths and perhaps fifty or sixty persons who were persuaded that the Book of Mormon was of divine origin, and that young Joseph (now twenty-five) had been instructed to establish the restored church, gathered at the home of Peter and Mary Whitmer in Fayette, New York, to organize the Church of Christ. During the day there was a solemn sacrament service, singing, baptisms in nearby Seneca Lake, and the exercise of heavenly gifts. Among those baptized were Joseph Smith Sr. and Lucy. Lucy wrote: "When Mr. Smith [Joseph Sr.] came out of the water, Joseph [Jr.] stood upon the shore, and taking his father by the hand, he exclaimed, with tears of joy, 'Oh, my God! have I lived to see my own father baptized into the true Church of Jesus Christ!'" From that date, Joseph Sr. was a "Father in Israel," and Lucy was a "Mother in Israel." Their lives were inextricably tied up with their prophet-son and with the tumultuous history of the infant Church of Jesus Christ that had been organized that day.

In the meantime, Lucy and Joseph Sr., unable to make the annual payments on their farm, had sold it and were living with their oldest living son, Hyrum, in Manchester. Warned by Joseph Jr. that his life was in danger there, Hyrum moved to Colesville, some twenty miles distant, where he moved in with Newel and Sally Knight. Joseph likewise urged his father and mother to leave Manchester to avoid harassment from the local people, telling them that they should move to Waterloo, near the Whitmer family.

When Hyrum departed for Colesville, Lucy and Joseph Sr. and their youngest child, Lucy, were left alone, for Don Carlos, Catherine, and William were away, and Samuel was on a missionary assignment. That night Joseph Sr. fell ill. Early the next morning a Quaker gentleman came to collect on a note for fourteen dollars that Joseph Sr. had signed. Normally, collectors would give fair warning, but the Quaker was insistent. "If thou dost not pay me immediately," Lucy remembered him saying, "thou shalt go forthwith to the jail, unless . . . thou wilt burn up those Books of Mormon; but if thou wilt burn them up, then I will forgive thee the whole debt." Lucy offered her gold beads and Joseph tried to settle for the six dollars he had on him, but the intruder went to the door and beckoned to a constable. The lawman ordered Joseph into the police wagon without even permitting him to eat the porridge Lucy had prepared for him.

Other creditors came the next day. That evening a stranger pounded on the door, demanding to see Hyrum. He was followed by a second, a third, and a fourth. They searched the house and threatened to take some corn stored in an upstairs room. While they were searching, Lucy glanced out the window and saw the heads of men in every direction, "some on foot, some on horseback, and the rest in wagons." Obviously, a mob of "bandits, religious bigots, and cutthroats," as Lucy referred to them, had gathered. Alone with little Lucy, she knelt and begged the Lord to save her children. At that moment her son William bounded into the house. He sized up the situation, grabbed a large fire iron, ran upstairs to chase the four intruders out, and, still brandishing the iron lever, went outside to confront the crowd. At his appearance, the mob fled.

Samuel returned early the next morning and set forces in motion to achieve the release of his father. He then helped Joseph and Lucy move to Waterloo. Their reception there was friendly, and they were soon holding evening meetings for singing and prayer. But forces were underway that would make that home temporary. At a church conference held in January 1831, Joseph Smith Jr. announced a revelation that directed that the Church, to "escape the power of the enemy," should move to northern Ohio. The gathering of Israel would commence.

Throughout the late winter and early spring of 1831, one hundred or so members of the Church in New York made their way west to Kirtland, Ohio. Joseph Smith Sr. and his sons Samuel and Hyrum went ahead of their families, joining Joseph Jr. Lucy left in early May, taking charge of a group of about fifty persons. They boarded a canal boat from a dock on the Seneca River, then followed the Cayuga and Erie canals to Buffalo. Heavy ice on Lake Erie blocked further passage. While they waited for the ice to break, Lucy boarded her party onto a steamboat and told them to "lift their hearts in prayer to God." Suddenly the ice parted miraculously, leaving space enough for the boat to pass through; then, just as suddenly, it closed behind them.

The immigrants finally reached Fairport, eleven miles from Kirtland, and were in Kirtland by the middle of May. The Smith farmhouse in New York, the Peter Whitmer farm where the Church had been organized, the places of worship in Waterloo and Colesville—all had been left behind. Lucy, now fifty-five, and Joseph Sr., sixty, had left their old lives behind and expected to spend the rest of their days in association with members of the Church of Christ.

Shortly after moving to Kirtland in the spring of 1831, Lucy paid a visit to the wife of her brother Stephen, Temperance Mack, who now lived in Pontiac, Michigan. Stephen had moved from Tunbridge, Vermont, to Detroit in 1807 to open a general merchandise store. He served with the Michigan Volunteers during the 1812 war against England, moving to Pontiac, twenty-six miles north of Detroit, in 1818. He died in 1826.

Accompanying Lucy were her son Hyrum and a few other Latter-day Saints. They were cordially received by Temperance. During the four-week visit Lucy, now an enthusiastic missionary for the new faith, told Temperance the good news about the Book of Mormon and the restored gospel. Temperance was converted and remained a faithful member the rest of her life. During the visit Lucy was introduced to the minister of a Protestant church in Pontiac. "So you are the mother of that poor, foolish, silly boy, Joe Smith, who pretended to translate the Book of Mormon," he mused. In writing of the experience later, Lucy says she shook her finger in his face, stoutly proclaimed the truth of Joseph's work, and prophesied that within three years the Latter-day Saints would have a third of his church, including the deacon. The minister laughed, but the prediction came true in two years. In 1838 Temperance moved to Kirtland to be with her daughter Almira, who also became an ardent Latter-day Saint, and to be close to Lucy.

In 1833 Lucy's workload was further altered by her husband's ordination as patriarch of the Church. Blessing feasts were a common festivity at the time in Kirtland. Held in the homes of various members, these activities occasionally featured full meals, at other times cake and cider or fruit juice. Then Father Smith gave patriarchal blessings to all who attended. Often the meetings were held at the Smith home, attracting so many that latecomers had to be turned away. After the Kirtland Temple was completed in 1836, the meetings were held there. Mary Fielding Smith, who was present at one of them, described the marvelous blessings given by her future father-in-law: "The hearts of the people were melted and the Spirit & power of God rested down upon us in a remarkable manner. Many spake in tongues & others prophesied & interpreted. . . . [It was] a time of love & refreshing. The Bretheren as well as the Sisters were all melted down and we wept and praised God together."

In Kirtland, the leaders of the Church began to erect a meetinghouse-schoolhouse. It was not finished before they had to go to Missouri in the spring of 1834 to assist the Saints who had been driven out of their homes there. They left Reynolds Cahoon in charge of completing the building, but he said he had neither the time nor the means to finish it. Impatient, Lucy told her husband that she would try to raise the means herself. Within two weeks she had raised sufficient funds and employed carpenters and cabinetmakers, and the building was completed in time for use that fall.

While Lucy's sons Joseph and Hyrum were in Missouri, they fell deathly ill from cholera. They prayed to be healed, and finally Hyrum sprang to his feet and exclaimed, "I have had an open vision, in which I saw mother kneeling under an apple tree; and she is even now asking God, in tears, to spare our lives, that she may again behold us in the flesh. The Spirit testifies, that her prayers, united with ours, will be answered." "Oh, my mother!" the Prophet exclaimed upon his return, "how often have your prayers been the means of assisting us when the shadows of death encompassed us."

Considering the responsibilities of Joseph Smith Sr. as patriarch, as well as Lucy Smith's motherly and neighborly instincts, which prompted her often to invite travelers to stay with them, the Smiths were almost in the position of running a free hotel. She wrote in her memoirs, "How often I have parted every bed in the house for the accommodation of the brethren, and then laid a single blanket on the floor for my husband and myself, while Joseph and Emma slept upon the same floor, with nothing but their cloaks for both bed and bedding."

In 1835, Joseph Jr. invited his parents to move into an upper room of his own house. They accepted the invitation. Lucy wrote that she hoped to devote most of her time to the study of the Bible, the Book of Mormon, and the Doctrine and Covenants. However, a sudden accident prevented her from doing so. One day, as she was going downstairs to dinner, she slipped on a stick near the top of the stairs and plunged down the steps head first. The accident crippled her to some extent and also blinded her; she was in bed several weeks and the doctors were unable to help. Finally she called on the elders to bless her so she could see and read. They did so, and, she recalled, "when they took their hands off my head, I read two lines in the Book of Mormon." So well was she healed that she did not wear glasses until after she was seventy, some ten years later.

In September 1837, Joseph Smith Sr. was sustained as an assistant counselor in the First Presidency of the Church; he continued to serve also as patriarch. That fall and throughout the winter, the Saints in Kirtland were severely persecuted by angry mobs and forced to flee to Missouri. Joseph and Lucy left in early 1838, moving to a small log hut near their son Joseph's home in Far West, Missouri.

But in Missouri the Saints continued to have difficulties with older settlers. Finally they were presented with an order to either leave Missouri or be exterminated. When a militia came to see that the order was carried out, Lucy and Joseph heard frightful screams and loud shouting. They assumed that their son, the Prophet, had been killed. That proved untrue, but the militia did forcibly arrest both Joseph and Hyrum, as well as several other Church leaders. As he was being taken to prison, the Prophet asked for a few moments to say goodbye to his family, but this was denied. However, Lucy managed to slip through the guard and to extend her hand under the wagon cover to touch her sons. She felt Joseph seize her hand and kiss it, and heard him shout, "God bless you, my dear mother!" Joseph Sr. did not get to see his sons at all.

The Saints abandoned their homes and fields in Missouri and headed for Illinois, first to Quincy and then to Commerce, which they renamed Nauvoo. Some five months later Joseph and Hyrum and their associates escaped from their captors and joined their families in Nauvoo. There the Prophet built a home for his parents near his own.

The Smith family gathered at the home frequently. On one occasion when all of the family were present, Joseph Sr. gave each of them a special blessing. Then he addressed Lucy, telling her, "Mother, do you not know that you are one of the most singular women in the world?" "No," she replied, "I do not." "Well, I do," he continued. "You have brought up my children for me by the fireside and, when I was gone, you comforted them. You have brought up all my children, and could always comfort them when I could not. . . . Do not mourn, but try to be comforted. Your last days shall be your best days." Shortly thereafter, in September 1840, he died. He was sixty-nine.

After the death of her husband, Lucy continued to bear her testimony, attend meetings, visit her children and grandchildren and nurse them when they were sick, and comfort and assist many who had suffered as the result of the exodus from Missouri. The year after her husband's death, her youngest son, Don Carlos, also died. Though only twenty-five, he had been the editor of the church magazine, the Times and Seasons, and a brigadier general in the Nauvoo militia.

In 1843 Lucy moved into the home of Joseph Jr. and Emma. Many visitors came to Nauvoo, the City Beautiful, desiring to meet not only the Prophet, but his mother as well. To show these visitors the items connected with Mormon history and doctrine that she had saved and collected, Lucy established a small, private museum. The articles on exhibit included not only church magazines, newspapers, pamphlets, and books, but also various historical artifacts and antiquities. Among the most talked-about items were four Egyptian mummies, which were connected with some papyrus scrolls that the Prophet used in writing the Book of Abraham.

Another of Lucy's activities was connected with the Nauvoo Female Relief Society, organized on March 17, 1842. She became a member at the second meeting, held a week after the organization, and all of her daughters and daughters-in-law living in the region became members, as did Temperance Mack and her daughter Almira. Lucy was always referred to in the society's discussions in almost reverential terms, and prayers were offered that her days should be prolonged so that she should "enjoy much in the society of sisters, and shall hereafter be crowned a mother of those that shall prove faithful!" On the day she was voted in, the minutes show that Lucy arose and said she rejoiced in what was being done. Then she wept, hoping that "the Lord would bless and aid the Society in feeding the hungry and clothing the naked."

Lucy's greatest moment of anguish was in June 1844, when she went to view the dead bodies of Joseph and Hyrum after their assassination in Carthage jail. Her account of the experience is as follows:

After the corpses were washed and dressed in their burial clothes, we were allowed to see them. I had for a long time braced every nerve, roused every energy of my soul and called upon God to strengthen me; but when I entered the room and saw my murdered sons extended both at once before my eyes, and heard the sobs and groans of my family and the cries of "Father! Husband! Brothers!" from the lips of their wives, children, brothers and sisters, it was too much. I sank back, crying to the Lord in the agony of my soul, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken this family!" A voice replied, "I have taken them to myself, that they might have rest." Emma [Joseph's wife] was carried back to her room almost in a state of insensibility. Her oldest son approached the corpse and dropped upon his knees, and laying his cheek against his father's, and kissing him, exclaimed, "Oh, my father, my father!" As for myself, I was swallowed up in the depths of my afflictions, and though my soul was filled with horror past imagination, yet I was dumb until I arose again to contemplate the spectacle before me. Oh! at that moment how my mind flew through every scene of sorrow and distress which we had passed together, in which they had shown the innocence and sympathy which filled their guileless hearts. As I looked upon their peaceful, smiling countenances, I seemed almost to hear them say, "Mother, weep not for us, we have overcome the world by love; we carried to them the gospel, that their souls might be saved; they slew us for our testimony, and thus placed us beyond their power; their ascendancy is for a moment, ours is an eternal triumph."

Not long after this, her son Samuel, who had managed to evade the mob in bringing the bodies back from Carthage, complained of an illness brought on by overexertion and exposure. He lingered on for a month and died in July. He had gone, to use Lucy's words, "to join his brothers, and the ancient martyrs, in the Paradise of God." Lucy, who was now sixty-nine and burdened by "the cruelty of an ungodly and hard-hearted world," to use her words, had endured the deaths of her husband and five of her six sons who had lived to manhood—Alvin, Hyrum, Joseph Jr., Samuel, and Don Carlos.

After she was able to quiet her feelings, Lucy decided that the most important contribution she could make to the memory of her husband and sons, as well as to the church they had been agents in establishing, would be to tell the complete story of her family and of the restoration of the gospel. With the encouragement of Brigham Young and the Council of Twelve Apostles, she secured the help of Martha Jane Knowlton Coray, a schoolteacher. During the winter of 1844-1845, she dictated her reminiscences to Sister Coray in an almost stream-of-consciousness narration. The reminiscences were written in some eighteen notebooks and bore the tentative title "History of Mother Smith, by Herself." Under the direction of Lucy and Sister Coray, this was then edited and refined to produce the preliminary manuscript of a book. Finally, with the addition of other material that occurred to Lucy as she went through the preliminary manuscript, a "final" manuscript, now in the Church Archives in Salt Lake City, was copied out by Sister Coray.

When Orson Pratt, an apostle of the Church, was in England as president of the British Mission and publisher of the Latter-day Saints Millennial Star, he was able to acquire the manuscript. He published it in Liverpool in 1853 under the title Biographical Sketches of Joseph Smith the Prophet, and His Progenitors for Many Generations. The book is 296 printed pages in length and covers the period from the birth of Lucy's father in 1735 to the assassination of her sons in 1844. She concludes her history by bearing testimony to the truth of her account of her prophet-son and the divine work in which he was engaged. It continues to be the principal source for the inspiring story of the early life of the Prophet and the family in which he was reared. The book, as well as copies of surviving letters she wrote, including one as early as 1829, show Lucy to have been an articulate person—intelligent, fluent, and with a remarkable memory.

By the time Lucy finished her history, the Saints had determined to leave Illinois and migrate to the Great Basin of the Rocky Mountains. In the conference at which the exodus was announced, Lucy was invited to address the congregation. The clerk of the conference recorded her address as follows (changing the third person of the clerk into first person, as she would have delivered it):

I am truly glad that the Lord has let me see so large a congregation. I had a great deal of advice to give, but Brother Brigham Young has done the errand, he has fixed it completely. . . . I raised up eleven children, seven of them boys. I raised them in the fear and love of God. When they were two or three years old I told them I wanted them to love God with all their hearts. I told them to do good. I want all you to do the same. God gives us our children and we are accountable. . . . I presume there never was a family more obedient than mine. I did not have to speak to them but once. I want you to teach your little children about Joseph in Egypt and such things, and when they are older they will love to read their Bible. Set your children to work; protect their health. Remember that I love children, young folks, and everybody. Now, brothers and sisters, if you consider me a Mother in Israel, I want you to say so.

At this point Brigham Young put the question: "All who consider Mother Smith as a Mother in Israel, signify it by saying yes!" One universal "Yes" ran through the hall, according to the clerk. Lucy then remarked that eighteen years had passed since Joseph Smith the Prophet had become acquainted with the contents of the plates. She recalled scenes of Church history—the trials and privations, the persecutions and suffering—and expressed confidence in the future, declaring:

I feel that the Lord will let Brother Brigham take the people away. Here, in this city, lie my dead—my husband and children. If the rest of my children go with you (and I would to God they may all go), they will not go without me; and if I go I want my bones brought back in case I die, so they may be deposited with my husband and children.

Brigham Young made a solemn promise that should she be in the West when she died, her bones would be returned to Illinois. This proved not to be necessary. For reasons of health and age, Lucy decided to remain in Nauvoo with her daughter Lucy Milliken. Two years later she went to live with her daughter-in-law, the Prophet's widow, Emma Smith Bidamon. Lucy died at Emma's home on May 5, 1855, age seventy-nine, fully confident that the celestial crown of glory awaited her in eternity. She was buried beside her husband and sons in the family burial ground in Nauvoo.

Sources

The best single sources on the life of Lucy Mack Smith are Lucy Mack Smith, Biographical Sketches of Joseph Smith the Prophet and His Progenitors for Many Generations (Liverpool, England, 1853), and Richard L. Bushman, Joseph Smith and the Beginnings of Mormonism (Urbana and Chicago: University of Illinois Press, 1984). Biographies of Joseph Smith that tell of his parentage include Edward W. Tullidge, Life of Joseph the Prophet (Plano, Illinois: Board of Publication of the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, 1880); John Henry Evans, Joseph Smith: An American Prophet (New York: Macmillan, 1933); Preston Nibley, Joseph Smith the Prophet (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1944); Donna Hill, Joseph Smith, the First Mormon (New York: Doubleday, 1977); and Francis M. Gibbons, Joseph Smith, Martyr, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1977).

The lives of Lucy's grandparents and their influence on Lucy and her family are traced in Mary Audentia Smith Anderson, Ancestry and Posterity of Joseph Smith and Emma Hale (Independence, Missouri: Herald House Publishing, 1929), and Richard Lloyd Anderson, Joseph Smith's New England Heritage: Influences of Grandfathers Solomon Mack and Asael Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1971). A biography of Lucy's sister-in-law is John and Audrey Cumming, The Pilgrimage of Temperance Mack (Mount Pleasant, Michigan, 1967).

Short sketches on the life of Lucy include "Lucy Mack Smith," in Emma M. Phillips, 33 Women of the Restoration (Independence, Missouri: Herald House Publishing, 1960), pp. 11-17; "Lucy Mack Smith," in Richard S. Van Wagoner and Steven C. Walker, A Book of Mormons (Salt Lake City: Signature Books, 1982), pp. 309-13; Jaynann M. Payne, "Lucy Mack Smith: Faith in the Family," in Joseph Smith, Sr., Family Reunion, 18-19 August 1972, Nauvoo, Illinois; "Lucy Smith" in Andrew Jenson, Latter-day Saint Biographical Encyclopedia 1:690-92; "Lucy Mack Smith," in Brigham Young University, Dedication and Naming of 22 Buildings (Provo, Utah, May 26, 1954), pp. 26-27.

Other sources include Dean C. Jessee, "Lucy Smith's 1829 Letter to Mary Pierce," typescript in possession of Leonard J. Arrington; "George A. Smith, Obituary of Lucy, the Mother of the Prophet," published in The Mormon (New York), July 12, 1856; Vida E. Smith, "Character Sketch of Lucy Mack Smith," Journal of History 1 (1908):406-12; Edward W. Tullidge, The Women of Mormondom (New York, 1877), pp. 6-9, 297-300; Heman C. Smith, "Distinguished Women: Lucy Mack Smith," Journal of History 12 (1919): 103ff.; Mary Salisbury Hancock, "The Three Sisters of the Prophet Joseph Smith," The Saints Herald, January 11, 1954, pp. 10-12; Richard Lloyd Anderson, "Joseph Smith's Home Environment," Ensign 1 (July 1971): 56-59; and Linda King Newell and Valeen Tippetts Avery, Mormon Enigma: Emma Hale Smith (Garden City, New York: Doubleday, 1984), esp. p. 265.
