Susan Arrington Madsen, Leonard J. Arrington, Mothers of the Prophets ( 1987)

Abigail (Nabby) Howe Young

Of my mother—she that bore me—I can say, no better woman ever lived in the world than she was. I have the feelings of a son toward her: I should have them—it is right; but I judge the matter pertaining to her from the principles and the spirit of the teachings I received from her. Would she countenance one of her children in the least act that was wrong according to her traditions? No, not in the least degree. (Brigham Young)

In October 1785, when she was twenty years old, Abigail (Nabby) Howe received a proposal of marriage from John Young. John, two years older than Nabby and a veteran of the Revolutionary War, was a "small, nimble, wiry man" who had worked for Colonel John Jones, a well-to-do landowner in Hopkinton, Massachusetts, a farming community about twenty-five miles southwest of Boston. John's father had died when he was six, and following colonial practice, the death of the father meant the dissolution of the family. John and some of his brothers and sisters were "bound out" to families that would take them in and raise them. A virtual servant, and frequently whipped, John ran away to volunteer for George Washington's army when he was sixteen; he served in three campaigns.

Nabby, with a "doll-like face, blue eyes, and yellowish brown hair folded in natural waves and ringlets" was popular in the social set of the town, a good singer, and thought to be "a good catch." She had a gentle disposition and a pleasing personality, and was pious. She also came from a family of some substance; her relatives included Elias Howe Jr., who later invented the sewing machine, and Samuel Gridley Howe, the educator and reformer who was the husband of Julia Ward Howe, author of "The Battle Hymn of the Republic."

Nabby's parents thought her foolish to marry "the little orphan" whose future was so uncertain. But Nabby liked John, saw real potential in his energy and personality, and went ahead with the marriage. After she had accepted John's proposal, one can imagine that on some night before the wedding, he dared to sing to her the jolly song of the Revolution:

"O soldier, soldier won't you marry me, with your musket, fife, and drum?" "Oh, no, sweet maid, I cannot marry thee, for I have no coat to put on." Then up she went to her grandfather's chest And got him a coat of the very very best, She got him a coat of the very very best, And the soldier put it on.

And by the time John had got the soldier into a hat, boots, and gloves—with the help of grandfather's chest and three more verses—the last verse was laughed through with gusto as Nabby joined in:

"For I have a wife of my own."

The ceremony was held on October 31, 1785, in Christ Church (Congregational) in Hopkinton. Nabby and John started life together on a farm in Hopkinton.

Nabby was born on May 3, 1765, in Hopkinton, the third of eleven children born to Phineas and Susanna Goddard Howe. She bore difficulties with good nature, handled tensions with laughter, and was prepared to achieve her identity by mothering and nurturing. Nabby's father was active in town affairs, signed at least one letter from the Hopkinton town fathers to the Continental Congress, and cast a skeptical eye toward higher authorities, whether political or ecclesiastical. Her mother was religious, accepting biblical statements as being literal and supporting evangelical revivals. She was also frugal: she carefully preserved her one silk dress to wear throughout her life. She and Phineas had their children christened at Christ Church and sent them to subscription school, singing school, and church socials.

Nabby continued these family traditions. One contemporary referred to her as "quite a reformer." Presumably, she meant by this that Nabby was always willing to help others do the right thing. She was sometimes sought by neighboring families to give counsel to newlyweds; she was a methodical and orderly person; and she had a lively sense of humor. She was pretty, had a good social sense, and encouraged the singing of hymns in her home.

After three years and the birth of two girls, Nancy and Fanny, in Hopkinton, John and Nabby moved to Durham, south of Albany, Greene County, New York, in the Platauva District on the eastern side of the Catskills. This was described as "a vast wilderness where fish and game were plentiful." A number of Revolutionary War veterans had moved there. John's older brother William had died there, and John may have taken up his land or independently acquired his own. The Youngs probably moved there during the winter of 1788-89. The wagon roads, such as there were, were too muddy to travel in spring or fall and too dusty during the summer. No doubt John wanted to get to his land by early spring in order to clear it and begin planting. Nabby was pregnant with her third child, Rhoda, who was born the following September in Durham.

Two years later Nabby and John were back in Hopkinton. Perhaps the Durham country was wilder than John anticipated; perhaps they returned in response to the pleadings of the Howes. At any rate, they were greeted warmly on their return. "All the family flew out to receive us," wrote Fanny, who at the time was only three, "and caught the three children (one older and one younger than myself) in their arms while grandmother and mother wept." The Youngs established themselves again on the south slope of Sadler's Hill in Hopkinton. In May 1791, their first son, John Jr., was born. They remained on their Hopkinton farm for another ten years, during which Nabby, Susannah, Joseph, and Phinehas were added to the family.

Eight children, all of them reasonably healthy, must have put a strain on both John and Nabby. John worked exhaustingly to provide enough to eat. He was quick to be tender but also quick to be angry. Just as Colonel Jones's wife had whipped him as a child, so John was not hesitant to discipline his own children. As his son Brigham later said, "It was a word and a blow with him but the blow came first." Nabby was calmer; free with counsel and correction, she bore their trials with good cheer.

Because of their poverty and John's heavy workload, Nabby found herself having to teach her children to read and write and do simple arithmetic. She often sang as she performed household tasks, and she led the children in their prayers and Bible reading. In the evening, John entertained the family with stories of his experiences during the war of liberation and subsequently on Colonel Jones's "plantation."

Two events had occurred in Durham that had lasting effects on the family. The first was that Nabby came down with consumption (what we later came to call tuberculosis), and her strength and resistance gradually wore down. Ultimately, much of her housework had to be done by her children, and eventually she would die when she was only fifty.

The other event was the conversion of Nabby and John to Methodism. Methodist circuit riders often called at the cabins of new settlers and baptized, conducted funerals, held revivals, and in other ways looked after the spiritual welfare of those on the frontier. John, who believed that a person might hold to an orthodox creed and yet be a meager Christian, just as one might "keep inside of statute law and yet be a meager citizen," was attracted to their fiery revivals, their orderly habits, and the warm spirit they exhibited. Religion was not something to be taken for granted and left to wither on the vine. Impatient with predestination and limited atonement, and above all with the theological quibbling of the various churches, John and Nabby believed in inner conversion—the "witness of the spirit" and "Christian perfection." So warmly did Nabby and John embrace Methodism that John himself, three of his sons, and eventually one of his sons-in-law became itinerant Methodist preachers.

In 1801 John and Nabby decided to move to southern Vermont. Just north of the Massachusetts border, at a place called Whitingham, a few settlers had begun to move in to cultivate the land and organize a town. On November 18, 1800, John bought a fifty-acre farm from his sister's wealthy husband, and in January 1801 the Young family went by ox-sled and horsesled (one sleigh for Nabby and the children, the other for their transportable family possessions) to the new destination. By then John was thirty-seven; Nabby, thirty-four; Nancy, fourteen; Fanny, thirteen; Rhoda, eleven; John Jr., nine; Nabby, seven; Susannah, five; Joseph, three; and Phinehas, one. For some unexplained reason, perhaps to console Nabby's parents, they left Rhoda behind with the Howes.

John and Nabby apparently stayed in the cabin of an earlier migrant until they could build their own home. They were probably assisted by neighboring settlers in the "log raising" of their own cabin. (There were about two hundred families in Whitingham in 1801.) By spring they were in their new sixteen-foot-square home, complete with bunk beds, stick chimney, and fireplace. Until the harvest, they had to live on wild turkeys, pigeons, partridges, berries, nuts, rabbits, deer, and bear, as well as use up any provisions, such as flour and corn, that they might have brought with them from Hopkinton.

On June 1, after John and the older boys had "sugared off" the maple trees and planted the corn, Nabby gave birth to her ninth child and fourth son. John and Nabby named him Brigham, after the surname of Nabby's maternal grandparents. Because Nabby continued to suffer from spells of coughing and was so weak that she could not properly care for him, "Briggie," as he was called, was bottle-fed by his thirteen-year-old sister, Fanny. "No one could pacify him but sister Fanny," one of the family declared. It is said that he became so attached to Fanny, who was "gentle and deft-handed," that she had to carry him on her hip even while she milked the cow.

The family's lot was a hard one, and Nabby, though weak, was proud to be making her contribution. She continued to sew, churn, read to her children, and visit with neighbors. One wonders how the children could have escaped the tuberculosis from which she suffered, since it was highly contagious. As we shall see, little Nabby, her mother's namesake, did not escape. The eldest daughter, Nancy, perhaps because of her own heavy workload at home, left to marry when she was sixteen. Fanny left shortly thereafter for the same purpose. Rhoda did not join the family until 1809, six years after the older girls left; in the intervening years, much of the housework, as well as the care of Nabby, had to be done by John and the boys.

In the meantime, John Young was discovering that Whitingham did not really have good agricultural potential. There were few level acres fit for cultivation, and most of the land was stony. The winters were also long and hard on Nabby. After three years the Youngs decided to make another move, this time west of the Alleghenies to Sherburne, Chenango County, in central New York. The family moved there in the spring of 1804.

More primitive than Whitingham, Sherburne was rich in wild berries, nuts, and wild animals, large and small. During that first year John and the boys (John Jr. was now thirteen, Joseph seven) were able to clear and plant enough corn to hold them through the next winter. Meanwhile, work proceeded on a log cabin, and a baby girl, Louisa, was born shortly after their arrival. Three years later the eleventh and last child of John and Nabby was born, a son whom they named after Lorenzo Dow, the great exhorter who had made an indelible impression on the family at a revival in nearby Smyrna. The excitement of the new birth was subdued by the family's grief over the death of little Nabby of consumption no doubt acquired from her mother. Apparently the same year the family moved a short distance away to "Dark Hollow," some three or four miles from Sherburne.

John and the boys once more cleared land of trees and brush; plowed, planted, and cultivated; trapped and hunted wild game; and made furniture for their home. By now Brigham was eight and could help with many tasks, both inside and out. John is always described in contemporary sources as a "worker." During that period farmers cut hay and grain with a hand scythe. Lorenzo remembered his father as "the best mower in the section where he lived." Even after he was fifty, one young man declared, "Uncle John Young is the best mower in this town." The family endured many privations and hardships, but Nabby stood loyally by her husband, and encouraged her sons to hire out to clear and work the land of others for such income as they could earn. The girls apparently worked with straw, making baskets and hats.

Through it all, Nabby conducted a school in the evening and on Sunday, teaching the younger children, as she had taught the older ones before, to read, write, and do sums. Brigham later said that he received eleven days of formal schooling. All the rest came from his mother.

After an absence of eight years, daughter Rhoda, now nineteen, returned to join the family. Joseph, who was now twelve, said that "it seemed as though an Angel had visited our house, and to add to our happiness had come to abide with us." Rhoda remained four years, after which she married John P. Greene, a Methodist preacher, who lived in Aurelius, six miles from the upper end of Cayuga Lake. Perhaps at the insistence of Rhoda, who wanted to be helpful in looking after Nabby and the younger children, the Youngs took the remainder of their family there.

About the time of the move, John Jr. married, and a year later Susannah also took the step, so five children remained with John and Nabby: Joseph, Phinehas, Brigham, Louisa, and Lorenzo. Brigham, who later in life reminisced publicly about the family, reported that the boys baked bread, milked the cows, and made butter. He spoke of fixing breakfast for the family, carrying his mother from the bed to the table and then to a chair in front of the fireplace, and then going out to work for the day. Upon his return he would prepare supper, carry his mother once more to the table, and after the meal back to her chair, and then tidy up things for the family's evening together at home.

It is, of course, misleading to simply report Nabby's worsening condition. There were no tranquilizing drugs, no sedatives. Tuberculosis was painful, and the slow disintegration of tissues, especially of the lungs, and the pain this produced, must have tormented not only Nabby but her husband and children as well. That she continued to function as a wife and mother, despite her inability to work and despite her wracking cough, increasingly emaciated frame, and bodily pain, suggests the magnitude of her courage. In a very real sense, she was heroic. Witnessing her struggle, the children also developed compassion, a quality they retained throughout their lives. Moreover, in a very direct way, the experience with his mother prepared Brigham for a similar problem. His first wife, Miriam Works, also contracted the dreaded disease after bearing two children, and he found himself caring for the children, preparing meals, and carrying Miriam to and from her chair at the fireplace, just as he had done with his mother. Miriam died in 1832.

In a very real way Nabby and John prepared Brigham and his brothers and sisters to receive positively the "restoration of Bible religion," as one of the children called it, which was Mormonism. His parents, Brigham said, "were some of the most strict religionists that lived upon the earth." They did not permit playing cards in their home, and they would not let the children say "darn it" or "the devil." "When I was young," he explained, "I was kept within very strict bounds, and was not allowed to walk more than half-an-hour on Sunday for exercise. . . . I had not a chance to dance when I was young, and never heard the enchanting tones of the violin, until I was eleven years of age; and then I thought I was on the highway to hell, if I suffered myself to linger and listen to it."

Brigham described his father as "very circumspect, exemplary and religious," never demanding of his children behavior he himself did not display. He never heard his father swear, "not so much as a darn it or curse it or the devil." Although the children remembered Nabby as tempering the sternness of her husband, she was just as fervent in her beliefs, not tolerating in her children "the least act that was wrong according to her traditions." Said Brigham:

My mother, while she lived, taught her children all the time to honour the name of the Father and the Son, and to reverence the holy Book. She said, Read it, observe its precepts, and apply them to your lives as far as you can; do everything that is good; do nothing that is evil; and if you see any persons in distress, administer to their wants; never suffer anger to arise in your bosoms. . . . Never did my mother or my father countenance any of the children in anything to wrong their neighbour or fellow-being, even if they were injured by them. If they have injured me, says my father, let me return good for evil, and leave it in the hand of the Lord: he will bless me for doing right and curse them for doing wrong.

The Youngs had been in Aurelius for two years when Nabby finally lost her extended and painful battle against consumption. She had long since relinquished her share of household burdens, but her death, on June 11, 1815, at age fifty, brought about a significant disruption of the family. John took leave of the farm and its many improvements and with three of his sons (Joseph, eighteen; Phinehas, sixteen; and Brigham, fourteen) moved thirty-five miles west to the "Sugar Hill" district of Steuben County, near Tyrone, on the Tioga River. Louisa and Lorenzo were left with Rhoda and John Greene in Aurelius. When John came home one day with a new bride, the widow Hannah Brown, and her several children, Nabby's boys also left. Joseph and Brigham went to live with their sister, Susannah Little, and Phinehas got married.

Nevertheless, the influence of Nabby continued strong. The family lived close together, they kept up their church affiliations, and they held frequent get-togethers. Early in 1830 family members were introduced to the Book of Mormon. Within two years, all ten of the living children, their spouses, and their father, John, became Latter-day Saints. They remained loyal to its principles and practices throughout the rest of their lives. "God bless my mother," said Brigham in a sermon delivered after he became president of the Church. "No better woman ever lived in the world than she was."

Sources

Although no Abigail Howe Young papers are known to be in existence, several of her children left information about her. This includes letters of Fanny Murray; personal histories of Joseph, Phinehas, Brigham, and Lorenzo Young; and other documents and papers, all in the Church Archives in Salt Lake City. Genealogical and historical material is also in the Susa Young Gates Collection, Utah State Historical Society Library, Salt Lake City.

Books that mention Abigail and John include Richard F. Palmer and Karl D. Butler, Brigham Young: The New York Years (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1982); S. Dilworth Young, "Here Is Brigham": Brigham Young, the Years to 1844 (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1964), esp. pp. 13-49; Eugene England, "Young Brigham," in Brother Brigham (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1980), pp. 1-33; and Leonard J. Arrington, Brigham Young: American Moses (New York: Alfred Knopf, 1985), esp. pp. 7-30.

Valuable information is found in Gene A. Sessions, "John Young: Soldier of the Revolution," in Latter-day Patriots: Nine Mormon Families and Their Revolutionary War Heritage (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1975), pp. 20-41; S. Dilworth Young, Young Brigham Young (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1962); Susa Young Gates, "Mother of the Latter-day Prophets: Abigail Howe Young," Juvenile Instructor 59 (January 1924): 6; Susa Young Gates, "Notes on the Young and Howe Families," Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine 11 (January 1920):182-83; Rebecca Cornwall and Richard F. Palmer, "The Religious and Family Background of Brigham Young," in Brigham Young University Studies 18 (Spring 1978): 286-310; Leonard J. Arrington and JoAnn Jolley, "The Faithful Young Family: The Parents, Brothers, and Sisters of Brigham," Ensign 10 (August 1980): 52-57; and Ronald K. Esplin, "The Emergence of Brigham Young and the Twelve to Mormon Leadership, 1830-1841" (Ph.D. diss., Brigham Young University, 1981), esp. chapter 1.

Many biographies of Brigham Young contain some information about his mother. The most useful is Susa Young Gates and Leah D. Widtsoe, The Life Story of Brigham Young (New York: Macmillan, 1930).
