Susan Arrington Madsen, Leonard J. Arrington, Mothers of the Prophets ( 1987)

Agnes Taylor Taylor

Here rests a pattern of the female life The woman, friend, the mother and the wife. A woman form'd by nature, more than art, With smiling ease to gain upon the heart A friend as true as guardian angels are, Kindness her law, humanity her care. A mother, sweetly tender, justly dear, Oh, never to be nam'd without a tear. . . . Love in her heart, compassion in her eye, Her thoughts as humble, as her virtues high. . . . Born to relieve the poor, the rich to please, To live with honour, and to die in peace. So full of hope, her wishes so resign'd, Her life so blameless, so unstain'd her mind, Heaven smil'd to see, and gave the gracious nod, Nor longer would detain her from her God. [^1]

Agnes Taylor, mother of John Taylor, third president of the Church, was born on August 22, 1787, the second daughter and fourth child of John Taylor and Agnes Whittington Taylor. Three additional sons and one daughter followed her. At the time of Agnes's birth, her parents lived in the small village of Pooley, Barton Parish, Westmorland County, in northwest England. Agnes later married a James Taylor, who became the father of President John Taylor, but it was coincidental that the last names of her father and husband were the same; there was no blood relationship.

In 1787 England was ruled by King George III, the same sovereign who, a few years before, had lost the American colonies to the new nation, the United States of America. King George would continue to govern England for another thirty-three years after Agnes's birth. His successor was his son, George IV, who ruled until Agnes, at the age of forty-three, left England for Canada. They were years of rapid economic and religious change, but Agnes lived a traditional life, both as a child and as an adult.

Agnes's father was an exciseman for the British government, that is, a collector of internal revenue and enforcer of tax regulations. Although he moved several times, he and his wife remained all their lives in Westmorland County. Agnes's mother was a descendant of the family made famous by Richard Whittington (better known as Dick Whittington), who, left without property when his father died intestate, apprenticed himself to a dealer in textile fabrics in London, made a fortune, and became an alderman, high sheriff, three times Lord Mayor of London, and member of Parliament. He made loans to Henry IV and Henry V, started a college, built an almshouse, and was knighted. Agnes's own grandfather, Christopher Taylor, who owned a gristmill at Kent and lived to be ninety-seven, took pleasure in repeating the many Whittington legends. Grandfather Taylor was a favorite of Agnes, who visited him often until she was middle-aged.

Westmorland County is in England's Lake District, just across the Irish Sea from the Isle of Man and northern Ireland. Bordered on the north by the Cumbrian Mountains, the highest mountains in England, and on the west by Morecambe Bay, an inlet of the Irish Sea, the county includes lovely Lake Windermere, largest lake in England, and Ullswater, a deep lake seven and one-half miles long. Many of the villages and towns in the county are near the river Eden, which drains the Pennine chain of mountains and flows north into the Solway Firth, on the border between England and Scotland.

In many respects this area was idyllic. This is where William Wordsworth grew up, received his schooling, and wrote his lovely poems celebrating the beauties of nature. Also in the Lake District were the most popular of all climbable peaks, Helvellyn, Grasmere, and Rydal Mount, with settings and scenic views eloquently described by Wordsworth. Beyond the lakelands and mountains was the rocky south, with its "auld grey town" of Kendal and its several fine castles and houses. Toward the east was Westmorland's Vale of Eden, valley of the river Eden, where sheep and cattle grazed, granite and slate were quarried, and woolens were manufactured. Kendal had produced famous woolens since the fourteenth century.

At the time of Agnes's birth, there were probably not more than a dozen families in Pooley. All of them owned their homes and a few acres of land that had been purchased by their ancestors from the Earl of Sussex in 1680. Situated at the foot of the Cumbrian hills, near the Ullswater, Pooley got its name from the nearby pool or lake. There was plenty of water and wood. The farmhouses and cottages were of gray stone, roughcast and then whitewashed. Not far from the village was Dun Mallard Hill, named for the mallard ducks that spent most of their summers there. There was good fishing in the lake and a small fish market in the town.

The Taylors remained in Pooley until Agnes was two. They then moved to Brough, where they remained for six years. Brough, located a few miles southeast of Pooley, was a larger village, with about two hundred families. The outstanding architectural achievement was St. Michael's Church, named for the archangel in the book of Revelation who led the hosts of heaven in the battle against the forces of evil.

As with other girls in the area, Agnes would have had a variety of inside and outside tasks. She would have taken her turn gathering the dead sticks that blew down in the nearby forest. She would have lit the fire on occasion, taken out the ashes, rubbed down the fender and fire irons, swept the floor, washed the hearthstone, set the table for meals, and carried in the milk. After each meal she would have washed the dishes, and perhaps she would have gone on errands for her parents. She would have taken walks in the countryside, strolling along the hedgerows and in the green fields, plucking yellow buttercups and bright daisies and enjoying the wildflowers. She would have watched the ducks and geese, with their bright, white feathers, swimming in the pond, the mother hen shepherding her little chicks about the yard, the sheep nibbling the tender grass, the lambs leaping about, and the busy bees humming among the bushes and flowers.

The days in the English villages as she grew up were not dull. There was a weekly market day, where she would have enjoyed the excitement and noises, if not all the smells, at the market. On May Day each year the girls, dressed in white with appropriate trimmings, would sing and dance around the village maypole. On Easter, brightly colored eggs were rolled down the hillside to symbolize rolling the stone from Christ's tomb. In July the children carried their "bearing" (wooden crosses decorated with flowers and rushes or baskets of flowers) as they walked through the village singing a special hymn. On November 5, Guy Fawkes Day, a village bonfire was lit and a carnival atmosphere prevailed. Other days of celebration were Halloween, Christmas, and New Year's. Agnes would also have enjoyed the village folklore—the stories that had come down from the old Celtic tales. One of these surely told in the Westmorland village in which the Taylors lived was "Babes in the Wood," which told of a little boy and girl who wandered off into the woods and became lost. They were not found, and eventually they lay down to die. Only the redbreasted robin knew where they were, and, in reverence for them, she scattered strawberry leaves over their little bodies. It was a sad tale, and its continued retelling was no doubt intended to warn little children against wandering away from home into the forest. It also helped them to learn respect for and to identify with the birds and animals of the region.

When Agnes was nine her parents moved to Shap, a village west of Brough and south of Pooley. Here Agnes remained until she left home during her late teenage years. Anciently, Shap had been a large forest, and there was still forested land in the area when the Taylors lived there. About one hundred eighty families comprised the village. Here also the church was named for St. Michael—there were many St. Michael churches in England. Not only did John Milton feature Michael in Paradise Lost as prince of the celestial armies, but the whole nation celebrated his feast on September 29 as Michaelmas. It was a good day for hiring servants, for leasing an apartment, for paying a debt, for almost any important activity. This was the day when even poor families ate goose.

As Agnes moved into her teens, the various village celebrations became more meaningful. There was an annual well-dressing, when the villagers, grateful for their good water, decorated their well and offered a prayer of thanksgiving. The decorations often depicted a religious theme and were executed by pressing flowers and petals into clay. Sometimes on May Day, and in other villages at Easter, there was a Morris dance, in which the villagers dressed in costumes, often resembling characters in the Robin Hood legend, and participated in a folk dance.

Occasionally a village would be visited by mummers (traveling actors or minstrels who wore masks or fantastic disguises), who came on festive occasions to put on entertainment in song, dance, and plays in which the story and characters were taken from sacred history or the legends of the saints. These were often performed on horse-drawn carriages or stages that moved from one village to the next. The performances, which were both serious and comical, were sponsored by the town government. Some were performed in pantomime.

The villages also held athletic contests, pancake races, rabbit pie scrambles, rugby and cricket matches, marble contests, and cheese-rolling competitions. Often, on a date important to the village such as the date of its founding, the construction of its cathedral, or the death of a prominent citizen, there might be a celebration in which the mayor or other local leader, costumed and wearing a huge garland of flowers, led a pilgrimage to the church for music, an oration, the presentation of awards, and other festivities. Hot cross buns would be provided for everyone—a special treat to the poor who often could only afford black bread.

Unfortunately, we have no direct evidence of the schooling received by Agnes. Considering that both of her parents were educated and that she attracted a husband who was also well-educated, it is fair to assume that she attended the village grammar school, played hopscotch on the playground, participated in the Christmas plays, and learned character-building poems and songs. Since the schools were close by, she would have walked to school in the morning, home for a midday dinner, and back to school in the afternoon.

The one thing we can be sure about is that Agnes learned to sew, spin, and weave. By the time she was thirteen, almost every girl learned to prepare the wool and work with the spinning wheel by drawing out, twisting, and winding the fibers. She would have darned and knitted socks and mittens as well as cut out and sewed clothes; learned embroidery, tatting, and needlepoint; made buttonholes; and in other ways helped to clothe the family. A local rhyme, first published shortly before Agnes was born, testifies to the pride of villagers in the proficiency of their girls:

She knows how to sing and knit And she knows how to carry t'kit While she drives her kye [cow] to t'pasture.

There is evidence that Agnes's parents were active in the local Church of England. All of the children were duly christened shortly after birth, their marriages were performed in the church, and members of the family are buried in the parish graveyard. The family would have been visited regularly by the Episcopal parish priest. Agnes would have attended Sunday School, participated in the family Bible readings, and been taught to pray. Some doctrines would not have appealed to her: that God was incomprehensible, incorporeal, and inscrutable; that unbaptized infants were condemned to hell; that men and women were creations of God but not children of God; and that the human spirit or soul did not exist prior to conception or birth. And it would have been difficult for her, as for other young people, to believe in the natural or innate sinfulness of people because of the so-called sin of Adam and Eve. But she believed devoutly in the teachings of Jesus, and she was brought up to be a moral and happy person.

Whether in Brough, Shap, or wherever, Agnes would have been impressed with the symbolism in the local parish church, with its beautiful carvings and stained glass windows depicting biblical characters and stories, and the close integration of the human and the divine in the sculpture—sublime wooden faces capturing the spirit of the eternal intermixed with representations of gluttony and greed. She was stirred by the congregational repetition of sacred texts in the local accent and by the performing of the sacred rituals of the sacrament. All of these pointed toward the overweening importance of religion in the life of the nation and individual. Especially impressive was the tall, shaky church tower full of bells that rang out in exultation, in grief, in patriotism, and in religious fervor. No wonder Handel declared that bells were Britain's national musical instrument.

After they reached the age of sixteen, most girls in English villages who were not required at home because of the illness of a parent went to work as domestics at a manor house in the region. There is no direct evidence that this was done by Agnes, but it would be surprising if it were not the case. All of the indirect evidence points to that happening. After the church, manor houses were dominant features of the landscape. A country gentleman who owned a manor, in most instances a descendant of a knight who acquired the land in years gone by in return for military service, was the squire—the justice of the peace, judge, philanthropist, patron of the arts, leading political figure, and principal employer. Employed in his house or castle, Agnes would have helped with the housework, the meals, the sewing, and other chores. She would also have had free time to visit in town—Kendal or Penrith—and would have gone with a fellow employee or friend to the seasonal fairs. She would also have gained experience in dealing with local artisans—blacksmiths, cobblers, watchmakers, butchers, saddlers, and tailors. She might go to a shop to get a half dozen eggs, a yard of cloth, or a shoe that had been repaired. She might also pick up the latest gossip. And, of course, she might meet a local swain. Perhaps in this way she met James Taylor. They were married when she was eighteen and he twenty-two.

James and his parents lived on an estate known as Craig Gate, Ackenthwaite, Westmorland, a short distance southwest of Kendal, the county seat. James's ancestors had lived there for several generations, but James was the third son of his father, and under the English laws of primogeniture the estate went to the oldest son. Thus, James and his other brothers and sisters had to fend for themselves. Nevertheless, he acquired a good English education, including some proficiency in Latin and Greek and the higher branches of mathematics. He started out as an apprentice to a carpenter, but eventually an uncle on his mother's side bequeathed to him a small estate in the Westmorland village of Hale, and he ended up as a farmer.

James and Agnes were married in Kirkoswald, some twenty-five miles down the Eden River from Agnes's parents' home in Brough. They left just before Christmas and probably traveled by carriage through Appleby, famous for its Norman castle, rare breeds of domestic animals, and apples; Temple Sowerby, with its representative manor house (now owned by the British National Trust) that featured beautiful iron work, a clock tower, and elaborate gardens; and Penrith, an agricultural trade center and stopping-off place for the Lake District.

Kirkoswald got its name from combining Kirk (church) with Oswald, after St. Oswald, a seventh-century English military leader and Christian martyr to whom the church was dedicated. Eight miles north of Penrith, the village consisted of a compact line of red sandstone houses along the eastern slope of the Vale (Valley) of Eden. As Agnes and James approached the village they would have first spotted the tower of a twelfth-century castle, surrounded by a deep moat and embankment, and the square nineteenth-century tower of St. Oswald's church, near the Eden River. Across the river was a fortified fourteenth-century tower that was built to frustrate the Scots, who came down periodically to plunder the village.

We can be sure that the marriage ceremony was filled with Christian texts and admonitions and performed before the altar with appropriate ritual and vestments. A poem of admonition said to have been commonly used at the time is the following:

In wedlock bands, All ye who join with hands, Your hearts unite: So shall our tuneful tongues combine To land the nuptial rite.

After the ceremony, which occurred on December 23, 1805, in Kirkoswald, Agnes and James would probably have driven back through Penrith, Hackthorpe, Shap, and Kendal, on their way to Ackenthwaite, where they made their first home.

From the time of their marriage in 1805 until their migration to Canada in 1830, Agnes and James had ten children, eight sons and two daughters. The oldest son, Edward, died in his early twenties; two other sons, William and George, died during their first year; and their last two sons, George and Edward, died in boyhood. (They did not hesitate to name later sons after earlier ones who had died.) So Agnes and James ended up with a family of five—three boys and two girls. Given the state of health and medicine at the time, this heavy mortality rate was not unusual. The first five children were born in the parish of Heversham, near Ackenthwaite. The second of these children was Agnes and James's most famous child—John Taylor, who would succeed Brigham Young as president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. He was born November 1, 1808, at Bridge End farm in Stainton, near Milnthorpe, a small seaport on the Bay of Morecambe near Ackenthwaite. The last five children were born near Hale, where the Taylor family settled on an estate James inherited from an uncle.

Because of his education and the status of his family, James Taylor received a government appointment collecting customs duties, which led to his moving from place to place. The family lived at Milnthorpe for a time, then moved to Liverpool, and finally settled in 1819 on the estate at Hale, about one mile from Beetham. The place of the estate is known today as Hale Green, but the contemporary term for it was Hale Grange, meaning an outlying farmhouse or group of buildings belonging to a manor where crops and tithes in kind were stored.

We can only surmise at Agnes's experiences as a young mother in Milnthorpe, Liverpool, and Hale. She was a good housekeeper, had a contagious sense of humor, and maintained high standards for her husband and family. There was unity in the family, and family members enjoyed their life in the home. In addition to household tasks, she and James sent their children to school, associated with their local parish, made sure the children were taught the catechism and prayers of the church, and in other ways sought to prepare their children for life. John, the future prophet, said that after their move to Hale when he was eleven, he went to school at Beetham. "I well remember some of my boyish freaks [pranks, whimsies] as I wended my way with satchell to school," he wrote in his early history. At Hale, he said, "I got mixed up with ploughing, sowing, reaping, haymaking, &c, . . . and have indelibly impressed on my mind some of my first mishaps in horsemanship in the shape of sundry curious evolutions between the horses' backs and terra firma."

John was apprenticed to a cooper in Liverpool when he was fourteen. When the business failed after a year, the youth returned to Hale and remained with his family until they arranged for him to go to Penrith to learn the business of a turner—one who fashions or shapes wooden objects on a lathe.

Something happened while John was in Penrith that would have a far-reaching effect on his family. A year after he went there, he heard the Methodist doctrine taught and was converted. "It seemed to me more of a matter of fact, personal thing, than the Church of England," he wrote. He prayed frequently, studied the Bible, and read works on Christian theology. The next year, while still apprenticed as a turner, he became a Methodist exhorter or local preacher. His first appointment was at a small village seven miles from Penrith, probably Temple Sowerby. A man from the Penrith church accompanied John as he walked to the village. After they had gone about a mile, John later wrote, "a peculiar influence overpowered me and I stood still and remarked to the brother who was with me: 'I have a strong impression on my mind that I have to go to America to preach the Gospel.'" At that time, he knew nothing about America except what he had learned in geography class in school. However, this impression remained with him: "I could not shake it off. . . . I had some work to do which I did not then understand." He repeated this experience to Agnes and James, and they accepted it as a legitimate whispering of the Spirit.

When John was twenty and had mastered the art of turner, he returned to Hale and went into business for himself under the auspices of his father. Shortly thereafter, in 1830, because of John's wish to go to America, Agnes, now forty-three, and James, forty-seven, with the four younger children, emigrated to Upper Canada (present-day Ontario). They left John behind to dispose of some unsold property and settle the affairs of the estate. Two years later John joined them in Canada and the family was once more united, this time in the New World.

The Taylors settled on a farm near York, the capital of Upper Canada. (It was incorporated as Toronto in 1834.) During the years after 1815, several thousand English, Scottish, and Irish settlers had gone there, as had the Taylors, and formed the basis for the strong British-oriented culture of that region in the early years of the nineteenth century.

Once more, however, the welfare of Agnes and James and their family would be affected by an action of their son. John, who established a turner shop adjoining his home, had continued to preach Methodism in Canada, but he was becoming increasingly dissatisfied with the doctrines of the church. "I often wondered," he wrote, "why the Christian religion was so changed from its primitive simplicity, and became convinced, before I dared acknowledge it, that we ought to have Apostles, Prophets, Pastors, Teachers and Evangelists—inspired men—as in former days." He found other persons who entertained similar views, mostly local preachers of the same church, and they met together several times a week to study the scriptures and pray. He continued to preach, but, to use his words, he was more interested in teaching "the leading doctrines of the Christian religion, rather than the peculiar dogmas of Methodism." He married Leonora Cannon, an immigrant from the Isle of Man and Liverpool, in 1833.

One day in 1836, Elder Parley P. Pratt, one of the finest of the early Latter-day Saint evangelists, arrived in Toronto, as York was now called, and was introduced to John. John's response, as given in his 1838 history, was as follows: "I wrote down eight of the first sermons that he preached, and compared them with the scriptures. I also investigated the evidence concerning the Book of Mormon and read the Doctrine and Covenants. I made a regular business of it for three weeks and followed Br. Parley from place to place. At length being perfectly satisfied of the truth of Mormonism, I was baptized by him. . . . [and] my wife was also baptized at the same time. I have never doubted any principle of Mormonism since."

John was soon ordained an elder and began preaching the glad tidings of the restoration of the gospel to his parents; they were baptized by John in May 1836. Their enthusiastic reception of the gospel paved the way for the conversion of their daughters Elizabeth and Agnes and of their youngest living son, William.

John served as the Church's presiding high priest in Canada for the next two years. In July 1838 he was called by revelation to be one of the Council of the Twelve Apostles, and he and Leonora prepared to join the main body of the Saints, then gathering in Missouri. Agnes and James, John's parents, prepared to move also. The Taylors set out for Missouri in the fall of 1838, arriving there as mobs were driving the Saints from that state. They fled to the Mississippi River and found temporary refuge in Quincy, Illinois, then in Warsaw.

John received a call to serve a mission in the British Isles, leaving in the summer of 1839. While he was gone, Leonora and the children found refuge in an abandoned army barracks in Montrose, Iowa, across the Mississippi River from Nauvoo (formerly Commerce), Illinois, the new headquarters of the Church. Agnes and James moved on to a wilderness area thirty miles north of Nauvoo, to a place called Oquawka, the county seat of Henderson County. They would remain there until the winter of 1845-46, when they joined the Nauvoo Saints in preparation for the migration west.

When John returned from his mission in 1841, he settled his family in Nauvoo. His mother, Agnes, occasionally visited the family there. Elder Wilford Woodruff mentioned in his diary that a group of Saints helped him celebrate his (Wilford's) birthday on March 1, 1842, and among the guests were John Taylor, his wife Leonora, and his mother, Agnes. Agnes was apparently not in Nauvoo long enough to have been active in the Female Relief Society.

One episode at Oquawka has special interest. In 1842 an attempt was made on the life of Governor Lilburn W. Boggs of Missouri. Enemies of the Church in Missouri determined to extradite Joseph Smith to the state to stand trial for that and other crimes. Certain that he would not receive a fair trial in Missouri, which had earlier expelled the Saints, the Prophet sought to avoid arrest. He had also received word that some persons were determined to return him to Missouri, dead or alive, and, indeed, in September 1842 his home was searched. He managed to elude the kidnapping party, which had come without legal documents permitting an arrest. On October 7, 1842, the Prophet's diary, as kept by Willard Richards, states: "From the situation and appearance of things abroad, I concluded to leave home for a short season, until there should be some change in the proceedings of my enemies. Accordingly, at twenty minutes after eight o'clock in the evening, I started away in company with Brothers John Taylor, Wilson Law, and John D. Parker, and traveled through the night and part of the next day; and, after a tedious journey, arrived at Father James Taylor's [feeling] well and in good spirits."

The Prophet remained with Agnes and James for two weeks, went back to Nauvoo to be with his family for one apprehensive night, then returned to the Taylors for still another week. He obviously enjoyed Agnes's twinkling eyes and respectful and helpful attitude. We can be sure that he liked her potato pie and roast lamb smothered with her special Cumbrian sauce.

Agnes often expressed her pleasure at this three-week visit of the Prophet. As one of her friends wrote at the time of her death: "She highly appreciated the confidence which he reposed in the integrity of her partner and herself in selecting their residence as a place of retreat at a time when he was menaced by great danger. His friendship and the teachings which she received from him during those days were among the most pleasing recollections of her subsequent life."

When it became clear that the Saints would have to leave Illinois, as they had left Missouri, Agnes and James moved to Nauvoo in the winter of 1845-46 and prepared for the journey west. They crossed Iowa in early 1846, and stayed at Winter Quarters, Nebraska, until the spring of 1847, leaving there on June 19, 1847. Agnes, fifty-nine, and James, sixty-three, traveled in a group of fifty Saints under the leadership of their son, William Taylor, now twenty-three. With them also on the trip were their daughters Elizabeth and Agnes (with her three children), their daughter-in-law Lovina (wife of William), and, of course, John and Leonora. One month out on the trip, on the North Platte, Elizabeth was married to George Boyes in a ceremony presumably performed by John. The party arrived in the Salt Lake Valley in September 1847.

Agnes and James lived until 1849 in a section of the Old Fort, which had been finished by the advance group of pioneers. Then, with the assistance of John, they were able to move into a log cabin in the Salt Lake Fourteenth Ward, west of Main Street and south of North Temple Street. John was in the same ward, as were Elder Parley Pratt, who had converted John, and Elder Wilford Woodruff, always a good friend. John Murdock, a close friend of the Prophet Joseph Smith, was the first bishop, followed in 1851 by Abraham Hoagland.

Agnes died on November 15, 1868, at age eighty-one. She left five children—John, Elizabeth, Agnes, and William in Utah, and James in Canada. Her husband, James, to whom Agnes had been married almost sixty-three years, died eighteen months later, on May 27, 1870, at age eighty-seven.

One of those who knew Agnes best was George Q. Cannon, an apostle at the time of her death and a brother of Leonora Cannon Taylor, the wife John had married in 1833 in Canada. George, whose parents were from the Isle of Man and Liverpool, had much in common with Agnes and James. Upon her death, he wrote:

Deceased [Agnes] was always of a buoyant, hopeful and cheerful turn of mind, and deeply religious withal. She took great delight in her religion, and until last fall, when she was prostrated by a severe sickness, her presence was rarely missed at meetings, no matter how stormy the weather might be. Until she had that sickness she was remarkable for her sprightliness, energy and strict attention to business, and the weight of years sat as lightly upon her as upon many who were not half her age. . . . During her sickness she maintained her cheerfulness and equanimity. Death had no terrors for her, and his approach could not disturb her happiness. She knew in whom she had trusted: He had never forsaken her, and in her last hours He sustained and comforted her. She fell asleep calmly and without a struggle, and her face, in death, wore a peaceful and happy smile.

Sources

Although we have not been able to find a single word written by Agnes Taylor, and although there is very little information specifically about her in existing manuscripts and publications, we believe that we have been able to put together a credible biographical sketch by careful study of mission histories, biographies of her son John, histories of the villages in which she lived, and sources in the Church's Genealogical Library in Salt Lake City.

Taylor family group sheets are in the Genealogical Library, and clipped items about Agnes indexed under her name are in the journal History of the Church in the Church Historical Department. An obituary was published in the Deseret News Weekly, November 25, 1868. There is a "History of John Taylor by Himself," in the Manuscript History of the Church, Book G, pp. 265-75, Church Archives.

One mention of Agnes is found in a footnote in B. H. Roberts, ed., History of the Church 3 (Salt Lake City: Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1946): 154. Other information in this six-volume set was helpful.

Book-length and shorter biographies of John Taylor that mention Agnes include B. H. Roberts, The Life of John Taylor (Salt Lake City: George Q. Cannon and Sons, 1892); Samuel W. Taylor, The Kingdom or Nothing: The Life of John Taylor, Militant Mormon (New York: Macmillan, 1976); Francis M. Gibbons, John Taylor: Mormon Philosopher, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1985); Richard L. Jensen, "The John Taylor Family," Ensign 10 (February 1980): 50-56; Nellie T. Taylor, "John Taylor, His Ancestors and Descendants," Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine 21 (April 1930): 48-52; Andrew Jenson, "Taylor, John," in Latter-day Saints' Biographical Encyclopedia (4 vols., Salt Lake City, 1899-1936), 1:14-19; G. St. John Stott, "John Taylor's Religious Preparation," Dialogue: A Journal of Mormon Thought 19 (Spring 1986): 123-28; Preston Nibley, "John Taylor," in The Presidents of the Church (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1971), pp. 69-98; and Paul T. Smith, "John Taylor," in Leonard Arrington, ed., The Presidents of the Church (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1986), pp. 75-114.

Three valuable histories are Joseph Nicolson and Richard Burn, The History . . . of the Counties of Westmorland and Cumberland (2 vols., London, 1777); Thomas Rose, Westmorland, Cumberland, Durham and Northumberland (London, 1835); and John Hadfield, ed., The Shell Book of English Villages (London: Michael Joseph, Ltd., 1980).

Agnes Taylor Taylor Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. A 1767 inscription by William Thomson in the chancel of the parish church in Brough, England, often visited by Agnes Taylor as a child.
