Susan Arrington Madsen, Leonard J. Arrington, Mothers of the Prophets ( 1987)

Beulah Thompson Woodruff and Azubah Hart Woodruff

O God, console the heart of my stepmother, Azubah, who has watched my wants, my youth, and my life. And when my mother, Beulah, rises from the grave, let the union of my father be like a three-fold cord not easily broken. True friendship is always eternal. (Wilford Woodruff)

Connecticut was one of the oldest English colonies in America. Facing the Atlantic Ocean, or to be more precise the Atlantic Inlet of Long Island Sound, the first permanent settlement took place in 1635 and 1636, when settlers from the Massachusetts Bay colony founded the three river towns of Hartford, Windsor, and Wethersfield. In 1639 these communities adopted the first American constitution based on the consent of the governed. Shortly thereafter, in 1640, the Puritan settlers founded Farmington (Farming Town) as a site for expanded agricultural production. The soil was rich, there was a vast open valley with hundreds of acres of clear meadowland, and the luxuriant vegetation gave promise of abundant crops. The river's waters would also power the gristmills and sawmills needed for industrial and agricultural self-sufficiency.

Connecticut residents were solid supporters of the war for independence; General George Washington passed through the region several times, stored war materiel there, and felt it a secure place to lodge British prisoners of war. While there was no enemy action in the central Connecticut villages around Farmington, the French army commanded by the Comte de Rochambeau traveled through the region on its way from Providence, Rhode Island, to New York City, and, after the battle of Yorktown, returned through the region in 1782.

After the war, when a new constitution for the United States of America was proposed, Connecticut was the fifth state to ratify it and was one of the original thirteen states of the Union.

Because of its Puritan founding and the strong Puritan influence on its life and thought, Connecticut has been called the Land of Steady Habits. Its strict laws enforcing observance of the Sabbath also led to its being referred to as the Blue Law State. Another nickname is the Nutmeg State, so-called because peddlers in the state always carried supplies of nutmeg seeds brought back by merchants and sailors from the Spice Islands in the East Indies. Connecticut kitchens were well saturated with the pleasant aroma, and Connecticut cuisine featured nutmeg powder in custards, puddings, pies, and even in some meats and vegetables.

A true descendant of the Connecticut Puritans was Beulah Thompson, whose ancestors were in Farmington as early as 1640. The only child of Lot and Anna Hart Thompson of Farmington, Beulah (sometimes spelled Bulah) was born on April 22, 1782, just two months after Lord Cornwallis surrendered at Yorktown, an event that led to British recognition of United States independence and the evacuation of British land and naval forces.

Beulah's life experiences inevitably began in the kitchen of the family's home north of Farmington in a place later incorporated as Avon. She would have spent most of her first year in a rocking cradle while her mother tended to her various household tasks. The first family exercise in the morning was reading the Bible, followed by prayer. A fire burned in the fireplace nearly all day, keeping a soup pot perpetually hot. An oven in the brick wall of the fireplace was often full of baked goods. Herbs and corn hung from the ceiling, and there were hanging baskets with drying fruit. The kitchen was the gathering place for visiting relatives and friends. The kitchen was Beulah's first home.

Since Beulah was an only child, her mother would have taken her with her as she worked in the garden in the summer. Beulah was no doubt around as her mother fed the chickens, milked the cow, and did other tasks around the yard.

Beulah's earliest experiences away from home, aside from visiting grandparents, uncles, and aunts, many of whom were in the Farmington area, were in the community church (Congregational). Preparations began Saturday evening with the weekly bath—in a cedar tub filled with water heated on the hearth. The Sabbath started at sundown on Saturday, and since cleanliness is next to godliness, the bath was almost a religious ritual. Church services on Sunday usually started at nine in the morning and lasted until dusk. No lights were allowed in most churches because of the danger of fire, nor were there stoves or chimneys, so during the wintertime worshippers took foot warmers, pillows, and blankets to keep warm. In deepest winter, bread sometimes froze at the sacrament table, and the parson wore an overcoat, earmuffs, and a muffler when he gave his sermon. To insure warm water for christening (Beulah was christened the first Sunday after her birth), he kept a flask of warm water under his coat.

The Farmington church had a steeple with a bell that served as a kind of town crier, ringing out as the congregation assembled for worship service, and also three times each day—at seven in the morning, noon, and at nine o'clock in the evening as a signal for curfew. When there was a death in the community, the bell rang out three times for a man and twice for a woman, and then the number of years the deceased person had lived. Such emphasis was given to Sabbath observance that residents did not work, play, or travel on that day except to go to and from the meetinghouse.

Beulah's life as a girl was a mixture of work, play, and school. The work included helping her mother in the kitchen, chores in the yard, and helping with the important tasks of carding wool, spinning, weaving, and sewing. The play would have included picking apples, gathering chestnuts, picking cranberries, spotting birds, and romping with lambs and calves.

Farmington had good schools for the time. Since Connecticut had an official religion (Congregationalism), religion and morality were prominent in the daily routine. Students were expected to read the Bible every day, and the teacher was required to close the daily class with prayer. They would have used Noah Webster's first blue-backed speller, Timothy Dwight's Geography Made Easy, and an anthology of patriotic readings. Good handwriting was emphasized.

The three major holidays during the year were Election Day, when people gathered on the village green to play at quoits, hold footraces and wrestling matches, and eat a common meal; Thanksgiving Day, when everyone feasted and gathered with friends and relatives to remember God's blessing in providing an abundance of food; and Christmas, when religious services were held to celebrate the birth of Jesus.

We do not know precisely what Beulah did as a teenager. Did she spin and weave and sew for various neighbors? Did she serve as a domestic? Did she teach school? Did she stay home to help her mother with an illness? These are matters we cannot be sure of. At any rate, at the age of nineteen she fell in love with twenty-three-year-old Aphek Woodruff, who was also a native of Farmington (Avon). They were married on November 25, 1801.

The Woodruff family was also in Farmington on the date of founding in 1640. Aphek was named for a fortified bastion in ancient Judea mentioned in the books of Joshua, Samuel, and Kings. He began a flour milling business when he was eighteen, and ran a gristmill and a sawmill and also operated a farm. He was generous with his customers and did not accumulate wealth, but he was a religious person and was loyal to the best traditions of the Puritans.

The responsibility of a wife in those days was to follow the will of her husband, and this was no problem for Beulah, who was brought up to be polite and agreeable. She was also thrifty and industrious. Although Aphek was priest in the family and led out in the prayers and Bible reading, he spent most of his time at the mill, and so the moral nature of the family devolved upon Beulah.

During the seven years after their marriage, Beulah gave birth to three children: Azmon, born in 1802; Ozem Thompson, born in 1804; and Wilford (the future prophet), born in 1807. There were, of course, no hospitals or maternity homes at the time, and no anesthesia, so in most early farmhouses the children were born in a room just off the kitchen fireplace called the "borning room," usually with knowledgeable neighbor women in attendance. One might bring herbs from her field and garden to relieve the discomfort. The women would offer prayers and emotional support, and one of them might hold the mother in her lap as she sat on the low "midwife's stool." Thus, while childbirth was a long and dangerous travail, there was plenty of help and empathy. Often one of the women brought refreshments so all, including the father, could celebrate the glorious event.

Her sons and husband remembered Beulah as a cheerful, industrious, and kindly mother and wife. But the state of medicine at the time helps us to understand why she died, of spotted fever, on June 11, 1808, when Wilford was only fifteen months old. Beulah was twenty-six. On her tombstone in the church graveyard in Avon the following verse was inscribed:

A pleasing form, a generous gentle heart A good companion, just without art. Just in her dealings, faithful to her friends, Beloved through life, lamented in the end.

Following Beulah's death, the evidence suggests that the children were cared for by grandparents, probably maternal, while Aphek was at work.

Seventeen months after Beulah's death, Aphek married Azubah Hart, almost certainly a first cousin of Beulah, and possibly the person who was most involved in looking after the children and the house of Aphek. They were married on November 9, 1809, in Avon. Azubah, who now became the stepmother of Azmon and Ozem and the only mother Wilford would remember, was born in Avon on July 31, 1792. At the time of her marriage, she was seventeen and Aphek was thirty-one.

An intelligent, industrious, and religious woman, Azubah served well as a second wife and mother. She and Aphek had six children of their own: Philo (1811), who died in 1827 at age sixteen; Asahel Hart (1814), who died in 1838 at age twenty-four; Franklin (1816), who died two and a half months after birth; Newton (1818), who drowned at the age of two; Julius (1821), who died young but no definite date is known; and Eunice (1820), who died in 1853 at age thirty-three. Of this second family, only Eunice lived to be an associate of Azmon, Thompson, and Wilford in their middle ages. Azmon lived to the age of eighty-six; Thompson to age eighty-nine; and Wilford to age ninety-one.

Azubah was a caring wife and mother. The lot of a farmer and miller was not easy. He was responsible for the acres he tilled—for his grains, his root crops, his flax and hops, and his orchard. He bred, milked, and pastured his cows. He found grazing for the sheep, sheared them in late spring or early summer, and kept them in warm sheds in winter. He cared for the swine, oxen, and horses. He cut and stacked the hay; plowed the fields; and cultivated, fertilized, and harvested the crops. In October he picked apples, ran the cider press, and helped his wife make apple butter. In November he butchered. In December he banked up the north sides of houses and barns with cornstalks, hay, leaves, and sawdust so they would withstand the winter. He also readied sleds and sleigh bells. (The bells were as necessary, especially when driving the otherwise noiseless sleigh at night, as horns on automobiles.) In January and February, when he could not work in the fields, he built and repaired fences; split fence rails; kept his harness in order; husked, threshed, flailed, and winnowed grain; repaired the house, shed, and barns; and shoveled and plowed snow on paths and roads. He cut firewood endlessly. All of this in addition to running his gristmill, sawmill, fulling mill, and wool carder.

With the encouragement of Azubah, and sometimes under her supervision, the Woodruff boys helped their father with his many tasks. For example, Wilford recalled that his chore at age six was to feed the cows and the bull, and that he and his brothers used to fish in the stream that fed his father's mill, and also did hunting and trapping. He remembered his father's incessant labor: "Most of the time he labored eighteen hours a day."

Azubah's work was equally demanding. She fed and clothed her family and cared for their social, educational, and religious needs; doctored and nursed them; supervised the children's play, whether inside the house or outside; churned butter; made soap and candles; and assisted with the butchering. To keep warm during the long winter season, both adults and children wore long woolen underwear, which was full of the tickling and scratching impurities of homespun wool. But, the wearers boasted, "If you fall out of a tree and catch your long underwear on a limb, you are saved."

New England wives were expected not only to furnish the family with woolen underwear and outerwear, but also to spin flax. It is said that a day's work on the tiny flax wheel would produce about a mile of thread. Most households had a spinning wheel, a flax-brake (a machine for separating the woody tissues of the flax from the fiber), a hetchel (or hook or hackle), a wool card, and a loom. The nearby pond served as a flax pond, where the outer stems of the flax and hemp were water-rotted (or "retted") in preparation for heckling out the long fibers. This was often done in a "bee," a neighborhood gathering that was half work and half game. By Azubah's time women were making mixtures of cotton or wool and linen, called linsey-woolsey. Because of the importance of wool in that cold climate, there were bounties on sheep-killing wolves and restrictions on killing sheep for food.

By remaining close to the house, Azubah was at the communications center of her husband's various activities and had some responsibility for passing on information and directions to workers, pacifying creditors, and helping friends and neighbors. She probably helped her husband keep his mill books straight. She also participated with neighboring women in huskings and quiltings, berrying and spinning, sharing their work just as she benefited from their sharing her work.

One year as the children were growing would prove to be memorable because of a meteorological freak. The year 1816, when Wilford was eight, was the year without a summer. Snow fell in July and August, ruining crops and causing famine. Many places in New England saw ice and snow during every month of the entire year. In Farmington, at the July 4 celebration, men were seen pitching quoits in the middle of the day with their thick woolen overcoats on. Only half enough corn ripened that year to furnish seed for the next crop. Many persons, believing that New England was becoming frigid, headed south and west.

Azubah's responsibilities for caring for Wilford, Beulah's youngest child, were particularly important. When he was three he fell into a kettle of boiling water and almost died; he did not recover fully for nine months. Another time he toppled from the top of the barn to the floor and landed on his face. One Saturday evening, while playing with his brothers Azmon and Thompson, he made a misstep and fell to the bottom of the stairs, breaking one of his arms. By the time he left home at the age of twenty, he had broken his leg in a fall from a carriage, had been kicked in the stomach by an ox, had been buried alive when a hay wagon overturned on top of him, and had narrowly escaped when a horse bolted down a hill while pulling a wagon he was in. Other incidents include these: He was caught in a blizzard but was saved by a neighbor; he fell fifteen feet from a tree limb and landed flat on his back; he nearly drowned in thirty feet of water; he split open the instep of his left foot while chopping wood with an ax; and he was bitten by a dog that had rabies. Finally, when he was seventeen, a bad-tempered horse he was riding threw him on a rocky hill, breaking both ankles and one leg in two places. For good reason he believed that the Lord was protecting him for some important future calling.

Azubah and Aphek saw that the children attended the nearest school, two miles from their home in Avon, and also supervised their religious education. Wilford remembered a Baptist revival in 1815, when he was eight. Aphek invited the preachers into his home, and Wilford attended meetings, prayed, and, as he expressed it, tried to feel religious, but could not. When he was fourteen the Presbyterians had a strong revival, and again he attended meetings, went to Sunday School and prayer meetings, and tried to get religion but couldn't. This didn't bother him, however, for Azubah taught him and his brothers and sister that "the Church of Christ was in the wilderness, that there had been a falling away from pure and undefiled religion before God, and that a great change was at hand."

Wilford left home when he was twenty. For three years he worked at his Aunt Helen's flour mill. He read the Bible on his free time, and prayed frequently. He and his brother Azmon then bought a farm near Richland, New York. While they were out in the fields one day, two Mormon missionaries came to the house and talked to Azmon's wife. Without waiting to eat supper, Wilford left to attend their meeting at the schoolhouse. Because of what he had been taught as a child—that the church of Christ was not on earth at the time but would one day be restored, and that what he had read in the Bible supported the doctrines that church would espouse—Wilford knew instantly that what the missionaries said was true. He was baptized on a cold, wintry day in December 1833. The snow was three feet deep and the water was mixed with ice and snow, but he said he didn't feel the cold. His brother Azmon was baptized at the same time.

As with his Puritan ancestors, once Wilford had been persuaded, he was totally converted. A valiant Latter-day Saint, he moved to Kirtland, Ohio, where the headquarters of the Church was located. In 1834 he joined the little army that marched from Kirtland to Missouri to assist the Saints who had been driven out of their Jackson County homes. He was ordained an elder and later a seventy, and served as a proselyting missionary in Tennessee and Kentucky. Back in Kirtland in 1836, he married, received his patriarchal blessing from Joseph Smith Sr., and was sent on a proselyting mission to the Fox Islands, in Maine. While on that mission he went to the home of his family in Farmington (Avon), Connecticut, and saw his parents for the first time in seven years. "It was a happy meeting," he wrote. This was in July 1837. A year later, in connection with another mission, he was back in Connecticut, and on July 1, 1838, he baptized his father, mother, and sister. Wilford's diary entry for that day tells of the drama of that important event in his family's history:

I began to cry unto God for my father and his household and the Lord showed me in a night vision that a great victory was nigh. But the devil fell upon the whole household with great wrath and temptations. Some of the time one was ready to fall back and reject the gospel and then again another. His power rested upon me at the same time as if to devour me at once. But after being confined to my bed for several hours under his grasp, in the name of Jesus Christ I with my friends burst the powers of darkness. I went and stood before the people and declared the gospel of Jesus Christ, and shout O Heavens, and rejoice O earth for the victory the Lord hath given us. For after preaching the gospel to the people, I immediately assembled upon the bank of Farmington River where there was much water and led six of my friends into the waters of baptism. Five of them were my relatives, viz. my Father, my Mother, and my only Sister Eunice, Aunt Anna Cossett, and Cousin Seth Woodruff and the other was Mr. Dwight Webster, a Methodist class leader who was boarding with my father's family. I organized the small number of nine persons . . . into a branch of the Church, . . . and administered unto them the Sacrament. It was truly a day of joy to my soul. . . .

Many eyes were turned to behold this scene and deep solemnity veiled their faces while I took my Father by the hand. My Father did I say?? Yes, HE Covenanted to walk with God and for the remission of his sins I baptized him. Feeling the victory won my Mother followed his steps and by obedience was sealed a Saint, a member of the kingdom. Eunice my sister my only sister was ready. Her noble soul by Ephraim's spirit inspired, her garb of pride had rent and broke the gentiles' chain. Fearless of the world's despising she freely received the watery bed her Master to imitate while her firm example should say Celestial glory is my boast, the garb of the Saints, my pride. . . .

Thus ended this scene of wonder shall I say?? Yes and, of mercy too, for heaven countenance'd the deed for it was God's command, an ordinance of the gospel. To be permitted to stand in one's own native land and the gospel of JESUS CHRIST to declare in the last dispensation and while [proclaiming] the word through the power of the priesthood to his kindred, his townsman, to behold the pride of the great, the rich, the learned, by the spirit of God humbled at his feet. Then to experience the living reality of a Father, a Mother, an only Sister meekly with other kindred receiving the ordinances of the house of God at the hand of their Son and brother is to me at least a scene of interest.

The next day he wrote in his diary:

After evening prayers with the family, Father retired to rest and I spent a season in conversation with Mother and we felt sensibly the weight of the powers of temptation that try the souls of men. But out of them all the Lord delivers his Saints. I also spent a short time with Sister Eunice before retiring. We mingled our sympathys, tears, and prayers together before a Throne of Grace. Truly how strong is the Cord of Consanguinity and of the Blood of Christ united in binding the hearts of Saints together. And how blessings brighten as they take their flight. This was the last night I spent beneath my fathers roof. May the Lord protect thy household and bring thee safe to Zion.

A month later, after he returned to the Fox Islands, Wilford received a communication that he had been called by revelation to be an apostle.

According to his diary, Wilford received letters two or three times a year from Azubah indicating his parents' continued faithfulness in the Church—"the New Covenant," as she called it. He was ordained an apostle in 1839, and undertook a mission with the Twelve to Great Britain from 1839 to 1841. While he was there, he wrote that on July 2, 1840, his mother, Beulah, appeared to him in a dream. She "clasped me in her arms and kissed me three times and said the Lord Almighty bless thee forever and ever." Two years later, he was able to arrange for her baptism by proxy.

Subsequent to his return to Nauvoo, Wilford served as business manager of The Times and Seasons, a church magazine published in Nauvoo, and went on a proselyting mission to the Eastern States. During a visit to his parents in September 1843, he explained to them the principle of the gathering. He wrote: "They seem to understand it pretty well. Mother says if we follow the good spirit of the Blessed Jesus we will do well." In July 1844, on his way to Great Britain to serve as president of the European Mission, he once more visited his parents. He wrote in his diary: "O God . . . console the heart of her [Azubah] who has watched my wants, my youth, my life, and when my mother [Beulah] rises from the grave, let the union of my father be like a three-fold cord not easily broken. . . . What I say unto one I say unto all. Watch, for thoughts dwell deep, but words pass away."

Having raised the question with them earlier, Wilford wrote to his parents from England in December 1845 telling them he would be returning to America in January and that he expected them to go with him to Nauvoo. As he expressed it in his diary, he could then "redeem [his] father and mother from Babylon." He arrived at his father's house in March 1846, and on March 23, he, his wife Phoebe, their children, and Aphek and Azubah left Farmington. They traveled by wagon to New Britain, Connecticut; by steamboat to New York City; by railroad to Philadelphia; by stagecoach to Brownsville, Pennsylvania; and by steamer to Pittsburgh, then via the Ohio River to the Mississippi, and up the Mississippi to Nauvoo. As they steamed up the Mississippi, Azubah busied herself writing letters to friends and relatives she had left behind in Connecticut. Wilford and Aphek "diverted ourselves by looking at objects through my spy glass as we passed along."

Nauvoo, when they arrived in April 1846, was in turmoil. Thousands of Saints had already crossed the river and traveled through Iowa on their way to Winter Quarters in eastern Nebraska, where they would be spending the winter. Others were still in Nauvoo hurriedly getting ready to make the same trek. A few were determined to remain behind, refusing to follow the leadership of Brigham Young and the Twelve Apostles. Unfortunately, some of the latter got to Wilford's sister Eunice and her husband, Dwight Webster, and they "worked on" Aphek and Azubah, trying to persuade them not to go west. Bitterly, Wilford wrote: "I called the family together and freed my mind upon the subject."

The parents did go with Wilford to the public dedication of the Nauvoo Temple on May 1. In June, Wilford wrote, Azubah "handed me a lengthy epistle of complaint written in a book of thirty pages, against several persons, their treatment of her, &c." He went on to comment: "It was like a tempest in a teapot, a bubble not worthy of notice. The more I have provided for her of late the more she has complained. She has manifested much of a spirit of fault finding and watching for iniquity since she came to Nauvoo."

Wilford finally persuaded Aphek to go with him to Winter Quarters that spring, while Azubah remained with her daughter. In May 1846 the little company of which Wilford had charge, consisting of his wife and children, his father, and a few other members of the family, left Nauvoo. They had three baggage wagons, one family carriage, six yoke of oxen, six cows, four calves, one yearling, and a pair of mules. His father was aged and had no grown sons other than Wilford to assist him, so the weight and responsibility fell upon the son.

There now began the tedious journey across Iowa. On the first day out their wagon mired down in the mud; the wagon tongue and several chains were broken in the effort to extricate it. On May 27, Wilford wrote, his father fell to the ground while trying to climb into the wagon, and both wheels of the wagon, which was loaded with twenty-five hundred pounds, ran over his legs. It was miraculous that no bones were broken.

At Farmington, Iowa, they bought four barrels of flour. On Sunday, June 7, they came to a long swale or swamp that covered a distance of one and one-half miles. Wilford got his carriage across by dark, but in the center of the swamp the wheels of his baggage wagons sank almost to the hubs. He worked most of the night in mud and water nearly knee deep to free the wagon. Finally on June 15 they reached Mount Pisgah and, after a brief rest, drove on to Winter Quarters. Azubah joined them there in late fall.

We do not have much information on the family's experiences in Winter Quarters except a reference in Wilford's diary to a special meeting on February 5, 1847, when the Saints held a religious service, then a feast, and ended with a dance. Wilford wrote: "It was truly an interesting sight to see the old men and women, some nearly a hundred years old, go forth and dance together in fulfillment of the ancient prophets. The Quorum of the Twelve spent the afternoon and evening with them. Father and Mother Woodruff was among the number."

Wilford was one of the company appointed by Brigham Young to make the pioneer journey to the Great Basin during the summer of 1847. Wilford, indeed, first set foot in the Salt Lake Valley on July 24 and called it a "Land of Promise, held in reserve by the hand of God as a resting place for the Saints."

In the Salt Lake Valley Wilford waited anxiously for news from his family in Nebraska. Finally, on August 29, he received three letters from his wife Phoebe with discouraging news. His father, Aphek, now sixty-nine, was on his way west in the fourth hundred of the John Taylor—Parley P. Pratt train, due to arrive in Salt Lake on September 25, 1847. His mother, however, had listened to her daughter Eunice and had gone back to Iowa to live with the Websters. Wilford was disgusted. He wrote: "Some persons who I have tried to do good and save, are filled with folly and the poison of asps are under their tongue and are tatling, lying and destroying themselves and using every exertion to destroy the peace of my family. . . . They are foolish and do not choose things which are right and righteous."

In the years that followed, Azubah wrote to her husband and to Wilford. But she was not destined to live long in Iowa. She died on March 20, 1851, still away from her husband and still outside the pale of the Church. Wilford regretted for the rest of his life that she had not chosen to leave "Babylon." Aphek, however, lived until May 29, 1861, when he died at age eighty-two. He was buried in the Salt Lake City Cemetery.

Sources

Although we have found no surviving papers of Beulah Thompson Woodruff and Azubah Hart Woodruff, we believe we have been able to piece together a believable and trustworthy account of their lives from histories of the areas where they lived and from the diaries and letters of their son and stepson, Wilford. One of the Church's most avid record keepers, Wilford Woodruff made diary entries for almost every day from 1834 to 1898. With the assistance of a computer scanner under the direction of Ronald K. Esplin and Marilyn Rish Parks, we have been able to locate and study the many entries that mention his mother and stepmother. The diary is in the Church Archives in Salt Lake City. A typescript was published in eight volumes in 1983 by Signature Books of Salt Lake City. Also in the Church Archives are three letters from Wilford to his parents: one from Tennessee, dated May 9, 1836; another from Tennessee, dated August 25, 1836; and the third from Nauvoo to his father, dated May 16, 1843. In the excerpts we have used, we have regularized the spelling and punctuation in most instances.

Local and regional histories that have been particularly helpful include two books by Eric Sloane: American Yesterday (New York: Wilfred Funk, Inc., 1956), and The Seasons of America's Past (New York: Wilfred Funk, Inc., 1958); David M. Roth, Connecticut: A Bicentennial History (New York: W. W. Norton, 1979); Christopher P. Bickford, Farmington in Connecticut (Canaan, New Hampshire: Phoenix Publishing, 1982); Jarvis Means Morse, A Neglected Period of Connecticut's History, 1818-1850 (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1933); Catherine Fennelly, Life in an Old New England Country Village (New York: Thomas Y. Crowell Co., 1969).

A book-length biography of Wilford Woodruff that mentions his parentage is Matthias F. Cowley, Wilford Woodruff: History of His Life and Labors (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1909). Biographical essays include Andrew Jenson, "Woodruff, Wilford," in Latter-day Saint Biographical Encyclopedia (4 vols., Salt Lake City, 1899-1936), 1:20-26; Preston Nibley, "Wilford Woodruff," in The Presidents of the Church (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1971), pp. 101-35; Dean C. Jessee, "Wilford Woodruff," in Leonard J. Arrington, ed., The Presidents of the Church (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1986), pp. 117-43; and Thomas G. Alexander, "Wilford Woodruff and the Changing Nature of Mormon Religious Experience," Church History 45 (March 1976): 56-69.

On the role of the wife and mother in early America, we have profited from reading Laurel Thatcher Ulrich, Good Wives: Image and Reality in the Lives of Women in Northern New England, 1650-1750 (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1982), and Page Smith, Daughters of the Promised Land: Women in American History (Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1970).
