Susan Arrington Madsen, Leonard J. Arrington, Mothers of the Prophets ( 1987)

Rosetta Leonora Pettibone Snow

A more kind, indulgent, and affectionate parent than her [my mother] no man ever had. She was good, and virtuous, benevolent, and charitable to all—true and faithful in the New and Everlasting Covenant. I am comforted in the thought that her spirit rests in peace in the presence of her Great Father. Oh that my daughters may live out their probation with no more blots upon the page of their history than angels see upon that of their grandmother whose head lies low, yet honorable in the grave. (Lorenzo Snow)

When Connecticut was chartered by the British Crown in the seventeenth century, it was granted a strip of land about seventy miles wide extending westward all the way to the Pacific Ocean. After the British surrender and the decision to form a United States of America, Connecticut, in 1786, ceded to the nation all its claims to western lands except a tract of four million acres extending about 120 miles along the southern shore of Lake Erie, west of Pennsylvania. Connecticut insisted upon reserving this land to sell and/or give to citizens who had been burned out by or had otherwise suffered inordinately from the predations of the British army and navy. This land was referred to as the New Connecticut or Connecticut's Western Reserve.

A semiofficial agency, the Connecticut Land Company, bought most of the land in 1795, and the next year one of its directors, Moses Cleaveland, surveyed and established the first permanent settlement in the region, Cleveland. With the completion of the survey in 1798, the Land Company partitioned the region in a way to equalize the holdings and distribute them all at once. This meant the settlements would be widely scattered. Small groups—families or members of church congregations—fought their way through the wilderness to an assigned area and then would chop out a hole in the forest, erect cabins, plant a few acres of corn or wheat, and struggle to stay alive. Connecticut abandoned jurisdiction over the region in 1800, and the land was incorporated into Ohio Territory.

Among the first persons to buy land in the Western Reserve was Jacob Blair, a Revolutionary War veteran from Blandford, Hampden County, Massachusetts. In 1799 he purchased three hundred acres in a township thirty miles southeast of Cleveland called Mantua, after the village of the Roman poet Virgil. He later sold the land and returned to Massachusetts, but in 1804 he returned to Mantua, bought another three hundred acres, built a log cabin, and made some improvements. He returned to Massachusetts to pick up his family and in the spring of 1806 returned to Mantua and settled on his land.

Living in Tyringham, Massachusetts, not far from Blandford, was Oliver Snow, brother of Blair's wife, Charlotte. A native of Becket, Massachusetts, he had married twenty-one-year-old Rosetta Pettibone on May 6, 1800. When Blair told the Snows about Mantua, they decided to make the month-long journey there in 1805. They could occupy Blair's cabin until he took his own family there in 1806. Thus the Snows were one of the earliest families to locate permanently at Mantua. They were soon joined by both Snow and Pettibone relatives.

Oliver Snow was descended from Puritan stock. He was well-educated and had been employed for several years as a schoolteacher in Massachusetts. Rosetta came from an even more distinguished family. Born Rosetta Leonora Pettibone on October 22, 1778, she was the oldest of the seven children of Captain Jacob Pettibone and Rosetta Barber. Both parents were descendants of "genuine Puritan stock"; that is, descendants of some of the original Pilgrims who landed in 1620 at Plymouth and inaugurated the Massachusetts Bay Colony. Experiencing some frustrations over limits placed on their freedoms in Massachusetts, and perhaps desirous of richer land, these ancestors migrated to a lush northern Connecticut valley in Hartford County, along the Farmington River. There, in the village of Simsbury, they had been farming and raising their families for four generations by the time Rosetta was born.

Rosetta's father, Jacob, was one of a hundred men from Simsbury who volunteered just three weeks after the first blood of the Revolution was shed at Lexington in April 1775. He was twenty-six at the time. His father, Jacob Pettibone Sr., was a soldier too, having served in the French and Indian War in the First Regiment of Connecticut.

Patriotism evidently ran high in Simsbury. Lucius Barber wrote in the Memorial History of Hartford County: "In the War of the Revolution, few, if any, of the towns of the state [of Connecticut] furnished a larger number of enlisted men than Simsbury. With great unanimity the inhabitants of this town espoused the cause of freedom, and rendered essential aid in the great struggle for independence."

Though the Farmington River Valley contained fertile farmland, production of crops (mostly tobacco and Indian corn) was still backbreaking labor involving the entire family. Farming tools were wrought by hand—literally manufactured—by the local blacksmith or by Rosetta's father or grandfather. Axes, hoes, forks, spades, ploughshares, and scythes would not be mass-produced for many years to come. As the oldest child, Rosetta shouldered a lot of responsibility at home and was constantly at her mother's side, learning domestic skills that she would later teach her own daughters. A major portion of her time was spent producing cloth items: blankets and sheets, tablecloths and towels, bed curtains and window curtains, flannels for the family, and even carpets, when carpets came into vogue. Lucius Barber described a typical scene in Simsbury in the late eighteenth century:

In the morning the lawn was white with "pieces of linen" spread out to bleach, and the meadow covered with flax to rot. All these were the work of women. They made the bread, the butter, the cheese. They milked the cows, they cooked over an open fire, they washed and ironed, they scrubbed the doors and sanded them, they made soap and candles, they raked hay, they pulled flax, they dug potatoes. When they visited, they "carried their work." When they sat by the fireside to rest, they were knitting or patching the children's clothes or darning their stockings. Of an autumn evening they were paring apples and quartering them for the children to string and hang in the morning in festoons on the outside walls. All were busy—always busy!

Simsbury supported schools for the community, and Rosetta probably received a respectable education, although no record indicates how long she attended. As early as 1703, a committee, appointed to carry out the community's educational goals, voted to obtain four "school dames" and a schoolmaster, and "to keep said school: to teach such of [Simsbury's] children as are sent to read, write, and to cypher, or to say the rules of arithmatick." To finance the schools, they sequestered the local copper mines and, before the copper was refined or wrought, a percentage of it was set aside to pay the teachers and maintain the school buildings.

After her marriage Rosetta was prepared, just as other Farmington girls including Beulah and Azubah Woodruff were prepared, to assume the responsibilities of the typical New England household. In addition to teaching school, Oliver ran a farm near Becket, and Rosetta had plenty of housework and yardwork to do. Their daughter Leonora was born in 1802, followed by Eliza in 1804.

We can only wonder at the decision of Oliver and Rosetta to leave their comfortable home in Massachusetts and tackle the wilderness in New Connecticut. Perhaps their difficulties in Massachusetts were such that no hardship on the frontier seemed insupportable. Were they disappointed with the thin soil saturated with glacial boulders? Did Jacob Blair glow as he told them of the fat loams and salubrious climate of the Western Reserve? Did they suppose that, with a few years of hard work and sacrifice, they could become persons of property—landed gentry? At any rate, emboldened by their faith in the new country, their own Yankee ingenuity, and their capacity for endurance, the Snows decided to go across the mountains into the Ohio wilderness.

They were not alone. In addition to Oliver and Rosetta and their family, Jacob W. Pettibone, Rosetta's younger, unmarried brother, went with them. Franklin Snow, Oliver's brother, joined them in Mantua the next year. And, of course, Jacob Blair and his family joined them in 1806 and his brother John in 1807. So they would have some family and close friends nearby.

We cannot be sure whether Oliver and Rosetta traveled by oxcart or by horse-drawn wagon. They had, of course, their daughters Leonora, age three, and Eliza, not quite two. If they were able to afford a horse and covered wagon, they would have also taken a bed, a blanket chest, a churn, earthen pots and jars (crocks), a few dishes, the family gridirons, some quilts and featherbeds, and a trunkful of clothing, as well as the family Bible and Webster's Spelling Book. Oliver, with a long walking stick in his hand and a floppy felt hat on his head, would walk beside the horse; Rosetta and the girls would probably sit in the wagon.

They arrived in Mantua in the fall and temporarily occupied the one-room log cabin left there the year before by Jacob Blair. The cabin, which had a leather-hinged door and greased paper at the windows to let light in but keep the weather out, must have been crowded at times, since the Snow family was joined by the family of Oliver's brother Franklin and by Rosetta's brother Jacob.

Oliver and Franklin settled on land that Samuel Barrows had selected in 1798, made some improvements on in 1799, and abandoned in 1800. While the family stayed temporarily in Jacob Blair's cabin, Oliver, with the presumed help of Jacob Pettibone, built a log cabin in which he and his family lived for the next ten years.

Mantua was located along the Cuyahoga River, which wound its way south to what later became Akron and then flowed north into Lake Erie at Cleveland. First settled on a permanent basis in 1801, Mantua was in an area heavily wooded with oak, chestnut, beech, maple, black walnut, and hickory, providing abundant timber with which to build fences, homes, and outbuildings. By the time the Snows arrived, a water-driven sawmill and gristmill had been erected up the river at Burton.

The area had been visited frequently by Seneca and Ottawa Indians, even after settlement. Their principal campground was at the rapids of the Cuyahoga River in the vicinity of Hiram, not far from Mantua. Occasionally an Indian family would establish a camp at Mantua for a season of hunting and trapping. Except for the rare instances when the Indians obtained whiskey and became intoxicated, they were, according to town clerk Orrin Harmon, "perfectly friendly to and with the early settlers." The early settlers traded potatoes and corn with them and obtained meat, deerskins, and furs from them.

Making a living during the first few years in Mantua was a stern and rugged adventure. The land was potentially rich, but a long period of sacrificial development lay ahead. Oliver and Franklin worked together to fell trees, dig out roots, and prepare the land for planting. By spring they had put in crops, built roads and bridges, dug a well, and erected a barn. Rosetta's task was to provide food for her own family, tend the children, make clothing, and keep the house as clean and livable as possible. Oliver helped her set out apple and peach trees.

The going was not easy. There were frosts every month in 1806, so very little of the corn matured; it was difficult to get even enough to save for seed for the next year. The 1807 growing season was equally disastrous. Life was hard, but Rosetta and Oliver bore it with resourcefulness and earned the respect of their neighbors. Eventually they prospered, and they remained in Mantua for thirty-two years, until 1837.

The family continued to grow. Two girls followed Leonora and Eliza: Percy Amanda, born in 1808, and Melissa, born in 1810. The first son, Lorenzo, was born in 1814. That same year the family, having outgrown the log cabin, built a substantial two-story frame home, the fourth dwelling house built in Mantua and the second that would be classed as a "good residence." There were four rooms on the main floor and two big bedrooms upstairs. Two additional sons were later born to Rosetta: Lucius in 1819 and Samuel in 1821, completing the family of three boys and four girls.

Rosetta and Oliver became influential citizens of Mantua. Three years after their arrival, Oliver was elected county commissioner, an office he held for two terms (1809 to 1815). He was also justice of the peace for several three-year terms, town councilman, and a member of the board that supervised the county fair in nearby Ravenna. During his involvement in these public affairs, Oliver employed his daughter Eliza as his secretary, a position she felt competent and proud to hold. She later wrote, "This experience proved of great benefit to myself and to others at different periods of my variegated life."

In the fall of 1808, under Oliver's supervision, the men built a log cabin for a schoolhouse; it also served as a church meetinghouse. Oliver taught there during the winter of 1809-10 and again in the winter of 1813-14. In the summer of 1819 a frame schoolhouse was built as an improvement on the old log cabin. This house was used also as a Baptist meetinghouse.

The skills Rosetta learned as a young girl in Connecticut seemed to serve her well as a mother. Eliza later wrote of her: "Whether my mother anticipated or originated the wise policy of Queen Victoria, concerning the training of girls, does not matter—at all events, my mother considered a practical knowledge of housekeeping the best, the most efficient foundation on which to build a magnificent structure of womanly accomplishments—that useful knowledge was the most reliable basis of independence."

Hence, Rosetta's daughters were trained early in cooking, housework, straw weaving, the making of bonnets, hats, and clothing, and various kinds of needlework. She took great pride in the fact that Eliza won first prize from the Committee on Manufactures at the Portage County Fair for the best manufactured leghorn (a hat made of smooth, plaited straw).

In addition to the homey skills, Rosetta and Oliver believed their daughters as well as their sons should receive a good education. Great importance was placed on their studies. Above all, Rosetta taught the children that useful labor, physical and mental, was honorable, and that idleness and waste of time were not only disgraceful but also sinful.

Young Lorenzo and his sister Eliza shared a love of literature, a curiosity about history, and the patriotism of their grandfathers, both of whom had been soldiers in the Revolutionary War. Many an hour they sat at the knee of their Grandfather Snow listening with quickened pulse to the tales of soldiering and battles. Eliza wrote of one particularly harrowing experience: "My Grandfather (Pettibone) when fighting for the freedom of our country was taken prisoner by the British troops, and confined in a dreary cell, and so scantily fed that when his fellow-prisoner by his side died from exhaustion, he reported him to the jailor as sick in bed, in order to obtain the amount of food for both—keeping him covered in their blankets as long as he dared to remain with a decaying body."

Lorenzo was evidently enthralled by such stories, for at the age of twenty-one he announced his plans for a military career. Although Eliza was alarmed at the possibility her brother's life would end prematurely on the battlefield, she agreed to sew his first, and most important, military uniform—his so-called "freedom suit." Although it was "beautiful—magnificent," Lorenzo's martial dreams were cut short by his desire to obtain a college education at nearby Oberlin College.

In 1809 a group of kindred souls from Mantua and such nearby villages as Aurora, Hiram, and Nelson formed a Baptist Church. Oliver and Rosetta were among those who were baptized that year in the Cuyahoga River, near the location of the log chapel. The Snows actively supported the congregation; Oliver was an ordained deacon, and, indeed, had held Baptist meetings in their home before the meetinghouse was built. However, he and Rosetta were open-minded. They were not, Eliza recalled, "of the rigid, iron-bedstead order." They freely invited preachers of any faith or religious persuasion into their home to share meals and religious conversation. Thus, the Snow children had ample opportunity to form acquaintances with persons of all religious persuasions. One of these visitors was thirty-three-year-old Sidney Rigdon, a "reformed" Baptist preacher in nearby Kirtland and Mentor, Ohio, who was employed in 1826 as preacher for the Mantua congregation. This was an important event, because Mr. Rigdon was then in the process of changing from orthodox Baptist to Campbellite Baptist.

A leading religious figure in the American West in the early years of the nineteenth century was Alexander Campbell, an Irish immigrant of 1809 and a notable orator in frontier pulpits, who believed the fragmentation of sects weakened the cause of Christ's Kingdom. He proposed to unite the divergent sects by concentrating on the simple faith and practice of the early New Testament church. They would adopt the name of Disciples of Christ or Christian, as followers of Jesus were first called at Antioch. Campbell preached this doctrine widely and effectively throughout the Western Reserve and won many converts. When Sidney Rigdon organized his church in Mantua on Campbellite principles in 1827, the Snows and most of the other Baptists in the region were quite willing to follow, and thus became Campbellite Christians.

Sidney Rigdon was the most brilliant of Campbell's converts. Thirty-seven years old in 1830, he was a powerful preacher. He differed with Campbell on two issues: He believed the second coming of Christ was imminent, as the early Christians believed, and he believed in the communal life practiced by the first Christians, as recorded in Acts of the Apostles: "All that believed were together, and had all things common; and sold their possessions and goods, and parted them to all men, as every man had need." (Acts 2:44-45.)

A number of Rigdon's believers decided to found a Christian Family at Kirtland, a town first established by Turhand Kirtland, a field representative for the Connecticut Land Company. Among the converts in Kirtland was a twenty-three-year-old religiously inclined young man, Parley P. Pratt (the same person who, as a converted Latter-day Saint elder, preached to Agnes Taylor and Mary Fielding in upper Canada). He became an ardent evangelist and went off to New York in 1830 to carry the Christian message he had learned from Sidney Rigdon. There he came upon a copy of the Book of Mormon, read it, and was so impressed that he interrupted his mission to go to Palmyra to see Joseph Smith. The Prophet was in Pennsylvania, but Parley stayed up all night talking with the Prophet's brother Hyrum. What he heard delighted him; here was what he was looking for—the ancient gospel restored, complete with the proper authority. He was baptized, ordained an elder, and continued his mission, this time as an advocate of the restored gospel. He went back to Ohio to win over the Campbellites to this newer revelation. Sidney Rigdon listened attentively, read the book, prayed earnestly, and announced that it had been revealed to him that the book was authentic, and he was ready for baptism. He then went to New York, met Joseph Smith face to face, accepted his leadership, and was soon designated as the Prophet's first counselor.

Late in December the Saints in New York were commanded by revelation to gather in Ohio, and indeed, for the next seven years the Western Reserve was the home of the Saints. It proved to be both a sacred place and a place that seemed to generate evil.

During the last of January 1831, Elder Rigdon drove Joseph Smith in a sleigh from New York to the Reserve. Most of his followers there were now prepared to accept Joseph as their prophet, and his personal appearance generated an atmosphere of rejoicing and spiritual bliss. There were miraculous healings, the exercise of heavenly gifts, and the thrill of associating with a modern-day prophet.

About this time, in February 1831, Rosetta Snow heard a knock at the door. She could not imagine who it could be; there were few visitors to their home during the winter. As she opened the door, a twenty-six-year-old man with sandy hair stood before her. It was Joseph Smith! After inviting him in to warm himself in front of the fire, she called her husband, Oliver, and their seven children down to meet this new prophet whom the family had first heard of a few months earlier.

Rosetta's twenty-six-year-old daughter, Eliza Roxcy, was especially fascinated. "I scrutinized his face as closely as I could without attracting his attention," she later wrote, "and decided that his was an honest face."

Prayerful investigation of Joseph's message and of the Christian gospel he preached during the next few weeks led Rosetta and her oldest daughter, Leonora, to be baptized. Rosetta was fifty-two, Leonora twenty-nine. They were followed within the next five years by Oliver, their daughter Eliza, and their son Lorenzo. Unknown to them at the time was that their commitment to the new faith would mean suffering, persecutions, being uprooted and moved numerous times, and being severely tested spiritually and emotionally. Rosetta would not live to see her beloved Eliza and Lorenzo rise to positions of influence and leadership in the new religious community. Lorenzo would ultimately carry the family name to the very helm of the Church, serving as fifth Prophet, Seer, and Revelator.

Kirtland was located on a hill above the beautiful Chagrin River Valley, some twenty-five miles north of Mantua. Converts to the new Church of Christ, as it was then called, began to swarm there. In discontinuing the "Family" that Elder Rigdon had set up earlier, the Prophet introduced the Lord's plan for a well-ordered community by practicing the law of consecration and the order of stewardships. Rosetta's son Lorenzo would later establish a cooperative community in northern Utah under similar principles.

The Prophet also announced a revelation that they should erect a holy building, a temple, on the crown of the high bluff overlooking the valley of the east branch of the Chagrin. The construction of this enduring mansion to God and monument to Zion was to be a common enterprise, financed by tithes and donated labor. Joseph Smith himself would serve as foreman in the quarry. The women would forward the work by knitting, sewing, and spinning clothes for the laborers. The Snows and dozens of others would contribute of their means to help build it during the years 1833 to 1836. All the materials except the glass and hardware were taken from the forests of walnut, white oak, and cherry and from the quarries in the vicinity of Kirtland.

After three years of labor, the temple was ready for dedication on March 27, 1836. Impressive indeed were the dedicatory ceremonies, attended by more than a thousand converts. Oliver and Rosetta were probably there, although we have no direct evidence to be sure. There was an outpouring of spiritual gifts; people spoke in tongues, some saw glorious visions, and there were visitations by angels. Joseph Smith himself was transported into the Divine Presence and was visited by such ancient prophets as Moses, Elias, and Elijah. The ceremony lasted just two days, but the Saints lived in spiritual ecstasy for many weeks thereafter. (The temple, owned today by the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, still stands serene and dignified among the trees on the bluff south of the Chagrin River.)

Rosetta and Oliver continued to reside on their farm until spring of 1837. By that time all of their family except their third daughter, Amanda (who had previously married and moved away), had joined the Church. Thirty-three-year-old Eliza, having joined the Church in 1835, and being a woman of talent, was invited to Church headquarters to teach "a select school for young ladies." Lorenzo went to Oberlin in 1836. Oliver and Rosetta then sold their farm early in 1837 and moved to Kirtland with their family, which consisted of their two teenage sons, Lucius and Samuel, and their daughter Leonora, and her two daughters. Although they would remain in Kirtland less than a year, Rosetta and Oliver sheltered the Prophet for a period after one of his escapes from a mob.

When the tensions in Kirtland in 1838 made life difficult and dangerous, Church leaders and their faithful followers, many hundreds of them, went to the new gathering place at Adam-ondi-Ahman, near Far West, Missouri, more than one thousand miles to the west. There the Snows purchased a double log house.

Despite their firm resolves and high hopes, however, the Saints had to move again less than a year later. Old-time Missourians resented the newcomers and their restored gospel of Christ. Fearful of civil war, the governor ordered the Mormons to clear out, on pain of extermination. Early in 1839, the Snows, along with several thousand other Saints, moved to Quincy, Illinois, where the people were more sympathetic and hospitable. They later moved north and west to the new city of Nauvoo, which Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, and others established as the new gathering place for the Saints. Something of Rosetta's state of health during these perilous times is suggested by Eliza's mention of the move from Adam-ondi-Ahman, when Rosetta's daughters sat by her all night so she could sleep and not be stepped on by other people in the same cabin.

With their settlement in Nauvoo, the Snow family was once again united after numerous separations. Except for Melissa, who had died in Mantua, and Amanda, who stayed with her husband in Mantua, Rosetta and Oliver were together, albeit briefly, with their children. Lorenzo, who was baptized in 1836, was back in Nauvoo, having served a mission to the Eastern States (but he was soon to be called on another mission, this time to England).

Rosetta found many friends. She joined the Female Relief Society at their meeting on April 28, 1842, in the Nauvoo Lodge Room. Joseph Smith was present on this occasion and stated, "I now turn the key to you in the name of God, and this Society shall rejoice, and knowledge and intelligence shall flow down from this time—this is the beginning of better days to this Society." Rosetta's daughter Eliza served as secretary of this first Relief Society.

The spring of 1842, however, was a time of great turmoil for the Snow family. John C. Bennett, a counselor to Joseph Smith and mayor of the city, lost his faith and began delivering a series of anti-Mormon lectures. He also published a history of Mormonism that purported to be an expose of its secret practices. Oliver Snow, who was inclined to be critical of people in authority, decided to leave. He bought a home in Walnut Grove, Knox County, Illinois, some seventy-five miles east of Nauvoo, and moved his family there. Rosetta did not want to go, but eventually she acquiesced and went with him. Eliza reflected in her journal her sorrow that her parents "did not in their trials draw out from the springs of consolation which the gospel presents, that support which was their privilege, and which would have enabled them to rejoice in the midst of tribulation and disappointment." Eliza, of course, remained with the Church in Nauvoo, teaching a school that included the Prophet's children. Lorenzo was on a proselyting mission in England.

The exodus to Utah completed the separation of the Snow family. Oliver died in October 1845, just four months before the Saints left Nauvoo. And on December 22, 1846, Eliza, having gone with the Saints to Winter Quarters, got word of her mother's death two months earlier on October 12. Rosetta was sixty-seven years old.

Rosetta's children proved loyal and helpful during her last days, and three of them went on to make substantial contributions to the latter-day kingdom. Leonora and her second husband, Isaac Morley, helped to colonize Manti, Utah; and after Isaac's death, Leonora was a much-respected mother-figure for the settlers of that area. Eliza, "Zion's Poetess," became general president of the Relief Society in 1867 and remained so until her death in 1888. Lorenzo, ordained an apostle in 1849, founded the progressive community of Brigham City, in northern Utah, and finally became President of the Church in 1898, serving until his death in 1901. Through such children, Rosetta lived on among the Latter-day Saints.

Perhaps the most fitting tribute to Rosetta was paid by Eliza in the journal entry she made after being told of her mother's death: "About the last of December I received the sad news of the death of my mother, in which, altho' accompanied with a feeling of heavy bereavement, I realized a sweet, soothing sensation in the thought that she was free from all earthly ills. She had lived a good age, and been a patient participator in the scenes of suffering through the persecutions of the Saints. Her mortal remains sleep in peace—her grave, and that of my father, whose death preceded hers less than a year, are side by side, in Walnut Grove, Knox Co., Illinois."

Sources

In the absence of any papers of Rosetta Snow, we have used existing papers of Lorenzo Snow, Church Historical Archives, Salt Lake City; Journal and Notebook of Eliza R. Snow, Church Archives, Salt Lake City; Eliza R. Snow Journal, 1846-1849, Henry E. Huntington Library and Art Gallery, San Marino, California; and Eliza R. Snow, "Sketch of My Life," holograph, Bancroft Library, Berkeley, California. We have also made extensive use of Orrin Harmon, "Historical Facts Appertaining to the Township of Mantua," photographic copy of handwritten manuscript, 1866, in possession of Maureen Ursenbach Beecher, Salt Lake City. The original is in the Western Reserve Historical Society, Cleveland, Ohio. Harmon was the town clerk of Mantua, Ohio, in the early nineteenth century.

Biographies of Lorenzo Snow that have been helpful include Eliza R. Snow Smith, Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Company, 1884); Thomas C. Romney, The Life of Lorenzo Snow (Salt Lake City: Sons of Utah Pioneers Memorial Foundation, 1955); Francis Gibbons, Lorenzo Snow: Spiritual Giant, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1982); and Clyde J. Williams, ed., The Teachings of Lorenzo Snow (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1984). Shorter biographies include Preston Nibley, "Lorenzo Snow," in The Presidents of the Church (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1971), pp. 137-76, and Heidi S. Swinton, "Lorenzo Snow," in Leonard J. Arrington, ed., The Presidents of the Church (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1986), pp. 145-76.

Eliza R. Snow, An Immortal (Salt Lake City: Nicholas G. Morgan Sr. Foundation, 1957) is a collection of her writings, autobiography, and poems. Biographical essays, all by Maureen Ursenbach Beecher, include "Eliza: A Woman and a Sister," New Era 4 (October 1974): 10-16; "The Eliza Enigma: The Life and Legend of Eliza R. Snow," in Charles Redd Monographs in Western History 6 (1974-1975): 29-46; "Eliza R. Snow," in Claudia L. Bushman, ed., Mormon Sisters: Women in Early Utah (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Emmeline Press Limited, 1976), pp. 25-41; "Eliza R. Snow's Nauvoo Journal," Brigham Young University Studies 15 (Summer 1975): 391-416; "Leonora, Eliza, and Lorenzo: An Affectionate Portrait of the Snow Family," Ensign 10 (June 1980): 64-69; and "Eliza and Her Sisters: Nineteenth Century Mormon Women," typescript in possession of the author, Salt Lake City.

The best history of the Western Reserve is Harlan Hatcher, The Western Reserve: The Story of New Connecticut in Ohio (Indianapolis, Indiana: The Bobbs-Merrill Company, 1949).

Local histories that mention the Snows and their environs include History of Portage County, Ohio (Chicago, 1885); Lucius I. Barber, "Simsbury," in Memorial History of Hartford County, Connecticut (Boston, 1886); Rolls and Lists of Connecticut Men in the Revolution, 1775-1783 (Hartford: Connecticut Historical Society, 1901); Rolls of Connecticut Men in the French and Indian War, 1755-1762 (Hartford: Connecticut Historical Society, 1903).

Genealogical sheets on the family are in the Genealogical Society Library, Salt Lake City. Also located in that library and in the Cache Genealogical Library, Logan, is VaLoie R. Hill, "Ancestors of Lorenzo Snow," photocopy of a typescript, 1973.
