Susan Arrington Madsen, Leonard J. Arrington, Mothers of the Prophets ( 1987)

Mary Fielding Smith

O! my God, how I love and cherish true Motherhood! Nothing beneath the celestial kingdom can surpass my deathless love for the sweet, true, noble soul who gave me birth. My own, own Mother. O! she was good! She was true! She was indeed a Saint! A royal daughter of God! To her I owe my very existence, as also my success in life, coupled with the favor and mercy of God. (Joseph F. Smith)

In 1793 John Fielding, forty-four-year-old resident of Halifax, Yorkshire, in northern England, received an invitation to become a tenant on one of his uncle's farms in Honidon (also spelled Honeydon), Bedfordshire, some fifty miles northeast of London. A Methodist minister, John had been married for three years to Rachel Ibbotson, also of Halifax, and their union had been blessed by two sons in addition to Sarah, child of John's first marriage. Rachel, who had first become converted to Methodism at age sixteen, was now twenty-five, and she and John had every expectation of remaining in Halifax the remainder of their days.

Upon receipt of the invitation, John, more out of family loyalty than of the desire to make a change, journeyed to Honidon and looked over his uncle's house and farm. He was not favorably impressed. As he began his return to Halifax, however, he opened his Bible, as he did at every opportunity, and noticed a passage that appeared so remarkably appropriate that he felt the Lord was telling him Honidon should be his future residence.

When John returned to Rachel, he honestly reported the unpromising nature of the Honidon situation, and this was seconded by the servant who accompanied him. There followed a long discussion, after which John decided once more to settle the matter by opening the Bible. His eyes settled on a passage similar to the one he had previously noted. He could no longer doubt that the Lord wanted him to move to Honidon. Rachel, herself a strong believer, nevertheless found the decision a trial.

About the middle of May 1794, they arrived in Honidon, a country village nine miles northeast of Bedford, a market town of about 6,000 inhabitants on the river Ouse. To use the words of one of their children, "They had exchanged a populous town for a lonely village; a large and commodious house for a small and inconvenient cottage; a circle of friends and relations for a place in which every face and character were to them alike unknown; and the immediate neighborhood of a Methodist chapel for a place four miles distant from one." Nevertheless, they decided the Lord was putting their Christian graces to the trial. They remembered the Lord's assurance "As thy days, so shall thy strength be." (Deuteronomy 33:25.)

Although they expressed gratitude many times later for having made the move, because of the opportunity it offered for Christian service, their principal disappointment was in the uncle, James Dyson. They had every reason to expect from him kindness and forbearance; instead he was unreasonably harsh and severe. Only by the most diligent industry, economy, and frugality were they able to bring up their large family.

Rachel was unusually subject to divine impressions. When she was fourteen her mother died, and a few months later her father also. She was taken by an uncle, a medical doctor, to raise. Her life with her uncle's family was happy and carefree, and she took up such "worldly amusements" as playing cards, attending the theater, and wearing elegant dresses. One day, when she was twenty-one, while she was taking a Sunday walk with a friend she passed a woman on her way to a house of worship. Rachel immediately stopped and exclaimed, "Oh, how I wish I was like that woman!" She then turned around and followed the woman to the Methodist chapel. The preacher was a powerful persuader. "Convinced of sin," in accordance with the description for those converted to Methodism, Rachel began at that time, according to a daughter, "her journey to the kingdom of heaven."

Some time later, against her better judgment, Rachel allowed her friends to persuade her to attend a play. She was so distressed with the performance that she vowed she would never again go to the theater, and she kept that vow the rest of her life.

At the age of twenty-three Rachel married John, who at the time was already a Methodist preacher. Not long afterward, invited to spend a day with him in the country, she went to her room and prayed that she would never do anything that would give offense to God. Upon her return from the outing at the end of the day, she felt an assurance that her prayer had been answered. "The love of God was shed abroad in her heart," her daughter wrote, "and she could rejoice in His forgiving love, His Spirit bearing witness to her spirit that she was a child of God." She then repeated the lines of an appropriate hymn:

My God is reconciled, His pardoning voice I hear; He owns me for his child, I can no longer fear; With confidence I now draw nigh, And, Father, Abba, Father, cry!

She was now as happy as she imagined she could ever be. Her cup ran over. Soon she had two sons, born in Halifax. Then the move to Honidon—with the trials and vexations. There were also eight more children, four sons and four daughters. With John's daughter Sarah, that made a total of eleven, only two of whom died in infancy. The one in which we have particular interest was Mary, born in Honidon on July 21, 1801, John and Rachel's sixth child and second daughter.

Mary was inevitably influenced by her mother. Rachel was a good manager and provided well for her children and for her husband's parishioners. She also tried to cultivate their spirituality by indicating God's mercy, by administering a word of exhortation, and by taking her family, good weather or bad, to the Sunday Methodist services at St. Neot's, a four-mile walk. By taking a large share of her family upon herself, Rachel left her husband more freedom to fulfill religious and pulpit engagements. "His temporal comfort and spiritual prosperity lay near her heart," wrote her daughter. Rachel was a real helpmeet for John.

Rachel was fond of reading, especially the Bible, which, to her, was as daily food. She also read works of Christian commentary, including the Wesleyan Magazine. She often introduced the subject of religion in groups in which she was present. She was particularly pleased that her oldest daughter, Ann, married a minister who effected a union of the local Church of England and the Methodist Church and served as curate of Colmworth Parish, the chapel of which was just a mile from her home in Honidon. Rachel died, apparently of a heart attack, in 1828, when she was sixty-one. Her husband, John, died eight years later, at age seventy-six. Rachel's last words, as befitted one who had lived forty years as a devout Christian, were: "Jesus is my Saviour. I cannot doubt. I have felt of late an unusual deadness to the world. Whenever I have seen anything that has for the moment given me pleasure, I have turned from it and said, 'O this will not do! My God, and my all; my God, and my all.'" At her funeral the following Sunday at St. Neot's Methodist Chapel, the Reverend James Golding used as his text, "Therefore be ye also ready: for in such an hour as ye think not the Son of Man cometh." (Matthew 24:44.)

The following is a list of children of Rachel and John (John's daughter Sarah is not included), the year of their birth, and the considerable number of them whose lifelong profession was Methodism:

It was a religious family, and each of the members was strongly influenced by the forceful and enthusiastic Methodist teachings of Rachel and John. Mary, for example, as with her brothers and sisters, was brought up to be a trusting person, willing to "depend upon the unseen hand of our Heavenly Father." Believing that suffering is a necessary part of life for the righteous, and that the proper response to problems is not despair but hope, she accepted the biblical promise that "all things work together for good to them that love God." (Romans 8:28.)

Upon the death of Rachel, her son Joseph went to Gravely, Bedfordshire, to work for his brother John. He was compassionately looked after by his brother's wife, and active in the local Methodist Church. But in 1832, as with many other young Englishmen, including John Taylor, Joseph and his sister Mercy, now twenty-four, decided to migrate to Canada. They located on a farm at Chesleton Settlement, a few miles from York, later Toronto. Joseph did well as a farmer and was a reasonably active Methodist, though an independent-minded one. Preoccupied with the Millennium, he became convinced that biblical doctrine in its completeness was not fully understood by the Christian denominations of the day. He lost confidence in the pastors he had heard, and prayed the Lord to "send us the Gospel in its fullness and power."

In 1834, Mary, now thirty-three and still unmarried, joined Joseph and Mercy in Canada. The three often attended meetings held by disenchanted Methodists in the York area. In this way they became acquainted with John and Leonora Taylor.

From the story of Agnes Taylor, mother of John Taylor, it will be recalled that when Parley P. Pratt went to York (now Toronto) in the spring of 1836, he carried with him an introduction to John Taylor, the semiofficial leader of the little group of Methodist seekers in the Toronto region. Finding no encouragement there, he was about to leave when he met Izabella Walton, a widow who had stopped by. Out of fairness, Mrs. Walton opened her home to the Mormon missionary, and it was there that John Taylor listened to Elder Pratt and, with increasing interest in his message, volunteered to take him out to the farming settlement where the Fieldings lived.

News of their coming preceded them, and when Mary and Mercy saw them approach, they ran to a neighboring house "lest we should give welcome or give countenance to 'Mormonism.'" Joseph Fielding said that he was sorry they had come, and the Methodist meetinghouse was closed to them. When Elder Pratt inquired why Joseph and his sisters opposed Mormonism, Joseph lamely replied that the name Mormonism had a contemptible sound, and anyway, "We do not want a new revelation or a new religion contrary to the Bible." Elder Pratt smiled and said that if Mr. Fielding would call his sisters home and provide supper for everyone, "I will agree to preach the old Bible gospel, and leave out all new revelations which are opposed to it." An honest man, Joseph agreed; Elder Pratt reported that "the young ladies came home, got us a good supper, and all went to the meeting." "The house was crowded," he added; "I preached, and the people wished to hear more. In a few days we baptized Brother Joseph Fielding and his two amiable and intelligent sisters. . . . We organized a branch of the Church, for the people there drank in truth as water, and loved it as they loved life." Joseph Fielding wrote:

I soon discovered that he [Elder Pratt] had the Spirit and Power of God and such Wisdom as none but God himself could have given to man, by which he could explain those prophecies of which the preachers of the day were ignorant, showing the great design and connection of the scriptures throughout. He also spoke of and introduced the Book of Mormon. . . . He at the same time said that the angel made known the record of the fallen people, the Nephites. . . . It was necessary that the Covenant should be renewed before a pure Church could be built up, to have the ordinances, gifts, and blessings of the Church of Jesus Christ as established by Himself; also that the Day of the Lord was nigh at hand, that those prophecies which speak of that great and dreadful day, in which the wicked should be cut off and the earth purified by fire, to prepare it for the coming of Christ to reign thereon with his Wants, was nigh at hand, even that the present generation should not all pass away until all those things should be fulfilled. Elder Pratt laid before us the ordinances of the Gospel, which were very plain, being perfectly in accordance with the scripture, being still more clearly expressed in the Book of Mormon.

On May 21, 1836, Joseph, Mary, and Mercy Fielding were baptized in a stream called Black Creek on Joseph's property, and the following spring they joined the Saints in Kirtland, Ohio.

The arrival of Mary and Mercy in Kirtland created almost a sensation. Still single, they were both pretty, personable, well educated, and imparted an enthusiasm for the gospel that was contagious. Their entrance came at a time of dissent and division that was eroding the morale of many of the Kirtland Saints. Joseph Fielding wrote in his diary, "I found the Saints were far from being all righteous. There was great contention among them." But all three Fieldings stood fast. As Mary later wrote in a letter to Mercy: "Notwithstanding all of our defects, this is the only Church of Christ."

Shortly after their arrival in Kirtland, Mercy married Robert Thompson, a former Yorkshireman and former Methodist who had also migrated to York, Canada, and who was also baptized in May 1836 by Elder Pratt. The Thompsons soon left on a yearlong mission to the Toronto region. About the same time Joseph Fielding responded to a call to serve as a proselyting missionary in Great Britain. He joined Heber C. Kimball, Orson Hyde, Willard Richards, and others, remaining there four years. During two of those years he served as president of the British Mission. He was, however, unable to realize his most fervent hope, that he could convert his brothers and sisters.

While Joseph was away, Mary became acquainted with Vilate Kimball, whose husband, Heber C. Kimball, was also in England on a mission. Mary accepted Sister Kimball's invitation to live with her and remained several months. Mary referred to Sister Kimball as "a Christian old friend." She was kind, gave friendly counsel, and treated Mary as she would her own sister. The two of them occasionally had dinner with Joseph Smith and other Church leaders, including their wives and other leading women. When some of the brethren disputed the Prophet's leadership, Mary stood firmly behind him. She was certain that he would "yet stand in his place and accomplish the work God has given him to do, however much many seek his removal."

Mary took employment in August 1837 as a live-in teacher and governess for the children of David and Fanny Dort, who, because of the death of their mother (the eldest daughter of Temperance Mack) in 1827, were now under the care of their father and new stepmother, Mary (Polly) Dort. Fanny's younger sister was Almira Covey, the daughter of Lucy Mack Smith's sister-in-law, Temperance Mack. In this way, Mary inevitably became acquainted with the Smith family.

Mary's admiration and affection for the Smiths is revealed in her letter of July 8, 1837, to Mercy. (Mary's letters are beautifully written in a handwriting style reminiscent of fine lace—small so she could get as much as possible on a page. The letters are lively and filled with Mary's personal worries and reflections.) At a meeting in the Kirtland Temple on a Sunday in June, Mary reported, it was gratifying to see "the venerable Patriarch [Joseph Smith Sr.] with his two aged brothers [presumably John and Jesse] in the upper stand, and in the next, four of his sons with President [Sidney] Rigdon in their midst, all I believe faithful servants of the Living God. Joseph and Hyrum I know best and love much. While I looked at them all my heart was drawn out in earnest prayer to our Heavenly Father in their behalf, and also for the Prophetess, their aged mother, whose eyes are frequently bathed in tears when she looks at or speaks of them."

Mary reported that she and others believed that angels were present at the meeting: "a bright light shone across the house and rested upon the congregation." She felt confident that the Church would continue to enjoy God's blessings and that the kingdom of God would prosper. "The Lord knows what our intentions are and He will support us and give us grace and strength for the day if we continue to put our trust in Him and devote ourselves unreservedly to His service."

Shortly after arriving in Kirtland, Mary, thirty-six and still unmarried, went to Joseph Smith Sr. for a patriarchal blessing. That blessing said, in part: "Thy heart is now pure. If thou wilt keep the commandments of God, from this time, no blessing shall be withheld from thee—none shall be too great. Thou shalt have all the righteous desires of thy heart. The Lord is willing that thou shouldest have a companion in Life—a man after thy own heart—thy children shall be blest of the Lord."

Mary had passed up opportunities to marry while she was still in England. Indeed, among her papers in the Church Archives are two drafts of letters, presumably sent, declining offers of marriage. The key sentence in the first letter is: "I never intend, whether I am right or wrong, to be united to any person whose religious sentiments do not agree with my own." This was essential, she explained, because "marriage is a matter of the greatest importance next to the salvation of the Lord." The key sentence in the second letter is: "It is the strong impression made upon my mind by the advice of my dear departed parent [Rachel] never to enter into the important and responsible situation of stepmother." The reference is obviously to Rachel's relationship with her husband's daughter Sarah. Having seen that situation again in the fall of 1837 when she worked for Polly Dort, Mary remarked in a letter to Mercy, "I desire [that situation] as little as ever I did."

But a tragedy occurred that caused her to change that opinion. On September 27, 1837, Joseph and Hyrum Smith and other Church leaders departed for Missouri to supervise the expansion of the Church in Far West and other nearby communities, leaving their wives behind. For Hyrum, leaving must have been especially difficult, for his wife, Jerusha, was about to deliver their fifth child. Nevertheless, the trip, which would take several weeks, seemed to be imperative.

A few days after he arrived in Far West, Hyrum received a letter from his brother Samuel in Kirtland, dated October 13, informing him that Jerusha had just died after giving birth a few days earlier to a healthy daughter. "We have done all that we could to save Jerusha, but in vain," Samuel said. In a postscript, younger brother Don Carlos Smith wrote, "Tell Hyrum that I shall take as good care of his family as I can until he returns." Although he left immediately, Hyrum was not back in Kirtland until early December. His brother Joseph soon followed.

According to the Smith family, Joseph inquired of the Lord what should be done, and he was instructed that Hyrum should marry the English convert, Mary Fielding. On December 24, 1837, just three weeks after his sad return from Missouri, Hyrum married Mary in Kirtland. Hyrum said later, "It was not because I had less love or regard for Jerusha that I married so soon, but it was for the sake of my children." There were five children under the age of ten. As for Mary, she certainly would not have undertaken the task of becoming mother to Hyrum's children had she not believed it to be the express will of the Lord.

Events in Kirtland were making it urgent for the Saints to leave. Their leaders were being hounded by mobs and lawsuits; their economy was faltering; their political future was unpromising. Late in December Brigham Young was forced to flee, and Joseph Smith and other leaders left in January. By April 1838, most of the faithful had left Kirtland for Missouri.

Hyrum and Mary left Kirtland in early March of 1838. Their family included Lovina, ten; John, five; Hyrum, three; Jerusha, two; and Sarah, just a few months old. The household also included "Aunty" Hannah Grinnels, who tended to the children after Jerusha's illness and death, and an old British soldier they had looked after, George Mills. Mary learned valuable lessons in managing things as they traveled. They arrived in Far West in late May after a trip that Hyrum described as characterized by "many privations and much fatigue."

Hyrum arranged for farming land and a temporary house in Far West. "I fondly hoped, and anticipated the pleasure of spending a season in peace," he said. But it was not to be. Cattle and horses were stolen; people were forced from their homes and farms; fields of wheat and granaries were set afire. Finally, Governor Lilburn W. Boggs, who wanted an end to "the Mormon problem," ordered out the militia with orders to drive the Mormons from the state. When Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, and three other officials approached the camp of the general of the state militia under a flag of truce to negotiate a surrender, the general arrested them. The next day, November 1, the militia picked up Hyrum and placed him under guard as well. Although a secret court of officers ordered the prisoners shot, the colonel in charge refused to carry it out, so they were ordered to jail. After much importuning, they were permitted a brief visit to their homes to get clothing. Ill and heavy with child, Mary commended her husband to God, saying "if indeed there is no God I should never expect to see you again in this world."

After spending time in jail in Jackson County and in Richmond, Ray County, Missouri, Hyrum, Joseph, and the other prisoners were sent to Liberty Jail in Clay County on November 30. They would remain there four months. During some of the period they were chained together in the dungeon.

On November 13, 1838, just a few days after Hyrum had been forced from his home at gunpoint, Mary gave birth to a son. He was named Joseph F. (for Fielding) Smith, and one day he would become President of the Church. Mary wrote: "Shortly after his birth I took a severe cold, which brought on chills and fever: this, together with the anxiety of mind I had to endure, threatened to bring me to the gates of death. I was at least four months entirely unable to take any care either of myself or the child; but the Lord was merciful in so ordering things that my dear sister [Mercy] could be with me at the time. Her child [Mary Jane] was five months old when mine was born; so she had strength given her to nurse them both, so as to have them do well and grow fast."

Latter-day Saint leaders, particularly Brigham Young, determined that the members had no alternative but to leave Missouri, and so, family by family, they walked or rode across the border into Illinois and set up a temporary camp at Quincy. Hyrum pleaded for Mary to bring little Joseph F. to visit him at the jail before they left (Liberty Jail was forty miles from Far West). Early in February, despite Mary's sickness, she and Mercy traveled on a bed on a wagon, possibly driven by Joseph and Hyrum's brother Don Carlos, to the jail. Their joy at seeing Hyrum was blunted by the fearful forebodings, but at least they spent a night. When the women left, they reported "the creeking hinges of the door closed on the noblest men on earth."

Later in February the women were transported on a bed in a wagon to Quincy. Mary gradually recovered, and the family in her charge, including little Joseph F., got along fine. On April 15 Missouri state officials, chagrined that they had no case against the prisoners, allowed them to escape. Within a week Hyrum was back with his family, this time in Quincy. The next month Mary and Hyrum and their children, along with several thousand other Saints, moved to Commerce (renamed Nauvoo), a town on the Mississippi River on the western border of Illinois.

Mary's years in Nauvoo were full of challenges. Hyrum was elected to the first city council, later served as vice-mayor, was assistant president of the Church, and was patriarch to the Church after the death of his father, Joseph Smith Sr., in 1840. He was nearly always at the side of his younger brother, Joseph the Prophet. So Mary inevitably had a public life that made her domestic life with her stepchildren even more difficult than it might have been if she could have given them her full attention. She also handled many of Hyrum's business transactions. She was always positive, always full of faith and hope, but her frustrations occasionally came out, as when she signed an 1842 letter to Hyrum, who was on a tour of church branches in the Northeast, "Your faithful Companion and Friend but unhappy StepMother, M. Smith." She apparently felt that her best efforts were not always appreciated. Her challenges may not have been insurmountable, but she appreciated occasional reassurances.

On May 14,1841, Mary was delivered of a daughter, Martha Ann. The joy occasioned by that birth, however, was shortly blunted by the death of Hyrum Jr. He was seven. Other deaths occurring during the fall of 1841 were those of Don Carlos Smith, brother of Hyrum, and Robert B. Thompson, husband of Mercy. Each was intelligent and skilled in writing, as well as especially helpful to Mary and her children.

A greater cause of anxiety was the continued difficulties of the Saints with their neighbors in Illinois. Hyrum was almost as vulnerable as his brother Joseph. There were threats, there were burnings and shootings. The mob-militia, as it was called, was vindictive and vicious. Mary called on the sick, attended meetings, and inaugurated the Sisters Penny Subscription to buy nails and glass for the Nauvoo Temple, but the general atmosphere was increasingly turbulent. Finally, on June 27, 1844, Joseph and Hyrum Smith were assassinated while being held in jail at Carthage, Illinois.

When Mary learned the news of her husband's death, according to Martha Ann, "she fell back against the bureau. The news flew like wildfire through the house. The crying and agony that went through that house and the anguish and sorrow that were felt can be easier felt than described."

The bodies were returned from Carthage, and Mary summoned her reserves of physical and spiritual strength to maintain a reverent composure in front of the children. An observer wrote:

She [Mary] trembled at every step, and nearly fell, but reached her husband's body, kneeled down by him, clasped her arm around his head, turned his pale face upon her heaving bosom, and then a gushing, plaintive wail burst from her lips! "Oh! Hyrum, Hyrum! Have they shot you, my dear Hyrum—are you dead? Oh, speak to me, my dear husband. I cannot think you are dead, my dear Hyrum." She drew him closer to her bosom, kissed his pale lips and face, put her hands on his brow and brushed back his hair. Her grief seemed to consume her, and she lost all power of utterance.

Her three daughters, and two young children clung, some around her neck, and some to her body, falling prostrate upon the corpse, and shrieking in the wildness of their wordless grief.

It was inevitable, of course, that the Saints should leave Illinois, as they had left New York and Ohio and Missouri. Mary was reluctant to leave, though she knew she would have to. Mary, Mercy, and their brother Joseph Fielding were among the last to leave, in the fall of 1846. By now, little Joseph F. was eight years old and Martha Ann five. Lovina was now married and had her own protector. John was fourteen, Jerusha eleven, and Sarah ten. Martha Ann described their leave-taking:

We left our home just as it was, our furniture, and the fruit trees hanging full of rosy cheeked peaches. We bid good-bye to the loved home that reminded us of our beloved father everywhere we turned.

I was five years old when we started from Nauvoo. We crossed over the Mississippi in the skiff in the dusk of the evening. We bid goodbye to our dear old feeble grandmother [Lucy Mack Smith]. I can never forget the bitter tears she shed when she bid us goodbye. . . . She knew it would be the last time she would see her son's family.

Mary's caravan was comprised of nine wagons, six of them belonging to her, one to Mercy Thompson, and two to Joseph Fielding. Mary's group totaled eighteen people; in Mercy's group was Mercy's little daughter Mary Jane; and in Joseph's group were nine people. In addition to their teams, they had twenty-one loose cattle and forty-three sheep. They finally arrived at Winter Quarters on October 21, 1846. They had now joined the main body of the Church. They would remain there until the spring of 1848—a stopover of about eighteen months.

In the fall of 1847, Mary decided to go to St. Joseph, Missouri, 160 miles away, to get food and clothing. She took with her Joseph F., Martha Ann, and her brother Joseph. They traveled in two wagons with two yokes of oxen on each. Joseph F., then nine, served as teamster. On their way back, as Joseph F. later recounted, they camped one evening on an open prairie on the Missouri River bottoms, by the side of a small spring creek. There they turned out their oxen to feed. The next morning they could not find their best yoke of oxen. Joseph F. and Joseph Fielding searched through the tall grass all morning, but they were not to be found. As Joseph F. returned to camp about noon, he saw his mother kneeling in prayer. He approached closely enough to hear her plead with the Lord not to leave them in a helpless condition, without a way of getting back. When she arose, she was smiling. In a few minutes her brother Joseph returned declaring, "Well, Mary, the cattle are gone!" Mary replied, "Never mind. Your breakfast has been waiting for hours. While you and Joseph are eating, I'll just walk out and see if I can find the cattle." "No chance," insisted Joseph. "We've been all over this country and they are not to be found. They've been driven off by someone, and it is useless for you to hunt for them." Paying no attention to him, Mary followed a little stream toward the river until she was almost on the bank, then beckoned to her brother and her son. "I outran my uncle and came first to the spot where my mother stood," said Joseph F. "There I saw our ox team fastened to a clump of willows growing in the bottom of a deep gulch which had been washed out of the sandy bank of the river by the little spring creek, perfectly concealed from view." Then he added, "We were soon on our way rejoicing."

It was natural perhaps that Mary and her children and stepchildren, Mercy and her children, and her brother Joseph Fielding and his group should make the trek to the Salt Lake Valley with President Heber C. Kimball's company in 1848. Mary had stayed with the Kimballs when Mercy was in Canada and her brother was in England, and President Kimball had committed himself to look after her, as of a wife, after the death of Hyrum. He was always kind and helpful. Mercy and Mary Jane had already gone west, traveling in Parley P. Pratt's company in the fall of 1847.

It was not easy for Mary and her brother to put together an outfit. Eleven of Mary's thirteen horses died in Winter Quarters, making it necessary to use wild steers, cows, and half-grown oxen to pull the wagons. The Indians had stolen most of her cattle. She had to have food enough to last several months, clothing, and firearms, powder, and lead. Her group, consisting of nine people, was assigned to the Third Ten of Captain Peter Lott, a venerable man who had enjoyed the esteem of both Joseph Smith and Brigham Young. Captain Lott would not leave without her, though she continued to delay him. Until the last moment there was real question as to whether she should go on or go back.

When Mary and her group finally reached Captain Lott's rendezvous point, he looked over her outfit and shook his head. It was folly for her to start under such conditions. She would not make it without considerable help, making her a burden on the whole company. After her valiant efforts to put together her outfit, Mary was hurt but determined. With only a moment's thought, she told the captain she would beat him to the valley—and without asking any help from him.

Mary had many resources—Heber C. Kimball, for example, and Howard Egan, and others. She had helped many people in months and years past; now they were prepared to help her. She and Joseph and the children joined the main company at the Elk Horn and headed west. They had four wagons (two of their own and two hired) and a big "ambulance," as they called it—a light wagon; each wagon was drawn by two yokes of oxen except for one that was drawn by two yokes of cows. They also had two additional cows and some sheep that had to be driven along in the rear. Captain Lott thought she should not come without reserve oxen; she was "traveling thin."

All went well until they reached a point midway between the Platte and the Sweetwater rivers. One of Mary's best oxen lay down, as if poisoned, and seemed to be stiffening in the throes of death. Captain Lott busied himself to help her out, but she wanted no help. She went to her wagon, came back with a bottle of consecrated oil, and asked her brother Joseph and James Lawson to administer to the fallen ox. After the prayer of healing was uttered, the moribund ox stirred, gathered its huge hind legs under it, stood, and started off as if nothing had happened. They hadn't gone far when another ox, "Old Bully," lay down under the same circumstances. Once more the holy ordinance was performed and the results were the same. The brave, fatherless family did well.

When they finally reached the edge of the Salt Lake Valley, on September 22, 1848, Mary, who by now was ahead of the captain, was elated—and thankful. She had brought Hyrum's and her own children to the Promised Valley. John, the oldest, turned sixteen the day of their arrival. The next day they rolled down to the Old Fort to spend their first winter in the new land.

Mary secured a lot at Second West and Second North streets. Nearby were the lots of Joseph Fielding, Mercy Thompson, and James Lawson. Wanting a farm, Mary rode out to Mill Creek, about six miles southeast of the settlement, and found a place at the base of a hill with cool water gushing forth to form a pool. She bought the spring and forty acres of land. But they spent their first winter in their wagons near the Old Fort. The next spring she started construction of a two-room adobe house, which was completed in 1850. Located then at what was later named 27th South and Highland Drive, the cottage is now part of the Pioneer Village located near This Is the Place Monument.

Mary's years were full of trials, but she did well. Her livestock multiplied, her land produced abundantly, and she was respected and admired by her neighbors and the members of the Salt Lake Sixteenth Ward. One incident told by her son Joseph F. is worth mentioning as an illustration of her determined faithfulness:

One spring when we opened our potato pits she had her boys get a load of the best potatoes, and she took them to the tithing office; potatoes were scarce that season. I was a little boy at the time [possibly eleven or twelve], and drove the team. When we drove up to the steps of the tithing office ready to unload the potatoes, one of the clerks came out and said to my mother: "Widow Smith, it's a shame that you should have to pay tithing." He chided my mother . . . [and] called her anything but wise and prudent. . . . My mother turned upon him and said, "William [Thompson], you ought to be ashamed of yourself. Would you deny me a blessing? If I did not pay my tithing I should expect the Lord to withhold his blessings from me; I pay my tithing, not only because it is a law of God but because I expect a blessing by doing it."

Mary still had the assistance of Hannah Grinnels in raising her children and stepchildren, managing the household, and running the farm. Her home was a place of industry, with a spinning wheel, a carding rack, and a weaving frame. Martha Ann, along with her stepsisters, learned to spin and weave and to cut out and sew cloth for dresses, bedsheets, jeans, and men's clothing. Mary had horses, oxen, cows, sheep, pigs, and chickens to look after; land to be plowed, harrowed, leveled, and furrowed; crops to be planted, irrigated, weeded, and harvested; animals to be butchered and meat to be cured; vegetables and fruit to be picked or dug and stored; soap and butter to be made; ditches to be dug and bridges to be built. She also attended general conferences and ward fast and sacrament meetings, and, above all, visited her sister Mercy and brother Joseph.

After four years in the valley, her hair showing streaks of gray and lines beginning to form around her mouth and in her forehead, Mary caught cold while attending a public function and drove by the home of President Heber C. Kimball to rest and receive a blessing. But she did not recover. After two months of debilitating illness, probably pneumonia, she died on September 21, 1852. She was fifty-one.

At the time of her death Joseph F. was almost fourteen; Martha Ann was eleven. Of Hyrum's children by Jerusha, Lovina, of course, had married and had remained in the Midwest; John was nineteen, Jerusha fifteen, and Sarah fourteen. In the years after Mary's death, George A. Smith, a cousin of Hyrum's, an apostle, and later Church Historian and member of the First Presidency, took the family under his wing and supervised their upbringing with fondness and dedication. Joseph F. was ordained an apostle in 1866, served as a counselor in the First Presidencies of John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, and Lorenzo Snow, and became President of the Church in 1901, serving until his death in 1918. Martha Ann married William J. Harris in 1857, lived most of her life in Provo, and had eleven children. She died in 1923 at age eighty-two. John married in 1853 when he was twenty, became the sixth Presiding Patriarch of the Church when his grandfather died in 1854, and served until his death in 1911. Jerusha married William Pierce in 1854 and lived until 1912; Sarah married Charles Griffin, also in 1854, and died in 1876 at age thirty-nine.

As for Mary's brother and sister in the Valley, Joseph located on a farm at Mill Creek not far from Mary's, became a member of the Legislative Council, raised a large family, and died in 1863 at age sixty-six. Late in her life Mercy visited relatives in Canada and also in England. She died in 1893 at age eighty-six.

Sources

There is a splendid collection of letters to and from Mary Fielding Smith in the Church Archives, Salt Lake City. These cover primarily the period 1833 to 1848 and are particularly informative on the Church in the late 1830s and early 1840s. Some of these have been published in Kenneth M. Godfrey, Audrey M. Godfrey, and Jill Mulvay Derr, Women's Voices: An Untold History of the Latter-day Saints, 1830-1900 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1982), pp. 58-68.

Early printed sources include Ann Fielding Matthews, "Memoir of Mrs. Rachel Fielding of Honidon, Bedfordshire," Wesleyan: The Methodist Magazine, August 1830, pp. 514-22; Edward W. Tullidge, The Women of Mormondom (New York, 1877), esp. pp. 224-25, 249-58, 344-49; and [Joseph F. Smith], "A Noble Woman's Experience," in Heroines of "Mormondom" (Salt Lake City: Juvenile Instructor Office, 1884), pp. 9-37.

The basic biography is Don C. Corbett, Mary Fielding Smith: Daughter of Britain (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1966). Biographical sketches include Andrew Jenson, "Smith, Mary Fielding," in Latter-day Saints' Biographical Encyclopedia (4 vols., Salt Lake City: Andrew Jenson Historical Company, 1901-1936), 2:710-11; Susa Young Gates, "Mothers in Israel: Mary Fielding Smith, Wife of the Patriarch Hyrum Smith," Relief Society Magazine 3 (March 1916): 123-48; Ben E. Rich, "A Mother's Influence [contains a June 1839 letter of Mary to her brother Joseph]," in Ben E. Rich, Scrap Book of Mormon Literature (2 vols., Chicago: Ben E. Rich, 1913), 2:535-39; Gracia Denning, "The Role of Women in the Kirtland Era," given at Joseph Smith Sr. Family Reunion, Kirtland, Ohio, August 1977.

A particularly thoughtful discussion of Mary Fielding Smith as a role model in Mormon literature is Lavina Fielding Anderson, "Mary Fielding Smith: Her Ox Goes Marching On," in Maren M. Mouritsen, ed., Blueprints for Living: Perspectives for Latter-day Saint Women, Volume Two (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1980), pp. 2-13.

Biographies of Joseph F. Smith that contain references to his mother are Joseph Fielding Smith, Life of Joseph F. Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1938); Francis M. Gibbons, Joseph F. Smith: Patriarch and Preacher, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1984); Scott Kenney, "Joseph F. Smith," in Leonard J. Arrington, ed., The Presidents of the Church (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1986), pp. 179-209; and Preston Nibley, "Joseph F. Smith," in The Presidents of the Church (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1971), pp. 179-215. Material relating to Mary Fielding as the wife of Hyrum is in Pearson H. Corbett, Hyrum Smith, Patriarch (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1963).

We are particularly grateful to Ronald K. Esplin for the opportunity of perusing his unpublished manuscript, " 'Called to Endure': The Letters of Mary Fielding and Hyrum Smith." We are also grateful to the Fielding family for the typewritten "Diary of Joseph Fielding," which covers the years 1832 to 1859.

In the contemporary quotations, we have regularized the spelling and punctuation in some instances.
