Susan Arrington Madsen, Leonard J. Arrington, Mothers of the Prophets ( 1987)

Rachel Ridgeway Ivins Grant

My mother was both father and mother to me, as father died when I was but nine days old. So near to the Lord would she get in her prayers that they were a wonderful inspiration to me from childhood to manhood. When she died, the Pacific Coast manager of the New York Life Insurance Company, who once boarded at our home, wrote me: "If the God of nature ever did stamp peace, nobility, and serenity upon any human countenance, He did upon the face of dear 'Aunt Rachel.'" "To know 'Aunt Rachel,'" as mother was affectionately called, "was to love her," is an expression I have heard times without number. I do not recall ever seeing her angry, or hearing her speak an unkind word. Mother was indeed a lovable character, always looking for the good in others, and never for their failings. She was truly a noble woman, a true Latter-day Saint. (Heber J. Grant)

In September or October of 1837, Jedediah M. Grant and two companion Mormon missionaries began a series of sermons in Hornerstown, an agricultural settlement near Trenton in central New Jersey. Twenty-three-year-old Elder Grant was a popular preacher and a good student of the Bible. He had read widely, was clever with words, and delighted his listeners with his humorous and quick-witted repartee. Those who heard his first sermon came back and brought their friends. Among those who enjoyed his lectures were members of the Ivins family. One of them, eighteen-year-old Rachel Ridgeway (sometimes spelled Ridgway) Ivins, who was an active Baptist, did not at first take the Mormons seriously, concluding that "they were some of the false prophets that the Bible speaks of." She took advantage of an opportunity to visit relatives in Philadelphia and thus avoided them. But her older sister, Anna Lowrie Ivins, and some cousins attended the meeting and in a short time were baptized.

When Rachel returned home, she found Anna "filled with the spirit of the Gospel. . . . She urged me to attend the meetings with her." Wrote Rachel: "I went to the meeting on Saturday, but when she asked me to go on Sunday I did not know whether I ought to break the Sabbath day by going to hear them or not, but through her persuasion and that of a schoolmate, who had come some distance on purpose to hear them, I finally went, but upon returning home I went to my room, knelt down, and asked the Lord to forgive me for thus breaking the Sabbath day."

She attended some more meetings, read the Book of Mormon, Parley P. Pratt's Voice of Warning, and other literature, and was soon convinced that they were true. She wrote:

A new light seemed to break in upon me, the scriptures were plainer in my mind, and the light of the everlasting Gospel began to illuminate my soul. While thus investigating, a little child died whose mother had joined the Latter-day Saints. The Baptist minister preached about it, regretting that its parents had neglected to have it baptized and thereby it was lost and could not have salvation. Afterwards Elder [Orson] Hyde preached the funeral sermon and portrayed the glories of our Father's kingdom and the saved condition of the little innocent ones who died before they came to the years of accountability—"For of such is the kingdom of heaven."

The contrast was very great. I was steadily being drawn into the Gospel net. One day while attending the Baptist prayer meeting our pastor admonished me for the course I was taking and said if I did not stop going to the "Mormon" meetings I could not hold my seat in the Baptist church, and they would be obliged to disfellowship me for they could not fellowship anyone who would listen to such false doctrine. This seemed to settle the question with me. One wanted to hold me against my convictions, and the other was free salvation without money and without price. I soon handed my name [to the Mormons] for baptism and rendered willing obedience to the first four requirements of the Gospel of Jesus Christ as revealed through the Prophet Joseph. . . . And, oh, what joy filled my being!

The mother of the man who would serve as prophet and President of the Church longer than any other person in the twentieth century had joined the Church.

Rachel Ivins was born March 7, 1821, in Hornerstown, the sixth of eight children born to Caleb Ivins Jr. and Edith Ridgeway Ivins. Her father was a merchant and a descendant of Dutch and English immigrants who had come to America as early as 1680. Both his paternal and his maternal ancestors were Quakers, the religion of many residents in central and southern New Jersey. Rachel's mother, of English ancestry, was described as "a lovely, spirited woman, liked by all."

When Rachel was four, her father was incapacitated by a sunstroke; after two years of being cared for as a little child, he died. Four years later, when Rachel was ten, her mother died. Now orphans, Rachel and her brothers and sisters went to live with their grandfather, Caleb Ivins Sr. He was a compassionate Quaker who was called "the good Samaritan." Owner of a store, distillery, gristmill, and sawmill, he had a large country home that looked out on a beautiful orchard of chestnut, hickory, and walnut trees. With servants doing most of the chores, the children enjoyed a life of relative ease.

After two years, Rachel left Hornerstown to live with her cousins Joshua and Theodosia Wright in Trenton, New Jersey. This was a different kind of home. Theodosia ran a strict household. As a descendant wrote: "No speck of dust was ever allowed to enter the sacred precincts of her home." Rachel's tasks included caring for the bedroom, the silver, and the glassware. She learned to cook, dry fruit, cure meats, make cheese and butter and soap, and, of course, do needlework.

Rachel lived a life of rigid discipline and hard work. Her brothers and sisters, who continued to live with their grandfather, extended their sympathy, and Grandfather Ivins said he would welcome her back at any time. But strangely enough, Rachel said she preferred her new structured life and appreciated being forced to learn so many practical skills. Later she would look back and declare, "I could see the hand of the Lord in this very clearly after coming to Utah and having to assume such practical responsibilities."

Observing her excellent training and her cheerful attitude, her uncle, Richard Ridgeway, a widower, asked her to be his housekeeper. Now eighteen, she became more independent and earned a reputation as a thrifty and spotless housekeeper and a memorable cook.

As she grew up, the silent worship of the Quakers did not satisfy all of Rachel's needs. Music was not included in their worship services, and she longed to hear the beautiful hymns that her mother had taught her and the other children. "The spirit often moved me to burst out in songs of praise," she recalled, "and it was with difficulty that I could refrain from doing so." When she was younger, after a day's work at the Wrights' she would go to a nearby grove of trees and sit and sew for her dolls, singing contentedly to herself and her dolls.

When she was sixteen, with the consent of her relatives, Rachel joined the Baptist Church, which offered greater latitude of expression of opinion. She especially enjoyed the singing and the prayers, but she didn't like the often-loud sermons any more than the non-sermons of the Friends. She described herself as "religiously inclined but not of the long-faced variety. I thought religion ought to make people happier and that was the kind of religion I was looking for." When she was eighteen she was introduced to Mormonism. It offered the things she had found lacking in the other churches, and she was baptized. Not long after her conversion, the Prophet Joseph Smith visited the Hornerstown branch, and she enjoyed his friendly, open manner and his thoughtful and impassioned sermons. She thought him a handsome, noble-looking person, fully deserving of the title Prophet. She wrote, "The light of the Gospel was shed abroad in our hearts. The Bible I could understand as never before—its truths were made plain to me, and the plan of salvation lay clear before me. . . . I could sing all the day long, and rejoice in the glorious promises of the Gospel."

The elders, of course, preached the spirit of gathering, and when they proposed that she join the Saints in Nauvoo, she responded eagerly. Some of her cousins were going there, and she decided to accompany them.

Rachel was twenty-one when she arrived in Nauvoo in the spring of 1842. She lived there for two years. Her first year there was a happy one, for the Saints were enjoying comparative peace and prosperity. She became better acquainted with the Prophet, and she was especially pleased with the doctrine of salvation for the dead because it offered the hope that she and her brothers and sisters and her dead parents could all be united together "in happy family union in the eternity to come."

Feeling at home with the Nauvoo Saints, and always with a cheerful disposition, she made many friends. One of them, Emmeline B. Harris (later Wells), wrote of Rachel: "She was dressed in silk with a handsome lace collar, or fichu, and an elegant shawl over her shoulders, and a long white lace veil thrown back over her simple straw bonnet. She carried an elaborate feather fan. . . . One could easily discern the subdued Quaker pride in her method of using it, for Sister Rachel had the air, the tone, the mannerisms of the Quakers."

Rachel was active in the social life of Nauvoo. Many times she went to the home of the Prophet Joseph for dinners, parties, and receptions. She wrote of him: "He was a fine noble looking man. Always so neat. When he was preaching you could feel the influence and power. He was not at home very much. There were so few that he could trust or put confidence in. His life was so often sought that he had to be hid up. After he had been in hiding and had come out he was always so jolly and happy. He was different in that respect from Brother Hyrum [Smith], who was more sedate, more serious."

Years later, in a letter to one of her granddaughters, Rachel related how one Sunday the Prophet Joseph came to her cousins' home. Rachel's seventeen-year-old cousin was playing the piano. The Prophet surprised Rachel by asking her to sing "In the Gloaming." It was not a church hymn. "Why, Brother Joseph, it's Sunday!" Rachel exclaimed. The Prophet put on a knowing smile and replied, "The better the day, the better the deed." Clearly, the gospel should work to expand spirits, not confine them.

Rachel's second year in Nauvoo was not so peaceful. There was much persecution and turmoil, and her life was threatened by malaria. Still, her faith did not waver. She was administered to many times and always felt better. Not all the Ivinses were as consistently loyal. When the doctrine of plural marriage was circulated in 1843-44, Rachel's cousin Charles joined a group that called Joseph a fallen prophet and advocated establishment of a new organization dedicated to the early gospel taught by Joseph. When the group published a disloyal paper called the Nauvoo Expositor, the authorities destroyed its presses. In the ensuing uproar, Joseph and his brother Hyrum were arrested, taken to Carthage, the county seat, and charged with riot and treason. On June 27, 1844, a mob of two hundred men with blackened faces broke into the jail and killed the two leaders.

As with the thousands of other loyal Latter-day Saints, Rachel was stunned and outraged. Her mental and emotional distress was heightened by malarial fever. Nevertheless, she was among the thousands who attended the meeting at which the Twelve Apostles were sustained to provide leadership for the Church. She recalled: "After the Prophet's death, when Sidney Rigdon came to Nauvoo and spoke, he thought it was his right and privilege to be president of the Church. Brigham Young jumped right up on the seat and spoke. If you had had your eyes shut you would have thought it was the Prophet Joseph. In fact, he looked like him—his very countenance seemed to change—and he spoke like him." Clearly, in her mind, Brigham Young was the divinely approved successor to Joseph Smith.

Rachel did not remain in Nauvoo, nor did she accompany the Saints in their exodus from Nauvoo to Winter Quarters. Deprived of the Prophet she had admired so much, disaffected from the dissident cousins with whom she lived, and weak from malaria, she felt desolate and alone. She decided to return to her family in New Jersey.

Rachel made her home with first one sister, then another, helping to care for her nieces and nephews. But she did not lose contact with the Church. She attended meetings and listened to visiting authorities and missionaries. Her sister Anna, who also remained faithful to the Church, had married her second cousin Israel Ivins in 1844 and now lived in Toms River, New Jersey. Israel was a staunch believer as well, and, indeed, was one of the first missionaries to preach in southern New Jersey. Rachel told Anna and Israel that if they ever migrated to the new gathering place in the Great Basin, she would accompany them. She welcomed the opportunity when it came in 1853.

In preparation for the journey, Rachel bought calico, bleach, linsey-woolsey, thread, needles, bedding, pillowcases, sheets, and other goods she wouldn't be likely to find in Utah. But, she later said, she gave away most of the items to people she thought had greater need than she did.

The 3,000-mile trip west took four months. The group was well-outfitted, traveling with two well-stocked wagons, two yoke of oxen, and a cow. With the milk from the cow, Rachel mixed cornmeal sprinkled with dried fruit and topped by milk—a nutritious if monotonous diet.

Besides Israel and Anna Ivins, Rachel's companions included their eight-year-old daughter, Caroline (Caddie) Ivins, and their eight-month-old son, Anthony (Tony) W. Ivins (who would be a close companion to Rachel's future son and eventually an apostle in the Church). Rachel read, knitted, helped care for Tony, and told stories to Caddie. The trip was good for her health; a persistent cough that had troubled her for years disappeared. They arrived in the Salt Lake Valley around the middle of August.

Once in the Valley, they were met by Jedediah Grant, Rachel's first missionary, who had been one of the First Presidents of the Seventy since 1845. He had visited the branch in Hornerstown several times since 1839 and, indeed, had married Anna and Israel. He took the Ivinses to his home on Main Street, where they continued as his guests until Anna and Israel were able to arrange for their own home.

During the next two years Rachel received a number of marriage proposals, but her final choice was to become a plural wife of her host and benefactor, Elder Grant. They were married on November 29, 1855. At the time Rachel was thirty-four and Jedediah thirty-nine.

Rachel did her share of the work and more in the extended Grant household, and she enjoyed it. She helped to prepare meals, make and wash clothes, nurse sick children and adults, work in the garden, care for the livestock, and keep the house clean and in good repair. In a letter to one member of the household, Jedediah wrote: "And tell Rachel not to work so hard!"

Jedediah, who was born at Windsor, Broome County, New York, on February 21, 1816, was baptized a member of the Church in 1833, when he was seventeen. He was a member of Zion's Camp, that little army of two hundred men and ten women that traveled from northern Ohio to western Missouri in 1834 to assist the Saints expelled from Jackson County. A member of the First Quorum of Seventy in the Church, he performed his first preaching mission in 1835 and visited New York, New Jersey, Virginia, and North Carolina in 1836-37, and also in 1839-40. He met members of the Ivins family for the first time in 1839. Orson F. Whitney, after interviewing many who had known Elder Grant personally, described Jedediah as one of the Church's most able missionaries:

Though not an educated man, he was wonderfully bright and intelligent, a natural logician, with a thorough knowledge of the scriptures, a ready and forceful delivery, and a most original and effective way of presenting and driving home an argument. Shrewd and quick-witted, he saw in a moment the weakness of an opponent's position, and like lightning attacked and demolished it. His style—for all that he was practical—was poetic, full of fire and replete with imagery. Withal, though of sound judgment, prudent and farsighted, he was perfectly fearless, daring, dashing—just the man to please the chivalrous and fiery Southerners.

In 1843 and 1844 Jedediah presided over the Saints in Philadelphia. In the Salt Lake Valley he was the first mayor of Salt Lake City, a member of the legislature, and Speaker of the House, and in 1854 he was sustained as second counselor to Brigham Young in the First Presidency of the Church. He was also a top officer in the Nauvoo Legion, the territory's official militia. Because of this activity, he was gone from home much of the time.

Only twelve months and two days after her marriage, Rachel became a widow. Jedediah contracted typhoid, followed up by double pneumonia, in mid-November 1856, and he died on December 1, 1856, at age forty. Just nine days before his death, Rachel had given birth to Heber Jeddy, the future President of the Church. Because of Jedediah's death, she would henceforth have to provide for herself and son. She contemplated living with her sister and brother-in-law, Anna and Israel, but they were called to help colonize southern Utah in 1861, and that option was no longer open. Her relatives in New Jersey assured her financial security if she would return, but her commitment to the Church was too strong to leave the Promised Valley.

Taking the five hundred dollars she received when the Grant mansion was sold, Rachel purchased a small adobe house at 14 South Second East. For the first time in her life she was completely on her own. She decided to try supporting herself and her son by custom sewing. She was not able to earn much—and people often paid her with flour, potatoes, wood, butter, milk, or old clothes. She and Heber did not eat well; they seldom had sugar, butter, fresh fruit, or vegetables, all of which were scarce. The house was often cold for lack of wood. Heber remembered, as he grew older, working the pedal of the sewing machine to relieve his mother's tired feet. They often worked late into the night.

Struggle, however, did not preclude entertaining; there were frequent gatherings in her home. "They loved to come," Rachel declared, "and I loved to have them. . . . 'Sister Grant,' the boys would say, 'we have such good times here.'" In order to splurge when she entertained friends, she and Heber would restrict themselves to a diet of fried bread (warmed slices of bread in a greased frying pan). She had always been proud of her personal appearance, so she was careful to keep in good condition a best dress for very special occasions and a next-best dress for Sundays. "She could wear a dress longer than anyone I have seen and have it look fresh and nice," recalled a relative. "She always changed her dress in the afternoon and washed herself and combed her hair, and if at home put on a nice white apron. . . . It would not look soiled [for several days]." She often borrowed from several threadbare garments to produce something that looked new and usable.

Rachel's situation changed in the 1860s when gold was discovered in Idaho and Montana. Salt Lake City was the regional trading center, and enterprising persons arrived in the city to take advantage of new business opportunities. One day Daniel H. Wells, who replaced Jedediah as mayor of Salt Lake City and as counselor to Brigham Young, called to see Widow Grant. A non-Mormon friend was coming to Salt Lake City to open a business. "He will pay you forty dollars a month," Mayor Wells told her. "Will you allow him to board with you?" Knowing the sum was far more than she could earn sewing, Rachel agreed. The friend decided to marry in the meantime, so when he came he brought his bride and paid eighty dollars a month.

One day the boarder, Park Wood, invited a friend to dinner, Colonel Alex G. Haws, an officer of the New York Life Insurance Company. "Madam, I like your cooking, I like your face, and I am coming here tomorrow to board," he stated. When Rachel protested that she had no place to put him, Haws explained that he would pay to have a room fixed up. He gave her one hundred dollars. Haws boarded with Rachel for years and she enjoyed him immensely—his conversation, his friendliness, his generosity, his discretion, and presumably his monthly rent. The colonel was, in many ways, a second father to Heber.

Yet Rachel insisted upon a certain independence and distance. She refused to allow the colonel to take charge of Heber and pay the expenses of his education. Moreover, she refused her ward bishop's offer to repair the leaky roof of her home, telling Bishop Edwin D. Woolley that her son would one day build her a new home. Heber did build her a home, and Bishop Woolley, father of Olive Woolley Kimball, whose history is given later, dedicated it.

Rachel's attitude is revealed in one of her letters to her son during his mission in Japan: "I never felt humiliated at having to work and support myself and you, and I thanked my heavenly Father for giving me the strength and ability to do it. When talking to President Young I said if the Lord would give me health and strength, it was all I asked. He did, and now I am not under any obligations to anyone but to God. . . . Persons had said to me I was a fool for working as I did when your father killed himself [he died of typhoid and pneumonia] working in the kingdom. I told them I did not wish to be supported by the church. I was too independent for that, and how well I feel about it now."

Despite her insistence upon supporting herself and Heber, Rachel was also active in the Thirteenth Ward. She helped nurse the sick, made burial clothes for the dead, and for thirty-five years (1868-1903) served as president of the ward Relief Society, whose members made carpets for the Salt Lake Temple. Rachel served on a committee of female leaders to draft resolutions protective of church (and Mormon) interests, advocated woman suffrage, and spoke often at Relief Society and Retrenchment Society meetings and stake conferences. She emphasized that "faith without works is dead," that faith should always be coupled with good works.

Rachel was a supportive mother to her son. She encouraged him to play baseball and inspired him to do well in school; but, above all, she encouraged him to remain faithful and active in church and to respect the authorities of the Church. When Heber was a mere boy, Rachel predicted that he would one day be an apostle, and she wanted him to live worthy of it. She was probably the only person in the Thirteenth Ward who was not surprised when, at age twenty-six, he was called to be an apostle through revelation to President John Taylor. Rachel saw her son serve as an apostle during the last twenty-six years of her life. He also served as president of two overseas missions during her lifetime.

Satisfaction with her son, however, could not overcome a physical problem that became increasingly serious. In 1868, when Heber was about twelve, Rachel suffered an attack of quinsy (abscessed tonsils) that made her deaf. Although her health and longevity would carry her through her eighty-seventh year, she spent the last forty years of her life in almost total silence. The loss of hearing was accompanied by terrible head noises, "like a steam engine going night and day." She continued as president of the Relief Society, always attended church meetings, and sometimes was helped by special blessings. Although her deafness prevented her hearing the music she loved, especially hymns, it did not stop her from singing. Her spirit of resignation is reflected in her statement, "I'm glad I can see. I feel blindness would be a great affliction." She made up for her loss of hearing by writing letters and reading hymns, magazines, and other "good thoughts and good books."

Rachel's last years were spent mostly with her grandchildren. She made one trip to New Jersey to visit the old homestead; she went with Heber to California, where they vacationed at Pacific Grove; and she enjoyed the many birthday celebrations held in her honor in Salt Lake City. Rachel carried herself like a queen and was treated like one. She reminded many people of Queen Victoria of England, who was only a year older.

When death came on January 27, 1909, at age eighty-seven, she was ready to go. "I have far more friends and loved ones on the other side than I have here," she said.

Sources

Among the Heber J. Grant Papers at the Church Archives, Salt Lake City, are a number of biographical and autobiographical manuscripts and typescripts about and by Rachel R. Ivins Grant.

Published biographical sketches and appreciations include: May Booth Talmage, "Coronets of Age: Rachel R. Grant," Young Woman's Journal 19 (April 1908): 182-85; Susa Young Gates, "A Tribute to Rachel Ivins Grant," Young Woman's Journal 21 (January 1910): 30; "Rachel Ridgeway Ivins Grant," Improvement Era 12 (June 1909): 585-99; Heber J. Grant, "My Tribute to Mother," Improvement Era 31 (May 1928): 541; Annie Wells Cannon, "Rachel Ivins Grant," Improvement Era 37 (November 1934): 643; Lucy Grant Cannon, "Recollections of Rachel Ivins Grant," Relief Society Magazine 25 (May 1938): 293-98; Mary Grant Judd, "Rachel Ridgway Ivins Grant," Relief Society Magazine 30 (April 1943): 229-31, 297, and (May 1943): 313-16.

By far the best sources for our purposes were the recent exemplary studies: Ronald W. Walker, "Rachel R. Grant: The Continuing Legacy of the Feminine Ideal," Dialogue: A Journal of Mormon Thought 15 (Autumn 1982): 105-21; Marlena C. Ahanin, "A Name and Place Among the Saints: The Life of Rachel Ridgeway Ivins Grant," typescript (1976) in possession of the writers; and Ronald W. Walker, "Jedediah and Heber Grant," Ensign 9 (July 1979): 47-52.

Biographies of Rachel's husband and son contain material about her life and character. These include Gene A. Sessions, Mormon Thunder: A Documentary History of Jedediah Morgan Grant (Urbana, Illinois: University of Illinois Press, 1982); Mary Grant Judd, Jedediah M. Grant, Pioneer-Statesman (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1959); Francis M. Gibbons, Heber J. Grant: Man of Steel, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1979); Andrew Jenson, "Grant, Jedediah M." in Latter-day Saints' Biographical Encyclopedia (4 vols., Salt Lake City: Andrew Jenson Historical Company, 1901-1936), 1:57-58, 3:637; Ronald W. Walker, "Heber J. Grant," in Leonard J. Arrington, ed., The Presidents of the Church (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1986), pp. 211-48; Preston Nibley, The Presidents of the Church (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1971), pp. 217-62.
