Susan Arrington Madsen, Leonard J. Arrington, Mothers of the Prophets ( 1987)

Sarah Farr Smith

My mother was born in a Latter-day Saint home. . . . She passed through the experiences of pioneer life in such manner as to develop the best there is in a human being. She began life with a strong physique and a cheerful disposition. . . . Her training made her exceedingly frugal and economical so that when, as a young girl, she married my father, . . . she began home-making under the most favorable circumstances. . . . Mother was and is one of the most industrious women I ever knew. I well remember, when I was a child, how she was the first one up in the morning and the last one to bed at night. And during her experience of giving birth to eleven children and rearing eight of them to man and womanhood not one of us was ever neglected in any way. She was a strict disciplinarian, and we always knew that when she told us to do anything she meant it. (George Albert Smith)

Sarah Farr Smith had just finished cleaning the kitchen after the family noontime meal when she heard a firm knock at the back door of her home at 23 North West Temple in Salt Lake City. Proceeding to the door, she was not particularly surprised to see a poor but tidy-looking gentleman standing on her porch. She didn't know the elderly man, but it was not uncommon for transients to come to her home from the nearby railroad station asking for a meal. As Sarah often tired of serving food at all hours of the day to whoever came by, her husband, John Henry, had purchased "meal tickets" to give to those in need, which enabled them to eat a satisfying meal at a nearby restaurant.

There was something different about this particular man, and Sarah felt moved to invite him in to her kitchen table. As he was eating, the man suddenly asked where Sarah's young son George Albert was. She indicated that he was outside playing in the yard. He then asked her to call the youth into the house so he could see him. Again she felt compelled to comply, although she was hesitant to leave a stranger alone in the house. She found George Albert, who was about eight years old, playing at a nearby two-story building north of their house, underneath a second-story balcony from which steps descended to the ground level. When she reentered her house with her young son at her side, the gentleman was gone. Sarah was searching through the house for him when she heard a loud crashing sound outside. She rushed out to see what had happened and was astonished to discover that the balcony and staircase under which her son had just been playing had collapsed, sending large beams and pieces of lumber crashing down onto playthings he had left behind just moments before.

Sarah was deeply moved and grateful for what she felt was divine intervention to save her son's life. Within a few years of this incident, it was made even more clear to her that her descendants had an important mission to fulfill in building the kingdom of God on earth. In 1881, at the age of thirty-one and just two weeks before the birth of her seventh child, she received her patriarchal blessing and was told that she and her husband would "raise up a posterity that shall be numerous and mighty and none shall excel them in Israel."

This must have been a humbling promise to a young mother who, by birth and by marriage, was associated with two of the most remarkable families in early Church history. The possibility that any of her children could excel any of their ancestors would be quite an accomplishment indeed.

Sarah Farr Smith's life began at the very time and place that one of the most remarkable colonization efforts in America had its beginnings. She was born October 30, 1849, just two years after her parents, Lorin Farr and Nancy Bailey Chase, entered the Salt Lake Valley in a covered wagon. She was the third of their eleven children, a family that included two sets of twins.

Sarah's mother, Nancy Chase, was born in Vermont in 1823, and at the age of four moved with her family to New York State, where they found the soil more suitable for farming. Several years later, when Nancy was fifteen, the family accepted the truth of the message of the restored gospel and were baptized. In 1839 the Chase family joined the main body of Saints in Nauvoo, Illinois, where they became well-acquainted with the Prophet Joseph Smith. During the terrible cholera plague of 1841, the Prophet healed eighteen-year-old Nancy of that serious illness, an experience that caused her to make a lifetime vow to "serve the Lord in every way possible."

In Nauvoo, Nancy became a charter member of the Female Relief Society, sang in choral groups for concerts and church activities, and studied history, language, and theology with such prominent leaders as Brigham Young, John Taylor, and Heber C. Kimball. She first saw her future husband, Lorin Farr, when they met at the well near their homes where both had gone to get fresh water for the evening.

Lorin Farr, also a convert, came from Vermont, where he was born in 1820. As a young boy, he witnessed the miraculous healing of his gravely ill mother by Elder Orson Pratt and his companion Elder Lyman Johnson, an event that eventually led to the baptism of Lorin and his parents. Their desire to join the rest of the Saints was strong, and Lorin's father sold his 2,000-acre farm for a fraction of its worth, left his prominent position as a county judge, and moved to Kirtland, Ohio. As a young man, Lorin lived for a period of time with the family of Joseph Smith and became one of the Prophet's closest associates. Lorin was serving a mission in the Eastern States when he learned of the Prophet's martyrdom in June 1844. The grief-stricken elder faithfully continued his labors, however, and did not return to Nauvoo until November 1844, the year he met Nancy Chase. Lorin and Nancy were married New Year's Day, 1845, in a ceremony performed by Brigham Young.

After their arrival in the Salt Lake Valley, Lorin and Nancy immediately set about the task of building a new home. They were assigned a fine lot northeast of the Temple Block, where they planted fruit trees, berry bushes, and a garden. Lorin joined "snake killing expeditions," in which several dozen men fanned out from a given place and walked slowly toward the mountain, killing the snakes and rodents in their path.

Their efforts at settling were expanded when the Salt Lake Valley proved to be only a temporary stopping place for Nancy and Lorin. Within a year of their arrival, they were called by President Brigham Young to move north to the Weber Valley to oversee the colonization of a new settlement, soon to be known as Ogden. In January 1850 Lorin packed the scant belongings of the little family—a plow on the side of the wagon, cooking utensils, a few simple pieces of furniture, chickens in pens hanging on the back, a cow trailing behind—and headed north, struggling over the snow-covered trail. In the wagon, Nancy tucked her three small children snugly next to her under blankets and buffalo robes: four-year-old Enoch, one-and-a-half-year-old Julia, and two-month-old Sarah.

Although the Ogden settlement later proved a great success, many were skeptical of the "farmability" of some areas of the Weber Valley. Sarah's maternal grandfather, Ezra Chase, had arrived there two years before Lorin and Nancy and, tongue-in-cheek, assured them of three good crops: "The upper land would yield good grain, but below, the land would produce one hundred bushel of crickets to the acre and fifty bushels of mosquitoes." Lorin agreed to colonize the upper district.

The Farrs lived briefly in what was known as Farr's Fort, three-fourths of a mile west of Ogden Canyon. In 1853 they later moved to the corner of Main and First Street (now Twenty-first and Washington), where Sarah's father built a twenty-one-room adobe home. Larger than most other homes in the area, it was the envy of many because of its good wooden floors made of thick planks. As a toddler, Sarah played at her mother's knee while Nancy, with help from friendly Indian women who visited regularly, made rag rugs for each room. The home was simply furnished with tables and chairs made from home-cut lumber and doors hanging on leather hinges. The family ate from tin and pewter dishes and utensils. A typical evening meal for the family, which Sarah helped prepare when she was old enough, consisted of cornmeal mush and milk, homemade salt-rising bread, milk with plenty of cream, and old-fashioned hominy.

Bearskins and buffalo robes kept the children warm in their trundle beds on cold winter nights. When she was a little older, Sarah slept on a bed with a fresh straw mattress and sometimes cuddled under a tick made from carefully selected feathers. The pillows were stuffed mainly with goose feathers, although some of the more rugged pioneers found it difficult to sleep on anything so soft.

Open fireplaces furnished heat and a place for Sarah and her mother and sisters to cook the family meals. Matches for starting fires were made from dry, split pieces of pine dipped into melted sulphur. The family called them "lucifers."

Insects of all kinds were a constant plague for these early settlers, and Sarah no doubt was continually battling them. Flies, mosquitoes, and bedbugs were "almost as thick as the sands of the seashore," wrote her half-brother John Farr. A story circulated among the early settlers tells of a traveling salesman who, in seeking accommodations for the night, asked the landlady if there were any bedbugs in the house. She replied, "Not a single bug in the house." The next morning at breakfast he said, "Madam, you told the truth. You haven't a single bedbug. But you do have a thousand married ones, all with big families!"

One of the most disagreeable encounters Sarah had with insects was most likely the experience of accidentally stepping on "army worms" while she was working or playing outside barefooted. These destructive pests have been described as being "green, horned, from four to six inches long and one-half inch thick." While driving cows to pasture or running errands for her mother, Sarah found it difficult to miss the worms, hard as she may have tried.

The family in which Sarah grew up would have to be considered both very unusual and highly successful. After his arrival in Ogden, because of the principle of plural marriage, Lorin Farr married additional wives. He fathered, in all, thirty-six children.

As the second oldest child in such a large family (her older sister Julia died at the age of nine), Sarah shouldered a major responsibility in helping her mother with housework, cooking, sewing, and caring for the younger children. Her father became the first mayor of Ogden, a position he held for twenty-two years, and was also president of the Weber Stake for twenty years. Hence, the Farr home was a flurry of activity centered around the father's business, civic, and religious responsibilities. Sarah met and became well-acquainted with numerous important religious leaders, including President Brigham Young, as they came on visits and spent the night in the Farr home.

Sarah probably first attended school in her father's private neighborhood schoolhouse, which was located at 2039 Washington Boulevard. The twenty-by-thirty-foot building was used not only as a school but also for civic meetings and recreational activities until larger facilities were available. Interest in education was keen among the early settlers, although the facilities were not lavish. Sarah and her classmates, for example, walked on dirt floors in the school, sat on split log seats, and wrote their first ABCs with slate pencils. One Ogden schoolteacher in 1854 devised an effective and unique method of keeping order in her classroom. She kept a supply of small wooden blocks about an inch in diameter and required her pupils each to put one of these blocks in their mouths, to keep them from talking. The technique must have "inspired" good behavior in Sarah Farr, for among her private papers at the University of Utah Special Collections is a small card with a handpainted flower on the front and a handwritten message on the back: "Reward of Merit—for not whispering in school. To Sarah Farr from Harriet Canfield Brown, teacher."

Sarah grew up accustomed to the sight of Indian tents pitched in the backyard of their home in Ogden. Friendly Indian women came to the Farr home every fall, staying for three or four days and asking for sugar, salt, and other foods and spices. They especially liked brown sugar and nibbled constantly on the dried fruit Nancy was happy to share with them. In return for the food they were given, the women brought pine nuts and moccasins for the children and even made clothes for the girls' dolls. One particular Indian woman, who was a favorite with Sarah and the other children, was known as Aunt Mary. She visited the Farr family periodically until she was in her nineties. After Nancy Farr's death in 1892, Aunt Mary brought a large handful of sego lilies each spring to put on her grave.

On October 20, 1866, ten days before Sarah's seventeenth birthday, she married John Henry Smith, eighteen-year-old son of George A. Smith (cousin of the Prophet Joseph Smith) and Sarah Ann Libby. It is not known exactly how Sarah and John Henry met, but both of their fathers were very active in civic and religious affairs, and the two men were undoubtedly well acquainted. John Henry's father was a prominent colonizer of the West, the youngest man ever ordained an apostle in the Church, and he eventually served as counselor in the First Presidency of Brigham Young and as Church Historian.

Sarah and John Henry became the parents of eleven children over the next twenty-five years; the first eight babies were boys and the last three girls. Sarah buried three sons who died in infancy: John Henry Jr., Lorin Farr, and Charles Warren. The eight children she raised to maturity were George Albert (whom John Henry proudly named after the boy's paternal grandfather), Don Carlos, Ezra Chase, Winslow Farr, Nathaniel Libby, Nancy Clarabell, Tirzah Priscilla (known as "Sib"), and Elsie Louise.

Sarah's upbringing proved to be excellent training for the life that lay ahead of her. The homemaking skills she learned at the side of her mother helped smooth her transition from daughter to mother. But even more importantly, Nancy Chase had set an admirable example for Sarah in how to live calmly and gracefully with a busy—and often absent—husband.

Sarah and John Henry Smith began their married life in humble circumstances, their first home being a log house with a mud roof in Provo, where John Henry worked as a telegraph operator. Although they had few worldly possessions, Sarah's cheerful disposition and frugal ways enabled the family to endure and accomplish much more through the years than they ever thought possible. She was quick to move herself and her children through the mountain of work that faced them each day, but slow to complain at the sometimes unfavorable circumstances surrounding her.

After a short stay in Provo, the family moved to Salt Lake City, where John Henry worked for the Central Pacific Railroad. In 1872 he was named assistant clerk to the territorial House of Representatives, an experience that sparked an interest in politics. He later served as a member of the Salt Lake City Council and as a representative in the Utah Legislature.

John Henry's devotion to the gospel sent him overseas twice to serve missions for the Church. On his first mission, at the age of twenty-five, he left Sarah with three small sons under the age of four to serve in Great Britain. In 1882 he returned to Europe again, this time to preside over the European Mission, leaving Sarah with five children and expecting their sixth.

In the October general conference of 1880, John Henry, at the age of thirty-two, was called to be a member of the Council of Twelve Apostles. By this time he had broadened his experience by serving as bishop of the large and thriving Seventeenth Ward in Salt Lake City. Thirty years later he was called to be second counselor in the First Presidency of President Joseph F. Smith.

Although Sarah was completely supportive of her husband's enormous responsibilities in the Church and community, she retained her own individuality and could, at times, be somewhat headstrong. A favorite family story indicates some stubbornness: One evening John Henry was preparing to go to a church meeting and asked Sarah to pin his collar on after he had put on his shirt. When she began attaching the collar, he complained that she was sticking him with the pin in the back of his neck. She laughed this off with something like "Oh, I am not, don't be silly," and proceeded to put the collar on. Again John Henry winced and complained of being poked, and again Sarah insisted she was not hurting him. When John Henry returned from his meeting several hours later, still smarting, he removed his shirt to find blood stains on the back of the collar.

During her husband's missions and other long periods when he was away from home, Sarah, of necessity, had to take his place as head of the family, seeing to it that order was maintained in the home. She was a strict disciplinarian and did not accept lightly the responsibility of raising eight children. She taught her children much of what they learned about the gospel, tending to their prayers and making sure they attended Sunday School classes even when she was unable to go herself. In case of serious illness, she called in the elders to bless her children.

An accident in the family brought evidence that Sarah had succeeded in training her children to rely on faith and prayer in time of need. While reaching for something on the top shelf of her kitchen cupboard, she upset a teetering cupboard and it came crashing down on top of her. Young George Albert, hearing the noise, ran to her aid, and found her unconscious on the floor. He was able to move the cupboard off his mother, but he couldn't revive her. Fearing that she was dead or dying, he prayed with all his might for the Lord to save her. In return, he pledged to devote his life to God's work. Sarah recovered, and George Albert never forgot his promise to the Lord.

Sarah took a great deal of pride in her home. An immaculate housekeeper who kept everything in good repair, she had a knack for mending things with whatever was handy. If she discovered an unwelcomed mouse in her cupboard, it would soon find its entrance covered with a piece of tin.

Sarah was a dedicated letter writer, whether she was corresponding with John Henry in the mission field, or inquiring as to the welfare of her loved ones at home when she herself was traveling. Her playful banter in these letters indicates that she was affectionate and had a charming sense of humor. She closed many of her letters to John Henry with such lines as "Your old sweetheart and young wife," or "Just consider yourself hugged and kissed."

In 1901, while visiting her sister and brother-in-law "Nine" (Diane) and Ben E. Rich, who was serving as a mission president in Tennessee, Sarah playfully teased her husband at home in Salt Lake City with this note: "I hope you don't think that I have found anybody down here that I am going to elope with. I think I had better keep the boat that has carried me through so far and satisfactorily. You don't need to think you can get rid of me so easy." (This note was written thirty-five years after their marriage and ten years after their last child was born.)

Sarah enjoyed traveling across the country, both on church business with her husband and to see relatives in the mission field. She wrote a note to her son George Albert and his wife Lucy Woodruff while she was in Washington, D. C., with John Henry in 1906 and described an experience that must have given her much pleasure: "Emily Richards appointed me a delegate to the Woman's Suffrage Convention at Baltimore. Went to a birthday [celebration] to honor Miss [Susan B.] Anthony's birthday—she is 86 years old. Miss Alice Roosevelt is to be married tomorrow, it has taxed the White House to find room to store the presents."

As her children grew older, Sarah found a new measure of freedom to travel, but her later life also brought new trials that were increasingly hard to bear. Her health became a major challenge as she suffered from the effects of high blood pressure—a condition that caused her to suffer from headaches, dizziness, and anxiety. Early medical practices called for the doctors to bleed Sarah to relieve the pressure, which they did many times. This procedure did, in fact, help her feel better for two or three days.

Another trial that worried Sarah daily was the health of her youngest child, Elsie, who suffered from epilepsy. Elsie had seizures virtually every day, and the family did its best to cope with them. When she felt a seizure coming on, Elsie would grab whatever she was close to, and sometimes that was a hot iron or pot on the stove, which caused numerous burns on her body. Sarah was convinced that the epilepsy resulted from Elsie's having been carried in the womb eleven months before she was born.

Sarah's love for her husband, family, and the Church were tested in other ways also. One year before his call to the apostleship, John Henry married another wife, Josephine Groesbeck, who was twenty-two. The relationship between Sarah and Josephine grew to be fond and affectionate. The two women were thoughtful of each other and treated each other's children as tenderly as their own. Josephine wrote a "Tribute to Aunt Sarah," which she read at a celebration honoring Sarah's seventieth birthday. Among the many lines of affection were these words:

Nearly fifty years of married life We have journied together Aiding and helping each other along, Through fair and cloudy weather. Now you have reached three score and ten And I'm not far behind you. May peace and happiness ever attend As God, in love, designed for you.

Josephine was also a gifted musician and a woman of means—which brought some relief to the financial struggles that had troubled the Smith family.

On October 13, 1911, while Sarah was in Chicago with her sister "Belle" (Mrs. H. J.) Sears, John Henry died at Josephine's home of a hemorrhage of the lungs and a weak heart. Shocked and grief-stricken, Sarah rushed home. Before she arrived, Josephine had John Henry moved in his casket to Sarah's home. It was an emotional moment when the two women met and wept in each other's arms. "Sarah," Josephine sobbed, "I have always loved you for sharing your wonderful husband with me."

Later, when the family was settling John Henry's estate and making financial arrangements to care for Sarah and the children, the more financially secure Josephine said to Sarah, "As long as I live, you and your children will be well-fed."

Sarah Farr Smith lived another nine years after the death of her husband, welcoming grandchildren into the family and taking pride in the accomplishments of her children. She had the distinction of having two sons serve as mission presidents, with Winslow in Chicago as president of the Northern States Mission and George Albert in Liverpool, England, presiding over the European Mission. Both sons were holding these positions, in fact, when they received word of their mother's serious illness and impending death. George Albert was too far away to return home, but Winslow came quickly to her bedside at her home (then on Yale Avenue in Salt Lake City), where she had been unconscious for two days. He leaned over her bed and whispered softly, "Mother, this is Winslow. Do you know me?" She roused momentarily and answered, "Yes," which was the last word she uttered. She died February 4, 1921, at the age of seventy-one.

Among the speakers at Sarah's funeral was Elder Richard R. Lyman, who described her as "the power behind the throne of her great husband." But he also added that John Henry was "no greater as a man than she was as a woman."

Perhaps one of the finest tributes honoring Sarah is part of a letter her oldest surviving son wrote to her on Mother's Day, 1912, from Ocean Park, California:

My Darling Mother,

This day is designated as one on which "Mother" is to be especially honored. In this sunny land I bow before my maker and thank him for you, who all my days has been all that that sweetest of names implies to me. No man ever had a better Mother, and today and in all days it is my desire to so live that you will be honored by what I do, and always be glad I am your son. You have had many trials in life but have borne your burden and taken your place like a queen among women.

The Lord loves you, and know this my dear Mother, that he will over-rule every difficulty for your ultimate triumph and complete happiness. Your sorrows will pass away and standing by the side of your beloved husband you will gather your children around you (every one) and they with their children to the latest generation will call you blessed and love you.

About Friday next I hope to be where I can see you again and you will see how fat I am growing.

Praying the blessing of the Lord upon you. I am ever

Your affectionate son Geo Albert Smith

Sources

Sarah's parentage and early life are described in R. Earl Pardoe, Lorin Farr, Pioneer (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1953), and John Farr, My Yesterdays (Salt Lake City: Granite Publishing Company, 1957).

Her life as a wife and mother is told in Merlo J. Pusey, Builders of the Kingdom (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1981). Additional information is found in "Papers of the George A. Smith Family," Special Collections, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah; and Thomas C. Romney, The Gospel in Action (Salt Lake City: Deseret Sunday School Union, 1949), chapter 11, "Lorin Farr."

George Albert Smith's appraisal of his mother is given in his article "Mothers of Our Leaders, Sarah Farr Smith" in Relief Society Magazine 6 (June 1919): 313-15.

We conducted personal interviews in May 1986 with Dr. W. Whitney Smith, Logan, Utah, a grandson of Sarah Farr Smith; Robert Farr Smith, Salt Lake City, a grandson of Sarah Farr Smith; and Shauna Stewart Larsen, Champaign, Illinois, a great-granddaughter of Sarah Farr Smith.

We have also examined the family group sheets and pedigree charts in the Genealogical Library, Salt Lake City.
