Susan Arrington Madsen, Leonard J. Arrington, Mothers of the Prophets ( 1987)

Jennette Eveline Evans McKay

My Mother! God bless you! For your purity of soul, Your faith, your tenderness, Your watchful care, Your supreme patience, Your companionship and trust, Your loyalty to the right, Your help and inspiration to father, Your unselfish devotion to us children. David O. McKay

On a lovely April evening in 1883, David and Jennette McKay gathered their four children around the fireplace of their rock home in Huntsville, Utah. David had just returned from serving a two-year mission for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in the highlands of Scotland, and nine-year-old David O., seven-year-old Thomas, and four-year-old Jeanette were eager to hear of their father's adventures in that far-off land. Two-year-old Annie sat on her father's knee and spent the evening getting acquainted with this gentle bearded man who had departed for Scotland ten days before she was born.

As David told the children about Scotland, describing the fields of heather, the music of bagpipes, the imposing castles, and the thousands of sheep dotting the hillsides, one of his sons asked him if he had seen any miracles while on his mission. David's eyes immediately met those of his wife, Jennette, and putting his arm around her and pulling her close, he replied, "Your mother is the greatest miracle I have ever seen on this earth."

Such fulsome praise was frequently expressed by David McKay and his children for their beautiful, dark-eyed Welsh wife and mother, Jennette Eveline Evans McKay. As David toured the farm and home upon his return, he had good reason to believe his wife was able to work miracles.

David's mission call had come in 1881 at a most inconvenient time for the little family. Jennette was expecting a baby right away, and her husband was reluctant to leave her home alone with the responsibilities of the children and the crops. They had just made their last payment on the farm, and their dream of enlarging their small home seemed now within reach.

Emotionally, David and Jennette still felt the pangs of grief from the loss just one year earlier of their two oldest children. Margaret, age eleven, had died of rheumatic fever on March 28, 1880, and Ellena, age nine, died on April 1 of pneumonia. The two girls were buried in the same grave.

But when David's mission call arrived, young David O. observed what was the first and only open disagreement he saw his parents have. His father's reaction was "Of course I cannot go," to which Jennette quickly replied, "Of course you will go! David O. and I will manage things quite nicely."

And manage they did. With the considerable help and support of friends and neighbors, Jennette quickly set about supervising David O. and his younger brother, Thomas, in learning more about running the farm and helping with household chores. Priesthood quorums did the spring planting, and by summer an excellent crop of hay and grain was ready for harvest. But grain prices were low, so Jennette decided to store her grain until spring. Because prices were good then, she realized a profit. Encouraged, she and her sons worked even harder the next season and were able to afford the addition to her house that Jennette and David had planned before he left. Several new bedrooms were added, and the dining room and kitchen were enlarged. Jennette took special pride in the new wide, straight stairway leading up to the boys' bedrooms. Many a winter night she had dressed warmly, gone outside, and climbed a ladder up the side of the house to tuck her children in bed and have evening prayers.

Jennette's willingness to sacrifice by having her husband gone for this length of time surely reflected her own personal gratitude for the two humble missionaries who knocked on the door of her parents' home in 1850 in southern Wales and changed their lives so enormously.

Jennette Eveline Evans was born August 28, 1850, the seventh of the eleven children of Margaret Powell and Thomas Evans. Margaret and Thomas were married in 1837 and made their home in a tiny cottage in Cefn Coed-y-Cymmer, near Merthyr Tydfil, Glamorganshire, Wales. Illustrative of their Welsh upbringing, it is said that before Thomas proposed to Margaret, in accordance with custom, he carved for her a wooden spoon which he presented to her as a token of his love. The intricate design on the spoon revealed just how much he cared. During the carving, he was said to be "spooning," a folk expression that came to be synonymous with courtship among Welsh peoples in the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries.

In prehistoric times the British Isles were inhabited by the Cymric or Brythonic branch of the Celts. These accomplished people, successively pushed back by waves of Anglo-Saxons, Romans, Scandinavians, and Normans, ultimately remained the principal occupants of the western peninsula known as Cambria (Cymry), or Wales, an upland region dominated by the Cambrian Mountains, the highest and wildest in Britain. Numerous small streams and lakes dot the countryside, which has an almost theatrical grandeur. South Wales ultimately became a coal and iron mining center; it was at Merthyr Tydfil (named for the fifth-century princess martyr) near Cefn Coed that Richard Trevithick's steam locomotive was first tried on rails in 1804. Although conquered by the English in the thirteenth century, the Welsh retained much of their native language and culture, and Jennette's family spoke Welsh in their home when she was growing up.

Because Merthyr Tydfil is in the very heart of the coal mining region of Wales, its lovely broad, low mountains and lush deep valleys were somewhat tempered in beauty by what Thomas Rees described in 1815, in The Beauties of England and Wales, as "the perpetual smoke and constant din of the forges." "At night, when the furnaces were opened," one visitor observed, "the sky looked as if a blazing volcano were erupting." Yet the misty bogs and grassy slopes surrounding these mining towns are among the most scenic areas of Wales.

Coal mining and metal processing had been the country's chief industry since the Industrial Revolution began in Great Britain in the 1700s, and it was in these mines that Jennette's father, Thomas, earned the family's income as an ironstone miner.

The house in which Jennette and her ten siblings were born is one of the many thousands of rowhouses that snaked through the villages and across the hillsides. The house is certainly a humble one by today's standards, but in those days even the poorest houses were often comfortably furnished with a good sofa, table, mahogany chest of drawers, knickknacks, porcelain figures, fire irons, eight-day clocks, and painted jugs hanging from the rafters. Religious prints or photographs of Queen Victoria and Prince Albert were usually on the walls.

Jennette surely accompanied her mother many times to the Wednesday and Saturday markets, where over a hundred stalls were occupied by traders selling everything from butter, cheese, and bacon to drapery, shoes, and books. Village children of Cefn Coed contributed to the market in their own small way by collecting bundles of bulrushes on the Cilsanws Mountain; the bulrushes were later used as candle wicks.

Jennette had pleasant memories of South Wales. Among other things, she told her children that there was a stone shaped like a chair just a little way up the stream from their cottage. She would walk up the stream, take off her shoes, sit on the stone, and let her feet dangle down in the water.

While Thomas spent long hours amid the hot furnaces of the ironworks, Margaret did her best to provide pleasant and healthy living conditions for her children. One author wrote concerning Welsh women in the nineteenth century: "Women took great pride in trying to keep their homes spotless, fighting a hard battle against the squalor outside." Indeed, the 1849 Public Health Reports of the Merthyr area paint a grim picture of the sanitary conditions the Evans family contended with. The rapidly growing industrial region had no sewage system and poor drainage, with little or no access to fresh water, all of which dramatically affected the incidence of sickness and death. Major epidemics of scarlet fever, typhoid, measles, and whooping cough raged through Merthyr, with the greatest toll among the young. The 1854 Public Health Report reads: "More than half of the funerals which took place are of children less than five years of age and more than one-fourth are infants under one year." The biggest killer was cholera, which claimed 824 lives in 1854 alone. The Evans family buried three children that year—a two-year-old daughter and infant twins, a boy and girl. Two years after this terrible experience, Thomas and Margaret decided they had more than one reason to pack up their belongings and seek a better life for their children.

A few months before Jennette was born, her parents had heard the restored gospel, received a testimony of its truthfulness, and had been baptized in May 1850. A determined and active member, Thomas served as the president over the Merthyr Tydfil Conference of the Church. Family members later felt it was more than just coincidence that William and Ellen Oman McKay, parents of Jennette's future husband, were baptized members of the Church the same year in Scotland. The Evanses of Wales and the McKays of Scotland were among the forty-three hundred European Saints who sold their property and immigrated to America in 1856.

Before they left, Margaret paid one last visit to the graves of five of her children. Then she and her husband journeyed to Liverpool, England, where they boarded the ship Horizon with their six remaining children: Ann, age sixteen; Thomas, fourteen; Evan, twelve; Howell, ten; Jennette, six; and Elizabeth (Lizzie), an infant.

The family set sail May 25, 1856, and were among 856 Saints under the leadership of Edward Martin. All were eager to join the Saints in Utah. Ironically, about six hundred of this group later became members of the second handcart company to be caught in a terrible early storm on the prairie in late 1856, and some 145 of them perished. The Evans family, however, had decided not to travel all the way to Utah that year. They remained in Iowa for three years while Thomas accumulated provisions, equipment, and clothing. The McKay family also waited in Iowa. By 1859, Thomas and Margaret had obtained wagons, teams, and a milk cow and joined Philip Buzzard's Utah-bound company. They arrived in Salt Lake City August 24, four days ahead of young Jennette's future in-laws, the McKays. Shortly thereafter both families moved to Ogden.

In spite of their surprisingly parallel travels, the Evans and McKay families never met until, shortly after the Evanses arrived in Ogden, fifteen-year-old David McKay saw the attractive nine-year-old Jennette sitting on the tongue of her family's wagon. He later said he could not forget the large brown eyes under her pink sunbonnet. As Jennette grew, she became one of the most attractive and popular young women in Ogden, and David's interest in her only increased.

Jennette's family lived in a temporary log cabin before they moved into a comfortable four-room rock home—considered rather elaborate for this time. Jennette helped considerably with the upkeep of the house and garden. She helped to gather fruits and vegetables to be bottled or dried and stored; learned how to make soap, butter, and tallow candles; and tended her sister, Lizzie.

Jennette made friends easily, and many of her social experiences were combined with activities providing the necessities of life. Often she and her friends would gather together to make a quilt or rug, knit stockings, or peel peaches for drying. Dances were held nearly every Friday, and special holidays and these occasions were perfect opportunities for numerous young men to court Jennette.

The early Latter-day Saint settlers in Ogden considered the proper education of their children second in importance only to the worshipping of God. They erected schools almost as quickly as they built homes. The first school in Ogden was established as early as 1849, just two years after the first company of pioneers arrived in the Salt Lake Valley. Jennette was sent to the Second Ward School in Ogden, where she studied under two sisters, Harriet Canfield Brown and Rose Canfield, who were among the finest teachers in pioneer Utah. Harriet and Rose were from New York State and had graduated from an eastern academy. Harriet was converted to the Church in Council Bluffs, Iowa, in 1854 and migrated to Utah in 1856. She settled in Ogden in time to start the Second Ward School under Bishop Edward Bunker. Rose, her younger sister, arrived in Ogden later and assisted Harriet as a teacher in the school. Teachers in Ogden for more than thirty years, the Canfield sisters implanted a love for books and good education among the Evans children and hundreds of other pioneer youths. It was with the encouragement of the Canfield sisters that Jennette started a lending library for friends and family members. She herself later became a fellow teacher for a short period of time, before her marriage to David McKay. (Harriet Brown was also a teacher of Sarah Farr.)

By the time he proposed, David had been courting Jennette for many months and had finally earned enough money to pay for a small farm in Huntsville, in Ogden Valley east of Ogden. Even though Jennette was not yet seventeen years old, he persuaded her parents to let him marry her. Their marriage was performed by Elder Wilford Woodruff of the Council of the Twelve on April 9, 1867, in the Endowment House in Salt Lake City.

They settled in a log cabin David had built in Huntsville. Jennette was considered to be one of the prettiest girls in the region, and David wanted her to stay that way, so he refused to let her work in the fields. Later, when they could afford it, he also insisted on obtaining help for her in the house. He admired her beautiful hands and lovely, clear complexion. It is not accidental that the McKay boys acquired the reputation of being handsome and the McKay girls, strikingly beautiful.

As a new bride, Jennette had to adjust to many things, including frequent visits of Indians to their farm. President Brigham Young had counseled the Church members to "feed them rather than fight with them," and Jennette tried her best to be friendly and generous, but she was always somewhat nervous. On one occasion an Indian man decided that Jennette would make a lovely bride for him. He came into the McKay cabin one morning while she was washing clothes and startled her with the announcement, "You be my squaw!" She grabbed a wet towel from the washtub, struck the surprised man in the face, and ran to the room where her husband was sleeping. As soon as the Indian realized Jennette was not alone in the cabin, he hurried to his horse and disappeared.

Two daughters, Margaret and Ellena, were born to Jennette and David while they were living in the log cabin. When the front part of their new rock house was completed, they moved into it. The new home was affectionately called "The Old Home." It was there that David Oman McKay was born on September 8, 1873. Seven more children followed: Thomas Evans, Jeanette Isabel, Ann Powell, Elizabeth Odette, William Monroe, Katherine Favourite, and Morgan Powell.

Motherhood was a role that fit Jennette perfectly. Together with her husband, she created an atmosphere in her home of tenderness, patience, and love. Daily prayer was held with the children, and gospel principles were taught by word and example. Surely the many hundreds of sermons President McKay would give later in his life can be traced to his own childhood experiences in "The Old Home," which he often referred to as "the dearest, sweetest spot on earth." He once described a nostalgic visit to the family home in 1938 in a letter to his brother Thomas, who was then serving as president of the Swiss-German Mission. He closed with these lines: "It is only an old country home, but no palace was ever filled with truer love and devotion on the part of the parents, brothers, and sisters, than those which pervaded the hearts of the loved ones in that family circle [When] I walked out of the front door, as the night-latch clicked, I thought it might have been the click of the lid of a treasure chest that held the wealth of memories that no money could buy."

Jennette and David made great financial sacrifices to ensure a good education for each of their children. They maintained a separate home on Madison Avenue in Ogden, where they lived during the winter so their children could attend school there. Then they returned to the farm for the summer months. With financial assistance from Grandmother Evans and by mortgaging their farm, they were able to send each of their eight surviving children to the university and all eight graduated with college degrees. Their children's educational accomplishments are impressive:

David O. attended the Weber Stake Academy (later Weber State College) two years and graduated from the University of Utah as valedictorian of his class. He was principal of both the Huntsville School and the Weber Stake Academy.

Thomas E. graduated from the University of Utah and served on the faculty at the Utah State Agricultural College (now Utah State University).

Jeanette graduated from the University of Utah, was on the English faculty at Weber Stake Academy, and taught at both the Huntsville School and the Grant School in Ogden. She also did graduate work at the University of Chicago.

Ann attended the Weber Stake Academy and graduated with a two-year associate degree in business from the University of Utah. She worked as her father's secretary while he served in the Utah State Senate.

Elizabeth graduated from Utah State Agricultural College and served on the faculty there, teaching domestic science and serving as the first dean of women. She did graduate work at Columbia University in New York City.

William was on the faculty of Weber Stake Academy and then received a medical degree from the University of Chicago. He practiced medicine for many years in Ogden and became head of the Department of Health for the State of Utah.

Katherine received a degree in English from the University of Utah, taught English at the Weber Stake Academy, and did graduate work at the University of Chicago.

Morgan graduated from Utah State Agricultural College and became a county farm extension agent.

Seven of the children filled honorable missions for the Church, and Thomas and David O. also served as mission presidents.

Jennette was involved with the Relief Society and Young Ladies Mutual Improvement Association in the Huntsville Ward, but most of her energy was spent rearing her family and supporting her husband as he served as bishop of both the Eden and Huntsville wards, as stake patriarch, and later as a member of the Weber Stake high council. He also served in the Utah Territorial Legislature, being elected a state senator for three four-year terms.

Church leaders visiting the Huntsville area frequently stayed at the McKay home, since the town had no restaurant or hotel. The table in their large dining room was always extended to full length, and guest rooms were nearly always occupied, especially on weekends. The McKay children met and ate dinner with members of the First Presidency, many other General Authorities, and general officers and members of the church auxiliaries. At times when there were many guests for dinner, Jennette had a special code, "FHB," which stood for "family hold-back." The children were encouraged to "hold-back" from taking too much food to be sure everyone at the table got enough.

The weight of her responsibilities eventually took a toll on Jennette's health, and she experienced health problems at a relatively young age. She died at her home at the age of fifty-four on January 6, 1905, and was buried in Huntsville by her grieving family.

It would be difficult to find a woman who has been remembered as fondly and affectionately by her posterity as Jennette McKay. Her son David O. spoke of her numerous times in sermons he gave during the many years he was an apostle and later President of the Church. (He was ordained an apostle in 1906, became a member of the First Presidency in 1934, and served as President from 1951 until his death in 1970 at the age of ninety-six.) On one occasion he said of his mother:

I cannot think of a womanly virtue that my mother did not possess. . . . To her children, and all others who knew her well, she was beautiful and dignified. Though high-spirited she was even-tempered and self-possessed. Her dark eyes immediately expressed any rising emotion which, however, she always held under perfect control.

In the management of her household she was frugal yet surprisingly generous . . . in providing for the welfare and education of her children. . . . In tenderness, watchful care, loving patience, loyalty to home and to right, she seemed to me in boyhood, and she seems to me now after these years, to have been supreme. . . .

During the intervening years [since her death] I have often wished that I had told her in my young manhood that my love for her and the realization of her love and of her confidence gave me power more than once during fiery youth to keep my name untarnished and my soul from clay.

President McKay and other members of the family visited Wales on several occasions to see the village and home where Jennette Evans McKay was born. When President McKay was in London in 1958 to dedicate the London Temple, he expressed a desire to visit Wales, and he and his sister Jeanette McKay Morrell, accompanied by her daughter, Jeanette, were driven to the area by former British Mission President A. Hamer Reiser. President Reiser wrote the following account of part of their trip in his diary:

"We're looking for Plas Helygen House, Clwyd Defagwr, Cefn Coed y Cymmer near Merthyr Tydfil, South Wales, can you help us?"

This was the question you will have to ask if you are ever in South Wales and want to see the birthplace of Jennette Evans, mother of President David O. McKay.

[Upon our arrival] we began making inquiry for the location. An older man, keeping a petrol station up the Cefn Road said: Clywd Defagwr is on the southwest hillside there near that new housing estate. So, we went to explore. Up a steep, narrow, rough and rutted hillside road, I drove in the direction of the old houses on the hillside.

We came out by a group clinging to the road. There a second road led to a row of four or five terraced houses, each with its front yard enclosed by fence and gate.

The President said, "Let's inquire here." We were at No. 69.

Inside the fence came an old lady who looked friendly at me as I asked for directions.

By this time President McKay had come into the yard. She turned to him and said:

"Oh, I know you."

It was Ann Morgan, a spinster who had been born in the house 76 years ago.

She assured President McKay that "This is the place." Then she showed President McKay and Mrs. Morrell into the small six-by-nine bedroom [in which their mother had been born] in which the bed completely occupied the narrow end of the room.

They stood with arms around each other weeping their emotions at being in this beloved place.

In March 1961, three years after this visit, President McKay returned to Wales to break ground for a new Latter-day Saint chapel in Merthyr Tydfil and to unveil a commemorative plaque he was given permission to have placed at his mother's birthplace. The inscription reads:

Birthplace of JENNETTE EVELINE EVANS Born in Plas-Helygen, 69 Clywdyfagwyr Merthyr Tydfil, Glamorganshire, South Wales Born August 28, 1850 Died January 6, 1905 At Huntsville, Utah United States of America Emigrated with her family To America May 22, 1856 Married David McKay on April 9, 1867 in Ogden, Utah They were parents of ten Children, of whom their Eldest son and third child, DAVID OMAN MCKAY Became the Ninth President Of the Church of Jesus Christ Of Latter-day Saints on April 9, 1951

The loving and jovial relationship between Jennette and her children is illustrated in an anecdote President McKay told in the talk he gave just prior to his dedicatory prayer for the new chapel. "I went home one weekend when I was in college," he said. "Mother was sitting on my left where she always sat at dinner and I said, 'Mother, I have found that I am the only one of your children whom you have switched [whipped, as with a willow shoot].' She said, 'Yes David O., I made such a failure of you I didn't want to use the same method on the other children!'"

When Jennette died in 1905, the Salt Lake Tribune said of her, "Few women in Weber County were more widely known or more universally loved than Mrs. David McKay, and the announcement of her death has caused a gloom of sorrow not only throughout Ogden City and Weber County, but over the entire state."

Sources

Biographies of David O. McKay and histories of his family that contain information about his mother include Francis M. Gibbons, David O. McKay: Apostle to the World, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1986); Jeanette Morrell, Highlights in the Life of President David O. McKay (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1971); Llewelyn R. McKay, Home Memories of President David O. McKay (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1956); Clare Middlemiss, Cherished Experiences (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1955); and James B. Allen, "David O. McKay," in Leonard J. Arrington, ed., The Presidents of the Church (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1986), pp. 275-313.

A special issue of the Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star (London) was issued in September 1963 to celebrate President McKay's ninetieth birthday; and there is an article by Jeanette M. Morrell, "Our Cover Picture," in Instructor (Salt Lake City) for July 1948. Also helpful was Gerry Avant, "Gospel Enhances Welsh Love of Family, Music, and Country," Church News, October 25, 1980.

Family group sheets for the McKay and Evans families are in the Genealogical Library, Salt Lake City. We have also conducted interviews in February and March 1986 with descendants of Jennette Evans McKay: David Lawrence McKay, grandson; Lou Jean Blood, granddaughter; Jeanette Morrell, granddaughter; Elizabeth Shaw, granddaughter; and Genevieve Taylor, granddaughter.

Information about Merthyr Tydfil can be found in Afon Taf History Research Group, Recollections of Merthyr's Past (Risca, Newport, Gwent, Great Britain: The Starling Press, Ltd., 1979), and Merthyr Historian, volume two, published by the Merthyr Tydfil Historical Society in 1978.
