Susan Arrington Madsen, Leonard J. Arrington, Mothers of the Prophets ( 1987)

Julina Lambson Smith

I was trained at my mother's knee to love the Prophet Joseph Smith and to love my Redeemer. . . . I used to sit by [her] as a little child and listen to her stories about the pioneers. . . . She used to teach me and put in my hands, when I was old enough to read, things that I could understand. She taught me to pray, . . . to be true and faithful to my covenants and obligations, to attend to my duties as a deacon and as a teacher . . . and later as a priest. . . . I had a mother who saw to it that I did read, and I loved to read. . . . I learned at a very early day that God lives. (Joseph Fielding Smith)

When Julina Lambson was born, on June 18, 1849, in Salt Lake City, her father had been a member of the Church for five years and her mother for twelve. Her father, Alfred Boaz Lambson, was born in 1820 at Royalton, Niagara County, New York. Reared in Michigan, he left with a friend for St. Louis in 1843 to join a fur company going to Oregon. They passed through Nauvoo, Illinois, to visit an uncle and to meet Joseph Smith, the Latter-day Saint prophet. Alfred came down with a serious illness (probably malaria) and was forced to remain there while his friend went on to join the Oregon-bound company. Alfred listened to the Prophet speak, was very much impressed with him, and was, in fact, miraculously healed by him. Alfred then made a study of the doctrines of the Church, was baptized in 1844, was ordained a seventy, and undertook a proselyting mission the next month to Virginia. He was called back to Nauvoo after the murder of Joseph and Hyrum Smith.

In November 1845 Alfred married Melissa Jane Bigler, twenty-year-old daughter of a genteel West Virginia family who had joined the Church in 1837. The couple left Nauvoo with other Saints in the spring of 1846. They remained in Winter Quarters, Nebraska, for the winter of 1846-47, during which time Alfred served the Church as a mechanic and blacksmith. The first child of Alfred and Melissa, who was named after her mother, was born in Winter Quarters in November 1846. In 1847 the family made the trek across the plains to the Salt Lake Valley, with Alfred serving as chief mechanic, often working throughout the night to repair wagon tires and shoe oxen. Melissa was best remembered by the trekkers for her singing—around the campfire, in the evenings, in the groves at Sunday meeting, even in her wagon as the oxen trudged along.

After arriving in the Salt Lake Valley, Alfred immediately began to build a four-room house. It was the first house plastered in Salt Lake City, and he made all of the nails on his own anvil from wagon tires. It was in this house, located at First South and Second West streets, that Julina was born.

Julina's father was the leading blacksmith in the Salt Lake Valley during the early years. He forged out of wagon tires all the mill irons used in most of the early gristmills and sawmills in the area. He also forged the dies, punches, and other equipment used in the Deseret Mint, which made the first money in the valley.

In 1852, when Julina was three and her younger sister, Edna, was one, Alfred was called to serve as a proselyting missionary in the West Indies; he remained there for two years. He was home for two years, during which time a son, Alfred Jr., was born. Then he was assigned to go to Florence, Nebraska, to serve as a mechanic and blacksmith for the wagons being prepared to make the journey to Utah each summer. He remained there ten years.

Julina's mother, Melissa, was left behind in Salt Lake Valley with four small children to look after, apparently without any help from Alfred. Fortunately, her sister Bathsheba, who had married George A. Smith, a member of the Council of the Twelve and a territorial officer, had a splendid home in Salt Lake City, just two blocks from that of Alfred and Melissa. Bathsheba enjoyed children and had two of her own, George A. Smith Jr. and Bathsheba Smith, who also enjoyed children. From the time she was seven, therefore—that is, when her father went to Florence—Julina lived at her Aunt Bathsheba's home, though she went home every day to see her mother. Young Bathsheba, five years older than Julina, was delighted to have a younger "sister" to play with. She had often taken Julina home with her when Julina's father was on his West Indies mission, so almost from the time she could walk and talk, Julina felt that she had two homes and two mothers. Cousin Bathsheba would make Julina dolls and would play with her.

In the summer of 1857, word came to Brigham Young, governor of the territory and President of the Church, that a federal army was advancing on Utah to "put down the Mormons." The valiant men of the territory organized to delay the army's invasion until negotiations could lead to a peaceful settlement. When that was worked out, the army was permitted to occupy a camp forty miles south and west of Salt Lake City. Brigham Young instructed the Saints in Salt Lake City to move to the south of the city in order to avoid any possible conflict with the troops marching through inhabited areas toward Camp Floyd, as the camp came to be called. The families were to prepare their homes for immediate burning in case the army indicated any intention of occupying Mormon land. "The people did not intend to give their homes and all they had labored so hard to get" to the enemy, wrote Julina, as she recalled the event. "They had been driven from Nauvoo and persecuted long enough. Rather than surrender all their property, they would destroy it themselves." The women packed trunks and boxes with things they could not take with them and left them in their houses. The young men drove the teams, and the older ones remained behind to face the enemy, should he determine to occupy their land Julina recalled:

My mother, with her four children, and her sister, Sarah Taylor and her six children, left in a big wagon such as the pioneers traveled in, with a neighbor boy to drive. I went with my mother, thinking the trip would be fun, for I was not old enough to realize the seriousness of it. [She was eight.] We went to Nephi [eighty miles south of Salt Lake City], where my mother's brother, Jacob G. Bigler, presided. He gave Aunt Sarah two rooms upstairs in his house and my mother occupied a room in a two-roomed house over the street. The other room was occupied by her cousin, Emeline Bigler Hess and her little family. We were not very comfortable. The town was new and the streets very dusty.

When we left Salt Lake we expected Aunt Bathsheba to follow us, but she remained in Provo [forty miles south of Salt Lake City], and her son George took Aunt Susan on to Parowan [in southern Utah] where her folks lived. I was very much disappointed, and got homesick [for Aunt Bathsheba and Cousin Bathsheba], and spent most of my time crying. I wanted my cousin and aunt; I could not do without them. . . . Each day I got worse instead of better. Finally, my mother went to her brother Jacob and asked him if he could take me to Provo. I cried so much that she was getting alarmed. . . . So, on my ninth birthday, June 18th, Uncle Jacob hitched his team and I bid my dear mother "good-by" and started with him towards Provo.

I can remember that day better than any birthday I ever had. When we got to my aunt's home, she was standing at the table, and was dressed in a blue underdress [less formal than usual] of changeable linsey [a coarse fabric woven from linen warp and coarse wool filling], which she had woven herself. It was made in the style they called the Deseret Costume. This was a wrapper or one-piece dress fitted around the waist, with a full skirt and no belt. My Uncle George [George A. Smith] sat in a chair in the center of the room. I ran up to him, put my arms around his neck, and began to cry. He said, "My girl, are you sorry so soon that you have come back to us." Then I sobbed harder, for I thought he really believed his teasing words, and did not know that I was crying for happiness. He then drew me close to him and showed me I was welcome. My own dear cousin Bathsheba then brought a box filled with my doll things and other things that she had made for me, and I was happy.

They returned to Salt Lake City a month later. When they arrived, Julina recalled, they found the Smith house with the windows boarded up and the paths and gardens covered with weeds, which had grown up four feet high. "There was a great deal of work to do to make the place look like home," she wrote. She went over to her mother's home and found it in the same condition. She felt bad for her mother, her two sisters, and her little brother, since her father was still in Nebraska.

George A. Smith, with the cooperation of President Young, constructed a new home for the family on Brigham Street (now South Temple) just east of Main Street (about where the downtown Deseret Bookstore is now located). It would serve also as the office of the Church Historian, for George A. had been Church Historian since 1854 (and continued to serve until 1871) and needed a large room for an office and library.

In 1859 Julina's Aunt Susan (Susan West Smith, a plural wife of George A. Smith and thus Bathsheba's "sister wife") had a baby girl, Clarissa. Julina, who was living with her Aunt Bathsheba these years, wrote, "The little tot added a great deal of joy to our home." Julina was the "little nurse" for the child, and thus began her nursing career when she was ten.

Julina described her life in Aunt Bathsheba's home as follows: "I used to get up at five in the morning and pull weeds, while Aunt Bathsheba milked the cow. She did the outdoor work and the yard work. Aunt Susan and Cousin Bathsheba did the housework and tended the babies."

Sadness came to the family in 1860 when Julina's cousin George A., by now eighteen, was killed by a group of Indians while on a mission in northern Arizona with Jacob Hamblin. Young George and his sister Bathsheba had been very close. Both were good singers, and he played the accordion, flute, and drum for their little home concerts. The news of his murder spread a gloom through the household that lasted for many months. Julina said that her cousin Bathsheba was so brokenhearted and lonely over her brother's death that she decided to marry. Only sixteen years of age, she married Clarence Merrill, a friend of George whom George had approved of as a "special friend" for her. Clarence and Bathsheba made their home with her mother, Julina's Aunt Bathsheba, so Julina continued to enjoy association with them. Their first baby, Annella, lived only a few days, but their second, Leila, born when Julina was fourteen, was healthy, and Julina helped look after her and played with her until the Merrills moved to Fillmore in 1865.

Shortly after they moved, cousin Bathsheba became pregnant and did not feel well. She asked her mother to allow Julina, who was now sixteen, to come to help out with Leila and the household. Julina stayed in Fillmore for six months, during which time little George Albert Merrill was born. Julina wrote, "I enjoyed myself with the young folks of Fillmore." She returned to Salt Lake City when she learned that her sister Melissa had married and her other sister, Edna, was ill. She managed to get a ride back with Brother and Sister Henry Lunt of Cedar City, who were driving to Salt Lake City for April conference in 1866. She arrived home on April 3, and just one month later, Julina was married to Joseph F. Smith, the twenty-seven-year-old son of Hyrum and Mary Fielding Smith and a nephew of the Prophet Joseph Smith.

Joseph F. Smith was born on November 13, 1838, at Far West, Missouri. As a boy of five he saw his father and his uncle, the Prophet Joseph, leave their home and beautiful city of Nauvoo, only to be murdered by a hostile mob on June 27, 1844. At the age of nine in 1848, he drove his mother's wagon as they made the three-and-one-half-month trek to the Salt Lake Valley. Upon his mother's death in 1852, he looked after his sister Martha Ann. General care of the two was under the supervision of George A. Smith, a cousin of Joseph's father and a member of the Council of the Twelve. Because of the closeness of Joseph F. Smith to George A. Smith, and because of Julina's closeness to George A. also, it was natural that the two young people should meet and have an interest in each other.

Joseph F. was called on a mission to Hawaii in 1854 and remained there almost four years. After his return, he married his cousin Levira. They had a few months of happiness together before he was called on a mission to Great Britain, where he remained for three years. Levira had health problems and went to California to live with her mother. Joseph brought her back to Salt Lake City upon his return from England, but when, after some months, he was called to undertake a mission to Hawaii, Levira went to live with her widowed aunt, Agnes Coolbrith Smith, in the Bay area. Agnes was not friendly to the Church or to Brigham Young, and she planted the seeds of doubt and discontent in the mind of Levira. When Joseph F. returned from his mission to Hawaii in 1865, Levira pled with him to remain in California, but he said he was duty-bound to return to Salt Lake City to give an account of his mission, and anyway, his home was there. Levira refused to go with him, so he returned home alone and boarded with his mother's sister, Mercy Fielding Thompson. Later, when Levira decided to return to Salt Lake City, Joseph F. fixed up their home and was delighted to receive her back.

It was at this stage that Brigham Young, who had been impressed that Joseph F. would become a future Church leader, advised him to marry another wife who could bear children and help look after Levira. (Levira was apparently unable to bear children.) By now a clerk for the legislature and assistant in George A. Smith's Church Historian's Office, Joseph proposed to Julina. Her account is as follows:

He [Joseph F.] did not lose any time on my return [from Fillmore] in finding out whether or not I had found a companion for life. . . . President Young had advised him [to get a wife] and he had told him a number of times, so he thought he should obey. I have always thought that the President would have liked him to marry one of his [Brigham Young's] girls. And I know he could have had any girl he knew for the asking. He was a clerk in the Historian's Office and had a good opportunity to get acquainted with me, and see how handy I was with all kinds of work.

When he asked me, my answer was, "Ask my mother and Uncle George. I would not marry the best man living without his consent." He gave his consent freely, but my mother knew how much he [Joseph] thought of his [first] wife Levira, and she said, "Julina, Joseph has a wife whom he loves and he is not marrying you for love." I answered, "Mother, I love him and if I am good he will learn to love me. He is the only man I have ever seen that I could love as a husband." "If that is the way you feel, all right," [said her mother].

Julina and Joseph F. Smith were married May 5, 1866. Julina commented that Levira was perfectly willing to have Joseph take her for a wife because of Levira's semi-invalid condition. Levira told her she was her choice for a plural wife for him. Julina remained with Aunt Bathsheba for a week, while she was fixed up with clothes and furnishings for a room in her new home.

Julina went to live with Levira and Joseph, and she reports that they were happy. "Levira was very kind to me and I loved her. I did all of the housework, washing, ironing, cooking, and took full charge of the home and little Edward," an orphan Joseph F. had brought back from England in 1863. Joseph was a home missionary and traveled from Brigham City in the north to St. George in the south to speak to church congregations. While he was on one of these speaking tours, Levira went back to California to live with her mother and aunt, and they persuaded her to get a divorce. This was granted in 1867. A month later, Joseph F. was sustained as an apostle. A month after that, on August 14, her dear cousin Bathsheba's birthday, Julina gave birth to her first child, Mercy Josephine, who was lovingly referred to as Dodo.

In addition to raising a vegetable garden, canning, drying fruit, tending a flock of chickens, looking after the cow and a span of horses, and caring for her daughter, Julina was president of the Sixteenth Ward Retrenchment Society (the early organization for young women that later became the Young Women's Mutual Improvement Association). She also worked in the Endowment House, which served as a temporary facility for eternal endowments and marriages until the Salt Lake Temple was completed, and she became a member of the Relief Society general board. A second daughter, Mary Sophronia ("Mamie") was born in 1869, and a third, Donette, in 1872. Her greatest sorrow was the death of Mercy Josephine ("our little chatterbox") in 1870 at the age of three.

Julina's diary, begun two and a half years after the birth of Dodo, shows frequent attendance with her husband at performances at the Salt Lake Theater; entertainment of relatives and friends, especially George A. and Bathsheba Smith; occasional sleigh rides during the winter; and two or three annual picnic excursions. Mostly, though, she was at home tending her girls—nursing them through chickenpox, whooping cough, diphtheria, and measles; making them clothes, rattles, and bed linens; serving them meals; and reading the scriptures to them. The diary shows lots of washing clothes, ironing, mending, scrubbing, dusting, and other housework. A listing of occasional purchases shows she bought shoes, calico, thread, flannel, linen, edging, a lamp chimney, shoelaces, cambric, delaine (high-grade worsted material), muslin, and clothespins. The diary also includes the words of some songs she obviously memorized and sang to her children: "Jesus Loves Me" and some play songs. She helped milk and feed the cow while Joseph F. was gone, tended the chickens, and took lessons on the organ. She listed the food she and her sister Edna took on a picnic for their children: bread, butter, radishes, beefsteak, mashed potatoes, green beans, gooseberry pie, and cake. On one occasion she sewed all day—"made twenty-eight diapers." She made a nightcap for her husband, some pillowcases, and a cap and neck handkerchief for a friend's deceased husband to be buried in.

In addition, Julina had several more children—eventually eleven, besides her adopted English child, Edward, and an adopted American daughter, Marjorie Virginia. Her first son was born in 1876. As the first son of the senior wife (Joseph F. had taken two other wives at the time), he was named Joseph Fielding Smith Jr. He would one day become President of the Church. All of Julina's children, except Mercy Josephine, lived to be married in the temple and bear children.

One spiritual experience that Julina appreciated was accompanying Joseph F. and the Brigham Young party to the dedication of the St. George Temple in the spring of 1877. This was the first temple completed in Utah. Young Joseph Fielding, who was just nine months old, was carried in Julina's and Joseph F.'s arms throughout the trip and the dedicatory services. "It was my first assignment in the Church," Joseph Fielding later reported. During the conference held in connection with these services, Joseph F. was called to preside over the European Mission of the Church.

Since Joseph F. by now had additional wives and had frequent need of a midwife (he eventually had forty-eight children, including five adopted sons and daughters), Julina decided to help out the family by getting professional training in obstetrics and nursing. She had already had many years of practical training, and was already the mother of four and adopted mother of one. She completed her training in 1878. She then delivered hundreds of women, including herself and her sister wives. "It was always a joy for me to place a tiny one for the first time in its mother's arms," she wrote. A book in which she kept a record of these deliveries shows 1,025 babies delivered between 1875 and 1893 without the loss of a mother. She delivered many more, because the record ends years before she stopped practicing midwifery. She assisted in many operations—some in the Deseret Hospital and some in the LDS Hospital in Salt Lake City—and she placed many babies in good homes.

Joseph Fielding Smith, her oldest son, recalls his mother's faithfulness as a midwife. In the first years of her practice, she often hitched her horse and buggy and went to her cases alone in the darkest nights, long before there were any street lights. She was known to drive as far as ten miles to wait upon a sister. Her usual charge was five dollars for each case, and this included all prenatal and postnatal calls to the home. She knelt in prayer before each delivery. When Joseph Fielding was old enough to help her, she recruited him to drive her to the homes of her patients. "I remember getting up in the middle of the night, taking the lantern to the dark barn, and hitching up the horse ('Old Meg') to the buggy," he said. "I would then drive my mother to the home of an expectant mother so she could serve as midwife and help with the new baby. I would sit in the buggy and wait. I wondered why babies were so often born in the middle of the night."

Young Joseph was helpful to his mother, often assisting in the kitchen, and sometimes cooking for his younger brothers and sisters when their mother was gone. He learned to bake bread and make mincemeat pie, and even how to piece quilts. He later acknowledged that his oldest sister, Mamie, was less impatient than he and served as "assistant mother" for years at a time to Julina's children. A daughter inherited the little brown leather satchel that Julina carried; it contained sterilized materials, a nursing apron, chloroform, and ergot, the latter used to prevent or check postpartum hemorrhage.

In the meantime, Joseph F. served as president of the European Mission in 1874-75. He was released after eighteen months of service when President George A. Smith died. Returning home, he helped look after Aunt Bathsheba as well as his own family, was given church jurisdiction over Davis County, north of Salt Lake County, and worked in the Endowment House and at the Historian's Office. In 1877 he returned to England as president of the European Mission, but he was recalled to Salt Lake City upon the death of Brigham Young in August. He later became second counselor to President Young's successor, John Taylor.

In 1882 the Congress of the United States passed the Edmunds Act, which was designed to diminish the power and alter the practices of the Latter-day Saints. Among other things, the act provided for vigorous enforcement of antipolygamy laws. Many Church leaders subsequently went into hiding to avoid prosecution. President Taylor suggested to Joseph F. Smith that he should take Julina and go to Hawaii. They left Salt Lake City in January 1885 and remained in Hawaii until mid-1887, when they returned to Utah just in time for Joseph F. to be at President Taylor's side when the prophet died.

At the time they left for Hawaii, Julina had six children (Mamie, fifteen; Donette, twelve; Joseph Fielding, eight; David A., five; G. Carlos, three; and Julina Clarissa, almost one). She left Mamie, Donette, Joseph Fielding, David, and Carlos with Joseph F. Smith's plural wives in Utah and took with her Julina Clarissa (usually referred to as Ina). Although Julina's two years in Hawaii were filled with work, they were nevertheless interesting and exciting. She shared in the love that the Hawaiian people had for Joseph F. and for the missionaries.

Julina entered wholeheartedly into the spirit of the islands. She took lessons in Hawaiian, learned to say the blessing on the food in Hawaiian, attended native feasts, was active in the Lanikuli Relief Society, where only three of the forty women present were Caucasians, and went on excursions to scenic areas. She wrote regularly to her children and prayed that they would remain healthy. In Hawaii she gave birth to a son, Elias Wesley, delivering him herself. She also served as a midwife, delivering dozens of other mothers, both Caucasians and native Hawaiians. One day little Ina, two and a half years old, came in with her dress all wet. "She cannot let water alone," wrote Julina. Her mother must have scolded her, because Ina, just able to talk, replied, "Mamma, let me tell you something. If our baby [Elias Wesley, only two months old] gets in the water when he gets bigger he will have to be whipped." Ina's greatest joy came from having permission to eat poi with her fingers.

Julina managed the mission kitchen, which served some eighteen to twenty-five persons, mostly missionaries and wives and children; went on occasional horseback rides; swam in the ocean; did ironing, washing, and sewing; and managed to write an article on their experiences for the Woman's Exponent. She enjoyed gathering guavas, puanas, oranges, and limes.

After more than two years there, Julina returned to Utah, where she bore three more daughters in addition to adopting Marjorie Virginia. She continued her work as a midwife, served as a counselor to the general president of the Relief Society, Emmeline B. Wells, and continued to conduct herself with a quiet dignity and engaging geniality.

A special source of pleasure for Julina during these years was visiting with her mother, who lived until 1899, when she died at age seventy-four. (Julina's father died in 1905.) Concerning her mother, Julina stated: "From mother I learned that notwithstanding the trials and hardships of the journey to Utah, the Saints were united, and enjoyed each other's society. When the camp fires were built, after the day's travel, they would come together, pray, sing, and spend a social evening and the friendship that grew among them was sacred and lasting. The visits of those dear brothers and sisters with my mother I shall never forget. They continued up to the day of her death when those who were left came to pay a tribute of love to her."

The same year as the death of her mother, Julina's oldest son, Joseph Fielding, left to serve a two-year mission in England. She took pleasure in sending him cakes, cookies, and other special treats. As she had expected, he wrote home regularly—newsy, well-written letters. She always felt especially close to him; in fact, Joseph Fielding and his first wife, Louie, stayed after their marriage in a room in Julina's home at 333 West North Temple Street.

When Joseph F. became President of the Church in 1901, he and Julina and their unmarried children moved into the Beehive House, the official residence of the President. This two-story structure, faced with cement, was constructed in 1852 and served as the official residence of Brigham Young as governor and as President of the Church. Situated on the north side of Brigham Street (now South Temple Street) just east of the temple block, it was an imposing edifice with a tower surmounted with a gilded eagle. It had a magnificent drawing room for entertaining important visitors.

Once when Julina was having dinner with some of her family, Joseph Fielding began telling of some of the things he had done as a boy. He reported that he had made the bread, taken care of his brothers and sisters, planted the garden, and so on. Finally Julina looked at him and said, "Joseph, what did I do?" Somewhat taken aback, he muttered, "I guess you just puttered around!" Julina must have enjoyed that response. Her "puttering around" had brought up eleven children to be worthy citizens, worthy Latter-day Saints, and worthy parents and grandparents.

In 1910 Joseph Fielding was ordained an apostle. During Julina's lifetime he wrote the most widely used book on Church history ever published (Essentials in Church History, 1922, which eventually went through twenty-four editions), and also The Way to Perfection (1931), a standard treatment on Church doctrine. He had already made significant strides toward becoming the Church's most reliable scripturist. Julina would have been very proud to have seen him sustained as President of the Church in 1970.

After Joseph F.'s death in 1918, Julina continued to work in the Relief Society, help her children and grandchildren, and assist in many Church and public causes. Seventeen years later she suffered a bad fall. She died on January 10, 1936, at age eighty-six. An editorial by Annie Wells Cannon in the Relief Society Magazine mentions Julina's frank, straightforward manner; her industry, frugality, and simplicity in dress; her graciousness and hospitality; her work in the Endowment House and the Salt Lake Temple; her management of the Beehive House as the official hostess of the President of the Church; and her determination to plant trees and flowers to beautify her home.

Julina had witnessed the change from the covered wagon to the airplane, from the tallow candle to incandescent light. She had known Presidents Brigham Young, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, Lorenzo Snow, Joseph F. Smith, and Heber J. Grant while they presided over the Church; and George Albert Smith, David O. McKay, and, of course, her sterling son, Joseph Fielding Smith, all of whom would serve as President of the Church after her death. Blessed is a virtuous woman, wrote the author of Proverbs, "for her price is far above rubies. . . . She looketh well to the ways of her household, and eateth not the bread of idleness. . . . Many daughters have done virtuously, but thou excellest them all." (Prov. 31:27, 29.) That would have been a perfect description for Julina Lambson Smith.

Sources

There are four holograph diaries written by Julina in the Church Archives in Salt Lake City. These cover the years 1870-1879, 1880, 1886, and 1886-1921. Excerpts from her 1886 diary are published in Kenneth M. Godfrey, Audrey M. Godfrey, and Jill Mulvay Derr, Women's Voices: An Untold History of the Latter-day Saints, 1830-1900 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1982), pp. 343-57. The Joseph F. Smith Papers in the Church Archives also contain material about Julina. In 1927 she wrote a fourteen-page personal history, which is especially detailed about her life as a child and young bride. This is written in the personal record book of her grandmother Bathsheba Smith, the original of which is in the Church Archives. Bathsheba's history suggests that Julina went to live with her in 1855 and remained until her (Julina's) marriage in 1866. Finally, a "Record of accouchements [assists at birth] by Julina Smith, Accoucheuse," covering the dates 1875 to 1893, is in the library of the Utah State Historical Society, Salt Lake City.

Materials about Julina's mother and father include Nettie Davis Bradford, Donnette S. Kesler, and Helen Davis, "Melissa Jane Bigler Lambson," typescript, Church Archives; "Autobiographical Sketch of the Life of Alfred B. Lambson," typescript, Church Archives; "Alfred Boaz Lambson," in Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine 6 (1915): 145-53.

The following biographies of Joseph F. Smith (the husband) and of Joseph Fielding Smith (the son) contain many references to Julina: Joseph Fielding Smith, Life of Joseph F. Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1938); Francis M. Gibbons, Joseph F. Smith: Patriarch and Preacher, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1984); Scott Kenney, "Joseph F. Smith," and Joseph Fielding McConkie, "Joseph Fielding Smith," in Leonard J. Arrington, ed., The Presidents of the Church (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1986), pp. 179-209, 315-41; Joseph Fielding Smith Jr. and John J. Stewart, The Life of Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1972); and Dean May, "Joseph Fielding Smith" in Preston Nibley, The Presidents of the Church (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1974), pp. 409-21. See also Hyrum M. Smith III and Scott G. Kenney, eds., From Prophet to Son: Advice of Joseph F. Smith to His Missionary Sons (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1981).

Information about Julina's career as a midwife is given in Claire Noall, "Mormon Midwives," Utah Historical Quarterly 10 (1942): 84-144, esp. 139-42; Keith C. Terry, "The Contribution of Medical Women During the First Fifty Years in Utah" (Master's Thesis, Brigham Young University, 1964), esp. pp. 25-26; and Chris Rigby Arrington, "Pioneer Midwives," in Claudia L. Bushman, ed., Mormon Sisters: Women in Early Utah (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Emmeline Press, Ltd., 1976), pp. 43-65.

Julina's obituary and an editorial tribute to her are given in Deseret News, January 10 and 11, 1936.

In quoting from Julina's diary and personal history, we have corrected some misspellings and have supplied some changes in punctuation and capitalization.
