Susan Arrington Madsen, Leonard J. Arrington, Mothers of the Prophets ( 1987)

Louisa Emeline Bingham Lee

I have been blessed with . . . a grand and lovely mother, one who didn't display her affection, but showed her love in tangible ways that, as a child, I came early to recognize as true mother love. As just a high school boy I went away on a high school debating team. We won the debate. I came back and called mother on the telephone only to have her say, "Never mind, son, I know all about it . . . " When I came home she took me aside and said: "When I knew it was time for this performance to start I went out among the willows by the creek side, and there, all by myself, I remembered you and prayed God you would not fail." I have come to know that that kind of love is necessary for every son and daughter who seeks to achieve in this world. (Harold B. Lee)

At the time the pioneers established the settlement in the Salt Lake Valley in 1847, 16,000 Saints were waiting on the banks of the Missouri to make the journey to the Great Basin. Several thousand church members in New England, the Middle Atlantic States, the Southeast, the Midwest, and Great Britain were also expecting to join the Latter-day Saints in the Rocky Mountain area as soon as places could be found for them to settle. A prime task of the pioneers, therefore, was finding suitable places for making a living. Many thousands could be settled in the Salt Lake Valley, but locations would have to be found for thousands of others.

With this in mind, the early pioneers conducted a systematic program of exploration, beginning with the Salt Lake Valley and then proceeding to Tooele Valley to the west, Weber and Ogden valleys to the north, Utah and Sanpete valleys to the south. One large exploring company was dispatched to southern Utah and across southern Nevada to California. They found oases and springs along their route and laid the basis for many future Latter-day Saint settlements.

Pioneering Saints pressed northward and settled on Box Elder Creek near the mouth of Box Elder Canyon in 1851, founding what was later called Brigham City. But trappers and other frontiersmen insisted that Cache Valley, still farther north and east between the Wellsville and Bear River ranges of the Wasatch Mountains, was too cold to grow crops. The Saints avoided it until 1856, when a year of drought forced them to try places with ample water. In 1856, therefore, Peter Maughan led a group of Saints from Tooele to settle Maughan's Fort, later renamed Wellsville. Other Saints colonized Logan, Hyrum, Providence, Mendon, Richmond, Smithfield, and Franklin. All told, eight villages were established in Cache Valley in 1859 and 1860. They were well-watered by mountain-fed streams, while sediments laid by the ancient Lake Bonneville extended from the mountains on each side in gentle slopes that were ideal for farming.

The principal problem facing further settlement in the northern end of Cache Valley was the periodic occupation of the area by a group of Shoshoni Indians. The Saints cultivated Indian leaders, treaties were made, and some of the more courageous Latter-day Saints gradually established ranches and residences further north.

In 1865 one of the settlers, Thomas C. D. Howells, once a member of the Mormon Battalion, and his four sons and others founded Clifton in southeastern Idaho. The village, with several hundred acres of good farming land, was located on Clifton Creek, a small tributary of Bear River, the large stream that flowed through much of Cache Valley and emptied into Great Salt Lake. As other settlers arrived, a branch of the Church was organized, a post office was established, and a meetinghouse was built in 1871. Ultimately, about 150 persons located in the village in the nineteenth century.

Among those attracted to Clifton in the early years were Levi Perry and Elizabeth Lusk Bingham and their children. They had crossed the Plains in the early 1850s and gone to Payson, Utah. Nine children were born in the family as they moved, in succession, to Pleasant Grove and Three-Mile, Utah, and on to Clifton, Idaho. Their oldest son was Perry Calvin Bingham, born in Payson in 1857. He was still a boy when his parents moved to Clifton. In 1875, at age eighteen, he married Rachel Elvira Henderson, who was born in Kaysville, Utah, and whose parents were also early pioneers in Clifton. Perry and Rachel were married in Clifton and remained there until her death in 1907 at the age of forty-nine.

A daughter was born to Perry and Rachel in 1876, but she died at the age of two. On New Year's Day, January 1, 1879, Rachel gave birth to her second child, also a girl, whom she and Perry named Louisa Emeline Bingham. In succeeding years a boy and four additional girls were born, all of whom, except one daughter, died while they were still young. Thus, Louisa and her sister Effie, five years younger, were the only two children to survive to adulthood, out of seven births.

Because of the invalidism of her mother, Louisa was obliged, as early as age eight, to care for her mother and her younger brother and sisters. Because her father was away much of the time freighting into Montana, and later buying and selling cattle, she did the cooking, bathing, washing, ironing, sewing, and the outside chores as well—all this in addition to attending school. Independent and resourceful, Louisa helped to plow and plant the crops, cut and stack the hay, shear the sheep, and care for the chickens and milk the cow. Her son Harold, who must have heard her tell many times of this experience, wrote that she was so small as a girl that when she did the washing, she had to stand on a box so she could reach far enough down into the tub to scrub the clothes on a washboard. When she was sewing, her feet would barely reach the treadles on the sewing machine. He continued:

They lived about a five-minute walk from school, and Mother would arise very early, fix breakfast, dress and care for her brother and sister, bathe and feed her mother, then dash off for school. When all the other children were enjoying their games at recess, Mother would run home to care for her mother and begin preparing lunch. At noon she would hurry home again to take care of the family responsibilities which came upon her early in her life. Mother owned a famous saddle pony named Maude, which she rode for the cows and on other errands.

Louisa attended church regularly. In those days Primary was held on Wednesdays, Young Women's Mutual Improvement Association meetings on Tuesdays, ward dances on Fridays, Sunday School on Sunday mornings and sacrament meetings on Sunday evenings. Louisa enjoyed the classes, gave two-and-a-half minute talks, read the scriptures, and, at the age of fourteen, began teaching a Sunday School class, which she continued to teach for four years.

When she was sixteen, dark-eyed, dark-haired Louisa met and married a nineteen-year-old newcomer to Clifton, Samuel Marion Lee, Jr. They were married May 13, 1895, in the Logan Temple. Samuel was the son of pioneer settlers of Panaca, Nevada. His mother, Margaret McMurrin Lee, an emigrant from Scotland, had given birth to eleven children, each of whom had died shortly after birth. Then, upon the birth of her twelfth child, Margaret herself died. This last baby, Samuel Jr., weighed only three and a half pounds at birth and was so tiny that a large finger ring could be slipped over his arm. He was nursed for six months by his aunt and then taken by wagon to Salt Lake City to be raised by his grandparents, Joseph and Margaret McMurrin. Upon his grandmother's death of cancer in 1893, when he was seventeen, Samuel went to Clifton to live with his uncle and aunt, Riley and Jeannette McMurrin Davis. He had been in Clifton a year and a half before his marriage to Louisa.

Samuel and Louisa settled down to a life on the farm, although during the first year he taught at the local school. Fully aware of the burdens of farm life because of her experience running her father's household, Louisa prepared to help with the planting, cultivating, and harvesting of their farm crops. She did some of the hoeing and irrigating, put up hay, helped with the threshing, and often fed the stock. She was also active in Clifton Ward. She served as counselor in the Young Women's MIA for six years; as president for seven years; and as a counselor in the Oneida Stake MIA presidency for several more years. She enjoyed music, the arts, sports, and the outdoors.

About a year and a half after their marriage, Samuel and Louisa had their first child, Samuel Perry Lee. Their second child, born March 28, 1899, was Harold Bingham Lee, who later became President of the Church. In the years that followed, Clyde, Waldo, Stella, and Verda were born, all in Clifton. All six children lived to marry and have families of their own. Samuel and Louisa saw to it that they were educated in the home as well as at school.

Louisa's first four children were boys, and she apparently became impatient to have a girl. Her oldest son, Perry, wrote that Harold had beautiful wavy black hair, and Louisa trained it into dangling ringlets that reached below his shoulders. He was a beautiful boy to the women of the neighborhood but was the object of scoffing from his father and the neighboring boys to the point that one day Harold, about four, snipped off one of the danglers, forcing the parents to give him a short, boyish haircut. "The shorn curls were carefully preserved," however, wrote Perry, and later, "when Grandfather Bingham was deputy warden of the Idaho State Penitentiary, he prevailed upon one of the inmates to braid the curly locks into two watch chains, which our mother kept among her treasures."

Louisa's presence of mind in the face of potential disaster is suggested in two experiences described by Harold in his life's history:

Mother was making soap and had a large tub of lye preparation stored on a high shelf to keep it out of the reach of the younger children. She wanted to take it down, and since I was the only one home she enlisted my help. We climbed up on a chair and began to steady it down. When it was exactly above my head, our hold slipped and the tub and its burning lye water dashed over my face, head, and arms. As quickly as she could act, Mother seized me so I wouldn't run and kicked off the lid from a jar of beet pickles she had just made, and with the right hand cupped, dipped out the reddened, pickle vinegar from the beets over my burning face, neck, and arms to stop the eating of the lye and save me from being badly scarred. What could have been a tragedy was averted because of her inspired action. Often she was intuitively led by the Spirit.

The second story is a vivid illustration of Louisa's possession of a heavenly gift:

There was a severe thunderstorm raging near the mountain where our home was located. Our family, consisting of my grandmother, my mother, and two or three of the younger children, were seated in the kitchen before an open door, watching the great display of nature's fireworks. A flash of chain lightning followed by an immediate loud clap of thunder indicated that the lightning had struck very close. I was playing back and forth in the doorway when suddenly and without warning, my mother gave me a vigorous push that sent me sprawling backwards out of the doorway. At that instant, a bolt of lightning came down the chimney of the kitchen stove, out through the kitchen's open doorway, and split a hugh gash from top to bottom in a large tree immediately in front of the house. Had it not been for Mother's intuitive action, and if I had remained in the door opening, I wouldn't be writing this story today.

In 1909, after Louisa's father had been in Boise for three years (her mother had died in Clifton in 1907), his health broke and he returned to Clifton, where, as had happened earlier with Rachel, he was an invalid dependent on Samuel and Louisa. He died in 1916 at age fifty-nine.

Her son Harold testified in his journal of Louisa's skill in caring for the sick:

She always began with castor oil, and so successful was she that never was a doctor in our home excepting when the babies came. I recall the many weary days and nights when four of us were down in bed at the same time with scarlet fever. Father was away much of the time, and for several days, my brother Clyde, particularly, was at death's door. I remember also Mother's bitterly successful fight to save his life when he suffered with diphtheria. She swabbed his throat constantly for several days and nights to prevent its closing.

In later years Louisa assisted as a midwife, helping with the delivery of eight of her own grandchildren. She was also one of the finest cooks, seamstresses, and quilters in Clifton, which enabled her to be especially helpful to the members of the ward during the nine years (1914-1923) Samuel served as bishop. Indeed, there is a hint of evolution of the Church Welfare Program, which her son Harold later managed, in the way Samuel ran his own storehouse, the commodities coming from Louisa's pantry. In the late evening when no one could see, Samuel would often take a sack of flour to a family in need.

Two of Louisa's daughters recall their childhood home with special fondness:

The simple joys created by a loving mother of hot, homemade tomato soup after sacrament meeting on Sundays; the "lumpy-dick" of which Harold was so fond; a very special evening when mother had made new flannel nightgowns for us little girls; and the nights when we couldn't sleep because the delicious aroma of baking bread cast its tantalizing aroma through the house to our nostrils in the bedroom. . . . We did have the sweetest childhood. . . . Though our family was poor for many years, we children were always well dressed and well fed because of Mother's thrifty efforts and talents.

One of the children characterized their growing-up years by declaring: "We had everything that money could not buy." One author told a story illustrating Louisa's method of disciplining her children (including Harold):

She kept a little green willow handy, and when the children got out of line she would swish it around. One day a six-year-old son refused to do as he was asked and dashed off through the alfalfa field. Louisa couldn't see him and knew she couldn't catch him, so she just stood at the edge of the field, switch in hand, and called: "Now, son, you think it over. You're going to get this little green willow whether you stay in there all day or fifteen minutes. So it's up to you. I'm going to stand here fifteen minutes and then I'm going back to the house. Now you just keep it in mind while you play today, that you are going to get this little green willow."

After fifteen minutes the errant little boy appeared; and though it was "the hardest thing in the world to do" at the moment, she applied the little green willow—but very lightly! Those fifteen minutes of her precious time were spent waiting at the edge of eternity for a child to think it over, to repent, and to learn to obey.

In 1923 their son Harold moved to Salt Lake City, and one year later Samuel and Louisa moved there also. Two years later they were in Green River, Wyoming, where Samuel worked for ten months as manager of a Piggly Wiggly grocery store. They returned to Salt Lake City in 1927 and remained there until their deaths.

Samuel spent many years as a night supervisor for ZCMI. Louisa taught Primary, served in the Relief Society, was the choir "mascot" and visited with her children. Both were present when their son Harold was sustained as president of Pioneer Stake in 1930, when he was only thirty-one. In 1935 he became general manager of the Church Welfare Program. Harold was ordained an apostle in 1941, and Samuel and Louisa proudly listened to him speak many times in general conference. Samuel died in 1947 at age seventy-one. Louisa, who suffered with angina pains for many years, died on July 27, 1959, at age eighty.

Before his death, Samuel paid Louisa a tribute that would have been completely satisfying: "Her efforts have not been in vain, for she can look with honor and pride upon her children, realizing that they are monuments of her life's mission."

Sources

The best single source on the mother of President Harold B. Lee is L. Brent Goates, Harold B. Lee: Prophet and Seer (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1985), a recent biography of President Lee, which contains extensive quotes from his diary and personal history, including memories of his parents and grandparents. Also excellent are Jaynann Morgan Payne, "Louisa Bingham Lee: Sacrifice and Spirit," Ensign 4 (February 1974): 80-85; and S. Perry Lee, "Prophet's Brother Recalls Early Days," Church News, December 29, 1973, pp. 5, 10.

The early history of Clifton is treated in Harold C. Bateman, "The History of Clifton, Idaho" (Master's Thesis, Brigham Young University, 1931). Cache Valley's history is given in Joel E. Ricks and Everett L. Cooley, eds., The History of a Valley: Cache Valley, Utah-Idaho (Logan, Utah: Cache Valley Centennial Commission, 1956); M. D. Beal, A History of Southeastern Idaho (Caldwell, Idaho: Caxton Printers, 1942); and Edward W. Tullidge, Tullidge's Histories: Northern Utah and Southern Idaho (Salt Lake City: Juvenile Instructor, 1889), pp. 480-86. Freighting to Montana is treated in Betty M. Madsen and Brigham D. Madsen, North to Montana! Jehus, Bullwhackers, and Mule Skinners on the Montana Trail (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1980).

Other useful sources include S. Dilworth Young, "Having Been Born of Goodly Parents," New Era 3 (March 1973):4-8; "Harold B. Lee," in Leonard J. Arrington, ed., The Presidents of the Church (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1986), pp. 343-71; and Gordon B. Hinckley, "President Harold B. Lee: An Appreciation" Ensign 2 (November 1972): 2-11.
