Susan Arrington Madsen, Leonard J. Arrington, Mothers of the Prophets ( 1987)

Olive Woolley Kimball

My mother was faultless. She was a saint . . . , the epitome of perfection. Who could even mention one virtue that she did not possess? She seemed especially angelic when the light shined through her light red hair and made a halo. . . . When others spoke in condemnation, her lips were always silent. . . . I liked being with my Ma. (Spencer W. Kimball)

Settlers living in the Great Basin in the late nineteenth century used a variety of mostly uncomplimentary phrases to describe the territory of Arizona. It was "a desert wasteland," "hot and dry," "colorless." Missionaries returned home to Utah claiming that the water from the rivers was so full of minerals that one "had to bite it off." Still another person described the land in his journal as "a formation of lava rock and sand, with here and there a poor unfortunate cactus or desert weed." But one word that young Olive Woolley Kimball never expected to use in describing that supposed inhospitable land was "home."

As a young mother living in Salt Lake City, by now a well-established community, Olive literally held her breath at general conference as leaders announced from the pulpit names of dependable priesthood holders being asked to move their families to Arizona to supervise and strengthen the wards, stakes, and missionary work there. Knowing this, it was with a heavy heart that Olive's husband, Andrew Kimball, returned home one evening in 1897, having just met with Church leaders in President Wilford Woodruff's office, to tell Olive that their fears had become reality. Christopher Layton, president of the St. Joseph Stake in Arizona, had been released, and Andrew had been called to replace him.

Olive was stunned. She could think of a hundred reasons why they couldn't go. She and Andrew were paying off a home and rental house and were fifteen hundred dollars in debt. She had just recently given birth to their seventh child. Six were living since the first child had died in infancy. It was not an opportune time for the family to pull up deep roots and start over as pioneers. Then too, she enjoyed living in Salt Lake City within walking distance of her mother and other family members and friends.

Together, Olive and Andrew prayed for understanding and acceptance. Andrew later wrote, "That couple bowed before God trying to pray while their hearts were so swollen with grief. They bubbled over with scalding tears and after a long and hard struggle a petition was made to the throne of Grace while a flood of tears gushed forth. This over, nothing remained but to go to work." There was but one answer, and that was to go. Olive and Andrew had both come from prominent pioneer families in which tremendous sacrifice "for the building of Zion in the latter days" was simply a way of life.

Olive Woolley was born in Salt Lake City on June 1, 1860, the sixth of eleven children born to Bishop Edwin Dilworth Woolley and Mary Ann Olpin. A former Quaker, Edwin Woolley was a dynamic, energetic, stubborn pioneer merchant who became one of the outstanding civic and church leaders in early Latter-day Saint history. He was a native of Chester County, Pennsylvania, where he was born in 1807 to John Woolley Jr. and Rachel Dilworth. Edwin and his first wife, Mary Wickersham, moved to Ohio in 1831 to be closer to her family and to locate where there were better opportunities for making a living.

Edwin and Mary Woolley were living in eastern Ohio, in Columbiana County, when they heard the gospel preached in 1837 by two Latter-day Saint missionaries, George A. Smith and Lorenzo D. Barnes. Mary was baptized soon after, but Edwin was undecided. He wanted to meet the Prophet Joseph Smith. So impatient was Edwin to meet him that he and his wife traveled some eighty miles by horseback in one day to Kirtland, Ohio, where the Prophet was thought to be staying. This trip was later referred to affectionately by his family as "Ed Woolley's wild ride to see the Prophet Joseph Smith."

Unfortunately, the Prophet was in Missouri at the time, so the Woolleys were disappointed, but they did ride on to Portage, Ohio, where they met the Prophet's parents, Joseph Smith Sr. and Lucy Mack Smith. Edwin seemed to benefit greatly from meeting and associating with the elder Smiths, and he was baptized a month later, on Christmas Eve, 1837, by Elder Barnes.

Edwin became a close friend of the Prophet and of Brigham Young, whose business affairs he managed years later in the Salt Lake Valley. The Woolleys crossed the Plains in a company led by Brigham Young, arriving in the Salt Lake Valley in 1848. In 1850, at the request of President Young, Edwin went to New England to purchase merchandise for the Church. During a stopover in St. Louis on his return trip, he hired a young English convert, Mary Ann Olpin, to cook for his company for the remainder of the journey to Utah. Sister Olpin was delighted, for she had been waiting for an opportunity to join her fellow Latter-day Saints in the West. Thus, the future parents of Olive Woolley first became acquainted.

Mary Ann Olpin, who was known as Ann by her family and friends, was born in Cam, near Dursley, Gloucestershire, England. Her village was only a few miles inland from the Bristol Channel, an arm of the Atlantic Ocean that lies between Wales and southwestern England. Cam lay between two major industrial and shipping centers: Gloucester, about fifteen miles to the north, where Robert Raikes founded the world's first Sunday school in 1790, and Bristol, about twenty miles to the south, where the family had access to a wide variety of merchandise in the numerous shops and stalls.

After joining the Church, Ann got permission from her parents, Henry Olpin and Sarah Ann White, to emigrate to America with her Aunt Eliza, and in 1849 they sailed for six weeks before arriving in New Orleans. It was either on the voyage from England or on the riverboat trip they took from New Orleans to St. Louis that Ann promised to marry another young convert from England, Edgar Jones. He, however, left her in St. Louis to seek employment up the river a few miles, and he died there of cholera during the epidemic of 1849. Soon after, Ann's Aunt Eliza also died of the dread disease, leaving Ann completely alone in America, hoping for a way to get to Utah. Being an expert seamstress, she was able to earn a considerable amount with her needle and thus earned her passage to Kanesville, Iowa, where she joined the pioneer company of Edwin Woolley.

After a long, hard journey, the Woolley caravan arrived in the Salt Lake Valley in October 1850. Two weeks after their arrival, Ann became the plural wife of Edwin, the ceremony being performed on November 10 by President Brigham Young in the Endowment House.

Ann first lived in a wagon box on the corner of Third East and Third South streets, where Edwin later built a small cabin for her. After the birth of their first child, Henry Alberto (Bert), Ann moved into a home owned by Brigham Young at 19 East South Temple, where the Hotel Utah garage would later stand.

In May 1860, Bishop Woolley was making final preparations for a business trip to the East, but he was concerned about the health and well-being of Ann, who was expecting their sixth child in June. He promised Ann's younger sister, Ellen, who had come west with her parents in a handcart company in 1859, a nice, eastern-made gift if she would stay with Ann and help run the house until his return. Ellen stayed through the birth of Ann's baby on June 1 and an additional two weeks until her own marriage; then another sister, Sarah Ann, came to assist Ann until Edwin's return. The baby, a beauty, was named Olive. She would become the mother of Spencer Woolley Kimball, twelfth President of the Church.

The home in which Olive was born was located at 29 South State Street and was designed by Truman O. Angell, architect of the Salt Lake Temple. The Woolley home, with its large, spacious rooms, was considered one of the finest homes west of the Missouri River.

It was in this home that Olive spent her first nine years. Her father had launched a successful mercantile business, had been elected to serve in the Utah House of Representatives, and was bishop of the Salt Lake Thirteenth Ward. Hence, their home was constantly teeming with activity, with many of the prominent civic and church leaders of the territory entertained there. Olive's mother considered it her calling to keep the bishop's home ready for callers at all hours, be they General Authorities or members of the ward seeking advice or assistance. History shows that she responded to her assignment cheerfully and effectively.

Next door on the north of the Woolley home was the Social Hall, the center of social and theatrical activities for Salt Lake City. Among Olive's earliest memories were of the wonderful parties held there. Often the fiddlers for the dances would head for the Woolley home during intermission for oyster suppers. Then they would return to the hall for several hours of post-midnight dancing. The Woolley children were thrilled to observe these activities from their upstairs bedroom windows, as their parents joined in the festivities. In 1862, when Olive was two, Brigham Young and the Church built the Salt Lake Theater, across the street and a few steps south of the Woolley home. Modeled after the Drury Lane Theater in London, the theater was compared with the finest in Boston and New York. The Woolleys were eager patrons and often took their children and encouraged them to play children's parts.

The prosperity and culture that the Woolleys enjoyed in their "haven in the West" is described with obvious pride in a letter Bishop Woolley wrote to his in-laws, the Wickershams, in Ohio. It was written in 1865, when Olive was five years old. Part of it reads:

All is peace and plenty, prosperity strides forth with her gigantic step and this once desolate land is now teeming with the busy bustle of life. Altho it is winter, nevertheless, the noise of the hammer, the hatchet, the plane and chisel, is heard at almost every step in some portions of our city, and there is a great spirit of improvement in this country of late. Our theater is very hard to beat. When I was east, I saw nothing this side of Boston to equal it. . . . We have a play every Wednesday and Saturday evening. The play tonight is Shakespeare's Macbeth a good play and is patronized very well, a full house almost every night.

When I come to speak of stores and storehouses I never have seen better, we are getting to have some very fine displays in show windows, I don't know that I ever saw better.

Olive has been described as being "a very lovely child" who was basically good natured and obedient. She and her sister Ruth, two years older than she, both had light red hair at a time when such hair color was often blamed for disagreeable behavior. So at least she had an excuse if the need arose. The Woolley family tended to be small in stature, and "Ollie," as her friends called her, measured 5 feet 1 1/2 inches as an adult; she weighed about 135 pounds while rearing her family.

Olive loved music and learned to play the organ. Once she won five dollars from her two older brothers, Bert and Orson, for being the first in the family to be able to sing a song and play her own accompaniment.

Olive attended school in the Thirteenth Ward District School, where she and students of various other ages were taught by her older brother Bert in a one-room schoolhouse. Bert was nine years older than Olive, and she idolized him. When he went on a proselyting mission to the Hawaiian Islands in 1880, he collected many interesting shells and ferns, which he brought home to Olive and his other sisters and brothers.

Roberta Flake Clayton, a friend, repeated a story she had heard of Olive's youth. One evening as Olive and some friends were playing cards, her father came home and saw what they were doing. After they were gone he said to her, "Daughter, where did you get those cards?" She told him a friend had given them to her. He said, "Where do you keep them?" She replied she kept them in her dresser drawer. He concluded, "That is the best place for them." She never did play with them again.

When Olive was nine, her father sold their beautiful home to Brigham Young, after President Young suggested that the home was more the style for the President of the Church to be living in. The Woolleys moved into the much more modest home of Brigham Young's son-in-law Jacob Gates, who had been called on a mission to St. George and was happy to have a buyer. The home, on the southwest corner of Second South and Second East, was purchased for seven thousand dollars. An adobe and stucco structure, it was directly across the street from the Thirteenth Ward meetinghouse, which made it convenient for the family, and especially Bishop Woolley, to simply cross the street for the many Church functions and meetings they attended.

The large, extended Woolley family gathered often for special occasions, such as birthdays and Christmases, and also at general conference time. In celebration of her father's seventy-first birthday, Olive helped with a gathering of approximately seventy-five of his descendants—children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren—as well as other relatives and friends. It was a surprise party for Edwin. "Cheerfulness, good humor and happy remarks were freely indulged in and all enjoyed a sumptuous, three-hour meal spread over several large tables," the Deseret News reported. After eating, the group moved to a large room for musical treats. Songs both written and sung by Woolley children "awakened deep emotions in Bishop Woolley." Various family members rose and reminisced concerning the deep trials and abundant blessings through the years. Edwin blessed them as the patriarch of the Woolley family and expressed deep gratitude for their love and affection. Such were the joyous family gatherings Olive learned to love. Three years after this gathering, on October 14, 1881, Edwin D. Woolley died at the age of seventy-four, being survived by ninety-five descendants. Olive's mother, Ann, died September 30, 1894.

As Olive matured into a young woman, she was well-liked by her friends and had many admirers among the young men of the city. She tended to be somewhat shy, often to the point of avoiding some meetings or activities lest she be asked to speak or pray. Among her friends in the Thirteenth Ward was a young man by the name of Heber J. Grant, who was three years older than she. When young Heber seriously decided to become a good baseball player, he threw his ball against the Woolley barn for practice.

But the young man Olive was particularly attracted to was Andrew Kimball, a six-foot tall, slender man with a dark complexion. Immaculate in dress, Andrew had a reputation for being a hard worker and strictly honest. He was the son of Heber C. Kimball, one of the Prophet Joseph Smith's closest and most faithful friends, who later became a counselor to President Brigham Young in the First Presidency.

Andrew's mother was Ann Alice Gheen, who, like Edwin Woolley, was of Quaker parentage, born and raised in Chester County, Pennsylvania. She was described as being "a delicate and intensely spiritual woman, Quakerish in dress, shy in society, with a soft heart for the weak and sick." Andrew and a twin sister, Alice, were born in 1858 in Salt Lake City. By 1880, both of Andrew's parents had died. He was working as a fireman on the Utah Central Railroad when he fell in love with pretty, blue-eyed Olive Woolley.

The date of Olive and Andrew's wedding had to be postponed because of her father's final illness and death; they were eventually married February 2, 1882, when Olive was twenty-one and Andrew was twenty-three. Sadness came quickly to the young couple when their first child, Maude Woolley Kimball, died of pneumonia at the age of ten months. Olive was grief-stricken, and journal entries she made during this period report numerous visits to the baby's grave. For months, her thoughts centered around this child: "May 14, 1884: I ironed all morning and in the afternoon, being alone, felt quite bad over the loss of our Darling Maude."

Within a year of Maude's death, Olive and Andrew were blessed with another child, Olive Clare. The couple would eventually become the parents of eleven children.

While her husband was away on business or Church assignments, Olive busied herself doing the wash, playing the organ, making rugs, starching clothes, and visiting her mother, whom she frequently walked a mile and a half to see. She often arose at five in the morning to begin the day's chores. Her diary of 1884 includes such phrases as "made a Mother Hubbard dress of calico"; "had to bussle around to get everything done"; "helped my husband plant potatoes, plant fruit trees, and fix the fence along the corral"; "made root beer."

When her daughter Clare was only three months old, another trial came to Olive. Her husband was called to serve a mission in the Indian Territory in present-day Oklahoma. The Woolleys rented their home, and Olive and the baby lived with her mother while Andrew was on his mission for three years. The separation was hard for both Olive and Andrew. Without Andrew's companionship, Olive felt especially lonely. She had given birth to two babies in less than two years, so her health was not the best. She worried about burglars and felt uneasy some evenings not having a husband around. Remembering the illness that took Maude from her, she was understandably frightened whenever Clare took sick. She wrote frequently to Andrew, but news and expressions of affection traveled slowly, letters often taking several weeks to reach their destination.

Meanwhile, Andrew and his companion missionaries made contact with a variety of Indian peoples, particularly Cherokees, Choctaws, and Creeks. They traveled without purse or scrip, mostly on foot, from one settlement to the next. They stayed with friends whenever they could, earning their keep by whittling household items and fixing gates, repairing farm machinery, and planting crops. Often they slogged through miles of mud and snow, wading through streams, to get from farm to farm. Five weeks into his mission, the first letter from Olive finally caught up with Andrew. He burst into tears as he read it.

Sometimes the missionaries had roads to travel and sometimes just trails. "Sometimes we get lost," Andrew wrote, "but by the aid of a compass we travel in Indian style and are sure to come out somewhere." They were pestered by swarms of mosquitoes, which carried malaria. For weeks Andrew and his companions fought off daily chills, fever, and headaches, walking and sleeping in wet clothes and missing many meals. But still they stayed and preached to those who would listen.

Andrew developed a special love and admiration for Indian peoples that remained with him for the rest of his life, and that inevitably influenced Olive and their children. Whatever Olive's problems at home, she was completely supportive of what her husband was doing and was especially appreciative of his work with these "people of destiny," as the Book of Mormon refers to the American Indians. During one three-month period Andrew was confined to bed with malaria and was cared for by some Cherokees.

Andrew's letters home were not only replete with information about the Indians, particularly the Cherokees, but also the countryside, "a beautiful country, composed of rolling hills, covered with many kinds of timber, open grassy prairies, and rich bottom lands." His letters exhibit a sly humor. For example, "The country is well supplied with wild fruits, such as plums, persimmons, woodticks, strawberries, centipedes and poisonous chiggers, black fleas, bedbugs and hickory nuts, tarantulas, scorpions, pecan nuts, tree lizards, grapes, and acorns."

In 1887, after almost three years, Andrew was released from his mission. Olive wept as she once more held him in her arms. Although released from his "walking mission," however, he was soon appointed president of the Indian Territory Mission. For the most part he was able to take care of this responsibility from Salt Lake City, with only occasional visits to Indian Territory. Under his direction the mission continued to expand, new chapels were built or acquired and dedicated, conferences were held, and church activity increased.

When he was not on visits to the mission field, Andrew traveled in Utah and southern Idaho in the interests of several firms, including the Beaver woolen mills, the Cedar City tannery, the Spanish Fork shoe factory, and new reservoirs and land projects at Fillmore and Kanosh. He traveled in Cache Valley, Box Elder, Weber, Morgan, and Summit counties, all in the interests of various "home industries." After ten years of service he was released from his Indian mission presidency in 1897. He served as a member of the Deseret Sunday School Union board, a position he held until the time of his death in 1924.

Andrew had civic responsibilities as well. He was also a district school trustee and a member of the constitutional convention that preceded Utah's emergence as a state in 1896. All together, his many obligations took him away from his family almost every evening of the week. Hence, nearly all responsibility for the care and raising of the Kimball children fell to Olive. Gordon was born in 1888, and a typical diary entry for these years is one written while he was still a toddler:

Thursday, May 30, 1889. It was a holiday for most folks as it was Decoration Day. But not for us. Andrew had to work the most of the day at the store. I took up the dining room carpet, scrubbed the floor, and then he [Andrew] came and lifted out the kitchen stove and I took up that carpet and I started to fix one, then picked over a pan of strawberries, and then went to bed, not at all dissatisfied with my day's work. The baby was quite restless all night.

Delbert W. was born in 1890 and Ruth in 1892.

On March 28, 1895, Andrew returned home from the constitutional convention to find Olive ready to deliver their sixth child. He went for Olive's sister, Rachel Woolley Simmons, who had delivered four of the others, and at 7:50 P.M. a nine-pound baby boy was born. Andrew recorded in his journal: "I took the children in to see him. Clare [ten years old] had made up her mind for a girl, was badly disappointed, and had a crying spell."

In their efforts to choose a suitable name, Andrew favored the name Roberts Kimball, in honor of Elder B. H. Roberts of the First Council of the Seventy. Olive, however, was much less enthusiastic, knowing that Elder Roberts was leading the opposition against women's suffrage at the constitutional convention currently in session. (She was an enthusiastic suffragist.) Thus they named the baby Spencer Woolley Kimball. He would become the twelfth President of the Church.

In 1898, when Spencer was three years old and his baby sister Alice just one, the Kimball family responded to the call from President Wilford Woodruff that made Andrew president of the St. Joseph Stake, and moved to that supposed desert wasteland, the Gila Valley, in southeast Arizona. The family's feelings as they packed the last of their belongings are well described by Edward and Andrew Kimball in their biography Spencer W. Kimball, Twelfth President of the Church: "Arizona was a life sentence, a prison, hot and dry, infested with savages and spiders and flies. A death in the home would have brought fewer mourners, less sorrow. To send a man to Arizona was to bury him alive, they thought." Olive paid one last visit to the grave of little Maude, and, with six children and a heavy heart, she boarded the train. On the platform stood a little group of well-wishers, standing under umbrellas in a steady rain. It was a sad parting.

After four days of travel through mostly colorless, dry landscape, the Kimballs entered the Gila Valley, which turned out to be less of a desert than an oasis—a strip of fertile farmland two miles wide along the river bottom. In Thatcher, which was too small to have a depot, a crowd of adults and children met them with arms full of roses, an omen of the blossoming that would take place in the valley under the direction of Andrew Kimball.

Thatcher had been colonized in the 1880s when a wave of new settlements took root in the Gila Valley and the St. Joseph Stake was created. The first stake president, Christopher Layton, gave the town of Thatcher its name, built the academy there, and designated it as the stake center. It had not been an easy place to subdue. One settler said of the plants and animals: "If you touch it, it stings you; if you pet it, it bites you; and if you eat it, it kills you." In 1854 General William T. Sherman said of the territory: "We have had one war with Mexico and took Arizona. We should have another and compel them to take it back."

Nevertheless, the stake continued to grow and flourish in the face of many hardships. Andrew's most significant achievement was the strengthening of St. Joseph's Stake Academy, a high school that was later known as the Gila Academy and still later was upgraded as Eastern Arizona College, the largest church school in Arizona. He also participated in crusades to minimize the sale of alcohol and tobacco and to promote the proper observance of the Sabbath.

Ever anxious to encourage Latter-day Saints from Utah to join the community in Arizona, Andrew presented a favorable impression of the Gila Valley on his visits to Salt Lake City. On one occasion, he boasted of corn sixteen feet tall, Johnson grass eight feet high, a sweet potato that weighed thirty-six pounds (he carried an affidavit to prove it), peaches too big to go into the mouth of a preserving jar, sunflower stalks that were used for fence poles, weeds that had to be cut with an ax, and sugarcane that grew four years from one planting. Having fully accepted their call with the desire to magnify the land, Olive was very loyal to Arizona and confident of its future. When she heard a certain person boast of "green Oregon" and talk of California as a "true garden spot," Olive, normally a quiet person, spoke right up. "We are in a good country," she insisted, and she brought up her children to believe it.

The Kimball family spent their first years in Thatcher living in a three-room adobe house with no sink, no bath, and no running water. Then the stake bought the family ten acres of land on which they built a more suitable home and ran a small farm. The brick house, which was Olive's pride and joy, was made possible by the inheritance she received from her father's estate. Nevertheless, keeping her eight children fed and clothed taxed her meager resources. Andrew did everything from selling Bible scrolls and insurance to contracting to lay railroad ties to support the family in a modest manner.

Olive made shirts, patched pants, and crocheted sweaters to make ends meet. "Fancy foods" were purchased only to feed conference visitors and Spencer would later remember patiently waiting while the guests ate, hoping something would be left for him. A basket of plums and apples from a Sister Jones was, Olive gratefully wrote, "a very acceptable" gift. The children were taught to do their part too, by caring for the farm animals and helping with the planting, irrigating, and harvesting. Olive had been brought up to hate idleness, and this part of her character was passed on to her children. She also believed in plenty of schooling. Her children attended school in Thatcher, and most of them furthered their education at the Gila Academy.

As always, the Church and the gospel played a central role in the Kimball household. Olive regularly sat with her children on the fourth row of the Thatcher meetinghouse for Sunday meetings, and the family prayed together at family meals, their chairs turned with their backs to the table, and offered nightly prayers at Olive's knee. At home, on special occasions, the family knelt around the revolving piano stool to pray. Andrew put a hand on the seat, Olive covered it with hers, and so on till each hand in the family was touching. "We felt very close together on those occasions," wrote Spencer.

In spite of the beautiful and sweet moments the family shared, life was challenging for Olive. Year after year she was the "Church widow," shouldering much of the responsibility while Andrew traveled to outlying wards or worked on a variety of jobs to support the family. She read the children stories from the Bible and supervised their baths in an iron tub, heating buckets of water on the wood stove.

She poured out her griefs only in the privacy of her journal. In 1901 she wrote: "I was sick with a pain in my bowels all night. It just poured down with rain. . . . All the beds and bedding got wet. Our house leaked in every room. I felt discouraged as every place but our front room was so wet, but we got through the day alright."

Brought up in a faithful household, Olive was determined to teach her children gospel principles and values. She led the way in practicing proper observance of the Sabbath, cautioned her children about criticizing Church officials, and taught them the law of tithing, emphasizing that they must always give a full tenth—one-tenth of the eggs, one-tenth of the hay, and one-tenth of their earnings. Above all, she taught of God's love and his heavenly presence. On one occasion her horses began a runaway, and she was terrified that someone would be hurt. "We were frightened awfully," she wrote, "but the Lord heard my silent prayers and we got the horse stopped. Praise be to our Heavenly Father for His goodness to us."

In 1900 the region suffered from a persistent dry spell. Olive was among members of the stake who fasted and prayed for rain. She wrote in her journal: "No breakfast. We are fasting." There was a similar entry the next Sunday. When, a week later, it rained hard, she was not surprised. "That," she wrote, "was in answer to the prayers of the saints in this stake." On another occasion she prayed with her children to find a lost child. After the prayer, one of the children walked directly to the very spot where the child lay sleeping. "We thanked our Heavenly Father over and over," wrote Olive. "We could think of nothing else all evening."

Olive took her children to sacrament meeting regularly from the time they were babes. If they became tired and fussy, she allowed them to doze in her lap, even when they were older. When reminded later in life that he had done this many times, her son Spencer drily replied: "I was just unconsciously absorbing the sermons."

Her family responsibilities, important and onerous as they were, did not exhaust her time or energy. She was inevitably a leader in the Relief Society in Arizona, at first as an officer and teacher in Thatcher Ward, and later as a counselor in the stake Relief Society. She always found time to help those who were sick, and to sew burial clothes.

Andrew and Olive were cultural, intellectual, and spiritual leaders of the Arizona Saints. They had a large library and were knowledgeable on the scriptures. They participated in a "polysophical" society in Thatcher, where he often lectured and she sang. They were among the first in the valley to buy an organ, and Olive taught her son Spencer to play. (He later played the organ at the special meetings of the First Presidency and Council of the Twelve on Thursday mornings in the Salt Lake Temple.) Olive had a fine soprano voice and was asked often to sing in public. On one occasion Alexander Brodie, governor of Arizona Territory, visited Gila Valley with his wife and small son, and they were entertained at the Kimball home. Mrs. Brodie commented that she thought it remarkable that Olive should be able to do her own housework for a large family and at the same time entertain visitors so graciously. "She had a sweet and mild disposition and would go more than half way to avoid misunderstandings or feelings," wrote one who knew Olive. Olive particularly enjoyed hosting President Joseph F. Smith, who had married Alice, Andrew's twin sister, and was therefore her brother-in-law. Olive and her daughter Clare often sang duets for President Smith and other General Authorities who visited their home.

Part of the responsibility Andrew felt in the St. Joseph Stake—a stake that included a vast arid region in southeastern Arizona, southwestern New Mexico, and some border areas of Texas and Mexico—was to supervise the construction of canals and other works to make possible the irrigation and reclamation of the immense stretches of arid lands. He served on the board of directors of several canal companies; was a member of the Twenty-first Arizona Legislature; was a director of the Arizona Eastern Railway and Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railroad; and represented Arizona at many national and international farm congresses. He was associated with the leading implement business in Gila Valley and was manager of the Thatcher Implement and Mercantile Company. He was widely known as a person of integrity and practicality, and his prestige among the businessmen in Arizona helped to strengthen the friendship of those interests for the Latter-day Saints.

The work of Andrew, Olive, and other Latter-day Saint leaders was effective in building a Latter-day Saint homeland in Arizona. A temple was built in Mesa in 1927, and by the end of 1986, there were more than forty stakes with a membership of about 150,000. A constant concern of the Kimballs was the relationship of Arizona settlers with native Americans. Of their Indian brothers and sisters Andrew stated: "They are investigating the principles and watching the example of the Elders. . . . After a little they will make a break like a flock of sheep. When one goes all will go, and there will be a bounteous harvest. . . . A foundation is slowly and firmly being laid for a great work amongst this people." Not the least of the contributions of the Kimballs was the establishment of a relationship of brotherhood and respect between Anglos and Indians—a relationship that blossomed as never before under their son Spencer.

The growth of the Church and the increase in good will, however, did not prevent personal grief for Olive and Andrew. In 1903 their tenth child, Mary, died shortly after her birth. As the tenth child, Andrew said, Mary had been the Lord's, and He had taken her back as a tithe. A month later, five-year-old Fannie became sick, and her heart, the doctor said, was damaged by inflammatory rheumatism. The suffering continued for weeks until she died in Olive's arms on Spencer's ninth birthday. "I remember the scene in our living room," he later remembered, "my beloved mother weeping with her little dying five-year-old child in her arms and all of us crowding around. I shall never forget the anguish and pain which she was suffering." Olive was overcome with grief. This was the third child she had buried. Friends cautioned her about grieving too much, and she accepted their counsel in humility. "I do not wish to grieve too much and displease my Heavenly Father," she wrote. But it was not something that went away quickly.

In the fall of 1906, Olive was pregnant for the twelfth time, having averaged a birth every two years for the previous twenty-four years. Andrew decided that perhaps a trip to Salt Lake City to be with her family would cheer her up and help make her well again. They had no idea how ill she really was. Andrew went only part way to Utah on the train with her and then returned to Arizona, sending her on to Salt Lake City. She seemed to be getting sicker "by the hour." At home in Thatcher, the Kimball children fasted and prayed for their mother's health. Eleven-year-old Spencer wrote her the following letter October 17:

Dear Mamma: As Clare told me to write a few lines to you, I will try. Clare and Ruth are doing the house work. They have the house all cleaned but the kitchen. We are all well now. We are very lon[e]ly without you. Gordon has hauled all the corn fodder from Bro Branham's. We are very busy around here. We received the telegram and were very glad to know that mama was out of danger. . . . I think I will close for it is getting bed time. Sister Allen told us in Religion Class that we should go to bed at eight o'clock so we could have enough sleep. Now it is nearly half past eight. Goodbye. Your loving Son. Spencer Kimball

A day later, on October 18, 1906, Olive was dead. The baby miscarried, and Olive died from a related infection. She was only forty-six.

The next day the Kimball children were called home from school. Bishop William A. Moody gathered them around him and said simply, "Your Ma is dead." Spencer recalled, "It came as a thunderbolt. I ran from the house out in the backyard to be alone in my deluge of tears. Out of sight and sound, away from everybody, I sobbed and sobbed. Each time I said the word 'Ma' fresh floods of tears gushed forth until I was drained dry. Ma—dead! But she couldn't be! Life couldn't go on for us. My eleven-year-old heart seemed to burst."

Five days later the train came from Salt Lake City carrying Olive's body. She lay in the parlor until the funeral. Spencer would slip into the parlor to gaze at her. Her red hair looked the same as always, but her blue eyes were closed and she was quiet. Spencer kissed her forehead.

Olive's funeral was held in Thatcher on October 28, 1906. After the services, which were attended by more than a thousand people, sixty-five carriages followed her coffin to the cemetery.

Though their mother was now gone, Olive's children kept a place for her in their hearts the rest of their lives. Their father was conscious of this. Nine years after her passing, Andrew inscribed a gift copy of the Pearl of Great Price: "Andrew and Olive Woolley Kimball to Spencer Woolley Kimball, January 25, 1916." Inside the book cover, Spencer attached a picture of his dear mother.

Sources

There are seven volumes of Olive Woolley Kimball holograph diaries in the Church Archives, Salt Lake City. They cover the years 1884, 1889, 1895, and 1899-1903, and include an account of her trip to Independence, Missouri, in 1895.

A brief biographical sketch is in Roberta Flake Clayton, comp., Pioneer Women of Arizona (Mesa, Arizona: Privately published, 1969), pp. 312-15. Biographies of Andrew Kimball include Andrew Jenson, "Kimball, Andrew," in Latter-day Saints' Biographical Encyclopedia, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: Andrew Jenson Historical Company, 1901-1936), 1:364-66, and Thomas C. Romney, "Andrew Kimball," in The Gospel in Action (Salt Lake City: Deseret Sunday School Union Board, 1949), pp. 93-98.

A splendid biography of Spencer W. Kimball that includes considerable treatment of his parentage, and which we have used extensively, is Edward L. Kimball and Andrew E. Kimball, Jr., Spencer W. Kimball, Twelfth President of the Church (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1977).

Olive's ancestry is treated in Preston W. Parkinson, The Utah Woolley Family (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1967); Leonard J. Arrington, From Quaker to Latter-day Saint: Bishop Edwin D. Woolley (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1976); Orson F. Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball (Salt Lake City, 1888); and Stanley B. Kimball, Heber C. Kimball: Mormon Patriarch and Pioneer (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1981).

The settlement of Arizona is described in James H. McClintock, Mormon Settlement in Arizona (Phoenix, Arizona: Arizona Historical Department, 1921); Charles S. Peterson, Take Up Your Mission: Mormon Colonizing Along the Little Colorado River, 1870-1900 (Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1973); and William A. Moody, Years in the Sheaf (Salt Lake City: Granite Publishing Company, 1959).

Kimball and Woolley family group sheets and pedigree charts are in the Genealogical Library, Salt Lake City.

The quotation from Spencer W. Kimball at the head of the chapter is a composite of several statements.
