Susan Arrington Madsen, Leonard J. Arrington, Mothers of the Prophets ( 1987)

Sarah Dunkley Benson

We had great spiritual moments in our home, many of them after Father left for his mission. In our prayers at night [Mother] would pray and pray and pray that Father would be successful, that he wouldn't worry about home. She'd pray that our work might go well in the fields, that we'd be kind to each other. She may have wept in the privacy of her bedroom, but she never doubted Father's call. I marveled at Mother's faith. When your mother prays with such fervor, night after night, you think twice before you do something to disappoint her. (Ezra Taft Benson)

Sarah Dunkley Benson, as a farm wife, witnessed many of nature's mysteries and tried her best to tame the harshness of the new land that she and her husband were pioneering. In the process, she not only developed a philosophy of life but also came to have strong and deeply felt convictions about America and about the Church. With an unwavering love and faith in God and Jesus Christ, she had an absolute assurance that her family was of eternal importance. Above all, she had one quality considered especially important for a farmer's wife in a stubborn land—unflappable optimism.

Sarah Sophia Dunkley was born June 29, 1878, in a small cabin in the newly established colony of Franklin, Idaho's first permanent white settlement. Franklin is often referred to as "mother of the settlements," for it was from here that the first-comers to northern Cache Valley lived before spreading out to form new communities farther north. Sarah's parents, Joseph Dunkley and Margaret Wright, had found separate ways to this southeastern part of Idaho before they met there and married on November 12, 1868.

Margaret had been born and raised in Scotland, where her parents had joined the Church in 1846. Margaret's father died during the great cholera plague of 1854, and for several years thereafter she and her siblings worked in the cotton factories to earn enough money to join the Saints in America. In 1868, Margaret, her brothers and sisters, and their widowed mother set sail from Liverpool, England, in a leaky packet ship, the Constitution. They spent most of their time singing, dancing, praying, and bailing out water. The ship sank on its return trip to England. The Wright family crossed the Great Plains in 1868 in a trip that Margaret enjoyed as somewhat of a lark. She remembered the names of their oxen: Nig and Coly, Duck and Dime, Buck and Bawley, Lam and Lime. After their arrival in the Salt Lake Valley on September 15, the Wrights immediately went north to Franklin, where relatives had settled several years earlier.

Joseph Dunkley was born in 1824 in Stratford, England, where he helped his father in a calico block-printing factory. The youngest of eleven children, Joseph shocked his family when he announced in 1852 that he had received a testimony of the truthfulness of the restored gospel, had been baptized, and was planning to migrate to America. He was twenty-eight and had married, but his wife had died of childbirth. His parents literally begged on their knees for him to remain in England. His mother even said that she hoped Joseph would break his leg, thus preventing him from leaving. But his desire to be with his fellow Latter-day Saints was unyielding, and he left in 1854, arriving in the Salt Lake Valley in 1855.

By the spring of 1860, President Brigham Young had asked Joseph, along with several other families, to establish the first colony at Franklin, twenty miles north of Logan, which had been settled the year before. Joseph had been living in Franklin about eight years when the Wright family arrived. He and Margaret were sealed in the Endowment House in Salt Lake City and became the parents of twelve children, eight boys and four girls. Sarah was their sixth child and second daughter.

Sarah's father, like many of the first settlers in Franklin, may have lived temporarily in a wagon box placed on the ground. Later, the Saints built cabins surrounded by a protective fort. The pioneers in this area had numerous encounters with the Indians, who were fiercely protective of the land they had roamed for hundreds of years. The settlers wanted to live in peace with the Indians, but they also saw them as representing a threat to their livestock, crops, and even their own persons. Farmers were encouraged to work always in groups out in the fields, and their firearms were kept as handy as the scythes and homemade rakes with which they harvested hay.

Night after night Joseph Dunkley took his turn standing guard at the top of Little Mountain, watching for the approach of hostile Indians. One incident occurring on the Dunkley farm shows that their fears were not always unfounded. Sarah's brother Joseph related the experience as follows:

The threshing crew had just finished their job on the Dunkley farm. An old Indian squaw, one of a band of Indians who were intending to winter in Bear Lake Valley over the Mountain to the East, was at the farm. The other Indians had started their journey. She remained to stack straw behind the old horsepower thresher for which she received a "toll." This share of the harvest was no doubt intended for winter food. The threshing completed, she asked Joseph if she could store her wheat in a nearby open straw shed for a while. He, knowing of the danger of livestock getting into the wheat, suggested that she put it in the granary. The old squaw refused. She very sulkingly lingered about the farm for three days. Saddling and packing her ponies she left during the night. Entering the horse stable as usual the next morning, Joseph found the result of her revenge. Two fine mules had been poisoned with strychnine kept for use in killing coyotes. One choice horse had a broken leg. An examination revealed that an axe had been used in committing this act.

When Sarah was ten years old, the Dunkley family moved to Whitney, Idaho, five miles northwest of Franklin, where Joseph homesteaded 160 acres of land. Much of the land with productive and fertile soil had been taken by settlers lucky enough to arrive earlier, and the Dunkleys ended up farming an acreage that was not the best because of the presence of alkali, a mineral salt detrimental to the growing of crops. The family often said, however, that it did furnish a setting for developing the qualities of industry, cooperation, and perseverance in their children.

These early years for the Dunkleys were often difficult, with many supplies available only in Salt Lake City, a distance of 110 miles to the south. Some people made the trip as many as four or five times during the spring and summer, often walking every step of the way, and occasionally returning with a fifty-pound sack of flour on their back. Men and women also walked to Salt Lake City to attend general conferences of the Church. The poverty-level incomes are suggested by the fact that girls went into homes and did housework for less than a dollar a week. One girl worked fourteen weeks to pay for a homemade linsey-woolsey dress.

In spite of the difficulties, Sarah Dunkley was a happy girl who enjoyed good health and a vivacious and attractive personality. She had dark eyes and an abundance of thick black hair, about which she tended to be quite fussy. As an adult she had a special barrel in which she caught rainwater to use in washing her hair because of the water's "soft feel." She liked to brush her hair thoroughly, braid it, wind it around on top of her head, and carefully pin it in place.

Sarah quickly earned the nickname of "little mother" because of her tendency to be a leader among her friends and an influence for good among her brothers and sisters. Her education began in the small Nashville School, across the Cub River from Franklin. In this log structure the children sat on long boards and used slates for writing. During the winter, Sarah and her friends and cousins who lived nearby were taken to school in a homemade horse-drawn sleigh that slid over ice and snow while the girls sang their merry ditties.

When she wasn't in school or busy helping with the farm and housework, Sarah found plenty of time for skating, wading, swimming, sleigh riding, picnics, and outings in the canyon. She especially enjoyed playing with their Uncle George Wright's children, who lived nearby.

After graduating from the one-room schoolhouse in Whitney, Sarah attended and graduated from the Oneida Stake Academy in Preston, Idaho, where she then organized and taught a summer school. The Academy was established by the Church as a middle school and high school in which the teaching of the physical, biological and social sciences, and the humanities could be combined with the teaching of scriptures and theology. The Church shouldered most of the burden of financing the school but solicited donations from the local stake members and charged each student a modest tuition. Stake members were called on missions to haul rock from the local quarry to construct the school building, and they donated locally produced goods, such as eggs, molasses, flour, and broom corn, to help finance the project.

The building was finally completed in 1894 and was dedicated in 1895 by Elder Moses Thatcher of the Council of the Twelve Apostles. Subsequently, several additions were made to the original campus, including a mechanical arts building, recreational facilities (where Sarah's children would play many basketball and softball games), and a library that by 1914 had grown to twenty-five hundred volumes. The Academy had a profound influence on the people of southeastern Idaho and was a source of great pride, bringing them education, culture, and wholesome recreation. (It was at the Academy in 1912 that Sarah's son, Ezra Taft, first met a classmate named Harold B. Lee, with whom he later associated in the Council of the Twelve.) The closure of the Academy in 1922 was considered an irreplaceable and sentimental loss.

Much of Sarah's social life centered around activities at the Whitney Ward. She had a lovely voice and often sang vocal solos. She was also a member of the Whitney Ward Choir, which won first prize in a valleywide contest, and was active in the auxiliaries as a teacher and officer. At the age of seventeen, she took a special sewing class in Logan and achieved such skill that she soon became known as an excellent seamstress. This talent would serve her well throughout her life, for she later made dresses, trousers, coats, shirts—virtually all the clothing—for the large family that would be hers.

During her adolescent years Sarah was especially fond of a pair of lively twin girls who lived close by—Addie and Florence Benson. Together with Sarah's sister Kate, they were the "popular four" of their ward, of which Addie and Florence's father, George Taft Benson Sr., was bishop. The girls spent many hours together, often had matching dresses, and styled their hair in the latest fashion. Together they made a tumbling mat on which they could work out regularly, laughing and keeping fit at the same time. The girls were together so much that they wore a regular path between the Dunkley and the Benson homes.

During these many fun-filled afternoons, the Benson twins' older brother, George Taft Benson Jr., began to take notice of Sarah, who by this time was blossoming into young womanhood. George was soon walking Sarah home from his family's house or from singing practice. Clearly, he was captivated by her charm and friendliness.

George Jr. was a grandson of Elder Ezra Taft Benson, an early apostle in the Church and leader of the Latter-day Saint settlements in Cache Valley from 1860 until his death in 1869. George Jr. had a reputation for being the best hay pitcher in the county and inherited his father's dedication to hard work and religious devotion. But he knew how to enjoy himself, too. He loved sports and participated actively. Every Wednesday night—and Friday, if there was a dance in Franklin or Preston—he would take the buggy to court Sarah Dunkley.

Sarah and George's courtship progressed naturally as they shared many buggy rides, picnics, outings to the Cub River Canyon, and, of course, Church meetings and socials where Sarah played the guitar while many of their young friends sang and danced.

As things began to look more serious for the couple, George busily brought logs from the canyon and had them cut at the sawmill to build their first home. Sarah and her mother made patchwork quilts, curtains, dish towels, and rugs for the home. After George and Sarah were married October 19, 1898, in the Logan Temple, they returned to Whitney to live in the two-room house George had built for his bride—with a shanty in back for washing. This was their home for thirty years, and in it their eleven children were born.

The arrival of their first child a year later was an event of considerable concern and anxiety, for the life of both mother and child seemed to hang in the balance as the childbirth progressed. The attending doctor told George and the two grandmothers who were present that there was almost no chance Sarah would live and very little chance that the baby would survive. The three of them almost instantaneously fell to their knees and prayed to God for the preservation of these two precious lives. As the doctor worked quickly to try to save Sarah, Margaret Dunkley and Louisa Benson worked to save their grandchild. The black and blue, nearly eleven-pound baby bay was put first in a pan of cool water and then a pan of warm water until finally he began to breathe and let out a boisterous cry. Tears of joy were shed as it soon became clear that both mother and child would survive. The child was blessed and given the name of his great-grandfather: Ezra Taft Benson. Thus was ushered into the world the man who would be sustained as prophet and President of the Church in 1985.

Not only did Sarah survive, but she went on to give birth to ten more children over the next twenty-one years: Joseph, Margaret, Orval Dunkley, Louisa, Lera, Valdo Dunkley, George Taft III, Sarah, Ross Dean, and Volco Ballif.

Sarah and George raised their family on an eighty-acre farm in Whitney. By this time the town had grown to fifty families—about three hundred people, all of whom were members of the Church except one. Even he finally converted. Numerous small businesses were established by now, making a wide variety of services available. Nephi McLeary, for instance, had a shoe-mending department in the corner of the local cooperative general store, where he mended shoes six days of the week and then led the choir on Sunday. Joseph Simons operated a blacksmith shop, J. W. Winward sold farming implements, and the Ballif family owned and operated a general merchandising store, which also included the Whitney Post Office for a time.

The Benson children were heavily involved in work on the farm. At the age of four, Ezra Taft (often called "T"), the oldest, was driving a team. At seven he began to thin sugar beets, and at fourteen he worked a team of eight horses on the dry wheat farm. The children all had turns pitching hay, thinning and topping sugar beets, canning fruit, driving wagons, milking cows, and feeding the chickens. The girls spent many hours with Sarah—sewing, cleaning house, making jams, jellies, and pies, and helping tend younger members of the family. The sight of several hundred quart jars of applesauce and other fruit was enormously satisfying and comforting as the cool fall air signaled that winter was not far away.

Much of the family's food supply throughout the year came from a large garden, an excellent raspberry patch, a small dairy, and many fruit trees. Seeds for the garden were understandably precious and not always easy to obtain. Families would go to great lengths to protect and preserve their seeds. Consider the actions of Sarah's half-sister, Margaret Mary Ann Hansen, who lived nearby, as related by her daughter, Ida Colby:

One spring morning Mother had worked hard preparing the soil for the planting of her annual crop of peas. She finished the last row, placed the seed bag over the stick at the end of the row and went into the house. A short while later she noticed a red-combed rooster strutting by her pea bed. When she examined the area she found that this cock had eaten all of her planted seeds. "That villain will not get away with this," Mother thought. Quick as a flash she grabbed the rooster, beheaded him, stuck him in boiling water, plucked off his feathers, cut him open, and, sure enough, there was her crop of precious seeds. Mother replanted the seeds and cooked the fowl for dinner.

At threshing time, Sarah and the girls baked for two or three days—bread, pies, cakes, and cookies. It was an exciting day when the threshing machine pulled into the yard. The children enjoyed watching the large machine operate and took cookies and lemonade to the twenty or so men working in the fields. Afterwards the family enjoyed fresh, clean-smelling straw in their bed ticks.

Not all activities on the farm were work. The Benson family enjoyed swimming in the creek, picking wildflowers, riding horses, and playing with newborn puppies and calves. Sarah could be counted on to cook fried chicken, potato salad, and lemon and pumpkin pies for a family picnic. The children especially looked forward to the July 4th and July 24th celebrations, when they romped and ate to their heart's content with their Benson and Dunkley cousins. These gatherings always included races, rodeos, various contests, and plenty of homemade ice cream. During the winter months, the family frequently went sleigh riding, and had a pot of Sarah's oyster stew to warm them afterwards.

One day in 1912 George and Sarah went to Uncle Serge Benson's general store and post office. As the buggy returned, the children could see their parents had been crying. A letter had come from "Box B" in Salt Lake City. Missionary calls were mailed from "Box B." Their tears, they told the children, were tears of joy that their father had been called to serve as a missionary in the Midwest. Sarah was expecting their eighth child, but she felt the family would be blessed by having their husband and father in the mission field. George sold their dry farm, leased eighty acres on half share, and left for Chicago. When Sarah gave birth to her eighth child, George Taft III, she and the baby were seriously ill, but she refused to tell her husband until they had both recovered, so the news would not interfere with his proselyting activity.

When the entire family came down with the measles, Grandmother Dunkley came to help with the sick and entertain the restless. On the front lawn she danced the Highland Fling, while her young audience gleefully watched from the windows above. Sarah's mother was adored by her Benson grandchildren, who remembered her as "a darling, vivacious little Scottish bundle of energy."

When a letter arrived from her missionary husband, Sarah would gather her children around her and, with a baby in her lap, read aloud his experiences in the mission field. The children must have caught the missionary spirit from these letters, for each of the eleven children later served missions for the Church.

George returned from his mission in 1914. The following year, Sarah's brother Joseph Dunkley was called as the new bishop, with George as his counselor. Sarah later supported her husband's call to the Oneida Stake high council, followed in 1927 by seven years in the stake presidency. During the years she was raising her family, Sarah served in the Relief Society as president and as an officer in other stake and ward organizations. She and George also went to choir practice every Wednesday night.

Sarah's love of singing carried over into her home. In times of work and relaxation, her lovely voice filled the home with warmth and pleasant melodies. She sang while she cooked, cleaned, and sewed on her treadle machine, and while she rocked her babies to sleep. One of her favorite songs was "Have I Done Any Good in the World Today?"

During the thirty years that George and Sarah lived in their first home, they made additions and remodeled to suit their growing family. The last five years of their marriage were spent in a new home that George built a mile and a half southwest of their farm, next to the Whitney Post Office and across the street from the ward chapel. They sold the farm to "T" and Orval, and George went to work securing contracts from the farmers for the beet-sugar factory.

A seemingly bright and comfortable future enjoying the fruits of their hard labors was cut short in 1932 when Sarah was diagnosed as having cancer. She underwent major surgery at the LDS Hospital in Salt Lake City, but died a year later on June 1, 1933. She was fifty-four years old. Her youngest child was only thirteen years old, and her twenty-year-old son George Taft El[ was in the mission field at the time. Her last words to him as he left had been "George, no matter what happens at home, I want you to stay and finish your mission." In spite of the grief he felt at her passing, George honored his mother's request. Sarah's husband, George, died a year later of appendicitis.

With Sarah's death, her lovely voice was now missing from the home. But the children remembered the many songs she had sung, including this favorite, which became a tribute to Sarah, their own "angel mother":

Oh, I had such a pretty dream, Mama, Such pleasant and beautiful things; Of a dear little nest, in the meadows of rest, Where the birdie her lullaby sings. A dear little stream full of lilies, Crept over the green mossy stones, And just where I lay, its thin sparkling spray Sang sweetly in delicate tones. And as it flowed on toward the ocean, Thro' shadows and pretty sunbeams, Each note grew more deep, and I soon fell asleep, And was off to the Island of Dreams. I saw there a beautiful angel, With crown all bespangled with dew: She touched me and spoke, and I quickly awoke: And found there, dear Mama, 'twas you.

Among the speakers at Sarah's funeral on June 4, 1933, was Elder David O. McKay of the Council of the Twelve Apostles, who had been the mission president of her son, Ezra Taft Benson. He closed his remarks with these words: "With all my heart I say, God bless Brother Benson and those brothers and sisters who mourn. It is something to have known and to have lived with and loved such a noble person."

Sources

Books on the history of southeastern Idaho include Marie Danielsen, comp., The Trail Blazer: History of the Development of Southeastern Idaho (Preston, Idaho: Daughters of the Pioneers, 1930); M. D. Beal, A History of Southeastern Idaho (Caldwell, Idaho: Caxton Printers, 1942); The History of a Valley, Joel Ricks and Everett L. Cooley, eds. (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Publishing Company, 1956); and A. J. Simmonds, "Southeast Idaho as a Pioneer Mormon Safety Valve" Idaho Yesterdays, Winter 1980. We have also profited from using The Face of Rural America, 1976 Yearbook for the United States Department of Agriculture, U.S. Government Printing Office.

Histories of the family include Descendants of the George T. Benson, Jr. Family, privately published and circulated in 1968; Leonard J. Arrington, "Idaho's Benson Family," and "Oral History of Ezra Taft Benson," Idaho Heritage, September 1977; and History of Joseph Dunkley by Richard P. Dunkley and K. Wright Dunkley, copy in the Genealogical Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

We had oral interviews with Lera Benson Whittle, Provo, Utah, March 22, 1986; and Zetta Benson Peterson, Logan, Utah, March 23, 1986.

"Oh, I Had Such A Pretty Dream, Mama" by J. S. Lewis is in Deseret Sunday School Songbook, 184.

We have examined the family group sheets on the Joseph Dunkley family and the George Taft Benson Jr. family in the Genealogical Library, Salt Lake City. Also helpful were the Newell Hart Papers, Marie Eccles Caine Archives, Special Collections, Utah State University Library, Logan, Utah. 1987
