Scott R. Peterson, Richard L. Bednar, Spirituality and Self-Esteem: Developing the Inner Self ( 1990)

Preface

The truth is usually provocative and always potent. Like a wolf exposing its underbelly, it can be soft and warm, unthreatening and pleasant. Yet, when it turns over, baring fangs both sharp and cold, it can be dangerous and unpredictable. Far too many of us have underestimated the power of truth to expose and humiliate as well as to clarify and enlighten. Nevertheless, we all praise truth's virtue. We praise its pursuit. Nothing has been so sought after, fought over, and misunderstood. It is highly valued in political and business arenas and yet is woefully absent in both. We expect it of our children, spouses, and friends. When we don't get it, we are disappointed and hurt. Yet when we do get it, we may be hurt just the same. When it comes to acknowledging our own weaknesses, shortcomings, and fears, this self-same truth is what we so naturally are inclined to deny, distort, and avoid.

How can we be so willing, often so compelled, to avert our eyes from the truth of what we are and wish not to be, a truth that we wish to hide from ourselves and others, a truth that we must recognize before it can no longer be the truth?

In a gospel context, the truth is paramount in our striving for exaltation. Truth "shall make [us] free" (John 8:32). "Truth abideth forever" (D&C 1:39). We look to "the way, the truth, and the life" for eternal guidance and direction (John 14:6).

So, although this book is about spirituality and self-esteem and how they relate to perfecting the internal self, it is also about the pursuit of truth, personal truth—the truth of what we are and what we may become. Our discussions of spirituality and self-esteem focus on the importance of acknowledging the truth about ourselves. The ability to truthfully evaluate one's behavior, motives, and feelings nurtures self-esteem and spirituality.

In both ecclesiastical and professional experiences, we have found that the condition that allows for the most growth is individuals' ability to confront what most they fear about themselves. Yet in a world that not only condones false appearances but demands and thrives on phony outward impressions, it is the exception, not the rule, for its inhabitants to be willing to recognize their own weaknesses for fear that others will as well. The result is a never-ending pursuit of glitz, glamour, and gratification, none of which is capable of bringing the happiness they all so deceptively promise. And so the paradox continues: happiness is sought by covering up the very truth which, if confronted, could bring the happiness so many desperately desire!

In Chapter 1 we talk about society's tendency to perpetuate facades. We see how spirituality and self-esteem are not impervious to this tendency, and we examine the essential elements of both these qualities. In Chapter 2 we define the internal self in relation to our eternal identities. In Chapter 3 we take an in-depth look at spirituality—what it is, as well as what it is not. In Chapter 4 we focus on a model of self-esteem developed by Dr. Bednar and his associates at Brigham Young University. This innovative model asserts that self-evaluation is essential to self-esteem: the process of being aware of, paying attention to, and then evaluating our own behavior. We suggest that self-evaluations will be positive or negative according to our tendency either to consistently cope with what we fear or to consistently avoid it, whether what we fear is a relationship, an important task at work, church, or school, or a characteristic about ourselves that keeps us from becoming the type of person we want to be. In Chapter 5 we discuss the relationship between spirituality and self-esteem and how their development follows the same process on different planes—one being spiritual, and the other, temporal. In Chapters 6 and 7 we describe the steps and the ingredients essential in cultivating spirituality and self-esteem. In Chapter 8 a case study drawn from real life shows the relationship of the internal/eternal self to spirituality and self-esteem.

Throughout the book we rely heavily on stories to illustrate the principles we introduce. We hope they entertain as well as inform. We hope, further, that this book allows you to find the truth about yourself, so that the truth will indeed make you free.
