Scott R. Peterson, Richard L. Bednar, Spirituality and Self-Esteem: Developing the Inner Self ( 1990)

Chapter One

Appearances: Compliance or Conviction?

Out of bed in the morning. Clean up. Look in the full-length mirror. Then in a deep and deliberate voice, repeat your fifty self-affirmations: "I am a good person, I am a confident person, I am a good person, I am a confident person," and so on. You attempt to persuade yourself that you are something better than you believe you really are. This technique is usually called positive self-talk, or something similar. What you call it doesn't really matter. It's a way of trying to feel better, of being more positive in your outlook, and of recognizing your strengths. But can words really do that? Does thinking it, and then saying it, really make it so? It's not like dieting to lose weight or exercising to build muscles. Do words really change things?

That approach to facing difficult problems is a prescription contained in many reputable self-help books. It is founded on one basic assumption: How you think determines how you feel, and what you think is revealed by what you say. If you have a problem with low self-esteem, it's because you have negative self-thoughts. So, the formula asks, do you want to improve your self-image? Then get out of bed in the morning, clean up, stand in front of a full-length mirror, and in a deep and deliberate voice, repeat your fifty self-affirmations: "I am a good person, I am a confident person." And if it looks like it's going to be a tough day, you may want to go through an extra fifteen or twenty.

Can saying it make it happen? Can verbal pretense make it real? It's an interesting thought, and one that has much to recommend it. It's quick, cheap, and easy (maybe that should be enough to make us suspicious). But will it work? That is the real question. Will it create an enduring sense of personal peace and well-being? There is only one way to tell for sure. Go over to the mirror, and in a deep and deliberate voice start saying, "I am a good person, I am a confident person."

Well, how many people do you think actually went to the mirror and tried it? Not many, you say? But why? Because everybody knows intuitively that "saying it" doesn't automatically make it so. Words can eloquently describe reality, but they are not nearly so effective at creating it.

We must ask ourselves, then, why are we so willing to accept simple appearances in place of the real thing? This all too human tendency is as global as it is individual. And the evidence of our short-sighted foolishness is everywhere. Nations are trying to prevent nuclear war while stockpiling the very weapons they say they eschew. The protective ozone layer of our atmosphere and the rain forests of South America have become victims of our highly prized technology and much coveted profits even as we preach environmentalism. Deadly drugs have become the counterfeit substitute for a meaningful life. The foolishness of our own contradictory, self-defeating behavior is both widespread and undeniable.

In our own country we have fared little better. We tend to be more concerned with power and prosperity than with poverty and principle. And more often than not, immediacy and expediency prevail in situations where patience and perseverance are called for. We are suckers for quick profits, cosmetic solutions, and a good time. Why?

Why are we so easily satisfied by immediate gratification, superficial results, and false appearances? Most of us like things the quick and easy way. You know, a pill for pain and cash for class. We live in a world where appearances seem more important than reality, and the difference between appearance and reality is not as clear as it once was. A very successful manufacturer has made a fortune on an advertising campaign for hair coloring, which goes something like this:

A gorgeous blonde with long silky hair is lounging on a white sofa in an opulent living room. In a slow, deep voice she says, "Some people think I'm spoiled!"

There's a long pause, then the camera zooms in for a close-up of her face and hair. "Maybe I am. I use only the best, you know. That's why I use this product. It may cost a little more, but I'm worth it."

The message is clear. If you use the best, you become the best. It's that easy. A quality hair rinse makes you a quality person! We have been exposed to the Madison Avenue mentality for so long now that some of us may actually believe that the sun always shines in Florida, a deep tan is essential for personal happiness, and the style of our clothing reflects the quality of our character. That's what happens when we believe that shallow appearances can meet deeper needs. We like them, we want them, and so we buy them, hoping that our dreams will all come true, when in reality the prospect of such easy purchases becoming happiness is next to nil. We really are suckers for pleasant illusions.

There are probably few of us who have not been fooled and cheated by appearances. That is particularly true of our impressions of others, as well as others' impressions of us. Regrettably but undeniably we live in a world of interpersonal make-believe. Politicians continually insist that they are our advocates, yet they keep getting prosecuted for self-serving fraud. Many of our friends and neighbors appear to be stable, hard-working, and happy, yet in the privacy of their homes they live in conflict, tension, and discontent. In most of our social circles and Christmas-card messages, the predominant theme is family successes, accomplishments, and optimism, even though we may be on the verge of divorce, bankruptcy, and poor health. No one wants to own up to a problem, and almost everyone seems ready to accept a quick fix.

The illusion of prosperity and tranquility is selling well these days. But lurking just beneath its thin veneer are the grinding realities of daily life with its difficult choices, crying children, emotional misunderstandings, and our eager search for personal happiness that is far more elusive than most of us had imagined. Ironically, the very substance of our daily struggles eventually exposes the cheerful but bankrupt illusions to be the hollow frauds they are. Only in our struggles do the benefits of psychological and spiritual well-being come into clear and vivid focus. They will never be found in the emptiness of gilded store fronts and glossed-over season's greetings.

Are we as foolish as we look? Probably so. You see, far too many of us search in the wrong places for what we value the most. We can only wonder why creating worldly appearances and maintaining false impressions receive so much attention when the happiness we seek is to be found only inside ourselves as a result of our own spirituality and self-esteem.

Fundamentals of Successful Living: Spirituality and Self-Esteem

How many times have you been part of a discussion where the questions were asked: "What does it take to be happy in life?" or "What are the ingredients for successful living?" Invariably, you've probably heard people respond using such phrases as "sense of security," "meaningful relationships," "sense of accomplishment," "feelings of self-worth," "relationship with our Heavenly Father," "an understanding of who we are," and so on. Listing them is easy. Understanding and prioritizing them is more difficult. With so many different and desirable ingredients available, we must ask, What are their properties? What proportion of each should we mix and stir together in our recipe for successful living?

Tough questions, you say? We agree. But difficult or not, they must be answered, either by default or deliberation. And in our view, the two most essential elements are authentic spirituality and enduring personal self-esteem—both concepts that are frequently misunderstood and seldom considered to be as attainable as they really are. The cost of such confusion can be high, particularly in a world where the tendency to accept easier alternatives and false substitutions can and does deter us from pursuing a direction that requires greater effort but that promises greater satisfaction. We won't be offering you recipe cards, how-to lists, or quick and easy ways of "getting" spirituality and self-esteem. As you will see, spirituality and self-esteem are not things you "get." They are not acquired like an educational degree or a certificate of merit. Genuine spirituality and self-esteem are rooted in life-long processes that require constant attention and nurturing. Our purpose is to discuss these concepts and their applications to daily living with the simplicity, precision, and care they deserve. To begin to do so, we must first ask what authentic spirituality and self-esteem are, and what role they play in perfecting the internal self.

Spirituality

The first crucial characteristic of authentic spirituality is that it is essentially an internal quality. Obviously, this internal quality regularly influences and motivates outward behavior. But few seem to fully understand that complying with the outward manifestations of spirituality without feeling its internal presence is nothing more than an empty imitation. And, as will be seen shortly, the scriptures are clear on this point. In authentic spirituality, outward behavior is a congruent expression of a healthy internal motive. It is as though persons actually sense the need and value of committing themselves to purposes that transcend their immediate pleasures and personal satisfaction. The motives for spiritual growth are healthy, internal, and reliable. They have little to do with fear, guilt, appearance, or compliance. They are personal, internal, and a reflection of the inner person. They spring from our eternal nature that longs for spiritual fulfillment. These motives tend to be quiet, congruent, strong, and durable when they are carefully cared for. And because of their healthy internal origins, they have more sustaining power when their durability is taxed by the burdens of righteous living. Authentic motives for spiritual growth are as essential to authentic spiritual growth as nutrition is to physical growth.

But what about desirable behavior that is not an expression of healthy internal spiritual motives and intent? There are many such motives, you know, particularly in church-related activities. It is not uncommon for people to attend church for social reasons or to study the scriptures out of a sense of duty, and, in some cases, guilt or fear. People are often gracious to others out of a need to be accepted rather than out of a genuine desire to be kind. How are we to interpret the meaning and value of behavior when such motives prevail? And why are motives so important if they can all lead to the same desirable behavior anyhow? After all, isn't high-quality Christian behavior the real test of spiritual development?

These are all important questions about which the scriptures provide clear and consistent answers. The point is almost always the same: appearances just don't count for much in spiritual domains. External compliance to rules, convention, or custom is not a substitute for internal spiritual strength and sensitivity. And outward behavior that is not an expression of internal development is generally a form of pretending that has few, if any, enduring spiritual benefits. Let us explain and illustrate.

We are all accustomed to being judged by our behavior and performance in our highly competitive western culture. It is quite natural, therefore, to assume that behavior and performance are accurate indicators of spiritual and psychological development and status. And, in some cases, they truly are. But the scriptures emphasize quite another message. Here, the value of the behavior is determined by motive and intent, not by performance and appearance. In other words, the underlying motive for the behavior reveals its authentic meaning and value.

That is hardly a trivial point in the scriptures. Paul's sermon on charity may be the most incisive and dramatic illustration of this fundamental point: "And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and have not charity, it profiteth me nothing" (1 Corinthians 13:3).

We find essentially the same point being made by Nephi and by Moroni:

"Verily, verily, I say that I would that ye should do alms unto the poor; but take heed that ye do not your alms before men to be seen of them; otherwise ye have no reward of your Father who is in heaven. Therefore, when ye shall do your alms do not sound a trumpet before you, as will hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, that they may have glory of men. Verily I say unto you, they have their reward" (3 Nephi 13:1-2).

"For behold, God hath said a man being evil cannot do that which is good; for if he offereth a gift, or prayeth unto God, except he shall do it with real intent it profiteth him nothing. For behold, it is not counted unto him for righteousness. For behold, if a man being evil giveth a gift, he doeth it grudgingly; wherefore it is counted unto him the same as if he had retained the gift; wherefore he is counted evil before God" (Moroni 7:6-8).

A latter-day prophet declared: "Mere compliance with the word of the Lord, without a corresponding inward desire, will avail but little. Indeed, such outward actions and pretending phrases may disclose hypocrisy, a sin that Jesus most vehemently condemned" (David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976], p. 382).

When properly understood, these are sobering and difficult spiritual qualities to master. They leave little doubt about the primacy of motives and intent in understanding righteous behavior and spiritual development. They require a high level of internal spiritual development to be effective.

Further, these provocative and perplexing requirements introduce the possibility that church activity, no matter how successful or productive, might well be considered spiritual hypocrisy when the behavior is not a sincere and congruent expression of internal spiritual motives. These requirements can be confusing and difficult for those who have been meticulously conditioned to recognize spirituality by appearances and performance. But difficult or not, the message is clear. Spiritual growth comes from spiritual sources. The only real solution to questionable personal motives is a broken heart and a contrite spirit, which invite an awakening of our internal capacity for spirituality.

Simply shifting the emphasis from outward behavior to internal motives has monumental implications. Such a shift increases individual responsibility and accountability because no one can understand more about your private motives than you—except, of course, God. You are the one who must learn to act congruently. You are the one who must learn how to alter and improve your motives when you find them to be less than pleasing and acceptable. Overcoming selfishness is no longer a matter of giving more; it is actually wanting to give more. And you are the one who must resolve conflicts between what you are and what you hope to become. This increased personal responsibility and accountability for self-direction creates the possibility of perfecting the internal self, both spiritually and psychologically. This is not the comfortable road that passive people follow or prefer. This is the dynamic road of the spiritually minded who constantly stretch to cultivate and refine the spiritual essence of their internal identity.

Self-Esteem

The importance of self-esteem to emotional well-being is undeniable. Self-esteem is as essential to psychological well-being as the spirit is to spiritual well-being. The degree to which we find a sense of psychological contentment and happiness is largely determined by our level of self-esteem. This point of view has been suggested by prominent Church leaders as well as by psychological research. President Harold B. Lee said: "As I have prayerfully thought of the reasons why one chooses this course which is dramatically described by the prophet Isaiah—when one who has departed from the path which would have given him peace is like the troubled sea, casting up mire and dirt—it seems to me that it all results from the failure of the individual to have self-respect" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1973, p. 4).

Similarly, psychological research has consistently suggested that individuals with low self-esteem are more depressed, more accepting of external influences, and more anxious, and that they possess more characteristics that inhibit creativity, performance, effective interpersonal communications, and conflict resolution than do individuals who have high self-esteem. Low self-esteem is also consistently related to emotional problems, lack of confidence, low initiative, and low expectations for success. There are simply no favorable consequences associated with low self-esteem.

High self-esteem, on the other hand, is related to everything that seems to make us a better person. Individuals with high self-esteem tend to be better adjusted, happier, more successful, more confident, better problem-solvers, and better communicators. The list of benefits goes on and on, but the primary point is obvious. Self-esteem is a highly valued trait that directly and undeniably influences the quality of our lives.

And what exactly is self-esteem? For now, we wish to point out only that self-esteem is an internal sense of well-being. It is quiet, confident, and strong. It is a realistic appreciation of ourselves that is experienced more as a feeling or emotion than as a thought or belief. It is a form of personal internal security that allows us to function more fully, freely, and effectively in almost every facet of our lives. And the benefits of high self-esteem tend to be consistent, regardless of social class, level of achievement, or religious affiliation.

But where does this elusive trait come from? And how can it be cultivated and nourished? Those are controversial topics in psychology. The model of self-esteem we discuss represents a radical departure from the views of most contemporary psychologists. Unlike many psychological theories, it is compatible with the most fundamental tenets of Christian belief generally and of Mormon doctrine specifically. This model of self-esteem was developed by Dr. Richard Bednar and his colleagues at the Comprehensive Clinic at Brigham Young University after twenty years of clinical research and practice. It was published recently by the American Psychological Association in a new academic text entitled Self-Esteem: Paradoxes and Innovations in Clinical Theory and Practice.

Unlike most theorists, who assert that the approval of is one of the prime ingredients of self-esteem, Dr. Bednar and his colleagues suggest that the self-esteem of adults does not depend on the approval or praise of others. Rather, as adults we regularly notice what we do, how we feel, and how we feel about what we do. Our own feelings about our behavior are the substance from which our self-esteem either grows or withers. High self-esteem and low self-esteem are not the result of how others see us. Rather, they are a result of how we see ourselves. The quality of character we see in ourselves, particularly when we are confronted with problems we would prefer to avoid, determines our level of self-esteem.

Like spirituality, self-esteem is by nature internal. Although certain behaviors are often attributed to high self-esteem, self-esteem cannot be measured by outward appearances. Therein lies the critical trap. We all too readily assume that external behaviors, possessions, or praise will either produce or reflect high self-esteem, something that only the internal process of self-approval can produce, measure, and acknowledge.

The Internal Self

Even though it may not appear obvious, we each have an internal self that is often distinctly different from our public self. This internal self does not have any known physical attributes, but its influence on our lives can be substantial, both spiritually and psychologically.

The internal self is composed of two primary ingredients. The first is psychological and is called our self-concept. Our self-concept is made up of our enduring attitudes and thoughts about ourselves. It is, literally, what we perceive ourselves to be. Its content can range from confident to awkward, from capable to clumsy. It embraces all facets of our make-up and can be quite complex. If you can get your spouse or your children to start talking openly and candidly about how they really see themselves, they are telling you about their self-concept. Such a conversation would probably cover such topics as talents, limitations, fears, values, attitudes, and expectations. Self-esteem, or the regard we have for ourselves, is simply one important dimension of our self-concept. The accuracy with which we perceive ourselves is usually considered to be a good indicator of psychological adjustment. Generally speaking, the more fully and accurately we perceive the full range of events that compose our self-concept, the better adjusted we are.

From a Latter-day Saint point of view, however, there is more to the internal self than just psychological attributes and perceptions. We also have an eternal spiritual identity. Our eternal identity is everlasting and consists of an element that was never created (intelligence), combined with a part that was spiritually created by our Father in Heaven. It is important to remember that our eternal identity is unique and separate from any other in the universe, that it is essentially spiritual in nature, and that this identity existed before we were born and accompanied us into mortality. It probably has strong leanings and dispositions to favor light and truth, seek spiritual companionship, and avoid evil—at least for most of us.

Obviously, we consider spirituality and self-esteem to be the most essential dimensions of our internal well-being. They both require constant care and attention. We are, after all, living both a spiritual and a secular life. It is essential, therefore, that we be able to understand and develop ourselves in both secular and spiritual terms.

Spirituality and self-esteem share many common qualities. Both enhance our eternal capacity to love others as well as ourselves, which is one of the highest levels of human functioning. Both contribute to our internal sense of personal well-being and the eventual fulfillment of our innate potential. And perhaps most important, both are essential for us to be self-directing and self-governing.

In this book we explore both the myths and the realities of authentic and enduring spirituality and self-esteem. In the process we raise intriguing questions for your consideration. Your answers to those questions can make important differences in how you choose to live your life. Therefore, we try to discuss the relationship between spirituality and self-esteem with considerable care and precision. We also explore the concept of internal/eternal identity as it plays a major role in developing both spirituality and self-esteem. In discussing these topics, we probably challenge a number of private beliefs about self-esteem and spirituality. Many believe, for example, that high self-esteem is spiritually dangerous because it implies a lack of humility. In spite of the delicacy of some of the questions we discuss, we are anxious to share our views for one very important reason: they are different, and therein lies their value. This difference requires you to think about our views and understand them before accepting or rejecting them. A reflexive response based on similarity to, or difference from, prior experiences simply won't do.

Ultimately, we suggest that self-esteem and spirituality influence successful living more than any other factors. They are the "manna" of our psychological and spiritual existence during our mortal lives. They are the sum and substance of the internal man, which must be nurtured and perfected if we are to overcome the natural man within us and the corruption that surrounds us. Self-esteem and spirituality are the path of self-reliance and internal strength in governing our lives during our mortal experiences. We focus on the realities and difficulties of everyday life in cultivating spirituality and self-esteem, and we hope the reader finds our thesis clear and consistent. Successful living is successful struggling. Our own highly individualized responses to struggles—both spiritually and psychologically—teach us what we are and how to think about ourselves. This book, then, is about successful struggling, the kind of struggling that leads to high levels of spirituality and self-esteem, the two most important ingredients in perfecting the internal self.

We do not mean to imply, however, that we consider spirituality and self-esteem to be the same thing. Nothing could be further from the truth. They are distinctly separate and unique dimensions of our mortal experiences. But, paradoxically, they both seem to be influenced by remarkably similar underlying developmental processes. We explain this fascinating similarity more fully later. Before that, however, we need to provide a more complete discussion of the origins and meaning of spirituality, self-esteem, and the eternal identity. We continually emphasize truly cultivating the internal self, both spiritually and psychologically, and show the general bankruptcy of simply trying to imitate the outward manifestations of these cherished internal qualities.
