Scott R. Peterson, Richard L. Bednar, Spirituality and Self-Esteem: Developing the Inner Self ( 1990)

Chapter Two

The Eternal Self

The concepts we are about to discuss have far-reaching implications in spite of their simplicity and directness. You see, we suggest that our eternal identity is, when properly understood, a most influential determinant of both secular and spiritual behavior. At this very moment, you are being influenced by an enduring identity that started before your mortal existence and will continue as part of you throughout your eternal existence. This internal/eternal identity is as active and alive as you are. It influences your thoughts, feelings, and perceptions. It influences everything, from how you read this book to your general disposition toward good and evil. It is not just an important part of you; it may actually be the essence of you. Learning to recognize and respond to this part of ourselves is essential to our developing both spirituality and self-esteem.

There can be little doubt that we existed prior to mortality. Many scriptures attest to this fact. The more revealing ones include Abraham 3:22-23, wherein the Lord showed Abraham "the intelligences that were organized before the world was; and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones; . . . for he stood among those that were spirits, and he saw that they were good; and he said unto me: Abraham, thou art one of them, thou wast chosen before thou wast born." In Doctrine and Covenants 49:17 the Lord discusses man's "creation before the world was made." And in Doctrine and Covenants 93:29 the Lord says, "Man was also in the beginning with God."

The message of these scriptures is clear. We all existed before we came to this earthly estate. We can also infer that there were important differences between us in that premortal existence. Abraham recognized these differences by noting that some spirits were noble and great, implying, by contrast, that there were others of lesser stature. And there is probably no more dramatic a manifestation of differences between spiritual temperaments and dispositions than a third of the hosts of heaven choosing not to follow the Savior. Bearing all this in mind, we assume that we are eternal in nature and that we were unique and different from one another in the premortal existence, just as we are unique and different from one other in mortality.

Joseph Fielding Smith gave us a concise definition of our eternal identity: "There is something called intelligence which always existed. It is the real eternal part of man, which was not created or made. This intelligence combined with the spirit constitutes the spiritual identity or individual" (The Progress of Man [Salt Lake City: Genealogical Society of Utah, 1936], p. 11; emphasis added).

Our eternal identity consists of an element that was never created (intelligence) combined with a part that was spiritually created by our Heavenly Father (spirit). These two parts compose our eternal identity, which existed before we were born and accompanied us into mortality. Our eternal identity is separate and apart, distinct and different, from any other eternal identity. It contributes to our earthly personality and is influenced by earthly experiences. It is also the enduring, fundamental self that can transcend circumstance, culture, race, genetics, or other temporal and temporary influences. It is the internal essence of what we are and of what we may become.

The concept of eternal identity is simple enough. At the core of our eternal being are dispositions and attributes that influence all we do and may even define who we are. They are certainly the source of much of our spirituality and self-esteem. The powerful implications for the development of spirituality and self-esteem that flow from this highly personalized view of man are rarely examined or understood. You see, fundamentally these implications suggest that we should turn inward to find enduring spirituality and self-esteem. Yet we live in a society that relentlessly teaches, reinforces, and occasionally demands compliance with external forces. Most of us are taught how important it is to appear appropriately calm, interested, or humble in the required way, even when we actually feel agitated, bored, or angry. But few of us are taught to turn inward to find and express our more authentic and enduring thoughts and feelings, some of which are at least partial expressions of our eternal identity.

There is a continual struggle between the internal and external influences that provide direction to our lives. Although we may wish it were not so, the evidence is undeniable that we are living in the age of the twentieth-century rational man. Computer technology, data analysis, and the underlying mentality that gives rise to sophisticated decision-making procedures prevail in all of our lives. Please don't misunderstand us on this point. We are not anti-technology. In fact, the manuscript of this book was written on an IBM computer, and we are grateful to have it. It's marvelous. But as technological sophistication increases, we suggest, it becomes progressively more difficult for us to turn inward with humility and simple faith and then respond to feelings (which can be hard to discern or understand in logical terms) when we are trying to solve complex problems. Yet that is precisely the role and function of spirituality in our lives, particularly on matters that transcend our mortal understanding. There is only one acceptable theological solution to this problem: to so perfect the internal self, the receiver and amplifier of spiritual guidance, so that we develop more faith in our capacity for spiritual guidance than in the technology that surrounds us. Cultivating and developing our internal/eternal identity is spiritual growth and development.

Alienating the Internal/Eternal Self: The Dangers of Imitation

There are many ways we can alienate ourselves from the influence of our internal/eternal identity. One of them is particularly subtle and dangerous because we live in a world of powerful external social influences and incentives. As children we are carefully tutored in the art of being socially appropriate, socially acceptable, and gaining the approval of others, particularly our parents. Generally speaking, we are taught to gain this approval by learning how to please—to imitate what we think others most want us to be. Examples of this process are numerous. It's the high-performing high school athlete or straight-A student eager for the approving smile of a loving mom or dad. In later years, it's the thriving young executive who imitates corporate leaders in dress, speech, and values because these are seen as essential ingredients for a successful career.

All of these socialization processes are perfectly natural and healthy unless they are overdone. Then they become quite dangerous. You see, elements in the process of learning to please others are the very elements that, when abused, help create two significant barriers to successful living:

Neither of these two conditions can foster the development of our temporal or eternal well-being. Yet the practice of surrendering the direction of our lives to influences external to ourselves has become so accepted that we barely even notice how willing we are to do so. And the damage we do is frightening as soon as we start noticing its effects. Our sensitivity to what is truly inside of us is gradually eroded away and replaced by a willingness to be what will bring us the rewards and approval of the culture that surrounds us. As the "public" self grows stronger, the "private" self withers away. Under these conditions both children and adults are most easily moved by the winds of fickle fads, fashions, and friends. External appearances compete with internal substance and external influences clash with internal influences in shaping and developing both our secular and our spiritual identities.

Enduring happiness and contentment can come only from attending to the internal/eternal identity and fostering it. That identity is the self that is in tune with what we were before the world was and what we can be after the world passes away. That unique self will flourish when spirituality and self-esteem are nurtured. Under those conditions, external behavior becomes the spontaneous expression of our internal/eternal nature.

Of course, the question of paramount concern is how to increase our awareness of our internal/eternal nature while living in a world that is so externally oriented. In the context of internal authenticity, self-approval rings synonymous with approval from the Lord when our thoughts and actions are motivated by our Christlike inclinations. Long gone is the influence of such mortal-pleasing motives as those of the scribes and Pharisees, who were "like unto whited sepulchres, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are within full of dead men's bones, and of all uncleanness" (Matthew 23:27).
