Scott R. Peterson, Richard L. Bednar, Spirituality and Self-Esteem: Developing the Inner Self ( 1990)

Chapter Three

Spirituality: What It Is, Where It Comes From, and What It Does

Confusion between external appearances and internal substance is everywhere, even in some of our most cherished ideas about spirituality and self-esteem. The challenge before us is to discriminate carefully between enduring inward spirituality and self-esteem and their imitative outward forms. As you might guess, distinguishing between them can be difficult. Spirituality and self-esteem are such highly prized qualities that we unwittingly imitate their outward appearance in hopes of gaining the happiness that only their internal presence can provide. So, although the external appearance of spirituality or self-esteem may look the same as its internal substance, it is not the same. To resist the attractive allure of hollow imitations, we must accurately understand what the essential properties of spirituality and self-esteem are and why we are so easily influenced by external appearances.

The presence of such internal substance as spirituality and self-esteem is usually inferred from such external behavior as attending church, paying tithes, or appearing self-confident. There is an almost reflexive tendency to consider spirituality to be attending church or paying tithes, and to consider self-esteem to be appearing self-confident. In fact, "too often we think of the spiritual life as something that can be had, an invisible equivalent to our material possessions. We think of . . . spiritual practices like meditation as "techniques" that stamp out saints like an assembly line produces shoes" (Robert Ellwood, "The Paradox of the Pathless Path," American Theosophist, 15 Nov. 1987, vol. 75, no. 10).

But all spiritual behaviors are not necessarily an expression of a charitable heart or of self-esteem. Remember, what we see people do does not necessarily indicate why they do it. The very same positive behavior of paying tithes can be prompted by many different motives, which can be either positive or negative—humility and gratitude, or fear and guilt. To truly recognize spirituality and self-esteem, then, we must take more notice of their private, internal manifestations while recognizing external behavior as a natural by-product of these essential traits—as they were always intended to be.

For example, a speaker stands at the pulpit, smiling as the congregation laughs at his clever joke. He proceeds in a deep and convincing voice to expound on various doctrines. He concludes with great sincerity and conviction. After the meeting, people shake his hand, complimenting him for a highly motivating talk from someone who is obviously self-assured and spiritual. As he leaves the chapel, he says to himself, "I followed my script. I made them laugh. I spoke in my deepest voice. I tried to look sincere. People seemed convinced. I must have given a good talk."

Would you rate this person high on spirituality or self-esteem? He certainly filled his assignment well. But our observations tell us more about his competence as an orator than about his spirituality or his self-esteem. What do you think? Is he high in spirituality or self-esteem?

Actually, he may well rate low in both qualities. We suggest that his spirituality is in doubt because he lacks humility and simple authenticity in his delivery. He gave a good performance, but genuine spirituality can seldom be packaged in a well-rehearsed delivery.

His self-esteem is equally doubtful. Even though he is singing his own praises to himself, his self-approval is intimately linked to the approval he receives from others. How much one needs the approval of others is a most revealing indicator of low self-esteem. This speaker, like so many of us, played the part of someone with high self-esteem as a means of defending against his very lack of it.

The congregation saw the typical trappings of assumed spirituality and high self-esteem: inspiring phrases, poignant pauses, self-assurance, quick wit, forceful voice, and so forth. In this case, however, the trappings do not represent the real thing. Instead, the behavior was like the wrapping paper on a present. Even though we call a brightly wrapped box a present, it really is not. The present is inside the box. (If you think we're splitting hairs, try convincing your children next Christmas that the colorful box with the shiny bow is their present, even though it's empty!) In the same way, our speaker hoped to become someone with spirituality and high self-esteem by wrapping himself up in the pretty paper and beautiful bows of spiritual, self-assured behavior, when in fact his character was empty.

What Is Spirituality?

Before we can discuss spirituality, we need to have a shared understanding of what it is. Fortunately, the scriptures provide us a clear picture. Elder Dallin H. Oaks notes the consistency with which the scriptures refer to the heart when discussing or portraying spirituality. The heart, as we shall see, is a metaphor representing the capacity to sense and then respond to the spiritual dimension that surrounds and pervades our mortal existence. Elder Oaks cites several examples of the heart representing spirituality (see Pure in Heart [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1988], pp. 114-15):

When the heart, or our spiritual nature, is hardened or ignored, our sensitivity to discern and understand spiritual things is crippled. When the heart is softened or changed, our ability to recognize eternal truth and its source is enhanced, and we humbly acknowledge and worship that source. The heart, or spirituality, defines the righteous soul and the spiritual essence of our eternal identity.

From this discussion, we can conclude some things about, first, what spirituality is not, and, then, about what spirituality is.

What Spirituality Is NOT

Even though spirituality is something we are aware of and can think about, it is NOT merely an idea, a concept, or a thought.

Even though spirituality has many behavioral manifestations, spirituality is NOT simply the behaviors that are frequently associated with righteous living.

Even though spirituality is something we experience primarily through our emotions, it is NOT just a feeling or an emotion in the world's meaning.

What Spirituality IS

Spirituality IS our capacity to experience, understand, and respond to the spiritual dimension of life that surrounds us.

Spirituality IS experiencing God's divine nature and, as a result of that experience, finding our sensitivity to and our capacity for love, charity, and compassion are increased beyond natural capacity.

Spirituality IS sensitivity to the promptings of the Holy Ghost, which guide and direct our lives toward spiritual purposes that transcend the wisdom of the natural man.

Spirituality IS the direct expression of our spiritual nature (eternal identity) as we gradually immunize ourselves against the sin and corruption of the natural world we live in.

Spirituality is not a secular event, even though it takes place in a secular world. Regrettably, however, secular and spiritual events are often confused with each other. That is not surprising. Spiritual events always occur in a secular context. That is why it is so easy to confuse authentic spiritual experiences with the behavior that most frequently occurs with them. The presence of intense emotions provides a good example. Weeping frequently accompanies such spiritual events as the bearing of testimonies. The weeping itself is not a spiritual event. Nevertheless, because it is such a typical reaction to spiritual manifestations, many people confuse the two. But the tears are not the testimony.

This point is extremely important. Often we suppose that an authentic spiritual experience is taking place when we see the outward secular rituals that accompany it. For instance, many will say that daily scripture reading is a spiritual activity. Actually, it is a secular activity that may or may not yield spiritual benefits. An obsessive ritual of daily scripture reading to satisfy a handbook of instructions for righteous living is not likely to be performed in a spirit that invites the Spirit. But reading the scriptures daily while humbly recognizing the need for spiritual sustenance and working patiently for spiritual improvement is another matter entirely. That is not an empty ritual. And for precisely that reason, the secular activity of reading the scriptures may be blessed by the presence of the Spirit. Truman Madsen eloquently describes such spiritual events (note how each is by no means a description of an outward behavior):

"Prayer flashes, when our words outreach thought and we seem to be listening above ourselves, completely at home while we are surprised at hints of hidden spirit memories within.

"Familiarity of persons, immediate luminous rapport—this face or that gesture or motion—that elicits the sense of recall, a premortal intimacy, especially in the environs of teaching and being taught.

"Haunting sensations, usually visual, sometimes auditory, of a landscape of life or a bitter predicament in the soul, that call up simultaneous feelings of 'again' and 'for the first time'; like being thrust, as leading actor, into the last act of a play without knowing, and yet almost knowing, what occurred in the first two.

"Numbing protests from below sometimes of unrelievable urgency or guilt, that are ruthless in unmasking our pretense. These are not simply the yeas or nays of 'conscience' about acts, but bell sounds of a whole self that will not be muffled, that ring with presentiments, thrusting us toward ends that seem tied to an elusive but white-lighted blueprint inside.

"Shades of consciousness that occur just at awakening or just before sleep, unpredictably impressing while they express, in images or silent words or free association. By the sanctity of their feeling-tone, these are different than our usual helter-skelter menagerie of thought.

"Dreams and illusions that seem not to be mere dreams or mere illusions, catching us quite off-guard and lingering in their after-effect, as if life were a game of internal hide-the-thimble and we were 'getting warm' to our own potential.

"Unaccountable reverberations (e.g. in tear-filled eye or tingling throat or spine) from a phrase or sentiment (which, for the speaker or writer may be merely parenthetical), or from a strain of music, or some trivial stimulus in the midst of drudgery, bearing a holy atmosphere of spontaneous and total recognition.

"Reflection of our faces in the mirror when we look in and not just at, our eyes. As if light were coming to the surface, and a curious recovery, and even awe, of the self occurs. There lurks an autobiography, a soul-story that is foreign, yet intimate, unfolding a more-than-I-thought-I-was.

"Right-track feelings, the sense of the foreordained, like emerging from a fever to find that roughshod or happenstance trials have been presided over by some uncanny instinctual self who knows what he is about. Just before or just after turning a crucial corner, this someone nearer than you, that is you, holds a quiet celebration that injects peace into the marrow of the bones.

"Such flashes and drives are tied to the whole gamut of complex mental life and may have neat and utterly mundane naturalistic explanations (such as the chemistry of the occipital lobe). Yet the joy that comes from these uprisings, rooted, as they seem to be, in some more primal creative being and that, in turn, in God, supersedes any of the pleasures of human possession or external manipulation" (Eternal Man [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1966], pp. 75-76).

Origins of Spirituality

Humility is a concept that plays an essential role in the origins of spirituality. Naturally, there are other important considerations, but the scriptures are clear and consistent on two points regarding humility and spirituality. First, the absence of humility virtually precludes the development of spirituality. And, second, the presence of humility is essential for spiritual growth.

We find in Alma 32 what could well be the most penetrating discussion of faith and its development in the standard works. This chapter gives us the blueprint for developing spirituality. The role of humility in that process is paramount. Alma preaches to the poor and afflicted who were cast out of their own synagogues because of their extreme poverty. When Alma sees that the people are penitent and that their afflictions have truly humbled them, he explains: "It is because that ye are cast out, that ye are despised of your brethren because of your exceeding poverty, that ye are brought to a lowliness of heart; for ye are necessarily brought to be humble. And now, because ye are compelled to be humble blessed are ye; for a man sometimes, if he is compelled to be humble, seeketh repentance. . . . Yea, he that truly humbleth himself, and repenteth of his sins, and endureth to the end, the same shall be blessed" (Alma 32:12-13, 15).

We can find at least three important points in Alma's words:

The message could not be clearer: humility is essential to spiritual growth. And though many different factors may contribute to humility, two of the more important ones are spiritual knowledge and understanding and afflictions and hardship.

We can only speculate about why humility seems to pose such a difficult problem for most of us during our mortal existence. Maybe it's just a hard attribute to cultivate in a well-educated and affluent society. The scriptures certainly suggest that the wealthy and the well-educated are likely to have a difficult time with humility. But most of us understand that in this life we are expected to learn how to discern good from evil and respond to them correctly. Perhaps our individual struggle with pride and humility is one of the better indicators of just how well we are doing at discerning and responding to good and evil in our own lives.

The essence of pride is self-aggrandizement, a condition that could not be more irrelevant to the task of preparing ourselves to be with Deity. Nothing else distracts us more completely from becoming like our Heavenly Father. Satan wanted to rule over us in a self-aggrandizing way, but Christ wanted to serve us. In so doing, He shunned short-term self-interests in favor of the long-term selfless act of atoning for the sins of all mankind. And during that atonement, at the moment of his greatest anguish, the humble heart of our Savior was evident in his contrite words, "Not my will, but thine, be done" (Luke 22:42). Pride was not there, nor could it have been. It is this attribute of humility that we must seek after and acquire.

Clearly, we know more about the consequences of pride than we know of its origin. Those consequences could not be more sobering. For example, the scriptures teach us that in the last days when the earth is cleansed by burning, the proud shall be as stubble (see 3 Nephi 25:1; D&C 29:9; D&C 64:24). The Lord has specifically warned his servants: "Beware of pride, lest thou shouldst enter into temptation" (D&C 23:1) and "thou shalt not be proud in thy heart" (D&C 42:40).

The rewards for humility are equally clear and profound. Two compelling examples are in the Doctrine and Covenants. "Inasmuch as you strip yourselves from jealousies and fears, and humble yourselves before me, . . . the veil shall be rent and you shall see me and know that I am—not with the carnal neither natural mind, but with the spiritual" (D&C 67:10). "My Spirit is sent forth into the world to enlighten the humble and contrite, and to the condemnation of the ungodly" (D&C 136:33).

The Lord wishes us to free ourselves from the myopic concerns of personal pride. The reasons are obvious. We must each undergo an internally motivated cleansing, in which we recognize our pride and choose to expunge it from our soul. When this task has proven too difficult for some of his people, the Lord has given them external motivation to more fully understand their vulnerability and their ultimate lack of self-sufficiency. Afflictions and hardships are not conditions in which pride is most likely to thrive.

Surely it would be difficult to underplay the importance of humility in the development of spirituality. Genuine humility is the outward expression of the internal state of the soul. Its essence is gratitude and appreciation for Deity's benevolent care and concern for us. That's the internal part. Its external manifestations will include our benevolent care and concern for others. Such activities manifest the spiritual essence of our eternal identity, which is most fully liberated by humility in the otherwise natural man.

Please notice carefully, however, that neither spirituality nor humility is behavior that is motivated by social customs, conformity, seeking the approval of others, or pretending to be better than we actually are. Humility and its resulting spirituality are internal events whose real qualities cannot be imitated, even though its outward appearances can.

Consequences of Spirituality

We may have become so accustomed to hearing the profound concepts and doctrines that teach us the consequences of spirituality that we have forgotten their deep meaning. They tell us that the development of spirituality is the most noble aspiration of human experience. And, as it develops, its consequences will be equally noble. Spirituality is an inner framework through which we view life, value life, and live life. To the spiritually minded, the meaning and value of daily activities are found through the enlarged perspective of spiritual understanding. Paul's letter to the Romans makes this clear:

"For they that are after the flesh do mind the things of the flesh; but they that are after the Spirit the things of the Spirit. For to be carnally minded is death; but to be spiritually minded is life and peace" (Romans 8:5-6).

Authentic spirituality is a sharp blade that cuts incisively into the resistant fabric of secular views and values. The importance of accomplishments and possessions starts to fade when we come to spiritually understand our Savior, the Atonement, and the underlying purpose of life. Tithes are paid out of a deep understanding of the purpose of the Lord's kingdom and a firm commitment to building it. The opportunity to "share" and "serve" is gratefully accepted instead of begrudgingly endured. Tolerance for others increases naturally as the spiritual heart melts away the emotional scars of unfulfilled living and personal frustration. Authentic spirituality inevitably becomes the prime determinant of priorities and choices. What we "want" to do becomes what we "ought" to do. Self-coercion is no longer necessary. Choices become an automatic and natural extension of what we experience and understand spiritually.

Because spirituality is internal, it cannot be seen. Nevertheless, we can see many of its influences. Authentic spirituality shows in our words, our attitudes, and our behaviors. But unlike false appearances of spirituality, all of these indicators actually are more Christlike because the behavior is now rooted in genuine spiritual motives.
