Scott R. Peterson, Richard L. Bednar, Spirituality and Self-Esteem: Developing the Inner Self ( 1990)

Chapter Five

Integrating Spirituality and Self-Esteem

Integrating spirituality and self-esteem into patterns of successful living is an all-important consideration. Our approach focuses on the developmental processes the two share. We believe that if you get the big pieces of a puzzle in place first, then the little ones, which are at times the most difficult and cumbersome to work with, will also fall into place. So, too, in integrating spirituality and self-esteem. When the large pieces, with their similarities and their differences, are known and established, it is much easier to recognize the smaller pieces by instinct and natural inclination.

We consider spirituality and self-esteem to be the biggest pieces of a successful life. It is easy to see why spirituality is a big piece. Our very nature is spiritual. Even in this temporal world, the Lord has told us, all his laws are spiritual. Our purpose for coming to earth is ultimately spiritual. Therefore, spirituality must be taken into account in attempting to understand what constitutes successful living. Remember, spirituality means the capacity to experience, understand, and respond to the promptings of the Holy Ghost as well as to directly experience or understand God's divine nature. So, although spirituality can exist in a secular world, it is by no means a secular phenomenon. Without spirituality, there can be no real happiness in a secular world, only the temporary pleasures of the natural man. Successful living is spiritual living.

It may not be as easy to see why we think self-esteem is a large piece of the successful life. We use the term self-esteem to mean an internal sense of personal well-being. A psychological theory of self-esteem that is compatible with the fundamental elements of Latter-day Saint doctrine suggests that self-esteem is a result of an internal self-evaluative process. According to that view, the more we attempt to cope with difficult problems in our lives, the more self-esteem we will develop. Inherent in the very act of coping with difficult problems are behavior patterns that please humans in spite of their difficulty. Those desirable behavior patterns produce favorable self-evaluations and contribute to our self-esteem and personal growth and development. On the other hand, psychological avoidance, which is an attempt to strategically retreat from problems we don't care to face, is an inherently inadequate response to personal conflict. Avoidance responses create negative self-evaluations, low self-esteem, and impaired personal growth and development. In the final analysis, then, our level of self-esteem is determined by the quality of character we observe in ourselves when we face problems and situations we would prefer to avoid.

But what can self-esteem contribute to successful living that spirituality does not? Why do we give it such preeminent consideration? We have three primary reasons for considering self-esteem so seriously:

Spirituality and self-esteem both require self-approving behavior in order to reside within us. We cannot have a high level of spirituality or a high level of self-esteem when we behave in ways we do not approve of. Self-approval depends on humility in a spiritual plane and on coping in a secular one. Both humility and coping are cultivated through our acting congruently with our internal/eternal identity, that part of us that lived with God and learned the difference between right and wrong. Our eternal identity resonates to all that is good and shrinks from all that is bad. Even as it chose the Savior's plan in the premortal existence, so too can it direct our choices now. In that way, self-approval results from heeding that part of ourselves that receives truth directly from its eternal source. There is no greater self-approval than the self-approval that comes from doing what we know is pleasing to the Lord.

Coping results from attending to our internal self in a secular world. If we allow our internal selves to be the prime source of our external self-expression, how we behave on the outside is congruent with what we think and feel on the inside. They become one and the same. In that manner we are true to ourselves. And regardless of the difficulty, such self-honesty is a coping response that generates a great deal of self-approval. Self-approval, in turn, strengthens self-esteem. When we are proud or avoidant, we behave contrary to our internal/eternal identity. That behavior inevitably results in self-disapproval and an absence of spirituality and self-esteem.

We must acknowledge that there are certainly many individuals in this natural world who display little spirituality and at the same time display an abundance of self-esteem. That can happen because self-esteem is a secular occurrence and spirituality is not, although self-approval remains the essential process for both. Thus we can have high self-esteem and low spirituality, but we cannot have high spirituality and low self-esteem. Where humility prevails and the individual is in tune with the Spirit of the Lord, high self-approval and, consequently, high self-esteem will always prevail, regardless of any other mortal condition:

Successful living, then, entails cultivating our internal/eternal identity. Success comes when the internal/eternal self is sufficiently unencumbered by mortal foibles so that spirituality and self-esteem manifest themselves both in our behavior and in the spiritual and psychological well-being they create inside us.

Similarities between Spirituality and Self-Esteem

At first it might seem incongruous to suggest that spirituality and self-esteem share many important developmental processes. After all, spirituality is a theological concept and self-esteem is a secular concept. But let's look at it another way. If spirituality were an apple and self-esteem a banana, anyone could see that they are different. Their color, shape, and size bear no resemblance. Were we to cut them open, their differences would be even more apparent. If we were to look at the processes underlying the development of these fruits, however, we would see striking similarities. Both apples and bananas grow from seeds, which produce plants, which, in turn, produce blossoms and then fruit. Soil, water, and sunlight are necessary for both to grow. Apparently, then, different fruits go through similar developmental processes.

In themselves, self-esteem and spirituality have little in common. Self-esteem consists of characteristics and attributes that create a sense of psychological well-being. Spirituality, on the other hand, transcends the psychological and satisfies our longing for spiritual sustenance, something self-esteem cannot do. Nevertheless, if we compare the developmental processes that lead to spirituality and self-esteem, we find similarities that are important, substantive, and even remarkable.

On the following page are four different sets of psychological and spiritual processes and attributes that are associated with self-affirming and self-defeating experiences.

______________________Psychological_______Spiritual______

Self-Affirming Coping Humility

Experiences Introspection Charity

Reality testing Gratitude

Insight Teachableness

Honesty Spirituality

____________________________________________________

Self-Defeating Avoidance Pride

Experiences Fear Selfishness

Denial Self-Aggrandizement

Distortion Self-Centeredness

Rationalization Self-Servingness

Coping

The process of psychological coping is based on one basic assumption: coping requires that imperfections in the self are openly and candidly acknowledged, at least to ourselves. That's right. No illusions or false beliefs are allowed. Effective coping results in our childish and immature wishes being set aside and replaced by a more mature and realistic understanding of ourselves and the world we live in. The instant we fully recognize and understand our personal faults, our possibilities for personal growth begin. Coping is the path of—

Introspection: examining what we are thinking and feeling about ourselves and about what goes on around us.

Reality testing: questioning the accuracy and completeness of our thoughts, feelings, and understanding of ourselves and what goes on around us.

Insight: learning from introspection and reality testing things that are true and undeniable about ourselves.

Personal honesty: acknowledging and accepting responsibility for what we have learned about ourselves and showing a willingness to do something about it.

All these are attributes that when properly exercised provide each of us with a deep personal knowledge of our capacity for highly effective and successful living. The following example illustrates the process of coping and the nature of its self-affirming consequences:

It had just slipped out. Again! The little word that she didn't mean to say but couldn't stop herself from saying every time someone asked her to do something: "yes." A most willing word—positive, helpful, and friendly. For Jan, though, it had become a tyrannical little monster that sank its sharklike teeth into every request thrown in her direction. Throw a bridal shower for a second cousin on your husband's side? "Why, yes." Bake seventeen dozen dream bars for the three-stake yodeling contest? "Yes, of course I will." Feed your schizophrenic Siamese cat while you vacation in Hawaii for three weeks? "Yes, thanks for asking." "Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes."

The word rolled off her tongue before her brain even knew it was gone. She didn't really want to say yes. She knew that most of the time she shouldn't have said yes. She'd push herself to do more than she could handle, and then, in a frantic bid to be everything to everybody, she'd wind up being less than what she wanted to be to herself. Oh sure, she could tell when she was genuinely needed, when her talents couldn't easily be replaced by someone else's. The times she cringed were when she agreed to do something that anybody in the civilized world could have done just as easily and just as well. It was when she did a poor job because she had spread herself too thin or when she ignored her family's needs in order to meet less important obligations that she mentally kicked herself. Apart from a thank-you for being so "special," the only thing she could count on getting was a tension headache.

Her husband was a big help. "Just say no," he'd bellow. "Just . . . say no," she'd think. "Easy for him to say." Whenever the quorum presidency called him with an assignment he didn't want to do, he never said yes. He'd lie, instead. "Gee, Bill, that sounds great. I'd really like to be there but, um . . . I've got a vacuum cleaner convention that same day at the exact same hour. Isn't that a coincidence!"

This time, when she hung up the phone after accepting another makework assignment, Jan really asked herself why didn't she just say no? Her first line of reasoning was as faulty as it was fault-finding. She blamed everybody else. If everybody wasn't so inconsiderate, she wouldn't have this problem. If they didn't ask, she wouldn't have to say yes! It was their fault. . . . Then she came to her senses and to the realization that there was really nobody to blame but herself. She knew why she never said no. And it wasn't very pretty. Somewhere along the line, dutifully accepting assignments and being of genuine service to others had turned into never, ever saying no. If you did, it meant you were a bad person and nobody would like you. The opposite was equally true: if you said yes, it meant you were a good person and everybody would like you.

So Jan learned to say yes. All the time. That way, everybody would like her all the time. Her desire to serve others had been replaced by a desire to be liked by others. Slowly but surely in her bid to win others' acceptance, she found that she had lost her own. To gain it back, she knew exactly what she had to do, and the thought just about killed her.

Two days later the phone rang. "Mom, it's for you!" her daughter yelled from the kitchen. Jan picked up the receiver. It was Selma Wilson. She needed two hundred envelopes stuffed with invitations to the PTA banquet. The little word with the nasty teeth went tearing toward its prey. "Why, y . . . ," Jan began, suddenly pausing to mentally grab the "yes" monster and chain it down. "Selma," Jan began again, hesitantly, "that's an awful lot of envelopes for one person. Have you tried contacting Jim Davis about using the Scout troop? I bet they'd help you as a service project. I appreciate your thinking about me, but I won't be able to give you a hand this time."

The conversation ended. Jan was still breathing. The universe had not ceased to exist. Selma still liked her. As a matter of fact, Selma appreciated her suggestion. But more than anything, when she hung up the phone, Jan liked herself. She liked saying what she meant. Oh, it was frightening. It was awkward. But in spite of the quiver in her voice and the butterflies in her stomach, it was also satisfying. And she didn't have a headache.

There is certainly nothing earth-shattering about coping in this instance. But the accumulation of such small, typical experiences ultimately creates a lasting, enduring sense of self-approval. How did Jan cope?

Jan finally had to stop and ask herself why she was feeling so miserable. That required introspection. She had to ask herself, "Why don't I just say no?" She had to examine her own thoughts and feelings about the situation. She also had to look at what she was doing and what others were doing. When she did, for just a moment, she began to blame others for her problems. Examining the situation and then determining how she thought and felt about things evidently wasn't enough, because the conclusion she came to was incorrect. She, therefore, had to reality test her perceptions. When she did that, she realized that her first reaction was a way of avoiding the fact that it was really her own fault. The resulting insight showed her that she failed to say no because she needed to be liked by everybody, so she sacrificed more legitimate needs as well as her own self-respect. She realized, however, that insight was not enough to do anything about her predicament. She had to demonstrate personal honesty by accepting responsibility for what she had learned about herself and then choosing to do something about it. To avoid facing what she had learned about herself would be the worst kind of self-deception and personal dishonesty, both of which would only increase her self-disapproval. But, as we saw, Jan chose to continue coping by facing what she feared: saying no. The next time someone asked her to do something she felt she should not accept, she declined. The process of coping (introspection, reality testing, insight, and personal honesty) resulted in Jan's liking herself; something she had not done in a long time. Her ability to deal with the difficulty of saying no was a very self-affirming experience.

Humility

Humility originates in personal strength, not in weakness. Humility is not self-abasement, servile submissiveness, or devaluing ourselves, as so many seem to believe. Rather, it is doing our very best and then quietly leaving our acts, expressions, and accomplishments to speak for themselves. Humility is a strength, a power within those who quietly and unpretentiously have been moved by the Holy Spirit. President Spencer W. Kimball said that "humility is teachableness—an ability to realize that all virtues and abilities are not concentrated in one's self. . . . Humility is gracious, quiet, serene—not pompous, spectacular, nor histrionic. It is subdued, kindly, understanding. . . . It never struts nor swaggers. [Humility is] faithful, quiet works. . . . Humility is repentant. . . . It is the doing of one's best in every case and leaving of one's acts, expressions, and accomplishments to largely speak for themselves" (The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, ed. Edward L. Kimball [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982], pp. 232-33).

Humility is the key that unlocks spirituality. Without it, spirituality is virtually impossible. With it, spiritual growth is almost inevitable. Fully understanding our own spiritual nature and being receptive to the promptings of the Lord depend on our knowing what humility is and how to cultivate it in our lives. Without humility, we will never really comprehend our own spiritual nature and capacities. But with humility, we can learn about our own eternal spiritual essence. That is a self-affirming experience of the highest order. The following example illustrates:

" . . . So, Brother Chavez, you see that you couldn't possibly be right."

Hector Chavez looked at the Gospel Doctrine teacher and wasn't sure what to do. Brother Stiles had taken that last quotation completely out of context in an attempt to prove Hector wrong and himself correct, and in the process Brother Stiles had demonstrated all the more his own lack of understanding. Unbeknownst to anyone else, Hector held on his lap the very same book from which the teacher had just read. By reading aloud just one paragraph he could dismantle Brother Stiles' rather weak argument as well as Brother Stiles himself and show the rest of the class members that he was right.

Hector knew he held all the cards. He now had to decide which one of many hands he wanted to play. His first inclination was to make his point and embarrass Brother Stiles in one fell swoop. He thought how easy that would be—and how unhelpful. It would merely be a show, one in which nothing would be taught or learned. In the fraction of the second in which all this thinking transpired, a fleeting image, pale and transparent, appeared before his spiritual eye and then faded away. More than a vague impression but less than a tangible thought, what Hector experienced was an understanding. In a small, mortal, imperfect way, Hector understood the Savior standing in magnificent humility before the Sanhedrin. With legions of angels at his beck and call, with all truth and righteousness at his side, the Savior yet remained silent, uttering only those words necessary to quietly assert his divine heritage. All power was his, and therein lay the complete humility and eloquence of his response to the derisive mockery and abuse. Human weakness responded with divine strength.

Hector sighed. Then he looked at Brother Stiles and smiled warmly. He could see that the entire class was waiting for him to say something. And so he did. "Thank you, Brother Stiles, for responding to my comment. I would very much like to discuss the topic with you in greater detail, but perhaps after class, so as not to take up any more of everyone else's time."

When class was over, Hector met the Gospel Doctrine teacher in the hallway and suggested that they read the quotation in question together. Brother Stiles raised a surprised eyebrow as Hector pulled out his book and invited Brother Stiles to do the same. As they read the quotation in context, it was evident that what Hector had said was correct. Hector gave no reinforcing argument, no chastising remark. He didn't have to say a word. He merely stood there quietly when Brother Stiles cleared his throat and apologized. Brother Stiles then asked Hector to take ten minutes in class next week to explain his thoughts on the subject and correct the teacher's misrepresentation. Hector said he was grateful for the invitation but would let the instructor handle the situation as he saw fit. They shook hands and parted.

Only Hector and Brother Stiles knew of their discussion. If Brother Stiles never mentioned the matter in class again, that would be all right with Hector, too. As he walked home from church that day, he didn't view what had happened as a personal victory. He felt no smugness or pride. More than a vague impression but less than a tangible thought, what Hector experienced was an understanding. In a small, mortal, imperfect way, Hector felt and understood the Savior's love.

This story may seem a fairly obvious example of humility; however, there are subtle points in this story we should look at more closely. For example, had Hector refrained from saying anything to Brother Stiles, that would not have been humility. It might have been fear, inadequacy, perhaps silent anger, but not humility. Humility requires unselfish but responsible behavior. As President Kimball pointed out, humility is courageous. Others might have been intimidated by Brother Stiles. Hector had the necessary humble strength not to be intimidated. He refused to embarrass the teacher and present himself as an authority on the subject being discussed, but he took Brother Stiles aside in private and taught him, quietly, meekly, without retribution or anger. No one else would know from Hector that Hector had been right or that Brother Stiles had been wrong and subsequently corrected. Hector responded to the higher law. His small act of mercy prompted by personal humility resulted in an affirmation of the Savior's love for him, something that couldn't help but affirm his own sense of spiritual goodness and satisfaction.

Avoidance

In virtually all important respects, avoidance is the very opposite of coping. Fear is the root of avoidance. Refusing to face personal conflicts we find unpleasant or unsettling leads us to such actions of avoidance as:

Denial: refusing to admit or accept what you know to be true about yourself.

Distortion: changing, twisting, and modifying what you know to be true about yourself in order to deflect the unpleasantness that facing the truth would bring.

Rationalization: excusing yourself from taking responsibility for your actions and their consequences by creating justifications that you know are false and irresponsible.

Avoidance precludes the possibility of personal growth for two reasons. First, it is an attempt to hide our own imperfections and inadequacies from ourselves. It is a way of pretending that we are better than we believe we are and then accepting those pleasant delusions as our reality. A conflict avoidance approach to living is seductive because it provides immediate relief from the tension of personal trouble spots (underachievement, marital discord, and so forth). But the long-term costs are high. Problems that are not faced and accepted cannot be resolved. Second, denial, distortion, rationalization, and conflict avoidance are all unflattering and inadequate ways of handling personal conflict. They seldom, if ever, improve things. But far more important, if we resort to using these responses too much, we will gradually come to think of ourselves in unflattering and inadequate ways. The adjectives that seem to be consistently associated with avoidance are weak, cowardly, and ineffective.

The following example shows why so many people come to think of themselves as inadequate because they consistently avoid problems they need to face:

"What do you expect me to do, Melissa? Not believe my own child? If he says he didn't do it, he didn't do it!"

Melissa stood there, lips quivering, her arm around her son. His puffy soon-to-be black eye brimming with tears was proof enough of the beating he had just received from someone's hands, but Elaine refused to believe that her son Jared had anything to do with it. As Melissa walked away, saying Jared was not to go near her son David ever again, Elaine took Jared in the house and slammed the door behind her.

"Why don't you play with someone older, Jared?" Elaine asked her son. "Someone who isn't so fragile!" she blurted out.

"But Mom," Jared began, "it's not my fault that . . . "

Before he could finish, Elaine interrupted. "I know, I know. Just don't go down there anymore. All right?"

"Yeah, okay! Can I go play now?" Jared asked.

"Go ahead and play," she said, "and nothing else."

"He's a good boy. He's a good boy. He's a good boy," Elaine thought as she watched Jared leave the house. Like a self-affirming litany of health recited by the terminally ill, Elaine repeated the words over and over again to stave off the sick feeling that grew in her stomach. This wasn't the first time that a mother had come to her door, child in tow, with some sort of complaint. "Your son broke my son's bike! Jared called my daughter a so-and-so! Your son took my son's baseball cards and I want them back now!" Parents, teachers at school and Primary, they all, at one time or another, had called or come by.

Elaine's husband Stan was gone so much that it was usually up to Elaine to handle such things. Lately, she had somehow chosen not to handle things at all. With each new complaint, her need to deny what she knew deep down was true increased. So, it was the other people's fault. Jared's teacher at school was too strict. Primary was too boring. Jared was just misunderstood. With every rationalization, Elaine distanced herself more and more from the true source of the problem: Jared was a troubled little boy. Somehow to Elaine that meant she was a bad mother. By refusing to face the very thing she feared most, she unwittingly made it come true! Elaine's inadequate response to a difficult problem eventually made her feel inadequate, which made her avoid facing the situation all the more. The ensuing vicious circle made her defensive with others and disgusted with herself.

Avoidance comes in as many different forms as there are different people. Each of us avoids issues that are unique to ourselves in unique ways. Yet the common thread throughout is undeniable: refusal to face what we fear or find unpleasant through denial, distortion, rationalization, or conflict avoidance. While Elaine's avoidance included refusing to face her son's difficulty and perhaps her own contribution to the problem, avoidance could be anything from refusing to discuss an important issue with your spouse to refusing to express your opinion in Sunday School. Whenever behavior is motivated out of an unrealistic fear or a need to deny what we know to be true about ourselves, that behavior is avoidance.

Pride

Pride is preoccupation with self. It is self-aggrandizing, self-serving, and self-centered. It is the very opposite of humility, and well it should be, because it comes from an entirely different source. Humility comes from recognizing our dependence and reliance on the Lord for all we are or may ever become. Pride comes from a distorted view of our self-importance, resulting in feelings of superiority, self-sufficiency, accomplishment, and vanity. Pride fails to acknowledge God's hand in all good things, attributing success only to self. More often than not, such tendencies can be nothing more than a way to avoid facing our true, more fundamental feelings of inadequacy and unimportance. Pride is offensive to the Spirit of the Lord. It alienates us from our eternal identity, which makes exercising pride a spiritually self-defeating experience. The following example shows how pride alienates us from our spiritual nature:

Jim loved ward conference. Being the Young Men's President gave him a chance to sit on the stand during priesthood meeting. The seventeen-page report with colored graphs felt substantial in his hands as he leafed through the clean, crisp pages. It would be his turn to speak soon. The talk he had prepared was designed to capture everyone's attention, especially the stake president's.

Jim Braithwaite ran his auxiliary like he ran his business: efficient, smooth, and with results. He worked hard and liked doing things his way. That's why he rarely delegated, and when he did, it was with express and specific instructions about how something should be done. That way he would be more assured of the outcome. Outcome was what mattered with Jim, no matter the setting: work, home, or church. He based his worth on personal productivity and success. His motto was, "If you want something done right, do it yourself." And so he did. With each success he patted himself, and only himself, on the back. With each rare failure, he'd blame someone else because those were usually the times he'd delegated.

Jim didn't know it, but he was proud. He had no idea that even in the midst of doing work for the kingdom, he was relying solely on the arm of flesh—his own arm. Rather than thanking the Lord for the opportunity to serve and for the talents and abilities he had to use, his offering consisted largely of saying, "Look, see what I've done. See what I've given you. Surely that makes me a profitable servant."

For Jim the opportunity to serve always turned into an opportunity to impress. Charity became a function of telling people what they needed rather than asking them and then humbly complying. If someone else's suggestion was accepted at the expense of his own, he supported it only halfheartedly. And if things didn't go the way he wanted them to, he felt frustrated and out of control. It was as if he craved chances to speak or be in charge. If he didn't get them, he was sullen and negative. Like so many prideful people, Jim looked to self-aggrandizement as his primary source of reinforcement. And like so many proud people, he was eventually disappointed when that source became bankrupt and empty.

In Jim's case pride showed itself through seemingly righteous acts motivated by unrighteous purposes: using a church calling primarily for self-serving ends. Jim acted out of a need to be recognized as well as a need to succeed in order to feel worthwhile. Real humility, remember, is doing our best and then letting our acts speak for themselves—good works done unobtrusively and without expecting reward. Jim, however, lived for the reward and conducted himself accordingly. In fact, the need for constant external reinforcement is a classic sign of deep feelings of worthlessness. Jim's pride was fueled by the feeling that if he did not produce, if he did not succeed, if he did not get the necessary recognition, he would be left with only what he had inside—a spiritual shallowness that left much to be desired. In short, his pride attempted to deny the very thing it verified: his own spiritual weakness.

It is evident that high levels of spirituality and self-esteem are the result of coping and humility, both attributes that promote a realistic and responsible approach to life's challenges. Moreover, high levels of self-esteem and spirituality are the direct experiencing of our internal/eternal self.

Self-esteem is a manifestation of our capacity to love ourselves and a prerequisite for loving others more fully and unconditionally. Self-esteem is a barometer that tells us, as well as anybody else who cares to look, whether we have a truly durable, internal sense of personal well-being, a well-being that leads to a quiet confidence and self-assuredness. Even though self-esteem is a temporal, psychological concept, it is far from being a trivial spiritual matter, given that the second great commandment instructs us to love our neighbors as we love ourselves.

Enduring self-esteem is not based on social recognition, status, or any other type of achievement. It is a reflection of knowing, trusting, and approving of our own internal psychological character as we have observed it being tested in situations we find difficult. The personal security required to face rather than to avoid difficult problems is the same psychological muscle required to resist the seductive tyranny of pleasing appearances and social approval and, instead, respond to our internal/eternal identity. Self-esteem provides us with the opportunity to experience the self at the highest level of human functioning. Self-esteem makes such experiences self-affirming and personally educational—and that is of paramount importance.

Humility is as essential to developing spirituality as coping is to developing self-esteem. Humility is a quiet strength and a personal resolve to live righteously. It coaxes us to set aside the natural man. It reminds us to remain teachable, and above all, it opens the way to spiritual experiences. Spiritual experiences open the way for us to more fully comprehend the depth and durability of our spiritual capacities. And as we become acquainted with our spiritual capacity, we also learn things about our capacity for eternal goodness that simply cannot be learned in any other way.

Though spirituality and self-esteem are only distant relatives during our mortal experiences, the most essential processes involved in developing personal humility and psychological coping share some rather remarkable similarities.

First, both spirituality and self-esteem require us to be teachable. That is, developing spirituality and developing self-esteem are both growth processes. Self-esteem is the result of learning how to respond to situations that are personally difficult with honesty, integrity, and forthrightness—all qualities that can be as difficult to cultivate as they are rewarding, once they are acquired. Spirituality is the result of learning how to subdue the natural man and yield to the enticements of the Spirit—a task that can also be as difficult as it is rewarding when it is successfully completed. Both learning processes require progressively higher levels of human and spiritual functioning, a task that supplies us with the opportunity to experience and then define ourselves as capable of attaining even higher levels of spiritual and psychological functioning.

Second, both spirituality and self-esteem require acknowledging and overcoming imperfections in the self. Remember, the process of coping is based on the assumption that the self is not perfect and that personal growth can begin when we openly and candidly recognize to ourselves our faults and imperfections. The process of developing spirituality is based on the very similar assumption that we are not perfect and that spiritual growth accompanies a process of continual repentance in which we openly acknowledge to ourselves our faults and imperfections as a first step in striving to overcome them.

Third, spirituality and self-esteem both effect fundamental improvements in our internal sense of personal well-being. The influence of these fundamental internal changes has a ripple effect in other areas of life as well. Self-esteem provides us with realistic confidence and self-assurance that liberate us from unwarranted fear, anxiety, and worry. Self-esteem allows us to more fully express our views and values and eagerly accept and incorporate the favorable and unfavorable consequences of our behavior into an accurate self-image. Spirituality becomes the prime ingredient in and determinant of values, choices, and priorities. It exposes the best of what we are to ourselves and others and, in the process, defines the meaning of life, death, family, and happiness. Spirituality and self-esteem are both powerful internal conditions that organize and influence every other facet of our lives.

These three important similarities between spirituality and self-esteem in turn suggest ways of successfully integrating spirituality and self-esteem in patterns of effective living that have far-reaching implications.

First, our most important point of spiritual or psychological growth is at our own point of greatest weakness and vulnerability. The more fundamental the shortcoming, the more important it is to squarely own up to it. We must honestly and candidly identify and describe our own problems to ourselves in no uncertain terms. Please notice that we are not suggesting that we punish ourselves for having shortcomings. Everybody has shortcomings. Some of us go to greater lengths to hide them than others. But trying to hide them does not alter their existence—it just makes them harder to work with. What we are suggesting is that no problem can be solved before it is identified and openly accepted as a personal or a spiritual shortcoming. It is that simple. If you don't have the courage to own up, you will probably foul up. Pretending just doesn't count in the art of successful living.

Brigham Young clearly understood this basic principle of personal growth and development. He continually urged the Saints to focus their energies on "this one thing, the sanctification of our own hearts, the purifying of our own affections, the preparing of ourselves for the approach of the events that are hastening upon us" (in Journal of Discourses, 9:3). Growth is a process that starts when we willingly face our most fundamental internal motives and desires. That can only be done by stripping away our false fronts and pretenses and probing deeply within ourselves. The following illustration clarifies this difficult but essential step in our own spiritual and psychological growth:

Phil's hand trembled as he looked at his bleeding knuckles and then at the fist-sized hole, jagged and sharp in the otherwise smooth surface of the wall. No one spoke. No one moved. Lisa, the thirteen-year-old, quietly whimpered. The other children had long since been banished to their rooms upstairs, where they could hear only muffled explosions of the violent clash of tempers erupting below them.

The pale wash of the television screen cast its flickering shadows over the room where they stood frozen in their places, immobilized by a loss of what to do now, what to do about it later. The dull ache in Phil's hand slowly crawled to his head. Where searing rage and anger had dominated, now only a numbing emptiness remained. Addie, his wife, took a wad of well-used tissue from her pocket and wiped the tears from her eyes. She then bent down to pick up the pieces of the dish she had thrown at Phil, wishing there was some way to pick up the pieces of a nearly shattered marriage.

Still no one spoke. No one looked at anyone else. The barrage and counterbarrage of verbal abuse and senseless violence left them enervated and spent. Suddenly, Phil's big frame shook with a heavy sigh. Mumbling something that resembled an awkward apology and justification rolled into one, he ran out the door, leaving it ajar. As if on cue, Lisa ran to Addie, throwing her arms around her mother in an attempt to console as well as seek consolation. All Addie could think about was how they would explain the hole in the wall when the home teachers came tomorrow evening.

Breakfast. Cold cereal for the kids, eggs for Dad. Lunches being made, teeth being brushed, hair being combed. The following morning was just like any other. Business as usual in a home where a hurricane had raged the night before. Each one, from eldest to youngest, pushed from their minds the images of last night's stormy turbulence. The sickness of the altercation wasn't restricted simply to the violent behavior itself. It was all too evident in their silence as well. Their silence was intended to protect the family, but it could ultimately destroy it instead, because silence masked the deadliness of their self-inflicted wound from themselves as much as from others.

The home teachers came, the stories were told, and the wrecked wall humorously dismissed along with inquiries into the family's welfare. Facades were maintained in Relief Society and elders quorum, appearances of strength covered up weakness, and illusions of family unity smoothed the surface of deep chaos. The desire to wear the aspect of a good, happy family kept them from being one. As long as they simply covered up their most serious problem by attempting to prove to others and themselves that nothing was wrong, nothing could ever really be right. Their greatest opportunity for achieving spiritual and emotional well-being had to come through facing their greatest spiritual and emotional difficulty. All efforts short of that paled in hopeless comparison.

The second major step in both spiritual and psychological growth usually requires us to resolve our most blatant spiritual or psychological shortcomings and vulnerabilities. This point is extremely important. It tells us where to invest our time and energy in personal improvement. The more serious the psychological or spiritual problem, the more important it is to deal with it now. That's right, right now. No pretending, and no substitutes. Fixing a leaky faucet won't make the car run better. Experience has taught us that this step can be very difficult. People usually like to work their way up to the big things. You know, sort of a warm-up that's not too scary. Sorry! That's called rationalization. In our view, you face the worst first, because as soon as the most difficult issue has been faced, or discussed, or identified, everybody relaxes a little. Rapport is easier, tension starts to dissipate, and people start problem-solving more productively. Why? Because the worst is over. There is nothing more to be afraid of. The hardest part is over. But before that happens, most people are uncomfortable waiting for the dreaded event to happen, whether it's confusion, confrontation, or simply a clear definition of the problem. The continuation of our example illustrates the importance of taking on the most difficult problems first.

A present! He always got her a present as a peace offering of sorts. It was his attempt to soothe the hurt without ever really dealing with it: emotional damage awarded emotionless damages. He would also attend to the smaller infractions he knew he was guilty of: help more around the house, spend more time with the kids, or share some nights out with Addie. He'd work even harder, make bigger sales with bigger commissions, fix the house up, and spend more on vacations. She would be a better wife, prepare dinner on time, iron his shirts, and clean the house more often. She would be more attentive to his needs, keeping herself in better shape.

Round and round they both went, focusing on every little problem in hopes that somehow the big problem would go away—efforts otherwise commendable but in this case worse than useless. They engaged in the nonessentials to avoid facing the absolute essential. From their parents' example, the children learned that unbridled anger was not unbridled at all. It was acceptable behavior. It was excusable and easily dismissed. Nevertheless, the thirteen-year-old was doing inexplicably worse in school, the nine-year-old's nightmares were more frequent and intense, and the six-year-old struck out at his friends for little, if any, reason.

At first it was easy for Addie to remain oblivious to the troubling signs of her troubled children. But gradually, as it became more evident, as friends and neighbors carefully but undeniably hinted at this or that child's behavior, it seemed at every turn there was a nagging reminder that her family was different—different, and not well. So she read books, books on marriage, books on families, books on being a better parent. With each book she read, she effectively distanced herself from really facing the problem that counted most, the problem that no book could resolve.

So it happened again. And again. And again. Until one morning she couldn't quite cover the emotional scars with a stiff upper lip and firm resolve. Looking in the mirror, she didn't recognize the woman staring blankly back at her. She looked too old, too tired, too crestfallen to be someone she knew. Then in a rush of overwhelming anger, frustration, and sorrow, she bowed her head and sobbed uncontrollably. Oppressive doom and sheer hopelessness enwrapped her like a dark shroud. Staccato-sharp images of her life with Phil punctuated the anguish of the present and the memories of the past: a temple marriage with covenants made but now broken, children born in hope but now raised in fear, life once bright with limitless dreams but now tarnished with debilitating reality. Where things mattered the most, they had succeeded the least. As the vision cracked, crumbled, and fell apart right before her eyes, "We have failed," was all she could utter.

As a result of facing problems we usually avoid, we start to affirm and improve ourselves. This gradual growth eventually allows us to accomplish what was originally inconceivable. There is an interesting paradox in this step. Facing up to both spiritual and psychological shortcomings involves immediate discomfort. That involves candidly recognizing that we are less than we might hope for, which is always an unsettling experience. But ironically, clearly labeling and understanding our personal imperfections is precisely what arouses in us the motivation to change them. Internal discomfort as a source of motivation for personal growth is not something to be short-circuited. It is normal, natural, and inevitable in healthy individuals. You see, increasing our capacity to tolerate the self-imposed discomfort associated with facing personal imperfections with candor and honesty is personal growth and development. The very act of facing what we tend to avoid is how we acquire confidence and belief in ourselves. And with every attempt to face forthrightly what we are displeased with in ourselves, we add to our own internal capacity for effective problem solving. Spiritual and psychological growth is a process, a style of traveling, not a destination. This important point is illustrated in the following:

That night, when Phil went to bed, he found a rectangular piece of paper lying on his pillow. As his eyes adjusted to the darkness, it became all too clear that he was looking at his and Addie's temple marriage certificate. He asked Addie what was going on. All she said was, "We've failed, Phil." He wanted to scoff, object, derisively demand an explanation. Instead, the ensuing silence was evidence enough that Phil understood what Addie meant. Even in his most lucid moments he refused to imagine that his marriage was actually in jeopardy. As topsy-turvy as things had gotten, the last thing he wanted was to lose his wife. And now his greatest fear was coming true. Phil sat down on the edge of the bed. With head in hands he whispered, "What have I done? What have I done?" The sheer tragedy of their predicament no longer afforded any alternative other than to pierce the repugnant, festering core of their diseased marriage.

Addie shook her head and said that he was not the only one to blame. Somewhere, somehow, in the fifteen years of their life together, they had both learned to accept and foster the destructive behavior that infected their marriage. Sitting in the darkness, they both knew with excruciating clarity, beyond doubt or question, the gravity of their situation. They knew what they were, what they had become. They'd read about, heard about, even known couples who hurled objects, obscenities, and abhorrence at each other. To place themselves in that category seemed inconceivable. Yet they had to. Someone had to come out and say it. Knowing it or thinking it wasn't enough. They had to share the words that would once and for all shed the light on the darkest corner of their lives. Moments passed in silence until Addie spoke the unspeakable. "We are a violent, abusive couple. We have injured ourselves and our children. We are sick and we need help."

Like the sweeping beacon of a lighthouse, her words clearly, undeniably, opened a lighted path through the once impenetrable darkness. Their ensuing conversation was awkward and difficult, yet because the worst had been said, the most feared had been faced, they were able to do what they had never been able to do before: candidly share their innermost thoughts and feelings, hopes and fears—especially their fears.

As the night wore on, Phil reveled in the closeness he felt toward Addie. Somehow, opening up to her, letting her in where long ago he had shut her out, seemed gratifying and right. They both marveled that this newfound sense of intimacy and sharing would come on the heels of such dire circumstances. They were puzzled that this closeness came only after they fell to the very bottom of their own personal pit. All their previous attempts to skirt around the gaping abyss had merely brought them added sorrow. Only when they leaped headlong into the gaping darkness could they begin to see the light. Yet even now, as they looked upward, they knew there was still the grueling climb ahead.

Morning came all too soon. Neither of them slept, really. They both just lay there, lost in reflections of what had transpired and of what was yet to come. As Phil shaved and Addie put on her makeup, neither spoke, as if words would break the fragile spell of intimacy that their talking had cast the night before. Phil's hand trembled, causing him to nick the corner of his chin. Wincing, he let the razor fall from his hand as he pressed a finger to the cut. He then leaned both hands against the sink and let his head drop to his chest.

Addie stopped, mascara in hand, and asked him what was wrong. "I'm afraid," he whispered. "Of what?" she asked, already knowing what he was going to say. Phil recounted his feelings of last night, of the sweetness that accompanied their candor and honesty. He then told her that he feared losing the peace and contentment that facing the worst together had brought them. He told her how afraid he was that they might not ever be able to retrieve that intimacy and peacefulness again. Addie wanted to respond with assurances to the contrary, but she knew they were false. She too was afraid that their newfound hope would soon wane.

In a desperate need to hold on to what was left of the night before, they agreed to set aside time to talk about those things that were once hushed up and ignored. The prospect of opening doors they had always kept closed, entering places they had never been, was both frightening and exhilarating.

They decided to take turns. They alternated determining what the topic of discussion would be from session to session. The only requirement was that they had to remain as honest as they were the night they stopped covering up and started owning up. As the weeks went by, they noticed that the honesty, the opening up, caused the most discomfort as well as the most satisfaction in their discussions. It was as if by recognizing and admitting to the worst things about themselves that they recognized their own ability to deal with them. They could never have known that they had the strength to overcome their greatest problems until they actually tried. Their best discussions, the ones that brought the most satisfaction and results, were also the ones where they dealt with the heaviest issues. They knew that if it was difficult to say, it was worth saying.

Every once in awhile Addie would mentally pull away while Phil was speaking. She sat and looked at the man in front of her. Inside she smiled. It was a smile of promise and assurance. This was the Phil she had married fifteen years ago: honest, open, trying to listen in order to understand. Her love and respect grew with Phil's increased willingness to recognize and confront his weaknesses. Addie couldn't understand why so many men felt they had to hide their fears and weaknesses in order to be admired or respected, when as far as she was concerned, the exact opposite was true.

Phil and Addie still had their ups and down, that was for sure, but as the weeks and months went by, a change was taking place, gradual, imperceptible day by day, but a change nonetheless. It manifested itself mostly in the comfortableness of the relationship. There was a casual ease between the two that had never existed before. Addie and Phil accepted one another on the basis of what they really were—their weaknesses as well as their strengths. And the more they were able to deal with their weaknesses, the more approving and accepting they became of themselves and each other. They knew they could never let down. Times were the roughest when they became closed and avoidant. They understood that their relationship as well as their personal spiritual and emotional well-being required a continuing process of honesty and forthrightness in facing and then overcoming what they feared the most. A complete resolution of Phil and Addie's problems will require both spiritual and psychological attention.

Remember, spirituality and self-esteem are the two sides of the same human coin. One influences spiritual development; the other, psychological development. But they are both, in their purest forms, a reflection and a result of our internal/eternal self in the process of becoming perfected. Both of these prized attributes grow best in soil that is rich with honesty, integrity, and willingness to face the imperfections that are inherent in our mortal existence.

Even though spirituality and self-esteem represent two domains of our mortal experience, their growth and development share many similarities. Coping and humility, the most essential ingredients in self-affirming experiences, are similar indeed. They are both manifestations of inner strength, quiet accomplishment, and enduring teachableness. Avoidance and pride, on the other hand, are the staple ingredients in self-defeating experiences. Not surprisingly, they also share a number of significant similarities. They represent the lower levels of human functioning, such as immediate gratification, escape from fear, responsibility, and conflict, and an exaggerated and unrealistic sense of self-importance.

Not surprisingly, it is difficult, if not completely impossible, to reach our psychological and spiritual capacities when we function at the lower levels of human effectiveness. Both spirituality and self-esteem, though separate in most respects, require the highest levels of human functioning. What we learn to think of ourselves and how we actually behave, both spiritually and psychologically, depends in large measure on the experiences we create for ourselves by being consistently humble or proud, coping or avoidant.
