Scott R. Peterson, Richard L. Bednar, Spirituality and Self-Esteem: Developing the Inner Self ( 1990)

Chapter Six

Cultivating Self-Esteem

Now comes the hard part! It's time to shift our focus from theory to application. That is not an easy task. There simply are no universal recipes equally applicable to all situations and individuals. Fortunately, however, there are general principles, which can prove useful to those of us who are searching for higher self-esteem, regardless of differences in our individual personalities or circumstances. When they are properly understood, these principles can be applied very successfully to individual problems. But make no mistake about it. Successfully applying these principles in our individual lives is impossible without our first understanding them.

We will approach that difficult task in three steps. First, we will review some important principles about self-esteem and the role coping plays in its development. Second, we will discuss several common and unfortunate myths about self-esteem. Our intent is to expose the absurdity of these views in hopes of dispelling their misleading appeal. Third, because we consider it extremely important to recognize and acknowledge the styles of avoidance that deter us from cultivating our self-esteem, we will describe several basic styles of avoidance and their coping counterparts. Then we will conclude with a brief example of one person's avoidant style and his eventual ability to replace it with coping responses, which enhance self-esteem.

Basic Principles of Self-Esteem

Principle 1

Self-esteem is the result of our consistently avoiding or coping with problem situations we find unpleasant or uncomfortable.

Our individual response styles are varying mixtures of coping and avoidance. Some of us are terribly bothered by things that others hardly even notice. We all have problems that concern us, and to the degree that our individual response style favors coping over avoidance, we can expect gradual increases in self-esteem over time. The converse is equally true. To the degree that our individual response style favors avoidance over coping, we can expect gradual decreases in our personal self-esteem over time.

High or low levels of self-esteem are not the result of dramatic events, significant gains or losses of status and position, or social popularity or acceptance. Self-esteem is based on something far more fundamental. The moment-by-moment events in our lives furnish the material from which we construct our own self-evaluations. Self-esteem is, ultimately, a reflection of the kind of person we perceive ourselves to be when we avoid or cope with the problems of life that surround us. When we face, understand, and resolve problems, our self-confidence, personal approval, and personal security increase. Patterns of excessive avoidance, however, breed just the opposite reaction. The very act of avoidance, by denying, distorting, and psychologically evading, precludes feelings of personal adequacy because of the inherent inadequacy of these responses.

Principle 2

Self-evaluative thoughts and feelings are a psychological reality for most of us.

Most people regularly notice what they do, how they feel, and how they feel about what they do. People regularly engage in a process of noticing, monitoring, thinking about, and evaluating their own behavior and beliefs. It would be unfortunate and short-sighted to consider personal awareness as nothing more than thoughts and observations about ourselves, however. It is far more than that. Virtually all human experiences have emotions associated with them. Some emotions can be more intense and compelling than others, but that is a variation in degree.

Self-evaluative feelings can be extremely intense, particularly when we observe our own tendencies to cope with or to avoid conflicts. A high-quality coping response in the face of conflict can easily create intense feelings of self-approval, confidence, and personal satisfaction. Coping is a self-affirming experience because it allows us to experience the self as strong, capable, and forthright. Self-affirming experiences are the result of the psychological behavior inherent in the process of coping itself. We know of numerous individuals who were well pleased with themselves even though the conflict they confronted remained unresolved. This pleasant and sometimes intense experience is the inevitable consequence of the satisfying behaviors inherent in coping. No matter how strategic a retreat from conflict may appear, retreating still invokes a reflexive negative self-evaluation.

Self-evaluation goes on for virtually all of us almost all the time. Sometimes it takes place at higher levels of clarity and explicitness than others, but the results usually remain the same. Self-evaluative thoughts and feelings express what we intellectually see and emotionally experience about ourselves when our fundamental character is revealed in anxiety-arousing situations.

Principle 3

Paradoxically, any attempt we make to clearly identify our own patterns of avoidance is a coping response.

Coping requires a realistic self-examination and a willingness to face unpleasant realities about ourselves that we usually avoid. All of that requires us to function at higher levels of risk and personal responsibility than we are generally accustomed to. Although such an experience can be uncomfortable, it produces growth. You see, personal growth is anchored to an increasing understanding of ourselves and the world we live in and to increasingly effective problem-solving. Personal growth requires each of us to identify and label imperfections in the self as the first step in improving the self. Identifying and labeling imperfections can feel uncomfortable and threatening. But that is the beginning of the very coping process that allows growth and positive change to take place.

Common Myths about Self-Esteem

Let us now take a look both at the myths that tend to overshadow the principles of self-esteem we have just examined and at the realities that dispel those myths.

The Myth of Unconditional Love

Many of us erroneously believe that if we are the recipients of constant doses of unconditional love, self-esteem is sure to follow. The "bucket of love" metaphor is overused: "If your bucket of love is full, you'll feel good about yourself and others." This rationale leads us to think that if disappointments are minimized, rejection is avoided, and our abilities are never questioned (that is, we are accepted unconditionally and unceasingly), our self-esteem will remain unquestioned and intact. Many unwary individuals fall prey to the false idea that others can and should act as a constant source of their well-being. In other words, according to this myth, if we suffer from low self-esteem, the reason is that those around us are not loving us enough. It is their fault and has nothing to do with us.

Reality

We assert that although others do contribute to how we feel about ourselves, if our family, our friends, and our associates spent all their time being nonjudgmental and uncritical and if they deflected every potential scrape and bump coming our way, they would actually be depriving us of the very experiences that provide important problem-solving opportunities and the chance to develop the internal self, which builds self-esteem.

This myth can be placed in proper perspective when we remind ourselves that the purpose of our earthly existence is to be separated from the Father and his protection so that in the face of mortal trials we can grow.

The Bucket of Love Myth, Part 2

A fascinating corollary to the myth of unconditional love, or the "bucket of love" concept, implies that if you're feeling down, if your self-esteem is low, if your bucket of love is nearly empty, then do something for yourself: get a new hairdo, go to the movies, buy some new clothes, or even just brush your teeth. The theory behind this myth is that if you focus solely on yourself when you lack self-esteem, that will lift your spirits and give you a moment's respite that will renew and rejuvenate you. Your bucket of love will be refilled and, in turn, you will be able to fill others' buckets.

Reality

We do agree that we all need to pamper ourselves occasionally, but escape should not be the primary means of combating low self-esteem. Escape merely delays the moment when the real issues, the real causes of inadequate self-esteem, must be confronted. Escape is actually avoidance, which temporarily assuages personal hurts but at the expense of facing and ridding ourselves of the true source of the pain.

The Myth That Success Produces Self-Esteem

The pernicious myth that success produces self-esteem is encouraged by well-intended but misguided parents who assume that their children's self-esteem can be nurtured through multitudinous opportunities to perform and compete: dance, piano, clogging, football, basketball, soccer, and so forth. The list is long, but the intention is as short as it is short-sighted. With such opportunities comes the opportunity to win, to succeed, to be better than peers. The myth that success produces self-esteem requires that we must win to feel good about ourselves. Self-esteem is seen as being something in short supply and is therefore reserved only for the victorious. In contrast, low self-esteem is bounteously served in its abundance to the lesser but infinitely more numerous failures or merely average people of the world.

Casualties of this myth show up as massive, self-debilitating chunks in adulthood. Happiness and self-worth are restricted to those who win and succeed. At home their kids are the cutest and brightest; at work they make the most money or have the biggest offices; at church they hold more prestigious positions.

Reality

We can all see the folly of this myth. It focuses entirely upon outcome and ignores the process through which self-esteem is achieved. Self-esteem is thought to be a by-product of winning or achieving some goal in a competitive process that renders trust, honest effort, integrity, and cooperation irrelevant. Although it is true that success can bring a sense of accomplishment, which is both reinforcing and reaffirming, success is neither necessary nor sufficient to produce lasting self-esteem (consider, for example, Marilyn Monroe, Judy Garland, Howard Hughes, and Ernest Hemingway).

We maintain that the essential element in building self-esteem is the process—the process of coping, or choosing to face difficult challenges regardless of the outcome. When effort and commitment to the activity are the focus, the process itself becomes the source of self-satisfaction and self-approval. We do not depend on external judges declaring us the winner and therefore worthy of feeling good about ourselves. In the words of T. S. Eliot, "For us, there is only the trying. The rest is not our business" (East Coker, in The Four Quartets, New York: Harcourt, Brace, and Co., 1943). The Savior is the perfect exemplar of this concept of process. He returned to his own Nazareth to bring his gospel to those he knew as a youth, yet they scorned him. They even attempted to stone and kill him. Was he a success? Did he win many disciples? Did the outcome matter? Did it preclude him from trying?

The Success Produces Self-Esteem Myth, Part 2

The myth that productivity equals self-esteem is an interesting corollary of the myth that success produces self-esteem. The idea here is if you get a lot done, if you work hard, you will really feel good about yourself, and your self-esteem will soar. This myth has brought about a boom in the schedule book business. The more organized, deliberate, and busy you are, the happier you'll be. Each task that you can check off as having been done is one more notch on your self-esteem six-shooter.

Reality

The reality is that people tend to feel like massive failures if they don't get everything done, and they feel very pressured to get everything done. Furthermore, some of the most miserable people we encounter are those who are compulsively driven to accomplish more and more. Yet, even when they do accomplish even more, it never seems to be enough. It appears that external achievements seldom truly satisfy internal deficits.

The Myth That Popularity Produces Self-Esteem

At one time or another, didn't we all think that if we could be a cheerleader, captain of the football team, or run around with the popular crowd, that we would feel much better about ourselves? Probably every adolescent has. The problem is that an abundance of adults are still thinking like teenagers. They believe that if they can be liked by all, they can remain invulnerable to social criticism—a sure downer on the self-esteem scale. So, instead of trying out for cheerleader, they bake loaves of bread or batches of cookies for the neighborhood in hopes of being liked by everybody. Instead of going out for the football team, they try out for office clown, cracking jokes and back-slapping in an equal bid for popularity and acceptance. And nothing has really changed since adolescence as far as running around with the popular crowd is concerned. We see a proliferation of country clubs and various other social groups and people clamoring to be admitted to them.

Reality

The search for social acceptance and invulnerability to rejection is a sure-fire formula for self-esteem: low self-esteem. If we use that type of impression management, the only result will be that our sense of self-worth decreases. For even if acceptance is achieved, it is acceptance of the facade, the phony self. That inevitably leaves us thinking, "They wouldn't accept me if they really knew what I was like." Certainly that is a far cry from genuine self-esteem.

The Myth of Following the Leader to Self-Esteem

Although not unlike the popularity myth, the myth of following the leader to self-esteem has a subtle difference that warrants examination. The key word of this myth is compliance, unhealthy compliance. This myth also has its origins in childhood. Many of us were taught that we should unquestioningly obey those in authority over us: parents, schoolteachers, and adults in general. The rationale was that we would be happier by listening to and complying with those "who knew better." By being "seen and not heard," we would feel good about ourselves because we were doing the right thing.

Reality

Childhood does require sufficient boundaries as well as obedience to those responsible for guiding us, but when the attitude of unquestioning obedience continues into adulthood, self-esteem is not likely to result. First of all, self-esteem requires self-directedness. If we are willing to follow others blindly, and we abdicate our own role in considering the consequences of our behavior, we deny the very essence of self-esteem, which is volitional decision-making and personal responsibility. Self-esteem flourishes with such statements as, "I choose to do this and will take responsibility for the outcome, not so much because so-and-so told me to do it, but because I choose to do it." If our sense of worth is wrapped up in blindly following authority figures or if we leech our identity and direction from them, then, in the absence of authority figures and lacking a true identity of our own, we are left confused, vulnerable, and devoid of self-esteem.

This overview is by no means an exhaustive look at the myriad myths and misunderstandings about self-esteem. You very likely have heard of others or may even harbor some of your own. If you ever catch yourself thinking, "I'll feel better about myself once I get this, or buy that, or once so-and-so likes me, or when I become this or achieve that," and if the outcome is your only concern, chances are you're living to some degree or another at least one myth of self-esteem.

Enhancing Self-Esteem

There is no magic, no secret formula, no innovative technique that will guarantee high self-esteem. We must instead be willing to take a hard, long, honest look at ourselves and face the things we tend to avoid.

Coping is the opposite of avoidance. Instead of resulting in guilt, personal stagnation, loss of productivity, and lack of self-esteem as avoiding conflict does, coping with conflict results in confidence, personal understanding, greater productivity, and increased self-esteem. Coping is a growth-oriented process in which personal development is the inevitable result of facing, understanding, and resolving conflict. Coping is also a process that involves psychological ingredients fundamentally different from those involved in avoidance. The two most important components of coping are psychological risk-taking and personal responsibility.

Psychological Risk-Taking

Psychological risk-taking is necessary if we are to cope with conflict, because when we move nearer to facing unpleasant impulses, emotions, motives, and experiences, we risk possible injury to our reputation, loss of self-esteem, disapproval of others, and personal discomfort. We must be willing to face those psychological risks before we can resolve underlying conflicts. The risks we must face seem to fall into two categories: internal risk and interpersonal risk.

Internal risk: results from increased awareness of unacceptable or feared characteristics within ourselves. Internal risk follows such processes as introspection, letting down defenses, or attempting personal challenges. It is the risk of knowing—the risk of finding out about ourselves, of facing the possibility that our greatest fears are in fact true. For example, introspection may lead us to discover strong resentment for a family member, or letting down our defenses may reveal an embarrassing fear, or attempting a challenge may uncover our inability to perform.

Interpersonal risk: results from allowing others to see us as we really are. Interpersonal risk follows such events as confrontations, personal disclosures, or social participation. It is the risk of being known—the risk of letting others know who we really are and thus risking their disapproval, rejection, or criticism. For example, disclosing our commitment to a particular belief may lead to rejection by a friend who rejects the belief, or participation in a group project may lead others to discover and criticize our inabilities.

Sometimes, both internal and interpersonal risks are involved in a single event. For example, our confronting a colleague about why he or she seems to avoid us may result in our being told that we talk too much. That confrontation involves an internal fear of discovering a personal problem as well as an interpersonal fear of being criticized or rejected.

Personal Responsibility

Personal responsibility is a willingness to see ourselves as causal agents—or at least contributors—to the outcome of our lives. It is accepting responsibility for what happens to us as a result of the decisions we make, the actions we take, and the attitudes we maintain. Personally responsible individuals realize that although they cannot influence some factors in their lives (the weather, accidents, the actions of others), they can control the course of their own personal development. Rather than forfeit control over their lives to fate or circumstance, they strive to increase their control over themselves. Rather than complain about their problems, they realize that if they are the cause, they can also be the cure. They understand the law of the harvest at a personal level and recognize the truth of the scripture, "all men shall reap a reward of their works" (Alma 9:28). They consciously work to narrow the gap between things as they would like them to be and things as they presently are.

Personally responsible people also have a special type of insight: they have a high degree of self-perception and are able to make the connections between what they see inside themselves and what they see outside. For example, responsible people might recognize that their insecurity about expressing themselves causes them to avoid especially articulate people. They would also realize that to feel more comfortable around their articulate associates, they need either to become more articulate themselves or become comfortable with their present speaking abilities. When they act on their recognition, they are coping with personal conflict.

Being able to recognize and understand our own style of avoiding difficult and uncomfortable things about ourselves is a critical step in enhancing self-esteem. We need to keep three observations about avoidance clearly in mind:

Immediately after they partook of the fruit, Adam and Eve heard the voice of the Lord, and their reflexive response was to hide themselves. In other words, once Adam and Eve knew good from evil as a result of yielding to Satan's enticement to partake of the forbidden fruit, their instinctive response was to avoid the Lord rather than own up to their wrongdoing:

"And they heard the voice of the Lord God, as they were walking in the garden, in the cool of the day; and Adam and his wife went to hide themselves from the presence of the Lord God amongst the trees of the garden.

"And I, the Lord God, called unto Adam, and said unto him: Where goest thou?

"And he said: I heard thy voice in the garden, and I was afraid, because I beheld that I was naked, and I hid myself.

"And I, the Lord God, said unto Adam: Who told thee thou wast naked? Hast thou eaten of the tree whereof I commanded thee that thou shouldst not eat?" (Moses 4:15-17).

The theological importance of these verses goes far beyond the idea of psychological avoidance, of course. But they do rather pointedly suggest several things:

This spiritual account of avoidance and its consequences parallels our secular understanding of personal growth and development in some rather startling ways. We have already suggested that avoidance is an unsatisfying psychological response for most of us in most situations. We have also suggested that when we behave in unflattering ways, we have an almost reflexive tendency to hide those unpleasant realities from ourselves and others. That process of hiding significantly retards our personal growth and development.

The conclusion is rather obvious. Personal repentance, or a process very similar to it, is as essential to psychological growth as it is to spiritual development. Repentance and coping both involve recognizing and owning up to our own shortcomings, accepting (rather than hiding from) those unpleasant realities, and then using the internal emotional discomfort caused by our self-perceptions as our motivation to strive for self-improvement.

Styles of Psychological Avoidance and Their Coping Alternatives

Impression Management

Impression Management is attempting to make yourself more appealing and acceptable to others by pretending to be what you believe others would like you to be. Mild forms of Impression Management are commonly seen in the early phases of dating. More severe forms are seen in adults who conform to standards, values, and expectations to the point they actually sacrifice their identity in trying to fit in.

This style of avoidance allows people to hide behind an appealing interpersonal facade and minimize the risk of being known or rejected by others. Approval is gained by complying with the expectations of others. Impression Management often becomes a style of life in which individuals constantly try to gain approval by satisfying others' needs and expectations in almost all situations. Psychologically, Impression Management is an extremely dangerous form of conflict avoidance because it denies individuals the opportunity to cultivate their own unique individuality and God-given talents. Furthermore, it also seems to create extremely harsh self-evaluative feelings because the individuals experience their own inadequacy and weakness so clearly and explicitly when they beg for the approval of others by conforming to their expectations. All of that maneuvering is to avoid truly knowing themselves or being intimately known by others.

A Coping Alternative

A coping response to replace Impression Management requires understanding that the more you are yourself, the more you give people an opportunity to like what you really are. The unavoidable flip side is that being yourself also provides others the opportunity not to like you. Most impression managers will say that if they acted as they really are, no one would like them. Our experience has been that these folks have been faking it for so long they really don't know what the outcome would be if they let down the facades. We recommend that they try being themselves (expressing their opinion, dressing the way they want to, sending back the too-done steak) in a situation where they typically want to manage impressions. Many of our clients have reported that the resultant self-approval far outweighs any perceived fear of rejection. Furthermore, they find that others actually appreciate them for their willingness to be genuine! Who wants to be friends with a phony, anyway?

Help Me Find the Way

As a style of avoidance, Help Me Find the Way is acting as if you understand or know far less than you actually do, while treating others as if they know far more. Here is a typical example of this fascinating and disarming style of avoidance:

You are talking with an acquaintance who asks a question that calls upon your professional expertise. You feel uncomfortable having to respond directly, so you hedge with such statements as, "It could be" or "I'm not sure, but" and so on.

You belittle yourself because you fear you may put her off with what you know. So you play dumb. Before she can ask you another question, you ask her one, even though you already know the answer and it's evident she doesn't. In your seemingly innocent, ignorant way (two excellent examples are "Gee, I'm just a down-home, country bumpkin—yup, yup" and the "Gosh, I'm so scatterbrained; could you help me find my head, please?"), you begin to answer the question you asked, all the while making it sound as if it's your friend who is coming up with the answer! You do that by giving the answers prefaced with such questions as, "Do you think it could be . . . ?" or "What do you think about . . . ?" When your acquaintance does respond, you quickly rephrase what she says, adding a little bit more of your own answer, and then you thank her for being so perceptive and smart. Your friend is very flattered because you make her feel as if you are learning so much from her.

The essence of the Help Me Find the Way routine, then, is to play dumb in a very inquisitive way to avoid both conflict and responsibility for simple self-declarations and other forms of psychological initiatives in problem-solving. Used skillfully, this routine allows individuals who use it to comfortably hide behind a shield of flattery and perceived eagerness to learn. They are seldom required to face difficult issues squarely because they understand the issues so much less perfectly than you do. Furthermore, because of the barrage of questions they so adeptly ask, they never really say what they think and feel beyond what they want you to know, which is usually superficial and innocuous. Their style allows them to function at very low levels of personal risk and responsibility.

A Coping Alternative

Although the coping alternative to Help Me Find the Way is a bit more difficult than the coping alternative for Impression Management, it requires the same basic ingredient: you must be willing to be honest with yourself and others. Such honesty requires risk and responsibility. Rather than avoiding being known by others, you express your thoughts and feelings openly. As with Impression Management, you run the risk of being accepted or rejected. Either outcome requires the responsibility of taking ownership of the causes and consequences of your behavior. In doing so, you no longer manipulate others in a self-effacing way. Instead, you treat yourself and others with respect. Both risk-taking and being responsible are coping mechanisms that have inherently strong self-approving responses. With increased self-approval comes increased self-esteem.

Walt Disney Productions

Users of the Walt Disney Productions style of avoidance find something good in almost any situation, no matter how bad it really is. People who use this style of avoidance tend to be patient, long-suffering, and unrealistically optimistic. They almost always see the good in others and almost never respond to the bad. They often receive many kind words and compliments; however, closer examination shows a marked difference between individuals who are truly "the salt of the earth" and the ones we are describing here. The telltale signs of real Walt Disney Productions people look like this:

They avoid conversations about the cocaine problem, world hunger, economic problems of the elderly, and growing concerns about such social problems as child abuse, crime, divorce, and violence.

They never discuss family problems or conflicts. If you are so insensitive as even to try (how could you!), they will break down in tears or give some quick, pat answer to dismiss your concern that your sister Shirley is crazy (wearing a pith helmet and lederhosen to her bank teller job is just a phase!).

They never criticize a waiter, auto mechanic, cab driver, or plumber. If they don't see a problem in the first place, how can they criticize the person that supposedly caused it? So what if you ordered chicken and got a liverwurst sandwich. Liverwurst is good for you. So what if the car leaks more oil than it did when you first took it in. Luigi's got a cold and the car needs an oil change anyway. It doesn't matter if the plumber's bill is $107.89 for three minutes of work. Now that the leak is fixed, just how much is your peace of mind worth anyway?

And they always say yes. They always say no. Actually, they say anything you like if it makes you feel better.

These people can only be properly understood by asking them, Why the aversion to the unpleasant realities that are an integral part of life? It isn't that these people do not find conflict or unpleasantness distressing, as most of us do. It is just that they cannot acknowledge conflict or unpleasantness at all. Why? Usually, because they doubt themselves, but not in the way most people doubt themselves at one time or another. It is much more fundamental than that. It's a complete lack of experience or ability in responding to conflict realistically. Because of that lack of experience or ability, they really have no idea what to do to respond to conflict. Asking them to respond to conflict or unpleasantness openly and constructively is like asking most of us to jump off a ten-story building and then fly down to the ground. We just don't know how to do that. And because we don't, most of us just won't jump off a ten-story building—it is simply too dangerous.

For these people, the primary dangers in responding to conflict probably include being completely overwhelmed by the conflict and making an utter fool of themselves, allowing their own feelings of conflict and anger to show and maybe get out of control, running the risk of looking off balance and out of control to those around them, and allowing others to see parts of their personalities that they are ashamed of or fear. The result of any of these fears, quite naturally, is simply to deny the existence of conflict and unpleasantness. Like most forms of avoidance, such a solution provides immediate relief from the stress of the moment but precludes long-term growth in the areas that are chronically avoided.

A Coping Alternative

The Walt Disney Productions style of avoidance presents an interesting paradox. By denying the problems that you fear, you support their very existence! As long as problems—personal or interpersonal—are avoided, they can never be resolved. Coping requires the understanding that acknowledging problems is the first step to overcoming them.

Facing your fears is the very purpose for which you were placed on earth. Therein lies growth. Your success in this life will be measured by the degree to which you can face your fears and individual problems, not by your ability to act as if they didn't exist. As therapists and ecclesiastical leaders, we have seen people grow immeasurably by confronting their most difficult problems. Remarkably enough, people are usually grateful to have such problems finally brought out in the open. Furthermore, most people are grateful when we are willing to talk about a problem that might exist between us and them. Precious energy can now be spent in resolving uncomfortable differences rather than in avoiding them. By facing difficult issues you demonstrate strength and courage, both of which are self-approving, both of which increase self-esteem.

It's Written in the Rule Book

Users of the style of avoidance called It's Written in the Rule Book have an overwhelming need to be in charge and have everything done by the book. In their minds, there is a rule for everything. All they have to do is look it up. This attitude is very convenient. If you ever disagree with them, they can look it up and quote you section and paragraph. That procedure makes it evident that you are wrong because the rule is written somewhere. Furthermore, they are right, not because they said so, but because the book said so. This vicarious style of rightness precludes such people from having to take responsibility for their decisions or behavior. As long as it's a rule, there's nothing they can do about it. And if it's not written somewhere, they know they've heard it somewhere before. The point is, there's a rule out there for everything, and they are only playing by the rules.

As long as there are rules, rulers can assure themselves of never losing control. And that's what it's all about: control over self, control over others. Rules provide convenient guidelines in a nasty world that is unruly and disorderly. People can be that way, too: spontaneous, unique, and totally out of order. Rules keep everything in place. Rulers live to maintain order lest by losing control they wind up having to face the things they try so hard to control: themselves and their own fears and sense of inadequacy. People and events must remain predictable and therefore controllable. Deep down inside rulers feel that if things do get out of control, their inadequacies will overpower them and the universe will fall apart. Thus they avoid facing their fears by controlling their environment as much as possible. They also avoid taking responsibility for their overbearing need for control by placing the responsibility on rules that may or may not exist.

A Coping Alternative

Like Walt Disney Productions, there is a fascinating paradox imbedded in this style. To have true control over your life, you must be willing to give up the control you perceive you require. Controlling others to feel good about yourself betrays your own lack of internal control and approval. By remaining rulebound at the expense of allowing your unique self to contribute to your environment and to those around you, you never afford yourself the opportunity to test the mettle you are truly made of. Failing to know how strong, self-disciplined, or capable you really are forces you to maintain the false boundaries that rules made by others provide. Coping requires that you create your own motives for obeying rules and, where necessary, create your own rules and take ownership of them. Only then can you acknowledge where you are weak and can improve yourself and where you are strong and can help others.

More Avoidance Techniques

Avoidance routines are by no means limited to the five you have read about. A complete list of them is not possible here, but a sample of some of the more impressive routines is listed below. Two things about this list should be noted. First, each of the interpersonal games or strategies helps people avoid conflict and anxiety. Second, when the games are executed with skill and daring, their success is remarkable. Almost all of the following styles of conflict avoidance are discussed more fully by Eric Berne in his book entitled Games People Play (New York: Ballantyne Books, 1976) and in Virginia Satir's book on marital relations, Peoplemaking (Palo Alto, Calif.: Science and Behavior Books, 1976).

If It Weren't for You

If It Weren't for You (IWFU) is probably the game most commonly played between spouses. Variations of IWFU are played by students who don't apply themselves to their studies and then blame poor grades on their church callings or on roommates whom they've helped through a personal struggle. Children also play IWFU by blaming their failures on parents. IWFU takes on many variations of the scenario played out in the following example:

Mrs. White often complains that her husband restricts her social activities. She tells him, for example, "If it weren't for you, I would have learned to dance." Eventually, Mr. White allows his wife to sign up for dance lessons. At her first dance lesson, Mrs. White finds that she has a terrible fear of dancing in front of others and leaves the room before the first waltz is over.

Mrs. White, the player who is "it" in this game, uses IWFU to avoid facing her own fears. She blames her failure to participate in feared activities on her domineering husband. She even makes him feel guilty about his role in the game so that she not only avoids feared activities but receives gifts and favors from her husband, who tries to make up for his dominance. With her friends, Mrs. White plays a variation of IWFU called If It Weren't for Him, in which she and her friends blame their lack of accomplishments on their husbands.

Mr. White's participation in the game is also avoidance. He may fear abandonment by his wife. Rather than come to terms with his fear, he demands that his wife rarely leave home, so that he can be sure she cannot abandon him.

Schlemiel and Schmaltz

Schlemiel and Schmaltz is a game often played between two people who could easily be friends, who may even feel they should be friends, but who are afraid of taking the psychological risk of initiating meaningful interchange. The term schlemiel comes from a Yiddish word for cunning and refers to people who manage to get their way with other people without conflict. The role of schlemiel is often played by people who need reassurance. They feel irresponsible, so they act irresponsible where they are sure of being told, "That's fine." Schmaltz comes from a Yiddish word meaning, literally, "rendered fat." This term refers to the other people in this scenario, who feel put upon but who also feel they must rise above a confrontation in order to win, as in the following example:

Mark and John go to a party. During the course of the evening, they join with some others in a trivia game. At one point, John is about to correctly answer a question and win the game for his team. Mark shouts out the answer from the sidelines, making the question void. John's initial reaction is anger, but he vaguely realizes that if he expresses his anger, he will come off as a sore loser and Mark will win.

Mark says, "I'm sorry. I got carried away."

John mutters, "Oh, that's fine."

Later, John and Mark are conversing with a few others. Mark makes a cutting remark, hitting a sensitive nerve in John. John is offended and wants either to defend himself or to attack Mark.

Mark says, "I'm sorry. I was just joking."

John musters up his good manners and self-control and says, "That's fine."

This behavior continues for the rest of the night.

Mark spills punch on John and says, "I'm sorry. It was an accident."

"That's fine," says John.

Mark makes advances to John's date. "I'm sorry. I was just being sociable."

"That's fine."

Both players, Mark the Schlemiel and John the Schmaltz, completely avoid facing a conflict. Mark is childishly destructive but avoids being forced to truly justify his conduct to others or himself. John avoids the potential embarrassment of a confrontation or of losing his temper but resents Mark and feels cowardly.

See What You Made Me Do

See What You Made Me Do (SWYMMD) is a game people play to avoid other people and also to avoid directly addressing why they want to avoid them. Feeling unsociable or just needing some personal space, they engross themselves in a solitary activity. An intruder, perhaps a child, spouse, or friend comes seeking attention or just to ask a question like "Have you seen the rubber cement?" This interruption "causes" them to forget a line they were writing, or drop the screwdriver, or make an error in calculating, and they yell in anger, "See what you made me do!"

If this game is played often enough, the intruders soon learn to keep their distance. Of course, the people who play SWYMMD are upset by the intruder, not by the "mistake" caused by the interruption, but they are only too happy to use the "mistake" as an excuse to eject the intruder. They play SWYMMD to avoid the difficulty of telling friends or family that they would rather not see them for a while. They may even avoid admitting to themselves that at times they would rather be alone than help others.

Another form of SWYMMD is used to avoid personal responsibility, as in the following example:

Will has difficulty making decisions, so he defers many decisions to his wife, often under the guise of gallantry or democracy. He courteously lets her decide where they will go for dinner or what movie they will see. He finds safety in his decision not to decide. If his wife's choice turns out to be a good one, all is well. If not, he can say, "See what you made us do." Either way he is safe.

The game becomes more serious when played with serious subjects like finances and child-raising. Will lets his wife decide how their accounts will be managed and their children disciplined. Then, if he bounces a check or a child becomes unruly, he can say, "See what you made me do."

At the office, Will asks his subordinates for advice on a project. When the project fails, he blames their input. He asks for their input on his next project, but they wisely say they have no ideas for him. He then asks his superiors for advice. They make several suggestions, which he uses. When this project fails, he says, "See what you made me do." They dismiss him from the company.

People play this form of SWYMMD to avoid facing their inability to make decisions. They avoid risking responsibility for their own actions. They also avoid the intimacy and cooperation necessary to make joint decisions or reach consensus.

Chances are very good that you've seen people use these styles or play these games many times before. Although our descriptions of avoidance may seem humorous, these techniques can be deadly, choking off positive self-evaluative thoughts, which are essential to self-esteem. When avoidance is used to win, look good, or protect our false sense of self, negative self-evaluations and low self-esteem are the inevitable results. Paradoxically, negative self-evaluations and low self-esteem are the very things that avoidance was used to guard against—and ended up fostering instead.

Finding Your Own Coping Responses

Regardless of the avoidance myth you believe in or the avoidance style you adopt or the avoidance game you play, they are all consistently associated with weakness and inadequacy. Coping, on the other hand, is associated with courage and adequacy. The following exercise may be useful in helping you adopt a coping response, no matter what means of avoidance you have employed in the past:

Chances are that you'd much rather have the feelings about yourself that coping brings. Yet in order to cope, you must have a strong understanding of how you avoid. You must be able to recognize it each time you choose to avoid and then acknowledge that avoiding is what you are doing. Find the words that describe you in the process of avoiding and ask yourself how you feel about yourself for being that way. When the discomfort of feeling negatively about yourself for avoiding outweighs the initial fear of trying to cope, your desire to cope will increase. And with each coping response you make, you will find that your self-esteem is growing.

Case Study: Jim

The following example of fear-motivated avoidance and then of coping responses is a good illustration of all the general principles we have been discussing:

It was a golden opportunity. A major studio had liked his proposal for a documentary screenplay and was now requesting the first draft. At age thirty-four, Jim had a chance to expand his career beyond his job as an in-house writer for a large corporation. This chance was something he'd been waiting for. It was the first occasion where his abilities would be pushed to the limit. In spite of his excitement in the face of such good fortune, only one thought came to mind. He would have to produce materials that would be reviewed by experts who would know what he was capable, or incapable, of doing. The thought proved incapacitating.

Jim really wasn't surprised. In fact, this reaction was old hat. Every time he had a chance to do something professionally rewarding, he reacted the same way—he froze. He was well aware that his fear of "going for it" was tied to his fear of failure, in this case, the fear that his best efforts would be found lacking. In spite of his ambition and hunger for success, his attempts at productive work were continually interrupted by television, menial tasks around the house, and other inconsequential activities. Ignoring the critical, he would deal with the mundane, talking himself into believing each silly chore was paramount. Though he had considerable creative and intellectual talents, they remained essentially unused. Better never to try than to be found inadequate in an authentic test. To this day, Jim's manuscript remains only partially completed. What is finished is excellent, and the studio remains eager for him to complete his assigned task, one that will probably never be completed.

By getting the studio interested but then only partially completing the screenplay, Jim again demonstrated to himself the inadequacy of his talents in such a way that his own estimation cannot be refuted by others.

As you might suspect, a life of mediocre accomplishments and personal dissatisfaction is the only realistic outcome for such people, as long as they continue to avoid facing their irrational and unresolved fear of failure. Again, the paradox is evident: avoiding fears in hopes of warding off discomfort, only to endure even more discomfort instead.

About ten months later, Jim had come to a virtual standstill. The screenplay remained on his shelf, and work on it became more and more dissatisfying. An older associate recognized Jim's talent as well as his tendency to underuse it. During lunch and on breaks they spent many hours talking about Jim's fear of failure and how he avoided situations where his fear could be potentially realized. That was the first time anyone had ever explicitly described to him what he really already knew but was never willing to face. Hearing it and understanding it made it more difficult not to do something about it.

In a bid to alter his avoidant style, Jim re-enrolled in a graduate program he had started and—as with other important things—had never finished. He completed his course work and had only one requirement to complete in order to graduate. That one requirement was his master's thesis. Nevertheless, on the eve of imminent success, the fear of failure loomed large once more.

In the face of that specific, crucial task, Jim again started to show the familiar signs of avoidance. He went to his friend, asking what he should do. Somehow he felt that if he could talk some more or in his own words, "get psyched up," he could find the necessary motivation to complete his thesis. His friend listened to his story patiently and attentively, as was his custom. When Jim had finished, the older man sat in silence, pondering the problem. Then, without warning, he confronted Jim with the obvious reality that he didn't seem to really want to complete his thesis, and he was puzzled why he pretended he did. In spite of Jim's protestations to the contrary, the friend shook his head and said he would feel more comfortable with Jim if he stopped making excuses for what was obvious to them both: he didn't really WANT to finish his thesis, and he was probably afraid to try.

Frustrated and discouraged, Jim stood up to leave, telling his friend that he had been of no help to him and that he felt let down by him. The friend smiled and told Jim to sit back down. He said, "It sounds as though you're your own man with this one. I can't seem to provide you the help you seem to need, though I wish I could. And you don't seem able to get past this barrier on your own. Perhaps it's time to accept the possibility you simply won't be able to finish your thesis."

With that comment, all Jim's rationalizations ceased, as did his attempts to find reassurance from the words of his wiser friend. In the absence of these defenses, his acute personal disapproval of himself for not even trying far exceeded his fear of attempting the task and failing. He had no further recourse but to squarely face that he felt deeply inadequate to the task. He decided that if he could not complete his thesis, he probably couldn't complete anything else of importance either. He now understood and accepted that reality—but more important, he took responsibility for his own failures. His thesis had become the explicit test of his adequacy, something that he had always known on an implicit level. What Jim once only acknowledged on the inside, he now recognized on the outside. But with his strength no longer sapped by avoidance and false pretenses and the meaning of the test clear, there was no more denying his fear of failure and avoiding the test of his adequacy. It became much more important to him to see what kind of work he could actually produce.

Jim's friend smiled and nodded his head. He applauded the younger man's honesty and said that if it turned out he couldn't finish his thesis, at least he should "go down fighting the whole way." If he didn't, he would be disappointed in him. He would rather see him give his maximum effort and fail than see him get by with another partial effort. Not once did he reassure Jim that merely by trying he would succeed.

Jim's efforts were well rewarded. He completed his thesis and received an unusual number of compliments from the faculty. Far more important, he had taken the first major step in removing his incapacitating fear of failure. The small confidence in himself he had acquired was well earned. He is now a much closer approximation of the free-lance writer he always wanted to be. Though his accomplishments are still few, his sense of personal well-being has increased measurably and is fairly obvious to those who know him.

We suspect that Jim's improved well-being is not a result of his modest success, though it undoubtedly helped. Rather, it is a result of the self-respect he feels for coping with a major personal conflict instead of avoiding it. As a result of that coping, he has acquired some realistic reasons to believe that he can trust his talents and abilities when he needs them. He has also come to understand the personal cost of avoiding rather than facing conflict. These two elements are major ingredients in his new definition of himself—the influence of which will probably be undeniable in many future events.

In effect, Jim now has a new measuring stick by which to judge his behavior. Knowing and demonstrating that he can face his fears will in the future make it more explicit and undeniable if he fails to do so. He will not be able to rationalize or justify his avoidant behavior with the same ease as he once did. He will have to acknowledge his avoidant behavior for what it is and experience the negative self-evaluations that accompany such avoidance. On the other hand, with each coping response, accompanied by self-approval and positive self-evaluations, Jim's coping behavior will progressively increase.

Coping with threatening situations rather than avoiding them is the means by which individuals can create personal learning experiences that teach about the self and its diverse abilities, liabilities, and needs. Knowledge about the self, when properly acquired, becomes the basis for us to orchestrate our lives into a meaningful, satisfying, and self-directed experience for which we readily accept personal responsibility. In fact, coping refers more to a process that regulates realistic learning about the self than it does to any specific psychological quality, attribute, or achievement.

Coping is a growth process in which personal development is the inevitable result of facing, understanding, and resolving conflicts. As a result of accepting higher than usual levels of psychological risk and personal responsibility inherent in the process of psychological coping, we can reasonably expect to experience the following four conditions:
