Scott R. Peterson, Richard L. Bednar, Spirituality and Self-Esteem: Developing the Inner Self ( 1990)

Chapter Seven

Cultivating Spirituality

Cultivating spirituality is usually not something automatic or easy for most people. The path of spiritual development is usually uneven and difficult—a burst of knowledge here, a personal setback there, a recommitment to do better—with our efforts being periodically blessed and sustained by the Lord. It is a continuous struggle to grasp and understand what we can glimpse but seldom hold in clear and constant focus. For many, there are greater problems along the way. Doubts creep in that, if not properly resolved, can leave us spiritually debilitated. The demands and responsibilities of the secular world distract us and consume our time. We become alienated from the saving doctrines of the gospel because we misunderstand them or we don't fully recognize the retarding effects our "minor" sins may have on our spiritual development. And even when we master those problems, there are still others to be considered. A healthy and serious attempt at cultivating enduring, authentic spirituality must frankly acknowledge and then overcome two obstacles.

The first obstacle to spirituality is the natural man, who is instinctively inclined to resist or be unresponsive to the mellow enticings of the Spirit. Pride, self-sufficiency, and striving for invulnerability seem to reside naturally where humility and contrition are required. Although we may regret that state of affairs, it is hardly controversial. More than seventy-five scriptures speak to this point either directly or indirectly. Two of the better known passages are the following: "For the natural man is an enemy to God, and has been from the fall of Adam, and will be, forever and ever, unless he yields to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, and putteth off the natural man and becometh a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord, and becometh as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his father" (Mosiah 3:19). "We have learned by sad experience that it is the nature and disposition of almost all men, as soon as they get a little authority, as they suppose, they will immediately begin to exercise unrighteous dominion" (D&C 121:39).

Spirituality won't just happen for many people. The passage of time won't create it, neither will maturity, the good wishes of our leaders, nor regular attendance at our meetings. Much more is required. The development of spirituality means the pursuit of eternal truth and knowledge. It is a personal and volitional struggle to learn and implement the will of God in our lives. Our willingness to engage in that struggle is as essential to spiritual development as learning how to recognize and choose good over evil. It is a proactive process of wanting and reaching with consistency and integrity. It is a formidable undertaking and should be accepted as nothing less.

The second obstacle to developing spirituality that we must acknowledge and overcome is more subtle but equally important. That problem is our culturally acquired habit of investing our time and energies in activities whose rewards are the most obvious, immediate, and appealing. The driving force behind our materialism is a "fly now and pay later" mentality. Principles are secondary to profits and expediency, and immediate gratification is the most important consideration.

Both of these culturally acquired habits are dangerous enemies to us in the pursuit of spiritual truth and knowledge. The more fundamental a gospel teaching, the more likely its enduring, eternal nature will run contrary to the immediacy and practicality that are staple values in our worldly existence. In our search for spiritual truth, sacrifice and study will almost always precede understanding; and enduring principles will hardly ever be affected by short-term expediency. Meaningful truth, whether spiritual or scientific, hardly ever reveals its intimate and powerful secrets to the impatient and impulsive.

So we must wonder how we are to cultivate an abiding spirituality when so many of the forces in the world we live in conspire to confuse and distract us. Our answer can only come from the scriptures. It is illustrated in its alarming simplicity at the conclusion of one of the most eloquent and faith-promoting discourses given to man by a prophet. In this story of conversion, belief, and subsequent spiritual growth, King Benjamin's people "all cried with one voice, saying: Yea, we believe all the words which thou hast spoken unto us; and also, we know of their surety and truth, because of the Spirit of the Lord Omnipotent, which has wrought a mighty change in us, or in our hearts, that we have no more disposition to do evil, but to do good continually. And we, ourselves, also through the infinite goodness of God, and the manifestations of his Spirit, . . . are willing to enter into a covenant with our God to do his will, and to be obedient to his commandments in all things that he shall command us, all the remainder of our days" (Mosiah 5:2-3, 5; emphasis added). On that day when the Spirit of the Lord encompassed King Benjamin's people, they received an exquisitely clear understanding of the truth. Then, because of the Spirit's revealing the truth, a mighty change was wrought in their hearts. That change of heart coincides with the metaphors pointed out in Chapter 3 of this book, which we described as being synonymous with spirituality. As a result of their change of heart, the people of King Benjamin chose to enter into a covenant to obey God for the remainder of their days, a thing which they would not have done without knowing the truth and their hearts being changed.

There we have the scriptural blueprint for cultivating spirituality. We suggest that cultivating spirituality in today's world involves the same considerations as it did in the days of King Benjamin: seeking and receiving an understanding of the truth, undergoing a mighty change of heart, and then acting upon that truth which we have received.

Seeking and Receiving an Understanding of Truth

Things as They Really Are

There are numerous ways of defining what the truth is. We have found Elder Neal A. Maxwell's definition to be most elegant, direct, and enduring. He begins by quoting from Jacob 4:13:

" 'Behold, my brethren, he that prophesieth, let him prophesy to the understanding of men; for the Spirit speaketh the truth and lieth not. Wherefore, it speaketh of things as they really are, and of things as they really will be.' . . .

"Jacob's declaration about truth is, of course, consistent with the definition of truth given by the Lord to a later prophet, Joseph Smith: 'And truth is knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come.' (D&C 93:24.) . . .

"The true religionist is actually the ultimate realist, for he has a fully realistic view of man and the universe; he traffics in truths that are culminating and everlasting; he does not focus on facts that fade with changing circumstance or data that dissolve under pressures of time and circumstance. The Lord said, ' . . . truth abideth and hath no end.' (D&C 88:66.)" (Things As They Really Are [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1978], p. 1).

Truth, then, is things as they really are. If truth prevailed in its purest sense in this impure world, the true nature of all things would be known. There would be no pretense, pretext, or prevarication. There would be no need for argument, because opinion would be based on the truth—a truth that all could see. Subjectivity and objectivity would be one and the same. We would see all things as they really are, and we would know each other as we really are.

The truth simply is. It can neither be created nor destroyed. In the Doctrine and Covenants we read that, "All truth is independent in that sphere in which God has placed it" (D&C 93:30). This passage implies that the nature of truth remains constant regardless of time, circumstance, or perception. The scriptures, for instance, are truth. Although people attempt to destroy, dishonor, or discredit them, the scriptures in their independent sphere will remain what they are: the word of the Lord, forever.

Things as They Seem to Be

It must be admitted that human understanding of "true things" will always be limited and slightly distorted. That is as true of scientific propositions and facts as it is of religious concepts and practices. Truth is revealed by knowledge, and we gain knowledge through our various senses. Those senses are seldom the perfect receivers we would like them to be. So, as noble as mankind's pursuit of truth is, whether it be scientific or spiritual, we must understand that our comprehension of truth, our ability to accurately perceive the uncontaminated truth, is limited and partially impaired. Until we are in a more perfect state, much of what we now understand can only be considered approximations to the ultimate truths that can be known after the resurrection. With that in mind, several precautions prove useful in our individual search for spiritual truth during our mortal existence:

In brief, the process of human perception is an active one. The values, preferences, and needs of perceivers often become part of the very event they are trying to perceive with clarity and precision. The implications of this statement are far-reaching. A seeker of truth must understand that whereas the truth is constant, our perceptions of it probably are not. Furthermore, many distortions of truth are self-made and self-serving, and obstacles to seeing things as they really are can only be properly compensated for by acknowledging the fallibility of our own perceptions. Acknowledging and accepting our own fallibility is essential to our moving closer to truth's infallibility. Humility and faith must flourish where certainty is generally preferred.

The following story illustrates how personal wants and needs seductively distort our perceptions of truth without our even knowing it:

A young man went to his bishop about a persistent and long-standing sexual sin. He requested a blessing immediately upon entering the bishop's office, asserting that that was the only way he could be helped. The bishop listened for a moment and concluded privately that a blessing would not be appropriate. Instead, he chose to listen to the young man in order to gain further insight into the problem.

As the young man disclosed the details of his nearly debilitating problem, a recurring theme was evident: the young man had abandoned all hope and no longer believed it was in his power or ability to deal with the problem on his own. The bishop was confused about his initial impression and wondered if this was a problem over which the young man could still exercise volitional control. The compelling and persuasive details of the young man's story required the bishop to reevaluate his earlier impression to not give a blessing. Eventually, he decided to give a blessing after all.

The blessing was short, succinct, and undeniable. Much to the surprise of both the bishop and the young man, without the slightest pause the bishop pronounced that the young man was an agent unto himself. It was already within his power to abstain from his indiscretions, if he would choose to do so. In the eyes of the Lord he was accountable for all of his past indiscretions and those he might yet commit.

Things as they really are became exquisitely clear both to the bishop and to the young man. In this situation, this young man was free to exercise his will in spite of his protestations to the contrary. Now the young man understood that he had a much more serious problem than he had originally supposed. He left the bishop's office understanding that he now had to face and resolve some unpleasant realities about his "willful" nature that he had previously avoided by claiming helplessness.

Seeing Things as They Really Are

The difficulty we face is learning how to see things as they really are despite our own tendency to distort the truth as well as our willingness to be satisfied with less than the truth. Because of that simple reality, the first step in cultivating spirituality—searching for things as they really are—must necessarily be a process of looking beyond appearances. That can be difficult. It is certainly tempting to accept the false fronts and superficial standards of counterfeit truth. Because they are so abundant and bear a strong surface resemblance to their authentic counterparts, they are often easily mistaken for the real things. Furthermore, embracing the obvious and ordinary is infinitely easier than struggling to reach beyond what is so readily within our reach. We must, therefore, resist being satisfied with half-hearted attempts or first-try results. To know the truth, to know things as they really are, requires a greater diligence and stretching that may trouble and try us. In the words of Elder John A. Widtsoe, "A conviction of the truth of the gospel, a testimony, must be sought if it is to be found. It does not come as the dew from heaven. It is the result of man's eagerness to know truth. Often it requires battle with traditions, former opinions and appetites, and a long testing of the gospel by every available fact and standard. . . .

"All should test their religious beliefs. But all such testing must be done in the right spirit and by the right method. Every testing must be a sincere and honest search for truth" (Evidences and Reconciliations, 2d ed. [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1943], pp. 6, 23).

How, then, do we overcome the human problems of distorting truth and failing to recognize it when we see it?

The resolution may appear difficult, but it is not complex. Within each one of us exists the ability to discern truth. That ability comes from our own innate, eternal nature. That nature is part intelligence, which is the "light and truth" that was with God in the beginning (D&C 93:29). Because of its penetrating and transcendant character, our eternal nature is the only means whereby we can differentiate between what may appear to be spiritual and what really is spiritual. The capacity to discern light and truth is the essence of our eternal identity.

Our own eternal nature, then, is both a detector and a receptor of truth. It is partially the result of being begotten by the Father and partially the result of being with the Father in the beginning, before the Creation. It is the essence of what we are. And that part of us is not passive. It resonates with truth, it seeks truth, it rejoices in the presence of truth, and it is most fully activated by the light and truth that emanates from Christ, who personifies truth. The light within us, when activated by the light of Christ, has its own unique radiance. Learning to feel and respond to spiritual radiance is the key to spiritual development.

So, how do we learn to feel the light of Christ radiating to our eternal self and from our eternal self to our mortal self, particularly when the glow is subtle? We can learn through many different things—prayer, fasting, scripture study, blessings, and seeking righteousness. But in another sense, we always learn through the same thing: attending to, cultivating, differentiating, and then trusting our spiritual identity that receives the light and truth that emanate from Christ. The spiritual person must be shaped and influenced by spiritual forces from within.

So far, we have described a process of spiritual development that focuses on the internal/eternal identity. We have repeatedly pointed out that the very essence of that identity is spiritual and naturally resonates with the light and truth that emanates from Christ. But we have said virtually nothing about the processes that activate the receptor of truth. That is an important consideration, particularly in light of the morally bankrupt world that surrounds us and influences us. We must consider how and why spiritual influences can affect our lives in an environment that can be so alien to them. Following are several possibilities:

The paramount importance of a deep sense of personal humility in developing spirituality is further indicated by Christ's declaring that his life and atonement fulfilled the law of Moses (3 Nephi 9:17). Then the Savior said: "And ye shall offer up unto me no more the shedding of blood; yea, your sacrifices and your burnt offerings shall be done away, for I will accept none of your sacrifices and your burnt offerings. And ye shall offer for a sacrifice unto me a broken heart and a contrite spirit. And whoso cometh unto me with a broken heart and a contrite spirit, him will I baptize with fire and with the Holy Ghost" (3 Nephi 9:19-20).

It is apparent that humility, a broken heart, and a contrite spirit are the precise conditions under which we are the most receptive to the truth about our own sinful nature and the most aware of our absolute reliance on repentance and the Atonement for our salvation. The significance of humility in our spiritual development is made clear in Ether 12:27: "And if men come unto me I will show unto them their weakness. I give unto men weakness that they may be humble; and my grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me; for if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them."

So you see, heightened spirituality is not the result of willpower and discipline (forms of self-reliance), though willpower and discipline play a prominent role in cultivating humility through study of the scriptures, prayer, and so forth. Humility is more the result of seeing ourselves as we really are, with all of our mortal foibles, and clearly seeing God's love for us as it really is. Perceiving these fundamental truths in their simplicity is the beginning of appreciation and humility. Paradoxically, it is that humility within us that plays such an important role in arousing the spiritual capacities that also reside within us.

Undergoing a Mighty Change of Heart

The people of King Benjamin came to understand two fundamental truths on the day of their conversion; they understood the truth about their own sinful nature and the truth about the divine nature of Christ. These two truths, juxtaposed, created a comparison far too compelling to ignore. The alternatives were simple and clear: openly embrace their sinful nature and, in the face of complete understanding, reject Christ; or acknowledge their sinful nature, forsake it, and embrace Christ. Seeing things as they really are forced the issue, requiring them to decide. When they made that decision, their hearts were changed. Their newborn spiritual state allowed them to see the present and future glory of the Lord.

The change of heart we too must experience for ourselves is similar. Spirituality can be achieved only to the degree that we acknowledge who and what we are. Unless we make such an acknowledgment, the incongruity of who we portray ourselves to be and who we really are will stand in the way of our totally accepting Christ. Maintaining facades, covering up fears, and hiding from weaknesses is denying the truth, a truth we must face in order to face Christ. Facing that truth requires a broken heart and a contrite spirit. They, in turn, replace fear with courage, weakness with strength, incongruity with congruity, and fear with hope.

Acting on That Truth We Have Received: "Give Me All"

The covenant the people of King Benjamin made was not only a consequence of their changed hearts and newfound spirituality but also a reinforcement of their spirituality. Spirituality is not a passive thing. It requires commitment to remain active and alive. Commitment that comes from true spirituality, born of substance and congruence, is synonymous with submitting our individual will to that of the Lord. In so doing, our will and his become one, where at least for one perfect moment, his infinite mind and our finite minds are at once harmonious, consonant, and unified. When that unity happens, our motives for seeking spirituality are not, cannot, be tainted by what is not true. It is impossible to be in harmony with the Lord while in disharmony with ourselves or others. We are able to arrive on that plane of which the Savior spoke when he importuned his Father to make his disciples one "as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us" (John 17:21).

Through a broken heart, contrite spirit, and a recognition of truth, we can commit ourselves, out of love, to please the Savior and to serve him by serving others. There are no other reasons for worship; there are no other motives for spirituality. In their absence, self-aggrandizement or self-doubt creep in, and our so-called spiritual exercises serve little more than to spiritually weaken and, ultimately, condemn us.

When we commit to the Savior we must do so fully. In the words of C. S. Lewis, "Christ says, 'Give me All. I don't want so much of your time and so much of your money and so much of your work: I want You. I have not come to torment your natural self, but to kill it. No half-measures are any good. I don't want to cut off a branch here and a branch there, I want to have the whole tree down. I don't want to drill the tooth, or crown it, or stop it, but to have it out. Hand over the whole natural self, all the desires which you think innocent as well as the ones you think wicked—the whole outfit. I will give you a new self instead. In fact, I will give you Myself: my own will shall become yours' " (Mere Christianity [London: Collins, 1988], p. 167).

Commitment to the Savior must be both internal and external; otherwise, it is not commitment. Spirituality, too, must be both internal and external, or it is not spirituality. Our level of commitment and spirituality will be manifested by the degree to which we do the right things for the right reasons. No more. No less.

The Greatest Hoax: Incongruity between Appearance and Substance

Much of our discussion has been about truth, about being congruent, about allowing the internal/eternal self to develop and eventually dictate outward behavior so there is little difference between who you really are and who you represent yourself to be. Regrettably, this mortal existence is the perfect breeding ground for the broadest variance between reality and appearance. And, more regrettably, all of us participate in the creation of that hoax and may not even realize it. The human factor can create a deadly form of deception to which we can all fall prey. Let's review how that can happen.

When we are in frequent contact with something, it is difficult to maintain our initial appreciation for it. A good example is the automobile. It is capable of getting us to work in minutes while we sit comfortably and listen to a variety of music or the latest reports on world events, change the temperature to suit our comfort, make phone calls, and carry enough luggage to be gone for a month. Yet the longer we have an automobile, the less we seem to appreciate it. In fact, we seem to appreciate it only when we don't have it.

Taking an automobile for granted may seem unimportant. But when we take for granted the truth of things of the Spirit, we run the risk of a most subtle and serious kind of deception: trivializing what is truly substantial while still acting as if it were important to us. For instance, through repetition and rote we can trivialize prayer, reducing it from a sweet communion to a hollow echo of previous supplications. We can continue acting as if prayer were meaningful by still getting down on our knees at night, blessing the food, or offering invocations in church meetings regardless of an improvised internal spiritual state. Even with the substance gone, we can still continue the semblance. When that happens, we lose the thoughts, the feelings, the resonating with the Spirit that accompany things of the Spirit, yet we continue behaving outwardly as if what we were doing was meaningful, significant, and a reflection of our truest internal self. The deception lies not only in the incongruity between outward appearances and inward substance but also in the willingness to maintain the outward zeal when the inner senses verge on apathy. By refusing to acknowledge the absence of the Spirit, we run the risk of not having the Spirit at all.

How do we remedy that problem of incongruity between outward appearance and inward substance? How do we remove ourselves from the condemning hoax of maintaining the outward zeal when the inner self is apathetic?

Let's go back and take another look at the automobile for a moment. What do we typically do to impress upon our teenage children the grave responsibility they have when they first learn to drive? We raise such issues as how expensive the car is to operate, maintain, and keep insured, how powerful and dangerous two tons of steel can be at sixty-five miles an hour, how they might get a ticket, or have the privilege of driving taken away from them if they abuse it. We teach them specific procedures to follow every time they get behind the wheel: buckle up the seat belt, check the fuel gauge, check the rearview mirror before they pull out—all of which could possibly save their lives some day. We take the concept of the family station wagon sitting in the driveway and broaden its meaning and significance. It is no longer merely a set of wheels that our children have gotten into and out of for half a dozen years. It is now in a context of other people, other cars, and potential hazards as well as potential benefits. It is not just an immediate, ordinary object; it is also a representation of its extraordinary possibilities for both good and bad. In short, a clear, accurate, and continual consciousness of the value, costs, potential dangers, and the inherent responsibilities of those who use the car is all that can prevent the use of the automobile from being trivialized.

If we are going to reduce the risk of making spiritual matters trivial, so too must we keep them in proper perspective. The sacrament provides us an excellent example, especially because the things we have frequent contact with stand a greater chance of being trivialized. If we are to uphold the sacred nature of the sacrament, we must first of all see beyond the ritual we practice each Sunday. The sacrament is not just bread and water. It represents the flesh and blood of Christ. Partaking of the sacramental bread and water represents our renewing the covenants we made at baptism, which is the gateway to salvation. We demonstrate our rebirth in Christ through the waters of baptism. If the meaning of what the sacrament represents is lost, the weekly practice of partaking of it becomes trivial. We no longer view partaking of the sacrament as an ordinance that can spiritually renew or spiritually condemn. It is merely a process that we participate in out of habit, or fear that someone will see us if we don't, or failure to understand how sacred it truly is.

Trivializing spiritual activity is a major stumbling block to cultivating true spirituality. As long as we call activities spiritual when they are not, true spirituality is blocked and frustrated while we remain satisfied with its mere appearance. If we trivialize spiritual activities, we can easily take for granted what could be truly spiritual activities by executing them in a half-hearted way and still calling them spiritual, even though the Spirit is absent. Either way, we have sacrificed spiritual substance for its much more evident, yet empty, form. Elder Neal A. Maxwell describes the trap of superficiality:

"Some give of their time yet withhold themselves, being present without giving of their presence and going through the superficial motions of membership instead of the deep emotions of consecrated discipleship.

"Some try to get by with knowing only the headlines of the gospel, not really talking much of Christ or rejoicing in Christ and esteeming lightly His books of scripture which contain and explain His covenants (see 2 Nephi 25:26)" (Ensign, May 1987, p. 70).

The importance of substance in spiritual activities is evident. Yet, oftentimes, even the substance behind the activity may be motivated out of less than spiritual intent. Here are five common ulterior motives that cannot qualify behavior as spiritual:

Cultivating spirituality requires carefully assessing our motives for engaging in spiritual activity. Behaviors we once perceived as spiritual may very well be motivated by purposes that hinder the very spirituality being sought. To heighten our awareness of the deception in trivializing spiritual things, the following points may be helpful:

The following story illustrates the concepts we have been discussing:

Carl had always done his home teaching as long as he could remember—as a teacher with his dad, as an elder, and now as a high priest. His sense of duty and obligation were strong, and so each month his families could be assured a visit. They weren't remarkable visits. They weren't like the stories you'd hear in church meetings or see on Church videos. They were just visits. He'd wonder every now and then how you could get the Spirit that would make home teaching something more than just friendly chit-chat once a month. He knew he didn't have it. But in its absence, it was enough for him to know that home teaching was something one just did. It gave him some satisfaction to be able to say he'd gotten it done, although sometimes he wondered if it was more a feeling of relief. Either way, his calling was fulfilled, even if it was not magnified.

The habit of home teaching had become a trivial thing to Carl. There was no malicious intent or premeditation involved. It was only a matter of gradually learning over the years to accept home teaching as an activity that could be done without the internal effort of seeking the Spirit. Thus reduced, home teaching was no more than any other passing, friendly gesture. It would never be more until Carl realized that "getting the spirit" of home teaching was not so much something you "got" as it was a process of soul-searching to find out why you hadn't got it. As President Spencer W. Kimball taught us a long time ago concerning things of the Spirit, "Learn, then teach." President Ezra Taft Benson made the same point in his book A Witness and a Warning, in a chapter entitled "Cleansing the Inner Vessel."

Cultivating spirituality is not easy nor was it meant to be. Finding the truth, having a change of heart, and then committing ourselves to Christ run contrary to the natural man within us and are, consequently, difficult tasks. Confounded by the tendency to trivialize spiritual things, we may feel that the process of becoming truly spiritual is not merely arduous but impossible.

To get past feeling overwhelmed, we must focus on the word process. Much like self-esteem, spirituality cannot be considered an achievement, something we strive for and then receive. It is not something that can be obtained, like a trophy awarded at the finish line and then placed on the mantel for display. Spirituality is the training, the exercise, and the running of the race, regardless of what place we finish in. It is dynamic and fluid. Its nature and strength are contingent upon the process we choose to apply and follow daily.

Rather than adding spirituality to a long list of things to do, make spirituality the template that guides the doing. What is done becomes secondary to how it is done. Personal accomplishments are much less important than the personal integrity that guides their being done. The character we display, the Christlike qualities we exemplify, become embedded in the choices we make, the relationships we cultivate, and the many small behaviors that make up our larger lives.
