Arise and come forth unto me, that ye may … know that I am the God of Israel, and the God of the whole earth, and have been slain for the sins of the world. … This they did do, going forth one by one until they had all gone forth, and did see with their eyes and did feel with their hands, and did know of a surety and did bear record, that it was he, of whom it was written by the prophets, that should come.

And when they … had witnessed for themselves, they did cry out with one accord, saying:

Hosanna! Blessed be the name of the Most High God! (3 Ne. 11:14–17).

Following the Savior’s Crucifixion and Resurrection, the people in the Western Hemisphere saw a man descending out of heaven and heard a voice proclaiming, “Behold, I am Jesus Christ, whom the prophets testified shall come into the world” (3 Ne. 11:10). He invited all who had gathered to “come forth unto me”—that they might gain their own witness of him. He offers each of us the same invitation.

On the next few pages, youth from around the world bear their testimonies—and share how they have accepted the invitation to receive a witness of Jesus Christ.

And whoso cometh unto me with a broken heart and a contrite spirit, him will I baptize with fire and with the Holy Ghost (3 Ne. 9:20).

And it came to pass when they were all baptized and had come up out of the water, the Holy Ghost did fall upon them, and they were filled with the Holy Ghost and with fire (3 Ne. 19:13).

“I first heard about the Church from my best friend, Vera, who is 16. I was curious to know about her beliefs, especially why Latter-day Saints don’t drink tea and coffee and where my friend went for three hours every Sunday. I asked her to take me to church, and a month later I was baptized.

“At first I didn’t understand many things. Everything seemed to be strange and unusual, but I kept asking questions of friends and missionaries.

“Now, four months later, I reflect on the many ways I have changed since my baptism. The day of my baptism, I could feel the Holy Ghost, but I was very emotional, somewhat worried, and a little afraid. Now I can feel the peaceful, quiet influence of the Spirit, and I have what is most important—my faith in the Savior.”

Vera Terekhova,
Vasiliostrovsky Branch,
St. Petersburg Russia West District

“Sometimes we expect particular spiritual experiences and think we don’t have a testimony if we don’t have those experiences.

“When King Benjamin gave his farewell address, the people were filled with the Spirit and felt a great change in their hearts (see Mosiah 5:2). When we have a feeling of wanting to change, when we recognize good and evil and choose good, and when we feel happy and at peace, we are obtaining a testimony of Jesus Christ. We are coming to feel what Alma described: ‘Your understanding doth begin to be enlightened, and your mind doth begin to expand’(Alma 32:34).

“We can have this experience on any day—in one of our many Church meetings or when we see our loved ones or when we enjoy life. The peace and love we feel come from our Savior.”

Alexandra Ramos,
Lido Branch,
Cali Colombia Stake

Jesus came and stood in the midst and ministered unto them. And it came to pass that he spake unto the multitude, and commanded them that they should kneel down again upon the earth. …

And it came to pass that when they had all knelt down upon the earth, he commanded his disciples that they should pray. …

And Jesus said unto them: Pray on; nevertheless they did not cease to pray (3 Ne. 19:15–17, 26).

“It is not always easy to be good, especially when facing difficult problems. Sometimes I begin to think my problems are the end of the world. But there is always one person to help me; that is Jesus Christ. He is always there to guide and give me comfort.

“To develop faith in Jesus Christ, I’m trying to be obedient, to study the scriptures and apply them in my life, and most of all to have daily prayers.”

Marvin M. Gamboa,
Mapandan Ward,
San Fabian Philippines Stake

“I did not have a full assurance that Jesus Christ existed. When people asked me if I believed in God, I would tell them I didn’t know, because I didn’t have a real testimony.

“One of the elders who was teaching me helped me realize I needed to work to have a strong belief in God. He told me, ‘Study the scriptures every day, pray, and go to Church, and you will receive an answer.’ I put his advice into practice, and I soon realized that my faith was growing bit by bit.

“My friends say I’m not the same anymore. They want me to be like I was before, but I can’t. Being a member of the Church has changed my life.”

Shirley Álvarez Vega,
El Socorro Branch,
Cartagena Colombia El Bosque District

And now, behold, I say unto you, that ye ought to search these things. Yea, a commandment I give unto you that ye search these things diligently. …

And whosoever will hearken unto my words and repenteth and is baptized, the same shall be saved. Search the prophets, for many there be that testify of these things (3 Ne. 23:1, 5).

“I know that the scriptures are the best way to come to know the Lord Jesus Christ, and the more diligently we study, the more we will know him. As I have studied the scriptures, I have realized all of the things Jesus Christ has done for us—and for me. I am very, very grateful for the infinite love he gives us, and I know that I have no better friend and companion. I know I am a child of God. My Father in Heaven loves me, and if I am worthy, he will always be at my side.”

Jennifer López Gianopoulos,
Gutierrez Zamora Ward,
Papantla Mexico Stake

“The year I turned 17, I studied the Book of Mormon in seminary. I hadn’t intended to take seminary, but I quickly became fascinated by my teacher’s lessons. Little by little I began to want to read the Book of Mormon, even though I did not understand what I read. It was hard to stick to my determination to read it to the end, but I was guided by the Spirit to continue reading every day.

“Seven months later the memory of a particular scripture I had read struck me forcefully, and I decided to pray. The first words I addressed to my Heavenly Father were difficult, and I was troubled. But during that personal prayer a warmth filled and surrounded me, and I perceived that my Heavenly Father was listening and that he loved me.

“Reading the Book of Mormon was only the beginning of my conversion. Since that time I have had to continue to work to repent and live the gospel daily. But now I know that Jesus Christ is my guide and my example. I need only follow him and, as he commanded, ‘do the things which ye have seen me do’ (2 Ne. 31:12).”

Nicolas Billings,
Nogent Ward,
Paris France East Stake

Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord;

And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a curse (3 Ne. 25:5–6).

“When I went to the Manila Philippines Temple, I felt peace and tranquility and an unexplainable joy from the very first moment. I know Heavenly Father was happy for me to perform temple ordinances for my dead ancestors.

“Being baptized for the dead strengthened my testimony that God really loves all of us. And serving in the temple gave me a vision of how to be strong in all things. If trials come into my life, I need to do my part, but I also need to turn to my Father in Heaven.”

Minda Demis,
La Trinidad Second Ward,
Baguio Philippines Stake

“My parents taught me Christian principles, and we read from the Bible together as a family, but I resisted attending their church. I tried to fill the emptiness I felt inside with the works of great philosophers. But that emptiness wasn’t filled until my sister introduced me to the missionaries. The gospel of Jesus Christ broke down the wall I had created between myself and God. As our entire family learned about the gospel and decided to be baptized, I came to understand in my heart that I had always hidden there the solid moral and spiritual principles that my parents had taught me. When I opened my heart, I was able to appreciate what my parents had always tried to teach me.”

Corrado Campisi,
Alessandria Branch,
Vercelli Italy District

Of his own witness of Jesus Christ, President Gordon B. Hinckley said: “I know that as I can bear testimony of these things, you too can bear testimony of them, because you have as much right as do I to have in your heart a testimony of the divinity of this work. And as surely as I have that testimony, you too can have that testimony if you do not already have it. If you will read the word of the Lord, if you will ponder the word of the Lord, if you will pray over the word of the Lord, if you will serve in the work of the Lord, there will grow in your heart a sure and certain conviction of the truth of this, His work” (“Inspirational Thoughts,” Liahona, November 1998, 3).

During this Christmas season, we invite you to celebrate the birth of the Savior by following President Hinckley’s counsel to receive, strengthen, and share your own witness of Him.
