Anthony W. Ivins, Relationship of Mormonism and Freemasonry ( 1934)

CHAPTER 1

THE ORIGIN OF FREEMASONRY

It will not be denied that the origin of Freemasonry is shrouded in mystery. Mackey, in his "History of Freemasonry," with addendum by McClenachan, a book of more than one thousand pages, says: "The origin and source whence first sprang the institution of Freemasonry, such as we now have it, has given rise to more difference of opinion and discussion among Masonic scholars than any other topic in the literature of the institution. Writers on the history of Freemasonry have, at different times, attributed its origin to the following sources: 1. To the patriarchal religion. 2. To the ancient pagan mysteries. 3. To the Temple of King Solomon. 4. To the Crusaders. 5. To the Knights Templars. 6. To the Roman Colleges of Artificers. 7. To the Operative Masons of the Middle Ages. 8. To the Rosicrucians of the sixteenth century. 9. To Oliver Cromwell, for the advancement of his political schemes. 10. To the Pretender for the restoration of the House of Stewart to the British throne. 11. To Sir Christopher Wren, at the building of St. Paul's Cathedral. 12. To Dr. Desaguliers and his associates, in the year 1717.

"Each of these twelve theories has been, from time to time, and the twelfth within a recent period, sustained with much zeal, if not always with much judgment, by their advocates."

Kraus, in his work, endeavors to prove that Masonry originated in the association of operative Masons, who in the middle ages traveled through Europe, and by whom the cathedrals and castles were built.

Mackey says: "I confess that I cannot find any incontrovertible evidence that would trace Masonry as now organized beyond the building corporations of the middle ages. But Freemasonry must be looked at also from another standpoint. Not only does it present the appearance of a speculative science, based on an operative art, but it also very significantly exhibits itself as the symbolical expression of a religious idea. In other and plainer words, we see in it the important lesson of eternal life.

"But whence came this legend? Did the operative Masons of the middle ages have a legend also? The evidence is that they did. We know what that legend was, and we know that its character was similar, although not in all details precisely the same, as the Masonic legend. It was, however, connected with the Temple of Solomon.

"This legend of the third degree as we now have it and as we have had it for a certain period of two hundred and fifty years is intended by symbolical representations to teach the resurrection from death, and the divine dogma of eternal life. All Masons know its character, and it is neither expedient nor necessary to dilate upon it.

"But can we find such a legend elsewhere? Certainly we can."

The author here refers to Egypt, Balbos, an ancient city of Phenicia, chief seat of the worship of Adonis; to Eleusis, ancient city of Greece, celebrated as the seat of worship of Ceres, whose temple was the largest sacred edifice in Greece. Ceres was the idolatrous goddess of agriculture. To Samothrace, an island in the Aegean Sea, seat of worship of the Cabiri, whose sacred mysteries are supposed to have been derived from the Pelasgians. These people worshiped all the gods at Dodona, without giving a name to any. The idolatrous worship of these people had the tradition of eternal life in their creed, differently taught and understood, but all containing the same idea.

The author here says: "It is this legend, and this legend alone, that connects speculative Freemasonry with the ancient mysteries of Greece, Syria and Egypt."

J. W. S. Mitchell, a recognized authority, in his history of Freemasonry, quoting Priest, says: "From the commencement of the world we may trace the foundation of Masonry."

With this statement Mitchell takes direct issue. He says: "There is no ancient craft degree that does not point to the temple. There is not a lecture that does not go back to the temple. There is not a ceremony that does not lead the mind back to that beloved spot. King Solomon was our first great teacher; he it was who conceived the plan and brought the beautiful system into being."

Some authors attribute the origin of Freemasonry to the Essenes and first Christians. Thomas Payne, and those of his school say that the Druids were the fathers of the craft.

In Germany in pre-Reformation times the Independent Stone Masons arose, coming out from the monastic orders, as the zeal for building magnificent edifices under ecclesiastical patronage declined.

Some years later, however, the revival of Masonry in England spread over all Europe, and this organization was disbanded, and, as Masonry had been developed in England, became popular in that country.

The Encyclopedia Americana says: "It is within the range of possibility that a connection existed between the chivalric order of Knights Templars, and the fraternity of operative Masons of medieval times, because bodies of skilled workmen erected Templar strongholds in the Holy Land, and built their preceptories and priories and round churches in Europe."

"The famous Temple Church in London is an example. What was more natural than that the Knights Templar, in the fourteenth century, proscribed, persecuted and despoiled of all things, should seek their perpetuation among the affiliated bodies of mechanics, of whose universality and antiquity they had abundant evidence? On the other hand, no historical doubt exists that every Freemason living since the revival of 1717 A. D. can trace his pedigree only to Great Britain."

As stated, the foregoing definitely proves that the origin of Freemasonry is shrouded in mystery, that the origin of the craft is based largely upon legends which are not authenticated by reliable evidence. If true, they take us back to the idolatrous worship and pagan practices of Egypt, Greece, and other semi-heathen nations of antiquity.

II—HISTORY OF FREEMASONRY

About the year 1118 A. D. a Burgundian Knight, Hugh de Paganis and eight comrades bound themselves by covenant to the representative of the Latin Christian Church at Jerusalem to fight for, defend and protect, the King of Heaven, as represented by his church upon earth.

Other members were added to the number and quarters were provided for the brotherhood in a Mohammedan Mosque, which was used as a palace of the Christian King of Jerusalem.

This palace is said to have been built on Mount Moriah, the supposed site of the Temple of Solomon, and came to be known as Templum Solomonici (Solomon's Temple). It was from this that the name Knights Templar was taken.

At a later date Hugh de Paganis went to England, where a number of English Knights were induced to become members of the brotherhood, and return with him to the Holy Land. Among these was the Count of Anjou, who was crowned King of Jerusalem in 1131.

It will thus be observed that the order of Knights Templars was not instituted until about one thousand years after the destruction of the temple at Jerusalem by the Roman armies, under the leadership of Vespacian and his son Titus, at which time the very foundation stones were removed, as our Lord had declared that they should be. (Matt. 24:2.)

It is a historical fact that at the time of the taking of Jerusalem by the Roman army not one of the foundation stones of the Temple was left upon another.

If the Knights Templars had proper understanding of the ceremonies and ordinances of the Temple of Solomon, from what source was it obtained? Can this question be answered? Matthew Ramsey, a Scotch gentleman, and writer on the subject, believed that Freemasonry had its origin with the Knights Templars.

Between the date of its inception at Jerusalem, in 1118 and 1314, the Order of Knights Templars had become a powerful and wealthy organization. They recognized allegiance to no power above the Church, of which the Pope was the recognized head.

At this time Jacques de Molay was Grand Master of the Order. Pope Clement V and Phillippe-le-bel, King of France, fearing the growing power of the Templars, and coveting their immense wealth, resolved to destroy the Order. While Jacques de Molay was preparing an expedition to avenge the wrongs and disasters suffered by the Christians in the East, the Pope ordered him to come to France. On his arrival he was received with every mark of friendship, but soon after the king ordered his arrest together with other members of the Order, accusing them of most heinous crimes, denouncing them particularly because of the secret rites and oaths of initiation.

By order of the Archbishop of Sens, Jacques de Molay, Guy of Auverne, and others of the Order were burned at the stake, on March 18, 1314. The Pope had declared the Order of Knights Templars abolished throughout the world, and the execution of the Grand Master and his companions gave the coup de grace to the order.

The knights, scattered by the action of the Pope, took refuge in various countries. Some who had escaped to Portugal assumed the title of Knights of Christ. Before his death Jacques de Molay appointed Johan Marcus Larmenio his successor to the office of Grand Master. Some of the Knights, who fled to Scotland and took refuge at the court of King Robert Bruce, refused to recognize his authority, and under the patronage and protection of the king, pretended to reestablish the Order of the Temple under the title of Architects, and laid the foundation of the Order of the Free and Accepted Masons of the Scottish Rite. This was in 1314.

This society is said to have retained the execratory oath to avenge the death of Jacques de Molay and his associates upon those who were responsible for their execution, but after the death of Phillippe-le-bel and Pope Clement V and others who were concerned in the death of their fellow members, this appears to have been discontinued, and the Order gave more particular attention to allegories and symbols, and extensive texts from the Bible were introduced into their ceremonies.

Little is known of the further activities of the Masons until the reign of Charles I of England. The enemies of Oliver Cromwell, seeking to restore the monarchy, created the Degree of Grand Master, to prepare the minds of the Masons for that event. King William III was initiated into the Order, and a great revival occurred. In February, 1717, the first Grand Lodge is said to have been established in London. The four lodges then existing in that city met at the Tavern of The Apple Tree, and appointed Anthony Sayer Grand Master. This is credited by many authorities as being the real origin of the craft. There are others, however, who claim that the craft did not originate with any order of chivalry, but in the building fraternities of the Middle Ages.

From the time of the organization of the Grand Lodge at the Tavern of The Apple Tree, Freemasonry spread rapidly throughout Europe, and in 1732 crossed the Atlantic to America. If the theory of Chevalier Ramsey is correct, that is, that modern Freemasonry had its beginning with the Society of Architects, founded in Scotland under the protection of Robert Bruce, and the title of Ancient and Accepted Masons of the Scottish Rite, then we may trace its origin to the Order of the Knights Templars, and through them to the ancient mysteries, practiced in Egypt, Chaldea, Greece, Etruria and other ancient nations from time immemorial.

It is well known that one of the charges made against Jacques de Molay and his associates was that they used secret oaths and rites in their initiations. We are told that the aim of the Architects was to perpetuate the ancient order of the Temple, it is therefore to be presumed that they endeavored to observe the rites and ordinances practiced there.

The writer has no knowledge of the secrets of Freemasonry, or the rites and ordinances observed in Masonic Temples, if there are such, nor has he a desire to know. They are held sacred by Masons, and his respect for the Fraternity is such that he would not feel justified in exposing them to public criticism, even if he were fully informed, a courtesy which has not always been manifested by writers when treating the sacred ordinances administered in the temples of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. He does, however, understand the ordinances administered in the temples of the church of which he is a member, and will discuss their relationship to Freemasonry before closing this treatise.
