Anthony W. Ivins, Relationship of Mormonism and Freemasonry ( 1934)

CHAPTER 13

THE DEVIL

Lucifer, Satan, The Tempter, Beelzebub, The Prince of Devils, The Old Serpent, The Prince of This World

In the previous chapter enough has been said to convince any honest investigator that secret societies existed among the ancient inhabitants of America, and that the rites and ceremonies pertaining to these organizations have been handed down from time immemorial, from father to son, and now exist among their descendants.

We will now proceed to determine, as far as possible, the source from which the impulse that suggested the organization of these societies came.

Before doing so, permit us to again quote from "Mormonism and Masonry," Book 1, page 53, as follows:

"Masonry directs the attention of its initiates to the Bible, the inestimable gift from God to man for the rule and guide to his faith and conduct. The Great Light in Anglo-Saxon Masonry occupies a prominent and well known position in the ritual and Lodge Room."

That the Bible is an inestimable gift from God our Father, to his children who are here upon earth, and should be the rule and guide to our faith and conduct, is accepted by every member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. In this respect, then, Mormonism and Masonry are again in accord.

In introducing the subject to be treated in this chapter, viz.: Was the Devil the author of the secret combinations which existed among the early inhabitants who occupied the American continent, we will first go to that sacred record.

The word Devil is used interchangeably in the Bible with Satan, the Tempter, Beelzebub, the Prince of this world, the Old Serpent, and other appellations all of which refer to the same personage. The word Devil is a contraction from the Greek word Di-ab-a-lus, which interpreted means a malicious accuser, or demon, and is equivalent to the Hebrew word Satan, enemy, or adversary.

Wherever referred to in the Bible Satan is represented as the tempter, the deceiver, the author of lies, the enemy of God and opponent of all that is good, but at the same time so adroit that the falsehoods which he utters are made to appear to be truth. He may even appear as an angel of light.

Shakespeare understood this characteristic of the evil one and his emissaries, when he makes Banquo say to Macbeth: "The earth hath bubbles as the water has, and these are of them. But 'tis strange, and often-times to win us to our harm the instruments of darkness tell us truths. Win us with honest trifles to betray us in deepest consequence."

I—HIS PERSONALITY AND CHARACTER

He is Lucifer, a Son of the Morning, an angel in authority, who rebelled and was cast down to earth, from the presence of God and the Son, and with those who followed after him, became perdition, the lost one, over whose fall the heavens wept.

"And there was war in heaven: Michael and his angels fought against the dragon; and the dragon fought and his angels,

"And prevailed not; neither was their place found any more in heaven.

"And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, which deceiveth the whole world: he was cast out into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him." (Rev. 12:7-9.)

When the disciples whom Jesus sent out to preach the doctrines of his gospel returned, they joyfully reported the success that had resulted from their ministry, and said:

"Lord, even the devils are subject unto us through thy name."

Jesus answered and said: "I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven." (Luke 10:18.)

More than three hundred years ago John Milton, in his Paradise Lost, refers to this incident. He recounts the events which occurred in heaven, the rebellion of Lucifer, and the dominion which he would assume over the earth, to which he was cast down, the temptation of our mother Eve, which brought death to her posterity, and the final redemption which would come through Christ our Lord.

Milton pictures Satan in human form, with a serpent with forked tongue and dripping fangs about his feet. Beneath this engraving are the following words:

"He it was whose guile, stirred up with envy and revenge, deceived the mother of mankind."

II—THE MISSION OF SATAN

The mission and character of Satan is illustrated in the story in which he appears to Eve, and by flattery and deception persuades her to disregard the command of God and partake of the forbidden fruit. Contrary to the word of the Lord he declares to her that by partaking of the fruit she shall not die, but be made wise. She eats and brings the heritage of death to her posterity. (Gen. 3:1-7.)

He thus proves himself to be a deceiver and falsifier.

"There was a day when the sons of God came to present themselves before the Lord, and Satan came also among them to present himself before the Lord.

"And the Lord said unto Satan, From whence comest thou? And Satan answered the Lord, and said, From going to and fro in the earth, and from walking up and down in it." (Job 2:1, 2.)

"Be sober, be vigilant; because your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour." (1 Peter 5:8.)

"Then was Jesus led up of the spirit into the wilderness to be tempted of the devil.

"And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was afterward an hungered.

"And when the tempter came to him, he said, If thou be the Son of God, command that these stones be made bread.

"But he answered and said: It is written, Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God." (Matt. 4:1-4.)

Satan then showed him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them, and promised to give them all to him, if he would only bow down and worship him.

Jesus commanded the tempter to leave him, after which angels came and ministered to him. (See Matt. 4:1-11.)

Satan is not alone in his mission of deception and falsehood, by which he seeks to lead mankind away from God. His angels, those who espoused his cause in heaven and were cast down with him are here, his emissaries, and are doing his will. He and his spiritual hosts are the enemies of God and man, using their utmost efforts to rob God of his glory, and men of their souls, thus continuing here upon earth the warfare which they waged in heaven.

III—HIS POWER AND DOMINION OVER THE EARTH WILL BE BROKEN

"And I saw an angel come down from heaven, having the key of the bottomless pit and a great chain in his hand.

"And he laid hold on the dragon, that old serpent, which is the Devil, and Satan, and bound him a thousand years.

"And cast him into the bottomless pit, and shut him up, and set a seal upon him, that he should deceive the nations no more, till the thousand years should be fulfilled: and after that he must be loosed a little season." (Rev. 20:1-3.)

IV—DEVIL WORSHIP

That Devil worship was practised by many ancient peoples, and is still observed in certain portions of the earth, cannot be denied. That it prevailed among the Israelitish people at a very early period of their history the following quotations from the Bible clearly show. Moses spake in all the congregations of Israel, reproving the people because they were following after strange gods, and forgetting the God of their fathers. He said: "They sacrificed unto devils, not to God." (Deut. 32:17.)

"They shall no more offer their sacrifices unto devils, after whom they have gone a whoring. This shall be a statute for ever unto them throughout their generations." (Lev. 17:7.)

Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, who succeeded to the throne of Israel, after the Ten Tribes revolted from Judah, cast out the Levites from officiating in the priests' office. "And he ordained him priests for the high places, and for the devils, and for the calves which he had made." (2 Chron. 11:152 Chron. 11:15.)

"And they served their idols: which were a snare unto them.

"Yea, they sacrificed their sons and their daughters unto devils.

"And shed innocent blood, even the blood of their sons and of their daughters, whom they sacrificed unto the idols of Canaan: and the land was polluted with blood." (Psalms 106:36-38.)

Referring to that which would occur after the time in which he lived, John the Revelator says: "And the rest of the men which were not killed by the plagues yet repented not of the works of their hands, that they should not worship devils, and idols of gold, and silver, and brass, and stone, and of wood: which neither can see, nor hear, nor talk:

"Neither repented they of their murders, nor of their sorceries, nor of their fornication, nor of their thefts." (Rev. 9:20-21.)

V—ZOROASTER

Zoroaster, frequently referred to by Mackey, in his "Encyclopedia of Freemasonry," was the founder of the Zoroastrian or Zarathustrian religion. He is referred to as a great legislator and prophet. He was of Bactrian extraction, an ancient people residing in Asia. The religion which he established was dualistic in character, and in modified form is still practised by the Parsees of India. There is great difference of opinion among scholars regarding the date of his birth and activities. Some place it 6,300 years B. C., while others place it 500 B. C.

According to Edward B. Taylor, LL. D., F. R. S., in his book, "Ancient Faiths and Modern," the predominant idea in the teachings of Zoroaster was as follows: "In the beginning there existed a pair of twins, Ormuzd and Ahrimanes. These two represented two spirits, each with peculiar activity which may be compared to the good and bad thought. They represent the contrast involved in day and night, light and darkness. Armuzd is light, life, law, order and truth, all that is good and pure. Ahrimanes is his antithesis. He is darkness, filth, lawlessness, the father of lies, all that is evil in the world, he is Satan, he is death."

Of the people of that time and their religion Taylor says:

"While recognizing a supreme being, their peculiar reverence was given to Satan, chief of the angelic hosts, who now has the means of doing evil to mankind, and in his redemption will have the power of rewarding them. Will not Satan then reward the poor Izedis, who alone have never spoken ill of him, and have suffered so much for him."

Since writing the foregoing the author has clipped the following from a dispatch sent from Mosul to the Salt Lake Tribune, Dec. 20, 1930.

"MOSUL (CTS)—One of the most curious religious sects in this country is the Yezidi, or devil worshipers.

"The religion has about 60,000 communicants scattered throughout that part of Kurdistan inside the Iraq borders. It provides for a form of devil worship on the principle that, since the devil is the only person capable of doing harm after death, he is the one to be placated during life.

"Their tenet is an admission of good and evil, coupled with the belief that the former requires no recognition in this life, for it will continue to exist even after the sway of the evil one has finished.

"They tolerate all other forms of religion. Their own incorporates curious fragments of others. They sacrifice oxen to the sun, and they also worship the sunrise and sunset. One of their holy books is the so-called Black book, which contains an account of their own creation.

"According to this account, the Yezidis are descended from Adam and a dark woman brought into the Garden of Eden by the devil. Death is the penalty for any member of the faith marrying outside his creed and their laws prohibit education for any one except priests."

* * * * * *

This reference is given because of the fact that it corresponds so closely with the belief of the many Indian tribes with whom the writer has had personal contact, and because it represents the almost universal belief among the American Indians in the existence of two governing spirits, or influences, one loved and served because of his virtues, the other feared and served because of his power to afflict those who offend him and bring evil to the offender.

VI—THE SERPENT, THE SYMBOL OF SATAN

Since the temptation of Mother Eve the serpent has been the symbol of the evil one, the tempter, the devil.

Le Plongeon says:

"In ancient days the serpent, emblem of Kneph, the creator, was the Agathodemon (Good Spirit or Demon to whom worship was rendered in ancient Greece,) the good genius. It is still regarded so by the Chinese who consider it one of their most beautiful symbols. Later when it became emblematical of Set, or Typho, the slayer of Osiris, it was looked upon with horror, as the evil principle, the destroyer, the enemy of mankind. It has ever since continued to be so held by the Jews, the Christians, the Mohammedans, in fact by all people whose religious tenets are founded upon the Bible."

He tells us that if the serpent is worshiped throughout the eastern continent, from the shores of the Atlantic ocean to those of the Pacific, from Scandinavia to Egypt and the Asiatic peninsula, its worship was not less spread among the nations that inhabited the lands of the west. He says:

"We find vestiges of it everywhere on the Western continent, from the banks of Brush Creek in Adams County, in the state of Ohio, where still exists on the crest of a mound, the effigy of a great serpent, entirely similar to that discovered by Mr. John Phene, in Glen Feochan, Argyleshire, in Scotland, to the ancient city of Tiahuanaco, whose ruins are 13,000 feet above the level of the Pacific, on the shores of Titicaca, near the frontier of Bolivia on the huge plateau of the Andes."

"It is one of the favorite ornaments, especially at Chichen Itza, at which place it seems to have been the particular genius. There it is found everywhere. It guards the entrance to all public edifices. It is at the foot of their grand stairways, as if defending the ascent. Chichen may well be called the city of serpents par excellence."

From the banks of the Nile in Egypt, the mud and slime of the Euphrates of ancient Chaldea, the Ganges in India, the Yangtze and Yellow rivers of China and the ocean washed shores of Japan, we gather definite evidences of ancient devil worship, while in far off Ceylon it is still practised as illustrated in the cut showing present day devil dancers of Ceylon.

We will now proceed to show that this debasing profession of religion existed among the ancient inhabitants of America, of whose history the Book of Mormon treats.

Just as Christian worship leads men and women in the path of virtue, truth, righteousness, fellowship and fraternity, so does the adversary contend against these divine ideals.

Cast out from heaven, banished from the presence of God, made miserable and unhappy by their fate, Lucifer and those who followed after him seek to make others as they are. He stirs up the hearts of the children of men to fight against that which is good. With flattery and praise he tells them there is no hell, that he is no devil, for there is none. He is the author of contention and war, of lasciviousness, of jealousy, and strife, of murder and death.

Where these conditions prevail Satan reigns. Where righteousness, truth, liberty and constant striving for higher ideals of life prevail, there God reigns. Christ leads us on to all that is good and praiseworthy, Satan seeks to drag us down to hell.

When the guns of the Pinta, on the morning of October 12, 1492, announced to Columbus that land had been sighted, the great mariner looked out upon a new world, the extent and importance of which surpassed his most ardent anticipation.

At that time two great empires or kingdoms existed in America; the Aztec empire in Mexico was the greater, the kingdom of the Incas in Peru the lesser. In addition to these two great governments numberless smaller tribes, or nations, of people were scattered over the vast expanse of the two Americas, who recognized neither the Aztecs nor the Incas as their masters.

The people of both Mexico and Peru were in many respects far advanced in civilization, but in religion were all idolaters, worshiping gods made by their own hands, and were in a condition of moral debasement to which the spirit of Satan alone could have reduced them.

When Fernando Cortez entered the city of Mexico, on the 18th of November, 1519, the first thing to attract his attention was the great temple erected to the idolatrous god Huitzilopochtli. There upon the summit of a pyramid, raised to a great height in order that the ceremony might be witnessed from afar, was the sacrificial stone upon which thousands of human beings were offered annually as sacrifices to this idolatrous god. The victim was placed upon this stone on his back, his limbs pinioned by strong men, while the priest, with an obsidian knife cut out and held up to the view of the populace his palpitating heart.

It is said that at the coronation of Moctazuma III, the reigning king at the time of the conquest, three thousand victims were offered to appease this god which the people worshiped. Could it have been any other than the father of lies, the Devil, who had led these people to believe that such worship was necessary, in order that he might be appeased and refrain from visiting the people with tragic judgments as they believed he had power to do?

It has been the privilege of the writer to look upon ruins, found throughout Mexico, which had been in the remote past great cities, temples and palaces. Wherever he has come in contact with the vestiges of the lost civilization of which these ruins bear silent witness he has been confronted by the serpent, cut in imperishable stone. Sometimes in monolithic form as shown in the engravings here reproduced, perhaps coiled ready to strike, or again coiled about a human form, always with forked tongue protruding and dripping fangs.

Wherever the writer has come in contact with Indians, and he has visited many tribes, the liar or deceiver is referred to as being like the serpent. He talks with a forked tongue, and walks in crooked paths. At the time of the conquest of the people of South America the Indians like those of Mexico, were Devil worshipers as the following shows.

VII—PEDRO DE CIEZA DE LEON

According to the best available information Pedro de Cieza de Leon was born at Seville, in Spain, in the year 1519. At the age of fourteen he embarked with other adventurous spirits to seek his fortune in the New World. He entered the service of Francisco Pizarro who later conquered the Incas of Peru. Observing that no record of the conquest was being kept, he conceived the idea of recording the things which he saw and heard. His observations cover a period from 1532 to 1550, during which time he was constantly in the service of Spain as a soldier. After retiring from military service he compiled his writings and published them in book form, in two volumes, entitled, "The Travels of Pedro de Cieza de Leon." It is a very rare work, one that is highly regarded by scholars and students of ancient American history. He is also the author of "Cusco and Lima, Travels in Peru and India," and a Quichua (Peruvian) grammar and dictionary.

His book "The Travels of Pedro de Cieza de Leon," in two volumes, was written in Spanish and dedicated to Philip II, king of Spain. It was translated into English by Clement R. Markham, and published in London by the Hakluyt Society. The following quotations are from this work:

"All over Peru they call the Devil Supay. I have heard that he has been seen by them many times."

"The natives of these villages were great sorcerers. No people in Peru were so addicted to sacrifices and religious rites."

"The Devil, in frightful form, appeared to them. He let them know future events. Many of these Indians hold it to be certain that the Devil is false, and wicked, and they obey him more from fear than love."

"They carve the form of the Devil very fierce, and in human form. Those who are set apart for that purpose talk with the Devil and are great sorcerers and magicians."

Discussing the religious rites practised by these Indians de Leon says:

"Very great is the dominion that the Devil, the enemy of the human race, is allowed by God to have over these people, and often he is visible among them. Notwithstanding that they worship the sun, and other things, I was informed at the same time that their priests saw the Devil, who communicated perdition to their souls."

To quote all of the references made by de Leon to devil worship and the abominations which it had introduced among the Indians would require many pages of space. Some of their practises were so abominable that decency forbids their publication.

If the Devil was not the author of this form of worship from what source did it originate?

In his contact with the various Indian tribes which occupied Utah, Arizona, New Mexico and Mexico the writer does not remember an instance when he has not found a well defined belief in the doctrine of eternal life, and the conflict between the Great Spirit, the Father of us all, and his antithesis, the evil spirit represented by the serpent.

Of these many Indian tribes the Navajos appear to be the most intelligent, and have the best concept of their origin and final destiny. They keep their religious belief before their children by repeating the story of the origin of their people told by learned men and by pictures which they paint in the sand of their desert country. The picture here reproduced gives an intelligent idea of their understanding of the beginning and end of things.

To the Navajo the central circle on the illustration represents the earth. Number two is the North Star which they say holds the earth in place, a sort of balance wheel. Number three, the red star (Mars) is the star which governs war. Number four controls cyclones, earthquakes and severe storms. Number five is the star which controls eclipses, which the Indians greatly fear; the earth, they say will surely die when the sun and moon are permanently darkened. Number six is a governing planet, far from the earth from which we come at time of birth, and to which we may return after death.

This planet can only be reached by following a straight and narrow path, which leads to earth, and from earth back to the home from which we came, as shown in the engraving with the tracks of people coming to earth, and going from it.

A long time ago the serpent fell from the governing planet to the earth. He encircled the earth, took possession of and established dominion over it and its people, with the exception shown between his tail and head in the engraving. By passing between the head and tail, which is very difficult, we may reach the earth and with still greater difficulty can we pass the narrow opening and return to our former home, which very few people succeed in accomplishing.

These Indians believe in the existence of an evil spirit of whom the serpent is the symbol. The coyote is at enmity with man. He is a night prowler, a sneak thief that obtains his living by dishonest methods, and teaches men to do likewise. He thus becomes the agent of the evil one.

The Hopi Indians call the evil spirit Pu-wah-kah, the prince of devils. They worship an idol, a kind of monkey man, as his representative. They appeal to him for protection from tornadoes, earthquakes, eclipses and violent storms.

None of these Indians kill a snake or coyote; they fear retaliation by Pa-wah-kah should they harm his representatives.

The Hopi Snake Dance is an event of great importance to these people. Rattlesnakes are collected from the deserts which are charmed by the Indians who then dance with snakes in their hands, sometimes in their mouths or wound around their arms and necks.

It is not the purpose of the writer to enter into any discussion regarding the fall of Lucifer, his endeavor to establish and maintain dominion over the earth upon which we dwell, whether there is such a character, or whether there is a heaven from which he was cast down, or a hell to which he is inevitably destined to go.

The quotations made from the Bible, "the book which Masons declare should be the guide to our faith and conduct;" and the references from the writings of students and scholars are sufficient evidence to prove that people believed that Lucifer was cast down to earth, that he is the tempter, Satan, the father of lies, that his mission is to lead mankind away from all that is good, and that the serpent is his symbol.

It has been definitely shown that people, both ancient and modern, have believed in his existence, that he possesses the power to afflict the individual, and that in order to appease him exorcism was resorted to, and that people worshiped him because of fear rather than love. Wherever devil worship has prevailed it has resulted in the degradation of the people who practised it.

If the evidence to which attention has been directed is not sufficient, there remains much more that is accessible and conclusive.

The purpose of the writer in his reference to Satan, his character, personality and mission, is to satisfy the reader that secret societies existed among the ancient inhabitants of America, that the devil was recognized as the founder of them, and that the references quoted from the Book of Mormon by the author of "Mormonism and Masonry," refer to these organizations and have not the most remote connection with Freemasonry, as the author would have us believe.

The author of this book knows that the things contained in it are true. He knows it because he has been with every tribe of Indians between Utah and Central Mexico. He has seen with his eyes and heard with his ears, and knows that these people believed in, and served the evil one. He has seen them practice exorcism, in their efforts to cast out evil spirits, has heard their incantations to drive them away, and seen arrows along the paths which led to the lodges of the sick, that the evil one might thus be frightened and not enter.

They have told him the story of the manner in which this form of worship came down to them. They offer no explanation or argument when asked why they indulge in these religious exercises except to say: "My father told me that his father said that his father told him that it had been so from the beginning."
