The following are additional ideas Primary leaders may use with the Sharing Time printed in the February 2009 Liahona. For the lesson, instructions, and activity that correspond with these ideas, see “I Will Be a Strong Link” on pages F4 and F5 of the children’s section in this issue.

1.  Use stations to teach that the priesthood is the power and authority of God used to bless and guide us. Invite priesthood holders approved by the bishop or branch president to teach at each station. Ask the pianist to play a song or hymn about the priesthood as the children move between stations (see “Stations,” Teaching, No Greater Call [1999], 179).

    Station 1: Display a picture of Jesus Christ. Use pictures to teach about the restoration of the priesthood (examples: Gospel Art Picture Kit 407 [John the Baptist Conferring the Aaronic Priesthood] and 408 [Melchizedek Priesthood Restoration]). Have a priesthood holder tell about his line of authority back to Jesus Christ by letting the children represent the priesthood holders in this line as he talks about them. Recite the fifth article of faith together.

    Station 2: Teach the children about the ordinances and blessings made possible through the priesthood by showing a picture and sharing a personal experience that goes with the picture (examples: baptizing and confirming: Gospel Art Picture Kit 601 [Baptism]; giving a healing blessing: 613 [Administering to the Sick]). Give the children an opportunity to share feelings about a blessing they’ve received. Make sure the children understand that if they do not have a priesthood holder in their home, they can receive blessings through home teachers, missionaries, the bishop or branch president, or others who hold the Melchizedek Priesthood.

    Station 3: Ask the children to name qualities that men need to qualify for the priesthood. Have them or their teachers write each quality on a piece of paper. Have the children choose a quality and tell what a Primary boy could do now to work on that quality. Bear testimony that having the priesthood to bless us is like having Heavenly Father close by all the time.

2.  Display pictures that represent each day of the Creation. Teach that Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ created the earth and everything on it for the benefit and use of people. Read together and discuss Doctrine and Covenants 59:18–20.

    Tape one of the following labels on eight children: please the eye, gladden the heart, for food, for raiment, for taste, for smell, to strengthen the body, to enliven the soul. Have these children sit facing the rest of the Primary. Have another child choose and hold a picture from the first day of Creation. Let the children decide which label fits that creation. Have the child wearing that label hold the picture. Ask how we show appreciation and good judgment in using that creation. Repeat for each day of the Creation. Stand the children with labels in the correct order, and again read Doctrine and Covenants 59:18–19. Bear testimony that God’s creations bless us.

3.  Song presentation: “How Firm a Foundation” (Hymns, no. 85, vv. 1 and 3). Introduce the song by having the children listen for who should be our rock—our foundation—as you read Helaman 5:12.

    Have a child hold a rock and a picture of Jesus Christ while you sing the first line. Have the children repeat the line. On the board, write “faith in his _____________.” Have the children listen for the words to put in the blanks while you sing the second line. Have them sing the line. Ask: Where do we find His word (scriptures)? Invite a child to come up and hold scriptures. Have the children sing the first two lines. Sing line three. Add to the child’s scriptures until he or she is holding all the standard works, a conference report, and pictures of modern prophets to show how abundantly the Lord has given us His word. Have the children sing line three. Ask them to listen while you sing lines four and five for the word that is repeated three times (“Savior”). Define refuge (place of safety), and have the children sing lines four and five. For each line in the third verse, show a picture of Jesus Christ that represents the message. Ask the children to listen again in lines four and five for the word that is repeated.

    Bear testimony that Jesus Christ is a sure foundation and that if we are built upon His gospel, we shall not fall.
