Richard O. Cowan, Milton V. Backman, Joseph Smith and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1992)

Preface

The Doctrine and Covenants is unique even among our standard works. The other scriptural books blend a historical narrative with their great doctrinal principles. Their teachings take on added meaning as they are seen in the context of the needs and experiences of God's people at the time. The Doctrine and Covenants, however, is almost entirely a collection of revelations. Hence, we must turn to other sources for insights from the historical background.

In conjunction with the Religious Studies Center at Brigham Young University, Dr. Milton V. Backman, Jr., has compiled on computer more than one hundred fifty diaries, journals, and other firsthand accounts from early Latter-day Saints who lived during the time of the Prophet Joseph Smith. This database, entitled "Writings of Early Latter-day Saints and Their Contemporaries," is available in the Harold B. Lee Library at Brigham Young University. Spelling, punctuation, and grammar in these documents have been standardized to current usage to make these writings more understandable. Other eyewitness accounts are drawn from published sources and are reproduced here exactly as published, unless otherwise indicated. Dr. Richard O. Cowan has identified items from the database and other sources that particularly shed light on Doctrine and Covenants scriptures. Both authors have worked together to select quotations for this work and to provide introductory material necessary to explain their relevance to the Doctrine and Covenants.

The authors hope that the content of this volume will be a blessing to teachers and students of the Doctrine and Covenants. Statements written by eyewitnesses shed light on the background and historical context of the Lord's revelations. Seeing these events through the eyes of those who actually participated in them should help us better appreciate the revelations and how they can apply to our lives today.

The authors express appreciation to all who have helped bring this work to completion. Brigham Young University provided facilities, equipment, and other support that made this project possible. Many student secretaries and researchers provided valuable and necessary assistance. Junius Merrill worked closely with the authors in selecting and preparing the quotations to be included and also in refining the text of the twenty-six chapters in this book. Special gratitude is given to Barbara Crawley, Debbie Boone, and James Shumway, secretaries in the Religious Studies Center, who helped prepare the manuscript. Now that their work is completed, the authors hope it will be of special benefit to you, the reader.
