Richard O. Cowan, Milton V. Backman, Joseph Smith and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1992)

1

How the Doctrine and Covenants Came to Be

Doctrine and Covenants 1

Revelation through living prophets provides a significant foundation for the faith of the Latter-day Saints. Modern-day divine communications began with the personal appearance of the Father and the Son to Joseph Smith in the early spring of 1820 and have continued to guide the Church ever since. The first step in recognizing these revelations as official scripture came just two months after the Church was organized. At a conference held in Fayette, New York, on 9 June 1830, Joseph Smith read the "Articles and Covenants" (now Doctrine and Covenants 20 and 22), which set forth the basic doctrines, organizations, and procedures of the newly restored Church, and they were accepted unanimously.

Preparations to Publish the Book of Commandments

Initially, the Prophet did not record his revelations at the time he received them, but the Lord instructed him in July 1830 to "continue calling upon God in my name, and writing the things which shall be given thee" (D&C 24:5). Joseph immediately began "copying and arranging the revelations received up to that time, evidently with a view to their publication in book form" (D&C, 1921 ed., p. iii). Parley P. Pratt, who was present when several of these divine communications were given, described how the Prophet received them: "Each sentence was uttered slowly and very distinctly, and with a pause between each, sufficiently long for it to be recorded, by an ordinary writer, in long hand. This was the manner in which all his written revelations were dictated and written. There was never any hesitation, reviewing, or reading back, in order to keep the run of the subject" (Autobiography, p. 62). William E. McLellin, another close associate, likewise recalled: "I, as scribe, have written revelations from the mouth of [the Prophet]. And I have been present many times when others wrote for Joseph; therefore I speak as one having experience. The scribe seats himself at a desk or table, with pen, ink, and paper. The subject of enquiry being understood, the Prophet and Revelator enquires of God. He spiritually sees, hears, and feels, and then speaks as he is moved upon by the Holy Ghost, the 'thus saith the Lord,' sentence after sentence, and waits for his amanuenses to write and then read aloud each sentence. Thus they proceed until the revelator says Amen, at the close of what is then communicated. I have known [Joseph], without premeditation, to thus deliver off in broken sentences, some of the most sublime pieces of composition which I ever perused in any book" (Ensign of Liberty, pp 98-99).

Of the revelations recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants, some thirty-seven sections, more than one-fourth of the total, were received during 1831 alone. These revelations were copied by hand for the use of the early Saints, but demand for them grew. Therefore, at a conference in November 1831, the Church considered publishing the "Book of Commandments." During that conference the Lord revealed what is now Doctrine and Covenants 1 to be "my preface unto the book of my commandments" (D&C 1:6). An early Latter-day Saint cited Oliver Cowdery's account of what happened on that occasion: "A committee had been appointed to draft a preface, consisting of . . . O. Cowdery and, I think, Sidney Rigdon, but when they made their report . . . the Conference then requested Joseph to enquire of the Lord about it, and he said that he would if the people would bow in prayer with him. This they did and Joseph prayed.

"When they arose, Joseph dictated by the Spirit the preface found in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants while sitting by a window of the room [John Johnson home in Hiram, Ohio] in which the conference was sitting; and Sidney Rigdon wrote it down. Joseph would deliver a few sentences and Sidney would write them down, then read them aloud, and if correct, then Joseph would proceed and deliver more, and by this process the preface was given" (William Kelley, in Saints Herald,16 Jan.1882, p. 67). At this point, William E. McLellin voiced some concerns about the wording of the Prophet's revelations. In response, the Lord issued the challenge quoted in Doctrine and Covenants 67:5-8. "After the foregoing was received," Joseph wrote in his history, "William E. McLellin, as the wisest man, in his own estimation, having more learning than sense, endeavored to write a commandment like unto one of the least of the Lord's, but failed; it was an awful responsibility to write in the name of the Lord. The Elders and all present that witnessed this vain attempt of a man to imitate the language of Jesus Christ, renewed their faith in the fulness of the Gospel, and in the truth of the commandments and revelations which the Lord had given to the Church through my instrumentality" (History of the Church, 1:226). Consequently, the conference decided to print several thousand copies of the revelations. Before the conference adjourned, the Lord also revealed what is now Doctrine and Covenants 133 to be an "appendix" for the book.

The revelations were to be printed on a press that would also publish a Latter-day Saint newspaper in Independence, Missouri. By the summer of 1833 the project of publishing the revelations was nearing completion. Then, on July 20, a mob broke into William W. Phelps's home and destroyed the press. Through the quick and courageous action of Church members who happened to be at the scene, several hundred of the unbound sheets were rescued. Mary Rollins Lightner, who was a teenager at the time, recalled the attack: "The mob renewed their efforts again by tearing down the printing office, a two story building, and driving Brother Phelps' family out of the lower part of the house and putting their things in the street. They brought out some large sheets of paper, and said, 'Here are the Mormon Commandments.' My sister Caroline and myself were in a corner of a fence watching them; when they spoke of the commandments I was determined to have some of them. Sister said if I went to get any of them she would go too, but said 'they will kill us.' While their backs were turned, prying out the gable end of the house, we went, and got our arms full, and were turning away, when some of the mob saw us and called on us to stop, but we ran as fast as we could. Two of them started after us. Seeing a gap in a fence, we entered into a large cornfield, laid the papers on the ground, and hid them with our persons. The corn was from five to six feet high, and very thick; they hunted around considerable, and came very near us but did not find us" ("Autobiography," Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine, July 1926, p. 196). The Saints cherished and bound the few copies they were able to save. The revelations in the Book of Commandments roughly paralleled the first sixty-four sections of our present Doctrine and Covenants, but we do not know how many other revelations might have been included if the printing had not been disrupted.

The Doctrine and Covenants

Not long after the destruction of the press in 1833, steps were taken to publish an even larger compilation, the Prophet having received additional significant revelations. On 17 August 1835, a solemn assembly convened to accept this expanded volume. The new title, "Doctrine and Covenants," reflected the two rather distinct parts of the book: the seven Lectures on Faith, prepared for use in the School of the Prophets during the 1834-35 season, treated the "doctrine of the Church"; and revelations, commonly referred to as the "Covenants and Commandments," completed the volume. The 1835 edition added forty-five new revelations. Another important change was made in the "Covenants" section: revelations had been called chapters in the Book of Commandments; now they were known as sections.

Forty-one years later, a significant new edition of the Doctrine and Covenants added to the scriptural canon a total of twenty-five revelations given through Joseph Smith between thirty-three and fifty-three years earlier. Under Brigham Young's direction, Orson Pratt arranged the revelations in essentially a chronological order, and introduced the present verse divisions. These features made the new book much easier to study and reference.

An important addition to the Doctrine and Covenants was made just after the turn of the century. President Wilford Woodruff's 1890 "Official Declaration," or "Manifesto," ending the performance of plural marriages was incorporated into the Doctrine and Covenants beginning with the 1908 printing. In England, a page bearing the Manifesto was glued into copies of the book that had been printed there two years earlier (Woodford, "Historical Development of the Doctrine and Covenants," pp. 92-93).

The 1921 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants introduced easier-to-read, double-columned pages, and improved section headings. The most significant change was the deletion of the Lectures on Faith, which had been published with the revelations since 1835. The introduction to the 1921 edition explained that this material was "never presented to nor accepted by the Church as being otherwise than theological lectures or lessons."

Our Present Edition

In 1981, for the first time in more than a century, numbered sections were added to the Doctrine and Covenants. Section 137, the revelation in which Joseph Smith learned that those who died without hearing the gospel might still have an opportunity to inherit the celestial kingdom, and section 138, Joseph F. Smith's vision of how the Savior inaugurated the preaching of the gospel in the spirit world, both set forth the fundamentals of salvation for the dead. These two revelations were added to the Doctrine and Covenants at a time of unprecedented temple building and activity, illustrating how the scriptural canon may be enlarged to meet a particular need at a particular time.

Another addition was Official Declaration 2, announcing President Spencer W. Kimball's 1978 revelation extending the blessings of the priesthood to all races. This revelation was received at a time of worldwide Church growth. As was the case with Official Declaration 1, or Wilford Woodruff's Manifesto, Official Declaration 2 is not a record of the revelation itself but rather an inspired announcement that the revelation had been received. That may explain why these two documents have the unique status of Official Declarations rather than being included with the numbered sections of the Doctrine and Covenants.

Expanded historical notes and more specific content summaries enhanced the section headings in the new edition. An easier-to-follow cross-referencing system improved the usefulness of the new volume of scripture in gospel study. President Spencer W. Kimball gave those preparing this new edition the charge "'to assist in improving doctrinal scholarship throughout the Church.' The goal of everyone involved has been to put into the hands of the members of the Church the tools that will enable them better to study and understand the Lord's revelations through his prophets" (Ensign, Oct. 1981, p. 9).
