Richard O. Cowan, Milton V. Backman, Joseph Smith and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1992)

2

Joseph Smith Receives the Plates and Begins Translating

Doctrine and Covenants 2; 3; 10

The three sections in the Doctrine and Covenants received the earliest all relate to Joseph Smith's learning about the Book of Mormon and beginning to translate that sacred record.

Visits by the Angel Moroni

On the night of 21-22 September 1823, an angel named Moroni appeared to Joseph Smith three times. During these visitations Joseph learned that by the power of God he would translate the Book of Mormon (Joseph Smith—History 1:34). Nearly two decades later, in his famous letter to newspaper editor John Wentworth, the Prophet wrote that Moroni had proclaimed "that the preparatory work for the second coming of the Messiah was speedily to commence; that the time was at hand for the Gospel in all its fullness to be preached in power, unto all nations that a people might be prepared for the Millennial reign" (History of the Church, 4:537). Moroni quoted several passages of scripture relating to these last days to emphasize the importance of preparing for them. Doctrine and Covenants 2 contains his paraphrase of Malachi 4:5-6 about the coming of Elijah. (See Joseph Smith-History 1:30-53 for additional information on Moroni's three appearances that night and two more that occurred the next day.)

Oliver Cowdery, a close associate of the Prophet, described in an early account of these visions the temptation, chastisement, and repentance Joseph experienced when he met Moroni at Cumorah. As he walked to the hill, "two invisible powers were operating upon his mind." One urged him to obey explicitly the instructions of the angel and the other to use the record for personal gain. When Joseph arrived at the hill, "on attempting to take possession of the record a shock was produced upon his system, by an invisible power which deprived him, in a measure, of his natural strength. . . . he exclaimed, 'Why can I not obtain this book?' 'Because you have not kept the commandments of the Lord,' answered a voice, within a seeming short distance. He looked, and to his astonishment, there stood the angel who had previously given him the directions concerning this matter.

"At that instant he looked to the Lord in prayer, and as he prayed darkness began to disperse from his mind and his soul was lit up as it was the evening before, and he was filled with the Holy Spirit. . . . While he thus stood gazing and admiring, the angel said, 'Look!' and as he thus spake he beheld the prince of darkness, surrounded by his innumerable train of associates. All this passed before him, and the heavenly messenger said, 'All this is shown, the good and the evil, the holy and impure, the glory of God and the power of darkness, that you may know hereafter the two powers and never be influenced or overcome by that wicked one. . . . You now see why you could not obtain this record; that the commandment was strict, and that if ever these sacred things are obtained they must be by prayer and faithfulness in obeying the Lord. They are not deposited here for the sake of accumulating gain and wealth for the glory of this world: they were sealed by the prayer of faith, and because of the knowledge which they contain they are of no worth among the children of men, only for their knowledge. On them is contained the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ" (Messenger and Advocate, Oct. 1835, pp. 197-98).

During the evening following these visions, Joseph Smith told his family about his remarkable experiences. They believed what he related to them and were fascinated by his suddenly increased knowledge of life in ancient America. As his mother explained, "From this time forth, Joseph continued to receive instructions from the Lord, and we continued to get the children together every evening for the purpose of listening while he gave us a relation of the same. I presume our family presented an aspect as singular as any that ever lived upon the face of the earth-all seated in a circle, father, mother, sons and daughters, and giving the most profound attention to a boy, eighteen years of age, who had never read the Bible through in his life: he seemed much less inclined to the perusal of books than any of the rest of our children, but far more given to meditation and deep study.

"We were now confirmed in the opinion that God was about to bring to light something upon which we could stay our minds, or that would give us a more perfect knowledge of the plan of salvation and the redemption of the human family. This caused us greatly to rejoice, the sweetest union and happiness pervaded our house, and tranquility reigned in our midst.

"During our evening conversations, Joseph would occasionally give us some of the most amusing recitals that could be imagined. He would describe the ancient inhabitants of this continent, their dress, mode of traveling, and the animals upon which they rode; their cities, their buildings, with every particular; their mode of warfare; and also their religious worship. This he would do with as much ease, seemingly, as if he had spent his whole life among them" (Lucy Smith, History, pp. 82-83).

The Prophet's brother William also described the family's emotions as they accepted Joseph's incredible accounts:

"The whole family were melted to tears, and believed all he said. Knowing that he was very young, that he had not enjoyed the advantages of a common education; and knowing too, his whole character and disposition, they were convinced that he was totally incapable of arising before his aged parents, his brothers and sisters, and so solemnly giving utterance to anything but the truth" (William Smith, On Mormonism, pp. 9-10).

The Lost Manuscript

Moroni continued to tutor the young prophet for four years. After Joseph Smith obtained the gold plates from the angel in September 1827, persecution intensified. Consequently, in December, Joseph and Emma moved to Harmony, Pennsylvania, and located near her parents' home. There Joseph began translating the Book of Mormon with Emma serving as scribe. In February 1828, Martin Harris, a Palmyra farmer who had previously befriended and assisted the Prophet, traveled to Harmony to personally help with the work. In that same month, Martin also journeyed to New York City, where an ancient prophecy was fulfilled (see Joseph Smith-History 1:64-65).

A relatively unknown history written by Joseph Smith in 1832 points out that because of Martin's faith and his assisting Joseph in the move to Harmony, "the Lord appeared unto him in a vision and shewed unto him his marvilous work which he was about to do and < imediately came to Su[s]quehanna and said the Lord had shown him that he must go to new York City with some of the c<aracters so we proceeded to coppy some of them and he took his Journy to the Eastern Cittys and to the Learned < read this I pray thee and the learned said I cannot but if he would bring the plates they would read it but the Lord had fo<bid it and he returned to me and gave them to < translate and I said . . . [I] cannot for I am not learned, but the Lord had prepared . . . spectacles for to read the Book therefore I commenced translating the char=acters and thus the Prop[h]icy of Is<ah was fulfilled which is written in the 29 chapter concerning the book" (Jessee, Personal Writings, pp. 7-8).

In April 1828, Martin arranged his business affairs in Palmyra, returned to Harmony, and became a scribe for Joseph Smith. By June 14, the Prophet had dictated 116 pages of manuscript. Martin, on three separate occasions, asked Joseph for permission to take the manuscript to show to relatives and friends in Palmyra. The first two times, the Lord denied the request, but the third time granted it, if Martin would show the writings only to five specified members of his immediate family. "In accordance with this last answer," Joseph recorded, "I required of him that he should bind himself in a covenant to me in a most solemn manner that he would not do otherwise than had been directed. He did so. He bound himself as I required of him, took the writings, and went his way. Notwithstanding, however, the great restrictions which he had been laid under, and the solemnity of the covenant which he had made with me, he did show them to others, and by stratagem they got them away from him, and they never have been recovered unto this day" (History of the Church, 1:21).

When Martin Harris did not return to Harmony with the manuscript, Joseph became deeply concerned and traveled to Palmyra to determine the reason he had not received any information from his friend. The Prophet's mother vividly remembered Joseph's arrival early one morning: "He requested us to send immediately for Mr. Harris. This we did without delay . . . he generally came in such haste when he was sent for. At eight o'clock we set the victuals on the table, as we were expecting him every moment. We waited till nine, and he came not-till ten, and he was not there-till eleven, still he did not make his appearance. But at half past twelve we saw him walking with a slow and measured tread towards the house, his eyes fixed thoughtfully upon the ground. On coming to the gate, he stopped, instead of passing through, and got upon the fence, and sat there some time with his hat drawn over his eyes. At length he entered the house. Soon after which we sat down to the table, Mr. Harris with the rest. He took up his knife and fork as if he were going to use them, but immediately dropped them. Hyrum, observing this, said 'Martin, why do you not eat; are you sick?' Upon which Mr. Harris pressed his hands upon his temples, and cried out in a tone of deep anguish, 'Oh, I have lost my soul! I have lost my soul!'

"Joseph who had not expressed his fears till now, sprang from the table, exclaiming, 'Martin, have you lost that manuscript? Have you broken your oath, and brought down condemnation upon my head as well as your own?'

"'Yes; it is gone,' replied Martin, 'and I know not where.'

"'Oh, my God!' said Joseph, clinching his hands. 'All is lost! all is lost! What shall I do? I have sinned—it is I who tempted the wrath of God. I should have been satisfied with the first answer which I received from the Lord; for he told me that it was not safe to let the writing go out of my possession.' He wept and groaned, and walked the floor continually.

"At length he told Martin to go back and search again.

"'No'; said Martin, 'it is all in vain; for I have ripped open beds and pillows; and I know it is not there.'

"'Then must I,' said Joseph, 'return with such a tale as this? I dare not do it. And how shall I appear before the Lord? Of what rebuke am I not worthy from the angel of the Most High?'

"I besought him not to mourn so, for perhaps the Lord would forgive him, after a short season of humiliation and repentance. But what could I do to comfort him, when he saw all the family in the same situation of mind as himself; for sobs and groans, and the most bitter lamentations filled the house. However, Joseph was more distressed than the rest, as he better understood the consequences of disobedience. And he continued pacing back and forth, meantime weeping and grieving, until about sunset, when, by persuasion, he took a little nourishment.

"The next morning, he set out for home [in Pennsylvania]. We parted with heavy hearts, for it now appeared that all which we had so fondly anticipated, and which had been the source of so much secret gratification, had in a moment fled, and fled forever" (Lucy Smith, History, pp. 127-29).

Joseph later told his mother what happened after his return to Harmony: "Soon after my arrival, I commenced humbling myself in mighty prayer before the Lord, and, as I was pouring out my soul in supplication to God, that if possible I might obtain mercy at his hands and be forgiven of all that I had done contrary to his will, an angel stood before me, and answered me, saying, that I had sinned in delivering the manuscript into the hands of a wicked man, and, as I had ventured to become responsible for his faithfulness, I would of necessity have to suffer the consequences of his indiscretion, and I must now give up the Urim and Thummim into his (the angel's) hands" (Lucy Smith, History, pp. 133-34).

A short time later, Joseph's history records, "I was walking out a little distance, when, behold, the former heavenly messenger appeared and handed to me the Urim and Thummim again—for it had been taken from me in consequence of my having wearied the Lord in asking for the privilege of letting Martin Harris take the writings, which he lost by transgression—and I inquired of the Lord through it, and obtained the following [see D&C 3].

"After I had obtained the above revelation, both the plates and the Urim and Thummim were taken from me again; but in a few days they were returned to me, when I inquired of the Lord" (History of the Church, 1:20-23). At that time he received the revelation (D&C 10) instructing him to continue translating.
