Richard O. Cowan, Milton V. Backman, Joseph Smith and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1992)

3

Those Who Came to Joseph's Aid

Doctrine and Covenants 4-9; 11-12; 14-16

Eleven revelations, recorded now in Doctrine and Covenants 4-9, 11-12, and 14-16, were given during the first half of 1829. They were addressed to various individuals who provided substantial assistance as Joseph completed the translation of the Book of Mormon. All recipients were directed to "thrust in their sickle" and labor to bring forth God's work. This instruction, first given to the Prophet's father (D&C 4), was repeated in several of these communications.

The Coming of Oliver Cowdery

Even though he received the plates once again from the angel in the summer of 1828, Joseph did not resume the translation immediately but rather worked on his farm to support his family. Recalling some of the difficulties he encountered when he resumed translating, Joseph wrote, "Now my wife had writen some for me to translate and also my Brother Samuel H Smith but we had become reduced in property and my wives [wife's] father was about to turn me out of doors & I had not where to go and I cried unto the Lord that he would provide for me to accomplish the work whereunto he had commanded me" (Jessee, Personal Writings, p. 8).

The answer to Joseph's prayer was Oliver Cowdery, a school teacher temporarily boarding with the Smith family in Manchester, New York. He traveled approximately one hundred miles to Joseph Smith's home in Harmony, Pennsylvania. Joseph's 1832 history explained why Oliver was willing to make such a trip:

"[The] Lord appeared unto a young man by the name of Oliver Cowdry [Cowdery] and shewed unto him the plates in a vision and also the truth of the work and what the Lord was about to do through me his unworthy servant therefore he was desirous to come and write for me and translate" (Jessee, Personal Writings, p. 8).

Oliver arrived in Harmony on 5 April 1829, and two days later he became a scribe for Joseph Smith. During that month, four revelations were directed to Joseph and Oliver (D&C 6-9). In the first of these, the Lord referred to a spiritual experience that Oliver had had while still in Manchester (D&C 6:23-24). Joseph recalled that after receiving this revelation, Oliver confided to him the details of what had happened: "Oliver Cowdery stated to me that after he had gone to my father's to board, and after the family had communicated to him concerning my having obtained the plates, that one night after he had retired to bed he called upon the Lord to know if these things were so, and the Lord manifested to him that they were true, but he had kept the circumstance entirely secret, and had mentioned it to no one; so that after this revelation was given, he knew that the work was true, because no being living knew of the thing alluded to in the revelation, but God and himself" (History of the Church, 1:35).

The original manuscript of the Book of Mormon and the writings of Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery provide historical evidence that nearly all of the Book of Mormon was translated in less than three months. Between April and sometime in June 1829, Joseph dictated possibly an average of about eight pages a day.

Five years later, Oliver Cowdery described his feelings about his role in the coming forth of the Book of Mormon. "These were days never to be forgotten—to sit under the sound of a voice dictated by the inspiration of heaven, awakened the utmost gratitude of this bosom! Day after day I continued, uninterrupted, to write from his mouth, as he translated, with the Urim and Thummim, or, as the Nephites would have said, 'Interpreters,' the history, or record, called 'The Book of Mormon"' (Messenger and Advocate, Oct. 1834, p. 14).

Ten years after his excommunication, Oliver Cowdery rejoined the Saints, who were then in their exodus to the Great Basin. He bore a powerful testimony at a conference at Council Bluffs, Iowa, in 1848, regarding the divine origins of the Book of Mormon:

"'Friends and brethren,—My name is Cowdery—Oliver Cowdery. In the early history of this Church I stood identified with her, and [was] one in her councils. True it is that the gifts and callings of God are without repentance. Not because I was better than the rest of mankind was I called; but, to fulfil the purposes of God, he called me to a high and holy calling. I wrote, with my own pen, the entire Book of Mormon (save a few pages,) as it fell from the lips of the Prophet Joseph Smith, as he translated it by the gift and power of God, by the means of the Urim and Thummim, or, as it is called by that book, 'holy interpreters.' I beheld with my eyes and handled with my hands the gold plates from which it was transcribed. I also saw with my eyes and handled with my hands the 'holy interpreters.' That book is true. Sidney Rigdon did not write it. Mr. Spaulding did not write it. I wrote it myself as it fell from the lips of the Prophet. It contains the everlasting Gospel, and came forth to the children of men in fulfilment of the revelations of John, where he says he saw an angel come with the everlasting Gospel to preach to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people. It contains principles of salvation; and if you, my hearers, will walk by its light and obey its precepts, you will be saved with an everlasting salvation in the kingdom of God" (Millenial Star, 20 Aug. 1859, p. 544).

Others Assist with the Work

Two revelations (D&C 11-12), given at Harmony during May, were directed to Hyrum Smith and Joseph Knight, Sr., respectively. In various ways, the latter assisted the Prophet, who had started working for him in 1826. "I paid him the money," Knight wrote, "and I furnished him with a horse and Cutter to go and see his girl Down to Mr. Hails" (BYU Studies, Autumn 1976, p. 32). Joseph married Emma Hale on 18 January 1827.

According to Knight, the angel had told Joseph Smith that "if he would Do right according to the will of God he mite obtain [the plates] the 22nt Day of Septemer Next and if not he never would have them." Joseph Knight traveled to Manchester to be there on the appointed day. The following morning, Joseph Knight discovered his horse and buggy were missing, but soon the Prophet returned with them. "After Brackfirst [breakfast]," Knight recorded, "Joseph Cald me into the other Room and he set his foot on the Bed and leaned his head on his hand and says ' . . . it is ten times Better then I expected.' Then he went on to tell the length and width and thickness of the plates, and said he, 'they appear to be Gold.' But he seamed to think more of the glasses or the urim and thummem then [than] he Did of the plates, for, says he, 'I can see any thing; they are Marvelus. Now they are writen in Caracters and I want them translated.'

"Now he was Commanded not to let no [any] one see those things But a few for witness at a givin time. Now it soon got about that Joseph Smith had found the plates and peopel Come in to see them But he told them that they Could not for he must not shoe [show] them. But many insisted and oferd money and Property to see them. But, for keeping them from the Peopel they persecuted and abused them [him] and they [the Smiths] ware obliged to hide them [the plates], and they hid them under a Brick harth in the west Room. . . .

"Now when he Began to translate [after moving to Harmony] he was poor and was put to it for provisions and had no one to write for him But his wife, and his wifes Brother [probably Reuben Hale] would sometimes write a little for him through the winter. . . .

" . . . His wifes father and familey ware all against him and would not h[e]lp him. He and his wife Came up to see me the first of the winter 1828 and told me his Case. But I was not in easy circumstances and I did not know what it mite amount to and my wife [Polly Knight] and familey all against me about helping him. But I let him have some little provisions and some few things out of the Store apair of shoes and three Dollars in money to help him a litle. . . . [The next spring] I told my wife I must go Dow[n] and see Joseph again. 'Why Do you go so soon, for?' said she. Says I, 'Come go and see.' And she went with me. Next morning we went Down and found them well and ware glad to see us. Joseph talked with us about his translating and some revelations he had Received and from that time my wife Began to Beleve and Continuwed a full Believer until she Died" (BYU Studies, Autumn 1976, pp. 32-36).

Soon afterwards, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery went to visit Mr. Knight, asking for additional help. Consequently, he bought "a Barral of Mackrel and some lined paper for writing . . . nine or ten Bushels of grain and five or six Bushels taters [potatoes] and a pound of tea, and I went Down to see him and they ware in want. Joseph and Oliver were gone to see if they Could find a place to work for provisions, But found none. They returned home and found me there with provisions, and they ware glad for they ware out" (BYU Studies, Autumn 1976, p. 36). With this help, the Prophet was able to finish the translation.

When Oliver Cowdery went to Pennsylvania to meet Joseph Smith, he stopped to see his friends, the Peter Whitmer, Sr., family, promising to send his impressions of the Prophet. He wrote them soon afterwards that "Joseph had told him his (Oliver's) secret thoughts, and all he had meditated about going to see him, which no man on earth knew, as he supposed, but himself" (Millennial Star, 9 Dec. 1878, p. 772). The Prophet at this time was being pressured by increasing mob threats to move from Harmony, Pennsylvania. Fortunately, he found refuge and a warm welcome with Oliver's friends, the Whitmers, in Fayette, New York, where he completed the translation of the Book of Mormon and received three revelations, Doctrine and Covenants 14-16, for members of the Whitmer family, during June 1829.

David Whitmer described how he personally assisted the Prophet during the final weeks of the translation. "Joseph sent for me . . . to come to Harmony to get him and Oliver and bring them to my father's house. I did not know what to do, I was pressed with my work. I had some 20 acres to plow, so I concluded I would finish plowing and then go. I got up one morning to go to work as usual, and on going to the field, found between five and seven acres of my ground had been plowed during the night.

"I don't know who did it; but it was done just as I would have done it myself, and the plow was left standing in the furrow.

"This enabled me to start sooner. When I arrived at Harmony, Joseph and Oliver were coming toward me, and met me some distance from the house. Oliver told me that Joseph had informed him when I started from home, where I had stopped the first night, how I read the sign at the tavern, where I stopped the next night, etc., and that I would be there that day before dinner, and this was why they had come out to meet me; all of which was exactly as Joseph had told Oliver, at which I was greatly astonished. When I was returning to Fayette, with Joseph and Oliver, all of us riding in the wagon, Oliver and I on an oldfashioned wooden spring seat and Joseph behind us; while traveling along in a clear open place, a very pleasant, nice-looking old man suddenly appeared by the side of our wagon and saluted us with, 'good morning, it is very warm,' at the same time wiping his face or forehead with his hand. We returned the salutation, and, by a sign from Joseph, I invited him to ride if he was going our way. But he said very pleasantly, 'No, I am going to Cumorah.' This name was something new to me, I did not know what Cumorah meant. We all gazed at him and at each other, and as I looked around enquiringly of Joseph, the old man instantly disappeared, so that I did not see him again. . . .

" . . . he had on his back a sort of knapsack with something in, shaped like a book. It was the messenger who had the plates, who had taken them from Joseph just prior to our starting from Harmony. Soon after our arrival home, I saw something which led me to the belief that the plates were placed or concealed in my father's barn. I frankly asked Joseph if my supposition was right, and he told me it was. Sometime after this, my mother was going to milk the cows, when she was met out near the yard by the same old man (judging by her description of him) who said to her: 'You have been very faithful and diligent in your labors, but you are tired because of the increase of your toil; it is proper therefore that you should receive a witness that your faith may be strengthened.' Thereupon he showed her the plates. My father and mother had a large family of their own, the addition to it therefore of Joseph, his wife Emma and Oliver very greatly increased the toil and anxiety of my mother. And although she had never complained she had sometimes felt that her labor was too much, or at least she was perhaps beginning to feel so. This circumstance, however, completely removed all such feelings and nerved her up for her increased responsibilities" (Millenial Star, 9 Dec. 1878, pp. 772-73).
