Richard O. Cowan, Milton V. Backman, Joseph Smith and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1992)

4

The Restoration of the Priesthood

Doctrine and Covenants 13; 18

Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery's claim to ordination by an angel is unique in the annals of Christianity.

The Aaronic and Melchizedek Priesthoods Restored

While Joseph and Oliver were translating the Book of Mormon, they pondered a question regarding authority to baptize. Retiring to the woods near the Susquehanna River, they knelt in prayer. The heavens were opened; John the Baptist appeared, laid his hands upon their heads, and conferred upon them the Aaronic Priesthood. The prayer offered by this resurrected being on 15 May 1829, is recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 13. Both Joseph and Oliver testified to what they saw, heard, and physically felt as John placed his hands upon their heads. Each published accounts of the ordination, including the prayer uttered by John the Baptist (see Joseph Smith— History 1:68-74 and the note on pages 58-59 of the Pearl of Great Price).

Oliver wrote yet another testimony of this vision in a book of blessings while he was serving as recorder for the Church's Patriarch: "Our souls were drawn out in mighty prayer, to know how we might obtain the blessings of baptism and of the Holy Spirit according to the order of God; and we diligently sought for the right of the fathers, and the authority of the holy priesthood, and the power to administer the same; for we desired to be followers of righteousness, and in the possession of greater knowledge, even the knowledge of the mysteries of the kingdom of God. Therefore we repaired to the woods . . . and called upon the name of the Lord, and he answered us out of the heavens. And while we were in the heavenly vision, the angel came down and bestowed upon us this priesthood; and then, as I have said, we repaired to the water and were baptized. After this, we received the high and holy priesthood; but an account of this will be given elsewhere, or in another place" (Improvement Era, Oct. 1904, p. 942). John the Baptist informed Joseph and Oliver that "he acted under the direction of Peter, James and John, who held the keys of the Priesthood of Melchizedek, which Priesthood, he said, would in due time be conferred on us" (Joseph Smith-History 1:72). Although there is no record of the precise date on which the Melchizedek Priesthood was restored, two references in the Doctrine and Covenants confirm that Peter, James, and John restored this authority (see D&C 27:12; D&C 128:20). The latter revelation indicates that the Melchizedek Priesthood was restored in the wilderness between Harmony, Pennsylvania, and Colesville, New York— probably about the time Joseph and Oliver moved to the Whitmer home in Fayette. Not long afterwards, the Prophet and some of his associates gathered "in the chamber of Mr. Whitmer's house" and prayed to know when they could exercise this higher power. "We had not long been engaged in solemn and fervent prayer," the Prophet recorded, "when the word of the Lord came unto us in the chamber [see D&C 128:21], commanding us that I should ordain Oliver Cowdery to be an Elder in the Church of Jesus Christ; and that he also should ordain me to the same office; and then to ordain others, as it should be made known unto us from time to time. We were, however, commanded to defer this our ordination until such times as it should be practicable to have our brethren, who had been and who should be baptized, assembled together, when we must have their sanction to our thus proceeding to ordain each other, and have them decide by vote whether they were willing to accept us as spiritual teachers or not" (History of the Church, 1:60-61).

During this gathering in the Whitmer home in June 1829, the Lord revealed Doctrine and Covenants 18. Many regard the Lord's statement in verse 9 of that section as evidence that the Melchizedek Priesthood had already been restored. The Lord's instruction to ordain brethren to a specific office in this priesthood would be carried out 6 April 1830 at the time of the official organization of the Church.

Oliver Cowdery Maintains His Testimony

In 1848, many years after his apostasy, Oliver Cowdery returned to the Church. At a conference of the Saints in Iowa, Oliver bore witness of having been present during the restoration of the lesser and higher priesthoods. After describing his role as a scribe in the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, he said (as recorded by Reuben Miller): "I was present with Joseph when an holy angel from God came down from heaven and conferred on us or restored the lesser or Aaronic Priesthood, and said to us, at the same time, that it should remain upon the earth while the earth stands. I was also present with Joseph when the higher or Melchizedek Priesthood was conferred by the holy angel[s] from on high. This Priesthood was then conferred on each other, by the will and commandment of God. This Priesthood, as was then declared, is also to remain upon the earth until the last remnant of time. This holy priesthood or authority we then conferred upon many, and is just as good and valid as though God had done it in person. I laid my hands upon that man—yes, I laid my right hand upon his head (pointing to brother Hyde), and I conferred upon him this Priesthood, and he holds that Priesthood now. He was also called through me, by the prayer of faith, an apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ" (Millenial Star, 20 Aug. 1859, p. 544). Shortly afterwards, the High Council authorized Oliver's rebaptism.

Another contemporary who reported Oliver Cowdery's testimony at the time of his return was Elder George A. Smith, an apostle and an early Church Historian: "He bore testimony in the most positive terms of the truth of the Book of Mormon—the restoration of the priesthood to the earth, and the mission of Joseph Smith as the Prophet of the last days; and told the people if they wanted to follow the right path, to keep the main channel of the stream—where the body of the Church goes, there is the authority; and all these lo here's and lo there's, have no authority; but this people have the true and holy priesthood; 'for the angel said unto Joseph Smith, jun., in my hearing, that this priesthood shall remain on the earth unto the end.' His testimony produced quite a sensation among the gentlemen present, who did not belong to the church, and it was gratefully received by all the Saints" (Millenial Star, 1 Feb. 1849, p. 14).
