Richard O. Cowan, Milton V. Backman, Joseph Smith and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1992)

5

The Book of Mormon is Published and the Church Organized

Doctrine and Covenants 17; 19-23

On several occasions during the early months of 1829 the Lord promised that "a marvelous work and a wonder [was] about to come forth among the children of men" (D&C 4:1; 6:1). This promise was fulfilled by two developments culminating in the spring of the following year: publication of the Book of Mormon and organization of the Church.

Witnesses to the Book of Mormon

Learning of prophecies in the Book of Mormon, three of Joseph Smith's close associates, Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris, requested that Joseph inquire of the Lord to "know if they might not obtain of him the privilege to be these three special witnesses" mentioned in that work. "Finally," Joseph wrote, "they became so very solicitous, and urged me so much to inquire that at length I complied; and through the Urim and Thummim, I obtained of the Lord for them the following [D&C 17]" (History of the Church, 1:53). Each of the three had previously been promised that he might stand as a witness to the truth of the work in which he was engaged (see D&C 5:11-12, 24; 6:27-28; 8:1; 14:8).

Consequently, these three men, together with Joseph Smith, retired to the woods near Peter Whitmer's farmhouse in Fayette, New York. The vision that followed is one of the best documented manifestations in religious history. The testimony of the three, recorded shortly after the event, appeared in many early American newspapers. Their testimony was published in the first (1830) and in all subsequent editions of the Book of Mormon. Although all three of the witnesses left the Church (two later returned), not one ever denied his testimony. All three were interviewed on numerous occasions and reaffirmed their witness on their deathbed.

David Whitmer, the only witness who did not return to the Church, gave a detailed description of their experience:

"It was in June, 1829—the latter part of the month, and the eight witnesses saw them, I think, the next day or the day after (i.e. one or two days after). Joseph showed them the plates himself, but the angel showed us (the three witnesses) the plates, as I suppose to fulfill the words of the book itself. Martin Harris was not with us at this time; he obtained a view of them afterwards, (the same day). Joseph, Oliver and myself were together when I saw them. We not only saw the plates of the Book of Mormon but also the brass plates, the plates of the Book of Ether, the plates containing the records of the wickedness and secret combinations of the people of the world down to the time of their being engraved, and many other plates. The fact is, it was just as though Joseph, Oliver and I were sitting just here on a log, when we were overshadowed by a light. It was not like the light of the sun nor like that of a fire, but more glorious and beautiful. It extended away round us, I cannot tell how far, but in the midst of this light about as far off as he sits (pointing to John C. Whitmer, sitting a few feet from him), there appeared as it were, a table with many records or plates upon it, besides the plates of the Book of Mormon, also the Sword of Laban, the directors—i.e., the ball which Lehi had—and the Interpreters. I saw them just as plain as I see this bed (striking the bed beside him with his hand), and I heard the voice of the Lord, as distinctly as I ever heard anything in my life, declaring that the records of the plates of the Book of Mormon were translated by the gift and power of God.

"Elder O. P. [Orson Pratt asked:] Did you see the angel at this time?

"D. W. Yes; he stood before us. Our testimony as recorded in the Book of Mormon is strictly and absolutely true, just as it is there written" (Millenial Star, 9 Dec. 1878, pp. 771-72).

That Oliver maintained his witness to the end of his life was confirmed by his wife, Elizabeth Ann Whitmer Cowdery, in a letter she wrote to her brother dated 8 March 1887: "Dear Brother David:— I, Elizabeth Cowdery, wife of Oliver Cowdery, do make the following statements: That my husband, Oliver Cowdery, bore his testimony to the truth and divine origin of the Book of Mormon, as one of the three witnesses of the Book of Mormon. . . . He always without one doubt or shudder of turning affirmed the divinity and truth of the Book of Mormon. 'God's promises never fail"' (The Return, Dec. 1892, p. 7).

David Whitmer further confirmed that throughout their lives all three of these witnesses testified to the divine authenticity of the Book of Mormon: "I also testify to the world, that neither Oliver Cowdery or Martin Harris ever at any time denied their testimony. They both died reaffirming the truth of the divine authenticity of the Book of Mormon. I was present at the death bed of Oliver Cowdery, and his last words were, 'Brother David, be true to your testimony to the Book of Mormon.' He died here in Richmond, Mo., on March 3d, 1850. Many witnesses yet live in Richmond, who will testify to the truth of these facts, as well as to the good character of Oliver Cowdery" (Address, p. 8).

Publication of the Book of Mormon

During the summer of 1829, Egbert B. Grandin had agreed to publish five thousand copies of the Book of Mormon for three thousand dollars. To assure payment, on 5 August 1829, Martin Harris mortgaged 240 acres of his farm to Mr. Grandin. According to the terms of this agreement, Harris was to pay the three thousand dollars within eighteen months. Should Harris default, Grandin was authorized to sell Martin's land at public auction to pay the debt. When the mortgage was negotiated, Martin Harris and others anticipated no difficulty in paying it off, assuming that receipts from Book of Mormon sales would be sufficient to meet the obligation. But opposition to "The Gold Bible" increased while the book was at the press. Lucy Mack Smith, the Prophet's mother, wrote: "When the inhabitants of the surrounding country perceived that the work still progressed, they became uneasy, and again called a large meeting. At this time, they gathered their forces together, far and near, and organizing themselves into a committee of the whole, they resolved, as before, never to purchase one of our books, when they should be printed. They then appointed a committee to wait upon E. B. Grandin, and inform him of the resolutions which they had passed, and also to explain to him the evil consequences which would result to him therefrom. The men who were appointed to do this errand, fulfilled their mission to the letter, and urged upon Mr. Grandin the necessity of his putting a stop to the printing, as the Smiths had lost all their property, and consequently would be unable to pay him for his work, except by the sale of the books. And this they would never be able to do, for the people would not purchase them. This information caused Mr. Grandin to stop printing, and we were again compelled to send for Joseph [who was then in Pennsylvania]. These trips, back and forth, exhausted nearly all our means, yet they seemed unavoidable.

"When Joseph came, he went immediately with Martin Harris to Grandin, and succeeded in removing his fears, so that he went on with the work, until the books were printed, which was in the spring of eighteen hundred and thirty" (History, pp.166-67).

These events are the setting for Doctrine and Covenants 19. Martin was apparently concerned that he might lose his farm if this boycott against the Book of Mormon continued. The Lord admonished him not to covet his property and to give up a portion of it, if necessary, to pay the debt (D&C 19:26, 34-35). At great personal sacrifice, Martin Harris kept the Lord's command. Eventually, in April 1831, he sold 151 acres of his inheritance at public auction (Gunnell, "Martin Harris," pp. 37-38).

Organization of the Church

Doctrine and Covenants 20 through 23 were given in connection with the organization of the Church on 6 April 1830. Section 20 resulted from revelations received by the Prophet during preceding months, some perhaps received in late 1829. Section 20 declared the basic beliefs of the Church and described Church government and ordinances. Most of this revelation was available for discussion on the day the Church was organized in Peter Whitmer's farmhouse in Fayette, New York.

The Prophet included in his history a description of the events leading up to and transpiring on the day the Church was organized:

"In this manner did the Lord continue to give us instructions from time to time, concerning the duties which now devolved upon us; and among many other things of the kind, we obtained of Him the following, by the spirit of prophecy and revelation; which not only gave us much information, but also pointed out to us the precise day upon which, according to His will and commandment, we should proceed to organize His Church once more here upon the earth" (History of the Church, 1:64).

"Accordingly we met together for that purpose, at the house of Mr. Peter Whitmer, Sen., (being six in number,) on Tuesday, the sixth day of April, A.D., one thousand eight hundred and thirty. Having opened the meeting by solemn prayer to our Heavenly Father, we proceeded, according to previous commandment [revelation at the Whitmer home discussed in the previous chapter], to call on our brethren to know whether they accepted us as their teachers in the things of the Kingdom of God, and whether they were satisfied that we should proceed and be organized as a Church according to said commandment which we had received. To these several propositions they consented by a unanimous vote. I then laid my hands upon Oliver Cowdery, and ordained him an Elder of the 'Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints;' after which, he ordained me also to the office of an Elder of said Church. We then took bread, blessed it, and brake it with them; also wine, blessed it, and drank it with them. We then laid our hands on each individual member of the Church present, that they might receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, and be confirmed members of the Church of Christ. The Holy Ghost was poured out upon us to a very great degree—some prophesied, whilst we all praised the Lord, and rejoiced exceedingly. Whilst yet together, I received the following commandment: [D&C 21]" (History of the Church, 1:75-78).

Joseph Knight recalled that those present "all kneeld down and prayed and Joseph gave them instructions [on] how to Bild up the Church and exorted them to Be faithful in all things for this is the work of God" (BYU Studies, Autumn 1976, p. 37).

The Prophet recorded: "After a happy time spent in witnessing and feeling for ourselves the powers and blessings of the Holy Ghost, through the grace of God bestowed upon us, we dismissed with the pleasing knowledge that we were now individually members of, and acknowledged of God, 'The Church of Jesus Christ,' organized in accordance with commandments and revelations given by Him to ourselves in these last days, as well as according to the order of the Church as recorded in the New Testament. Several persons who had attended the above meeting, became convinced of the truth and came forward shortly after, and were received into the Church; among the rest, my own father and mother were baptized, to my great joy and consolation; and about the same time, Martin Harris and Orrin Porter Rockwell" (History of the Church, 1:79).

Lucy Smith wrote that when her husband "came out of the water, Joseph stood upon the shore, and taking his father by the hand, he exclaimed, with tears of joy, 'Praise to my God! that I lived to see my own father baptized into the true Church of Jesus Christ!"' (History, p. 168).

At this time, when some believers who had been baptized in other churches asked whether or not they needed to be baptized again, Joseph received Doctrine and Covenants 22 for them. On the same day the Church was organized, five converts expressed a desire to know their respective duties. The Prophet inquired of the Lord and received the revelations in Section 23. These were printed as five separate chapters in the Book of Commandments and were all dated 6 April 1830.

At the Church's first conference held at the Whitmer home on 9 June 1830, the material in Doctrine and Covenants 20 and 22 was accepted as authoritative. The minutes of the meeting record: "Articles and Covenants read by Joseph Smith jr. and received by unanimous voice of the whole congregation" (Far West Record, p.1). This document was read at many early conferences, copied by many Saints, and became a guide for proper belief and procedures for the early Church.
