Richard O. Cowan, Milton V. Backman, Joseph Smith and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1992)

6

Encouragement and Instruction

Doctrine and Covenants 24-27

The months following the organization of the Church witnessed remarkable miracles and substantial growth. But persecution also increased, and it became so intense that some leaders had to seek safety in partial seclusion. Doctrine and Covenants 24 through 27 were given during this time to strengthen, encourage, and instruct early converts.

Newel Knight and the Church's First Miracle

Soon after the Church was organized in April 1830, Joseph Smith returned from Fayette, New York, to his home in Harmony, Pennsylvania. During the same month, Joseph went to visit the Knight family in nearby Colesville, New York. The Prophet's history records that he conversed on religious subjects with many people but especially with Joseph Knight's son Newel. "He and I had many serious conversations on the important subject of man's eternal salvation. We had got into the habit of praying much at our meetings." One morning Newel "retired into the woods; where, according to his own account afterwards, he made several attempts to pray, but could scarcely do so, feeling that he had not done his duty, in refusing to pray in the presence of others. He began to feel uneasy, and continued to feel worse both in mind and body, until, upon reaching his own house, his appearance was such as to alarm his wife very much. He requested her to go and bring me to him. I went and found him suffering very much in his mind, and his body acted upon in a very strange manner; his visage and limbs distorted and twisted in every shape and appearance possible to imagine; and finally he was caught up off the floor of the apartment, and tossed about most fearfully.

". . . I succeeded in getting hold of him by the hand, when almost immediately he spoke to me, and with great earnestness requested me to cast the devil out of him, saying that he knew he was in him, and that he also knew that I could cast him out.

"I replied, 'If you know that I can, it shall be done;' and then almost unconsciously I rebuked the devil, and commanded him in the name of Jesus Christ to depart from him; when immediately Newel spoke out and said that he saw the devil leave him and vanish from his sight. This was the first miracle which was done in the Church. . . .

"This scene was now entirely changed, for as soon as the devil had departed from our friend, his countenance became natural, his distortions of body ceased, and almost immediately the Spirit of the Lord descended upon him, and the visions of eternity were opened to his view. . . . He afterwards related his experience as follows:

"'I now began to feel a most pleasing sensation resting on me, and immediately the visions of heaven were opened to my view. I felt myself attracted upward, and remained for some time enwrapt in contemplation, insomuch that I knew not what was going on in the room. By and by, I felt some weight pressing upon my shoulder and the side of my head, which served to recall me to a sense of my situation, and I found that the Spirit of the Lord had actually caught me up off the floor, and that my shoulder and head were pressing against the beams.'

"All this was witnessed by many, to their great astonishment and satisfaction, when they saw the devil thus cast out, and the power of God, and His Holy Spirit thus made manifest. As may be expected, such a scene as this contributed much to make believers of those who witnessed it, and finally the greater part of them became members of the Church" (History of the Church, 1:82-84).

Concerning subsequent events Newel Knight wrote: "During the last week in May [1830] I went on a visit to Fayette and was baptized by David Whitmer.

"On the [ninth] day of June, 1830, the first conference was held by the Church. Our number consisted of about thirty, besides many others who came to learn of our principles, or were already believers, but had not been baptized. Having opened the meeting by singing and prayer, we partook of the emblems of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ. A number were confirmed who had lately been baptized, and several were called and ordained to various offices in the Priesthood. Much good instruction was given, and the Holy Ghost was poured out upon us in a marvelous manner. Many prophesied, while others had the heavens opened to their view. It was a scene long to be remembered" (Classic Experiences, p. 52).

Opposition Increases

Newel Knight's account sheds light on the type of persecution the Saints were suffering at Colesville: "Soon after conference Joseph Smith the Prophet, accompanied by his wife, Oliver Cowdery, John Whitmer and David Whitmer, came to Colesville to make us a visit. There were many in our neighborhood who believed, and were anxiously waiting for an opportunity to be baptized. Meeting was appointed for the Sabbath, and on Saturday afternoon we erected a dam across a stream which was close by, with the intention of baptizing those who applied on Sunday, but during the night a mob collected and tore away the dam. This prevented us from attending to the ordinance of baptism that day." Nevertheless, on Sunday "we held our meeting, Oliver Cowdery preached, others bore testimony to the Book of Mormon, the doctrine of repentance, baptism for the remission of sins, and the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, etc. In the audience were those who had torn down the dam. They seemed desirous of giving us trouble, but did not until after the meeting was dismissed, when they immediately commenced talking to those whom they considered our friends, to try to turn them against us and our doctrine. . . .

"Early on Monday morning we were on the alert, and before our enemies were aware of it, Oliver Cowdery proceeded to baptize . . . but before the baptism was entirely finished, the mob began to collect again. We retired to my father's house, and the mob, which numbered about fifty surrounded the house, raging with anger, and apparently wishing to commit violence against us. So violent and troublesome were they, that the brethren were obliged to leave my father's house and they succeeded in reaching mine. The mob who soon found where they had gone, followed them and it was only by great prudence on our part and help from our Heavenly Father that they were kept from laying violent hands upon us.

"A meeting had been appointed for the evening to confirm those who had been baptized in the morning. The time appointed had arrived, and our friends had nearly all collected together, when, to our great surprise and sorrow, the constable came and arrested Brother Joseph Smith, Jun., on a warrant charging him with being a disorderly person, and of setting the country in an uproar, by preaching the Book of Mormon. The constable soon after he had arrested Joseph, told him that the plan of those who had got out the warrant for his arrest, was to get him into the hands of the mob who were now lying in ambush for him, and that he, the constable, was determined to save Joseph from them, as he found him to be a different person to what he had been represented. This proved true, for they had not proceeded far from the house, when the wagon in which Joseph and the constable were riding, was surrounded by the mob, who seemed only to await some signal from the constable, but to their great discomfiture, he gave the horses the whip and was soon out of their reach. As the constable was driving briskly along, one of the wagon wheels came off, which accident left them almost in the hands of the mob, who had pursued them closely. But the constable was an expert man and managed to get the wheel on again, before the mob overtook him, and soon left them in the rear once more.

"He drove on to the town of South Bainbridge, Chenango county, where he lodged Joseph in an upper room of a tavern; and in order that all might be safe for himself and Joseph, he slept, or laid during the night with his feet against the door, and kept a loaded gun by him, (Joseph occupied a bed in the same room) and declared that if they were unlawfully molested he would fight for Joseph, and defend him to the utmost of his ability.

"On the following day a court was convened for the purpose of investigating the charges which had been made against Joseph Smith, Jun. On account of the many scandalous reports which had been put in circulation, a great excitement prevailed. . . .

". . . His persecutors managed to detain the court until they had succeeded in obtaining a warrant from Broome county. This warrant they served upon him at the very moment he had been acquitted by the court.

"The constable who served this second warrant upon Joseph had no sooner arrested him, than he began to abuse him; and so heartless was he, that, although Joseph had been kept all day in court without anything to eat since the morning, he hurried him off to Broome County, a distance of about fifteen miles, before allowing him to eat. The constable took him to a tavern, where were gathered a number of men, who used every means to abuse, ridicule, and insult him. They spit upon him, pointed their fingers at him, saying, 'Prophesy! prophesy!' and used their utmost ability to pain and torment his mind; and thus did they imitate those who crucified the Savior of mankind, not knowing what they did. . . . Next day he was brought before the magistrate's court of Colesville, Broome county, and placed on trial. . . .

"They proceeded for a considerable time in [a] frivolous and vexatious manner, when finally I was called upon. . . .

"As soon as I had been sworn, Mr. Seymour proceeded to interrogate me as follows:

"Question.—'Did the prisoner, Joseph Smith, Jun., cast the devil out of you?'

"Answer.—'No, sir.'

"Q.—'Why, have you not had the devil cast out of you?'

"A.— 'Yes, sir.'

"Q.—'And had not Joseph Smith some hand in it being done?

"A.—'Yes, sir.'

"Q.—'And did he not cast him out of you?'

"A.—'No, sir, it was done by the power of God, and Joseph Smith was the instrument in the hands of God on this occasion. He commanded him to come out of me in the name of Jesus Christ.'

"Q.—'And are you sure it was the devil?'

"A.—'Yes, sir.'

"Q.—'Did you see him after he was cast out of you?'

"A.— 'Yes, sir, I saw him."'

"Q.—'Pray, what did he look like?'

(Here one of the lawyers on the part of the defense told me I need not answer that question). I replied:

"'I believe, I need not answer you that question, but I will do it if I am allowed to ask you one, and you can answer it. Do you, Mr. Seymour, understand the things of the Spirit?'

"'No,' answered Mr. Seymour, 'I do not pretend to such big things.'

"'Well, then,' I replied, 'it will be of no use for me to tell you what the devil looked like, for it was a spiritual sight and spiritually discerned, and, of course, you would not understand it were I to tell you of it.'

"The lawyer dropped his head, while the loud laugh of the audience proclaimed his discomfiture. . . .

"After all the efforts of the people and court to sustain the charges brought against Joseph proving an entire failure, he was discharged and succeeded in making good his escape from the mob through the instrumentality of his new friend, the constable" (Classic Experiences, pp. 53-61).

Joseph visited the Knight family once again before leaving the region. A few hours before his arrival, Newel's wife had a dream that enabled her to know that the Prophet would visit them. Joseph declared, "Our faith [was] much strengthened concerning dreams and visions in the last days, foretold by the ancient Prophet Joel; and although we this time were forced to seek safety from our enemies by flight, yet did we feel confident that eventually we should come off victorious, if we only continued faithful to Him who had called us forth from darkness into the marvelous light of the everlasting Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ" (History of the Church, 1:101).

Shortly after returning to his home in Harmony, Pennsylvania, the Prophet received three revelations, instructing him how to proceed in leading the Church. Joseph was instructed in Doctrine and Covenants 24 to devote his full time to strengthening Church branches in the face of growing opposition. Doctrine and Covenants 25 was given for the Prophet's wife, Emma. It had been difficult for her to understand why she couldn't have the reassurance that could come through seeing the plates, which had already been shown to several others. This revelation sought to give her needed comfort and direction.

Newel Knight described the setting of Doctrine and Covenants 26, another far-reaching revelation given August 1830: "In the beginning of August I, in company with my wife, went to make a visit to Brother Joseph Smith, Jun., who then resided at Harmony, Penn. We found him and his wife well, and in good spirits. We had a happy meeting. It truly gave me joy to again behold his face. As neither Emma, the wife of Joseph Smith, nor my wife had been confirmed, we concluded to attend to that holy ordinance at this time, and also to partake of the sacrament, before we should leave for home. In order to prepare for this, Brother Joseph set out to procure some wine for the occasion, but he had gone only a short distance, when he was met by a heavenly messenger, and received [a] revelation [see D&C 27]. . . .

"In obedience to this revelation we prepared some wine of our own make, and held our meeting, consisting of only five persons namely, Joseph Smith and wife, John Whitmer, and myself and wife.

We partook of the sacrament, after which we confirmed the two sisters into the Church, and spent the evening in a glorious manner. The Spirit of the Lord was poured out upon us. We praised the God of Israel and rejoiced exceedingly" (Classic Experiences, pp. 62-63; see also History of the Church, 1:106).
