Richard O. Cowan, Milton V. Backman, Joseph Smith and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1992)

7

Mission to the Lamanites

Doctrine and Covenants 28; 30; 32

In September 1830 Oliver Cowdery was called to preach the gospel to the Lamanites (D&C 28:8). Shortly thereafter, Peter Whitmer, Jr. (D&C 30:5), Parley P. Pratt, and Ziba Peterson were instructed to accompany him (D&C 32:1-3). The great significance of this mission would not be among native Americans, but it would be the means of bringing many non-Indians into the Church. It would also give the Latter-day Saints their first contact with two areas of future importance: Kirtland, Ohio, and Independence, Missouri.

Only a few months before his calling as a missionary, Parley P. Pratt learned of the restored gospel while preaching the need to re-establish the ancient Christian order. He recalled that an old Baptist deacon by the name of Hamlin told him about a book, "a STRANGE BOOK, a VERY STRANGE BOOK!" that he had in his possession, which had just been published. "I inquired of him how or where the book was to be obtained," he continued. "He promised me the perusal of it, at his house the next day, if I would call. I felt a strange interest in the book. . . . Next morning I called at his house, where, for the first time, my eyes beheld the 'BOOK OF MORMON.' . . .

"I opened it with eagerness, and read its title page. I then read the testimony of several witnesses in relation to the manner of its being found and translated. After this I commenced its contents by course. I read all day; eating was a burden, I had no desire for food; sleep was a burden when the night came, for I preferred reading to sleep.

"As I read, the spirit of the Lord was upon me, and I knew and comprehended that the book was true, as plainly and manifestly as a man comprehends and knows that he exists" (Autobiography, pp. 36-37). After his conversion, he led his fellow missionaries to northeastern Ohio, where he knew people who were seeking religious truth.

Conversions in Kirtland

Parley P. Pratt has provided the most complete account of the mission to the Lamanites. Leaving his wife and children at the log cabin of Peter Whitmer, Parley and the other missionaries started westward on foot in the latter part of October 1830. After traveling about two hundred miles, they arrived in Mentor, Ohio, at the home of Parley's friend, Sidney Rigdon, an influential restorationist preacher. "He received us cordially and entertained us with hospitality," Parley recalled. "We soon presented him with a Book of Mormon, and related to him the history of the same. He was much interested, and promised a thorough perusal of the book.

"We tarried in this region for some time, and devoted our time to the ministry, and visiting from house to house. . . .

"The news of our coming was soon noised abroad, and the news of the discovery of the Book of Mormon and the marvelous events connected with it. The interest and excitement now became general in Kirtland, and in all the region round about. The people thronged us night and day, insomuch that we had no time for rest and retirement. Meetings were convened in different neighborhoods, and multitudes came together soliciting our attendance; while thousands flocked about us daily; some to be taught, some for curiosity, some to obey the gospel, and some to dispute or resist it" (Autobiography, pp. 47-48).

Although the missionaries had arrived in Ohio carrying satchels filled with copies of the Book of Mormon, there were not enough copies for all who desired to read that record. Mary Rollins, a twelve-year-old girl living in Kirtland, borrowed a copy from Isaac Morley. She recorded: "If any person in this world was ever perfectly happy in the possession of any coveted treasure I was when I had permission to read that wonderful book. Uncle and Aunt were Methodists, so when I got into the house, I exclaimed, 'Oh, Uncle, I have got the "Golden Bible". ' Well, there was consternation in the house for a few moments, and I was severely reprimanded for being so presumtious as to ask such a favor, when Brother Morley had not read it himself. However, we all took turns reading it until very late in the night—as soon as it was light enough to see, I was up and learned the first verse in the book. When I reached Brother Morley's they had been up for only a little while. When I handed him the book, he remarked, 'I guess you did not read much in it.' I showed him how far we had read. He was surprised, and said, 'I don't believe you can tell me one word of it.' I then repeated the first verse, also the outlines of the history of Nephi. He gazed at me in surprise, and said, 'child, take this book home and finish it, I can wait"' (Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine, July 1926, p. 194).

John Murdock, a farmer in that area, was converted in November 1830, also by reading the Book of Mormon. In one week he read the book, was baptized, confirmed, ordained an elder, and sent forth as a missionary to tell others of the reality of the Restoration.

Meanwhile, another restorationist, Philo Dibble, traveled to Kirtland to investigate the message being proclaimed by the missionaries. After listening to the elders, he received a witness by the Spirit that the gospel had been restored, and he was baptized on the same day.

By mid November 1830, Sidney Rigdon had resolved his doubts concerning modern scripture, latter-day revelation, and the elders' claim of restored authority. On Sunday, November 14, this Reformed Baptist preacher spoke to a large congregation in the Methodist meetinghouse in Kirtland, announcing his conversion to the restored Church. Shortly thereafter he and his wife were baptized by Oliver Cowdery and were overwhelmed with tears of joy.

Parley P. Pratt reported that in less than one month, the missionaries baptized in Kirtland and vicinity some 127 converts. After ordaining a few leaders to preside over the newly created branches, the missionaries to the Lamanites resumed their journey. Parley stopped in the area where he had lived when he was first married. There he found people who "wished to learn and obey the fulness of the gospel—were ready to entertain us and hear us preach. Others were filled with envy, rage and lying." He spent the night at the home of Simeon Carter and left a copy of the Book of Mormon with him. "He read it with attention. It wrought deeply upon his mind, and he went fifty miles to the church we had left in Kirtland, and was there baptized and ordained an Elder. He then returned to his home and commenced to preach and baptize. A church of about sixty members was soon organized" (Autobiography, pp. 48, 51).

Preaching to the Indians Near Independence, Missouri

After traveling by foot across the states of Ohio, Indiana, and Missouri, they reached what was then the western frontier of the United States. Crossing the Kansas River into Indian territory, they located a tribe of Delaware Indians. "We immediately inquired for the residence of the principal Chief," Parley wrote, "and were soon introduced to an aged and venerable looking man, who had long stood at the head of the Delawares, and been looked up to as the Great Grandfather, or Sachem of ten nations or tribes.

"He was seated on a sofa of furs, skins and blankets, before a fire in the center of his lodge; which was a comfortable cabin, consisting of two large rooms.

"His wives were neatly dressed, partly in calicoes and partly in skins; and wore a vast amount of silver ornaments. As we entered his cabin he took us by the hand with a hearty welcome, and then motioned us to be seated on a pleasant seat of blankets, or robes. His wives, at his bidding, set before us a tin pan full of beans and corn boiled up together, which proved to be good eating; although three of us made use alternately of the same wooden spoon.

"There was an interpreter present and through him we commenced to make known our errand, and to tell him of the Book of Mormon. We asked him to call the council of his nation together and give us a hearing in full. . . .

" . . . He despatched a messenger, and in about an hour had some forty men collected around us in his lodge, who, after shaking us by the hand, were seated in silence; and in a grave and dignified manner awaited the announcement of what we had to offer. The chief then requested us to proceed; or rather, begin where we began before, and to complete our communication. Elder Cowdery then commenced as follows:

"'Aged Chief and Venerable Council of the Delaware nation; we are glad of this opportunity to address you as our red brethren and friends. We have travelled a long distance from towards the rising sun to bring you glad news; we have travelled the wilderness, crossed the deep and wide rivers, and waded in the deep snows, and in the face of the storms of winter, to communicate to you great knowledge which has lately come to our ears and hearts; and which will do the red man good as well as the pale face.

"'Once the red men were many; they occupied the country from sea to sea—from the rising to the setting sun; the whole land was theirs; the Great Spirit gave it to them, and no pale faces dwelt among them. But now they are few in numbers; their possessions are small, and the pale faces are many.

"'Thousands of moons ago, when the red men's forefathers dwelt in peace and possessed this whole land, the Great Spirit talked with them, and revealed His law and His will, and much knowledge to their wise men and prophets. This they wrote in a Book; together with their history, and the things which should befall their children in the latter days.

"'This Book was written on plates of gold, and handed down from father to son for many ages and generations.

"'It was then that the people prospered, and were strong and mighty; they cultivated the earth; built buildings and cities, and abounded in all good things, as the pale faces now do.

"'But they became wicked; they killed one another and shed much blood; they killed their prophets and wise men, and sought to destroy the Book. The Great Spirit became angry, and would speak to them no more; they had no more good and wise dreams; no more visions; no more angels sent among them by the Great Spirit; and the Lord commanded Mormon and Moroni, their last wise men and prophets, to hide the Book in the earth, that it might be presented in safety, and be found and made known in the latter day to the pale faces who should possess the land. . . . And if the red man would then receive this Book and learn the things written in it, and do according thereunto . . .

"'Then should the red men become great, and have plenty to eat and good clothes to wear, and should be in favor with the Great Spirit and be his children"' (Autobiography, pp. 53-55).

After telling these people about the Prophet Joseph Smith and the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, they gave the chief a copy of the new witness for Christ.

"There was a pause in the council," Parley wrote, "and some conversation in their own tongue, after which the chief made the following reply:

"'We feel truly thankful to our white friends who have come so far, and been at such pains to tell us good news, and especially this new news concerning the Book of our forefathers; it makes us glad in here'—placing his hand on his heart.

"'It is now winter, we are new settlers in this place; the snow is deep, our cattle and horses are dying, our wigwams are poor; we have much to do in the spring—to build houses, and fence and make farms; but we will build a council house, and meet together, and you shall read to us and teach us more concerning the Book of our fathers and the will of the Great Spirit"' (Autobiography, pp. 56).

The missionaries continued to instruct the old chief and many of his tribe for several days:

"We found several among them who could read, and to them we gave copies of the Book, explaining to them that it was the Book of their forefathers.

"Some began to rejoice exceedingly, and took great pains to tell the news to others, in their own language.

"The excitement now reached the frontier settlements in Missouri, and stirred up the jealousy and envy of the Indian agents and sectarian missionaries to that degree that we were soon ordered out of the Indian country as disturbers of the peace; and even threatened with the military in case of non-compliance.

"We accordingly departed from the Indian country, . . . and commenced laboring in Jackson County, Missouri, among the whites. We were well received, and listened to by many; and some were baptized and added to the Church.

"Thus ended our first Indian Mission, in which we had preached the gospel in its fulness, and distributed the record of their forefathers among three tribes, viz: the Catteraugus Indians, near Buffalo, N.Y., the Wyandots of Ohio, and the Delawares west of Missouri.

"We trust that at some future day, when the servants of God go forth in power to the remnant of Joseph, some precious seed will be found growing in their hearts, which was sown by us in that early day" (Autobiography, p. 57).
