Richard O. Cowan, Milton V. Backman, Joseph Smith and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1992)

8

Future Leaders Seek Guidance from the Lord

Doctrine and Covenants 34-36

Many individuals who met the Prophet Joseph Smith asked him to inquire of the Lord concerning them. Several sections now in the Doctrine and Covenants were the result. During November and December l 830, while living with the Whitmer family in Fayette, the Prophet received four revelations directed to three converts: Orson Pratt, Sidney Rigdon, and Edward Partridge.

Orson Pratt

Speaking through the Prophet, the Lord told Orson Pratt he was to prepare for the Second Coming by preaching the gospel "as with the sound of a trump, both long and loud" (D&C 34:5-6). Orson would become one of the most successful missionaries and influential members of the Quorum of the Twelve in the history of the Church. He summarized his conversion and the events that led to his meeting with the Prophet:

"From the age of ten to nineteen I saw much of the world, and was tossed about without any permanent abiding place; but through the grace of God, I was kept from many of the evils to which young people are exposed; the early impressions of morality and religion, instilled into my mind by my parents, always remained with me; and I often felt a great anxiety to be prepared for a future state; but never commenced, in real earnest, to seek after the Lord, until the autumn of 1829. I then began to pray very fervently, repenting of every sin. In the silent shades of night, while others were slumbering upon their pillows, I often retired to some secret place in the lonely fields or solitary wilderness, and bowed before the Lord, and prayed for hours with a broken heart and contrite spirit; this was my comfort and delight. The greatest desire of my heart was for the Lord to manifest His will concerning me. I continued to pray in this fervent manner until September, 1830, at which time two Elders of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, came into the neighborhood, one of which was my brother Parley. They held several meetings which I attended.

"Being convinced of the divine authenticity of the doctrine they taught, I was baptized September 19, 1830. This was my birthday, being nineteen years old. I was the only person in the country who received and obeyed the message. Shortly after my baptism the Elders left.

"In October, 1830, I traveled westward over two hundred miles to see Joseph Smith, the Prophet. I found him in Fayette, Seneca County, N. Y., residing at the house of Mr. [Peter] Whitmer. I soon became intimately acquainted with this good man, and also with the witnesses of the Book of Mormon. By my request, on the 4th of Nov., the Prophet Joseph inquired of the Lord for me, and received the revelation published in the Doctrine and Covenants [D&C 34].

"On the 1st day of December, 1830, I was confirmed and in accordance with the word of the Lord, I was ordained an Elder under the hands of the Prophet. My first mission was to Colesville, Broome County, N. Y., where I commenced to open my mouth in public meetings, and teach the things of God, as the Holy Ghost gave me utterance" (Journals, pp. 8-10).

Sidney Rigdon and Edward Partridge

Before the missionaries to the Lamanites left Ohio, they called Sidney Rigdon to be a leader over the Saints. He recognized his need for assistance, because he had just been baptized and did not know many principles of belief or practice. He decided to travel east, find Joseph, and seek counsel. He was accompanied by one of his followers, Edward Partridge, a successful hatter in nearby Painesville, who was delaying his baptism until he had personally met Joseph and received a witness of the Prophet's divine calling. Lydia Partridge recalled that when her husband began the journey, he was not fully convinced of the truth of the gospel taught by the elders.

Because Edward Partridge was noted for his integrity, other "inquirers" awaited Edward's appraisal of Joseph Smith's character before making up their minds. (Backman, Heavens Resound, p. 40.) Meanwhile, Joseph Smith, Sr., had moved from Manchester to a home east of Waterloo, not far from Fayette, where the Church had been organized. Lucy Mack Smith described the events that occurred in her home when the two strangers from Ohio first met her son:

"In December [1830], Joseph appointed a meeting at our house. While he was preaching, Sidney Rigdon and Edward Partridge came in and seated themselves in the congregation. When Joseph had finished his discourse, he gave all who had any remarks to make, the privilege of speaking. Upon this, Mr. Partridge arose, and stated that he had been to Manchester, with the view of obtaining further information respecting the doctrine which we preached; but, not finding us, he had made some inquiry of our neighbors concerning our characters, which they stated had been unimpeachable, until Joseph deceived us [them] relative to the Book of Mormon. He also said that he had walked over our farm, and observed the good order and industry which it exhibited; and, having seen what we had sacrificed for the sake of our faith, and having heard that our veracity was not questioned upon any other point than that of our religion, he believed our testimony, and was ready to be baptized, 'if,' said he, 'Brother Joseph will baptize me.'

"'You are now,' replied Joseph, 'much fatigued, brother Partridge, and you had better rest to-day, and be baptized tomorrow.'

"'Just as Brother Joseph thinks best,' replied Mr. Partridge, 'I am ready at any time.'

"He was accordingly baptized the next day [11 December 1830]" (History, pp. 191-92).

The Prophet recorded that shortly after the arrival of Sidney Rigdon and Edward Partridge, the Lord spoke to him concerning them, giving the revelations that are now Doctrine and Covenants 35 and 36 (History of the Church, 1:128).

During the 1820s Sidney Rigdon had been influenced by the teachings of Alexander Campbell and was a successful restorationist preacher in Ohio, but when Campbell began organizing followers in 1830 in a movement that became the Disciples of Christ, Rigdon refused to unite with him. Unlike Campbell, Rigdon believed in a restoration of God's power and in the establishment of a communal order of living. Unlike the Latter-day Saints, Rigdon believed that the Bible was the sole standard of faith and that when individuals accepted Christ they were thereby endowed with God's authority without the need of special ordination. After listening to the Latter-day Saint missionaries, the former Baptist preacher recognized significant differences between the teachings of Alexander Campbell and Joseph Smith. Some of these differences were identified in the revelation recorded by the Prophet shortly after meeting Rigdon: "Behold thou wast sent forth, even as John," the revelation read, "to prepare the way before me." Before his conversion to Mormonism, the revelation continued, Rigdon "baptized by water unto repentance but they received not the Holy Ghost." After he had received God's authority, individuals who were baptized by him would "receive the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands." This revelation further emphasized that "miracles, signs, and wonders" would be manifest among believers (D&C 35:4-9).

Three years later, Sidney Rigdon would be called as a "spokesman" for Joseph Smith and the Church (D&C 100:9). In that capacity, he published a series of articles in the Latter Day Saints' Messenger and Advocate, emphasizing differences between the "Restoration" as taught by the Prophet Joseph Smith and that taught by other faiths. He affirmed that the biblical prophecy regarding restitution of all things included a restoration of "all spiritual gifts" and "every blessing which had ever been enjoyed among men from the first to the last" (Messenger and Advocate, May 1835, p. 117). Rigdon added that Joseph Smith not only restored correct beliefs, such as the principle of the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, but also received God's power and authority. He further testified that this restored power included revelations, visions, healing, prophecy, and speaking in tongues.

Sidney Rigdon was also called by revelation to be a scribe in making what came to be known as the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible (D&C 35:20, 23), restoring, clarifying and correcting the biblical text by inspiration—a work that began as early as June 1830. Immediately he began writing as the Prophet dictated to him, and he assisted the Prophet in recording the visions and prophecy of Enoch and other portions of the Old Testament. After the Saints moved to Ohio, Rigdon served as scribe for more of Joseph's translation of the New Testament than any other person.

Because of Rigdon's education, maturity, and eloquence as a speaker, early critics claimed that he was the dominant influence in the translation of the Bible and was the principal author of the Book of Mormon. Refuting these allegations, however, Sidney Rigdon emphatically reiterated his testimony. According to his son John, "My father . . . looked at me a moment and slowly raised his hand above his head and slowly said, with a tear glistening in his eyes: 'My son, I can swear before high heaven that what I have told you about the origin of that book is true. Your mother and sister, Mrs. Athalia Robinson, were present when that book was handed to me in Mentor, Ohio, and all I ever knew about the origin of that book was what Parley P. Pratt, Oliver Cowdery, Joseph Smith, and the witnesses who claimed they saw the plates have told me, and in all of my intimacy with Joseph Smith, he never told me but the one story, and that was he found it engraved upon gold plates in a hill near Palmyra, NY, and that an angel had appeared to him and directed him where to find it, and I have never to you or anyone else told but [this] one story, and that I now repeat to you"' ("Life Story," pp. 193-94).

The Lord had made a distinction between the roles of Joseph, who was to "prophesy," and of Sidney, who was to call on the scriptures to prove the Prophet's words (D&C 35:23). Consequently, for many years, Sidney Rigdon, serving as first counselor in the First Presidency, used his knowledge of the scriptures to substantiate and promulgate the truths taught by the Prophet Joseph Smith.

In the revelation for Edward Partridge, the Lord admonished him to share his newfound faith (D&C 36). Edward Partridge returned to his home in Ohio at the beginning of February 1831 after two months' absence. "After his arrival home," Edward's daughter Emily wrote, "his old and most intimate friends that had been so anxious for him to go and find out the truth of the reports about 'Mormonism' because of his honesty and superior judgment, pronounced him crazy when he declared the Book of Mormon true" ("Autobiography," p. 6). Within a few days of his return from New York, Edward Partridge became the Church's first bishop (D&C 41:9). In this capacity he administered the law of consecration and assigned stewardships (see Chapter 10). Near the end of 1831, Bishop Partridge, representing the Church, purchased sixty-three acres of land at Independence, Missouri, including the spot where Joseph Smith had placed a cornerstone for the future temple. Just over a year and a half later, when mob violence commenced against the Saints in Jackson County, Missouri, Edward was one of two Latter-day Saints who were tarred and feathered. This incident occurred on the same day that the Saints' press and the nearly completed copies of the Book of Commandments were destroyed (see Chapter l ). Edward Partridge served faithfully as the Church's first presiding bishop until his death in 1840.
