Richard O. Cowan, Milton V. Backman, Joseph Smith and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1992)

9

Gathering in Ohio

Doctrine and Covenants 37-38

The number of converts grew rapidly in Ohio after the visit by the missionaries sent to the Lamanites (see Chapter 7). By December 1830, there were more Church members in Ohio than in New York. While visiting Joseph Smith in New York, Sidney Rigdon informed him of the conversions in Ohio and invited him to go there. Joseph inquired of the Lord and received two revelations (D&C 37 at the end of 1830 and D&C 38 at the beginning of 1831), telling him and other Church members to migrate from New York and Pennsylvania to "the Ohio." This move was but the first step in the Church's westward migration. In Ohio, the Saints were to develop a strong nucleus from which the gospel and the Church might spread.

Joseph Smith Moves to Ohio

The Saints in New York and Pennsylvania immediately began preparing to move to Ohio. Joseph Smith's mother recorded in her history that late in December 1830, "Joseph received a letter from John Whitmer, desiring his immediate assistance at Kirtland in regulating the affairs of the church there. Joseph inquired of the Lord, and received a commandment to go straightway to Kirtland with his family and effects." Consequently, the Prophet was the first to depart for Ohio. He and his wife traveled with Sidney Rigdon and Edward Partridge, who were returning to their homes near Kirtland. "When they were about starting," Lucy continued, "they preached at our house on Seneca River; and, on their way, they preached at the house of Calvin Stoddard, and likewise at the house of Preserved Harris [brother of Martin Harris]. At each of these places, they baptized several individuals into the Church" (History, pp. 192-93).

Joseph and his companions arrived in Kirtland about the first of February 1831. When the sleigh pulled up in front of a store owned by Sidney Gilbert and Newel Whitney, the Prophet sprang out, "walked into the store and to where the junior partner was standing. 'Newel K. Whitney! Thou art the man!' he exclaimed, extending his hand cordially, as if to an old and familiar acquaintance. 'You have the advantage of me,' replied the merchant, as he mechanically took the proffered hand, 'I could not call you by the name as you have me.' 'I am Joseph the Prophet,' said the stranger smiling. 'You've prayed me here, now what do you want of me?"' (History of the Church, 1:146 n.). The Whitneys kindly extended hospitality to the Prophet and his wife.

Other groups of Saints followed, and by the summer of 1831 about two hundred New York and Pennsylvania Saints had migrated to Ohio. Some of the challenges, trials, and unusual experiences that accompanied this migration were recorded by two participants, Newel Knight and Lucy Mack Smith.

Newel Knight and the Colesville Branch

Newel Knight described how the Saints received the revelation to move: "On the 2nd of January, 1831, the third conference of the Church assembled. . . .

"It was at this conference that we were instructed as a people, to begin the gathering of Israel, and a revelation was given to the prophet on this subject [D&C 38].

"Having returned home from conference, in obedience to the commandment which had been given, I, together with the Colesville Branch, began to make preparations to go to Ohio. . . .

"As might be expected, we were obliged to make great sacrifices of our property. The most of my time was occupied in visiting the brethren, and helping to arrange their affairs, so that we might travel together in one company. Having made the best arrangements we could for the journey, we bade adieu to all we held dear on this earth and in the early part of April started for our destination.

"We had proceeded but a few days on our journey, when I was subpoenaed as a witness, and had to go [back] to Colesville. On arriving there it was very evident that this plan had been adopted by our enemies to add a little more to the persecutions already heaped upon us. The whole company declined traveling until I should return.

"Soon after I left, my aunt, Electa Peck, fell and broke her shoulder in a most shocking manner; a surgeon was called to relieve her sufferings, which were very great. My aunt dreamed that I returned and laid my hands upon her, prayed for her, and she was made whole, and pursued her journey with the company. She related this dream to the surgeon who replied, 'If you are able to travel in many weeks it will be a miracle, and I will be a Mormon too.'

"I arrived at the place, where the company had stopped, late in the evening; but, on learning of the accident, I went to see my aunt, and immediately on my entering the room she said, 'O, Brother Newel, if you will lay your hands upon me, I shall be well and able to go on the journey with you.' I stepped up to the bed, and, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, rebuked the pain with which she was suffering, and commanded her to be made whole; and it was done; for the next morning she arose, dressed herself, and pursued the journey with us.

"We arrived at Buffalo without any further trouble, where we were to take passage on board a sloop for Fairport, Ohio. But the wind blew from the lake and filled the harbor with ice, so that we were detained nearly two weeks. When we set sail on the lake, the winds continued boisterous, and the vessel was tossed about in such a manner that nearly all the company were sea-sick, which made it rather a disagreeable voyage. We arrived safely, however, at our destination" (Classic Experiences, pp. 68-69).

Lucy Mack Smith's Faith and Determination

The same revelation that directed Hyrum Smith and Joseph Smith, Sr., to travel with the Colesville Saints also directed Lucy Smith and two of her sons to wait until spring, when they should go to Ohio with the Saints from the Waterloo-Fayette area.

Lucy Mack Smith recorded:

"When the brethren considered the spring sufficiently open for traveling on the water, we all began to prepare for our removal to Kirtland [February or March 1831]. We hired a boat of a certain Methodist preacher, and appointed a time to meet at our house, for the purpose of setting off together; and when we were thus collected, we numbered eighty souls. The people of the surrounding country came and bade us farewell, invoking the blessing of heaven upon our heads. . . .

"I then called the brethren and sisters together, and reminded them that we were traveling by commandment of the Lord, as much as Father Lehi was, when he left Jerusalem; and, if faithful, we had the same reasons to expect the blessings of God. I then desired them to be solemn, and to lift their hearts to God continually in prayer, that we might be prospered. We then seated ourselves and sang a hymn. The captain was so delighted with the music, that he called to the mate, saying, 'Do, come here, and steer the boat; for I must hear that singing.' He afterwards expressed his pleasure and surprise at seeing such an appearance of devotion among us, stating that his wife had refused to accompany him, on account of her prejudice against us, which he very much regretted.

"At the approach of sunset, we seated ourselves, and sang another hymn. The music sounded beautifully upon the water, and had a salutary effect upon every heart, filling our souls with love and gratitude to God, for his manifold goodness towards us.

"The services of the evening being ended, I inquired of the brethren concerning the amount of provisions which they had on hand for the journey; and, to my surprise, I ascertained that we had on board, besides twenty grown persons, thirty children, who were almost destitute of food. This was unaccountable to me at first, but I afterwards learned that they had converted their substance into clothing, expecting that those who were in better circumstances would support them, as well as defray their traveling expense; those, however, from whom they expected the most assistance, disappointed them, consequently, the burden was thrown entirely upon my shoulders. From this time forward, I furnished the whole fifty persons with food from day to day" (History, pp. 195-97).

The first part of their journey was made in a flatboat along the Erie Canal to Buffalo, New York, where Lucy Smith and the others "found the brethren from Colesville, who informed us that they had been detained one week at this place, waiting for the navigation to open. Also, that Mr. Smith and Hyrum had gone through to Kirtland by land, in order to be there by the first of April. . . .

"While we were talking with the Colesville brethren, another boat landed, having on board about thirty brethren, among whom was Thomas B. Marsh, who immediately joined us, and, like the Colesville brethren, he was decidedly opposed to our attending to prayer, or making known that we were professors of religion. He said that if our company persisted in singing and praying, as we had hitherto done, we should be mobbed before the next morning.

"'Mob it is, then,' said I, 'we shall attend to prayer before sunset, mob or no mob"' (History, p. 199).

After locating places for the people to stay near the harbor, the next morning Lucy Smith resumed to the boat on the shore of Lake Erie. "On arriving there, Captain Blake requested the passengers to remain on board, as he wished, from that time, to be ready to start at a moment's warning; at the same time he sent out a man to measure the depth of the ice, who, when he resumed, reported that it was piled up to the height of twenty feet, and that it was his opinion that we would remain in the harbor at least two weeks longer. . . .

"I went to that part of the boat where the principal portion of our company was. There I found several of the brethren and sisters engaged in a warm debate, others murmuring and grumbling, and a number of young ladies were flirting, giggling, and laughing with gentlemen passengers, who were entire strangers to them, whilst hundreds of people on shore and on other boats were witnessing this scene of clamor and vanity among our brethren with great interest. I stepped into their midst. 'Brethren and sisters,' said I, 'we call ourselves Saints, and profess to have come out from the world for the purpose of serving God at the expense of all earthly things; and will you, at the very onset, subject the cause of Christ to ridicule by your own unwise and improper conduct? You profess to put your trust in God, then how can you feel to murmur and complain as you do! You are even more unreasonable than the children of Israel were; for here are my sisters pining for their rocking chairs, and brethren from whom I expected firmness and energy, declare that they positively believe they shall starve to death before they get to the end of their journey. And why is it so? Have any of you lacked? Have not I set food before you every day, and made you, who had not provided for yourselves, as welcome as my own children? Where is your faith? Where is your confidence in God? Can you not realize that all things were made by him, and that he rules over the works of his own hands? And suppose that all the Saints here should lift their hearts in prayer to God, that the way might be opened before us, how easy it would be for him to cause the ice to break away, so that in a moment we could be on our journey!' . . .

" . . . 'Now, brethren and sisters, if you will all of you raise your desires to heaven, that the ice may be broken up, and we be set at liberty, as sure as the Lord lives, it will be done.' At that instant a noise was heard, like bursting thunder. The captain cried, 'Every man to his post.' The ice parted, leaving barely a passage for the boat, and so narrow that as the boat passed through the buckets of the waterwheel were torn off with a crash, which, joined to the word of command from the captain, the hoarse answering of the sailors, the noise of the ice, and the cries and confusion of the spectators, presented a scene truly terrible. We had barely passed through the avenue when the ice closed together again, and the Colesville brethren were left in Buffalo, unable to follow us.

"As we were leaving the harbor, one of the bystanders exclaimed, 'There goes the "Mormon" company! That boat is sunk in the water nine inches deeper than ever it was before, and, mark it, she will sink—there is nothing surer.' In fact, they were so sure of it that they went straight to the office and had it published that we were sunk, so that when we arrived at Fairport we read in the papers the news of our own death.

"After our miraculous escape from the wharf at Buffalo, we called our company together and had a prayer meeting in which we offered up our thanks to God for his mercy, which he had manifested towards us in our deliverance" (History, pp. 202-5).

After arriving at Fairport Harbor, the group members became concerned about where they would stay temporarily and how they could transport themselves and their luggage to Kirtland. "My attention was attracted by a stranger, who sat a short distance from us on the shore of the lake. I inquired of him the distance to Kirtland. He, starting up, exclaimed, 'Is it possible that this is Mother Smith? I have sat here looking for you these three days.'

"Replying to his question in the affirmative, I asked him if it would be possible to procure teams to take our goods to Kirtland. He told me to give myself no uneasiness about the matter, that Joseph was expected every hour, and in less than twenty-four hours there would be teams sufficient to take all our company to houses that were waiting to receive them. When he mentioned Joseph's name, I started, for I just began to realize that I was so soon to see both my husband and my sons. I turned from the stranger and met Samuel, who was coming towards me, closely followed by Joseph. I extended my right hand to Samuel and my left to Joseph. They wept for joy upon seeing me." In Painesville, "we stopped at the house of Brother Partridge. Here we found a fine supper prepared for the whole company" (History, pp. 206-7).

Emily, a young daughter of Edward Partridge, recalled how "the Saints began to gather to Kirtland from all parts of the country where the gospel had been preached; and as we lived about three miles from the landing, our house made a good stopping place for the Saints" ("Autobiography," p. 6).
