Richard O. Cowan, Milton V. Backman, Joseph Smith and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1992)

10

Challenges of New Converts

Doctrine and Covenants 41-51

The Prophet Joseph Smith recognized that the Saints were confronted with many problems relating to Church doctrine and administration. All the Saints were new converts, from diverse backgrounds, who brought with them a variety of beliefs and religious behavior. Between February and May 1831, Joseph received at Kirtland, Ohio, eleven revelations relating to proper Latter-day Saint beliefs and practices. Writings of contemporaries provide insights into the challenges that led to those instructions and help us understand the effect they had in the lives of the fledgling Saints.

Common Stock Replaced by the Lord's Law

Before their conversions, many of the Saints had been eager to restore primitive Christianity. To this end, they had sought specific guidelines in the New Testament. When they read that early Christians "had all things common" (Acts 4:32), they organized a system called "common stock," in which title to all property was held by the group rather than by individuals. The Prophet quickly discerned, however, that what they were doing was not in agreement with the Lord's will. "The disciples had all things common," John Whitmer recorded in his history, "and were going to destruction very fast as to temporal things; for they considered from reading the scripture that what belonged to a brother, belonged to any of the brethren. Therefore they would take each other's clothes and other property and use it without leave which brought on confusion and disappointment, for they did not understand the scripture" (Early History, p. 37). To remedy such problems, the Lord's first revelation in Ohio promised that he would reveal his "law" and called Edward Partridge to administer it as the Church's first bishop (D&C 41). Just a few days later, Joseph dictated a portion of what is today Doctrine and Covenants 42, which contains the moral code of the Church and basic elements of the law of consecration and stewardship. As a result, the Prophet recorded, "the plan of 'common stock,' which had existed in what was called 'the family,' whose members generally had embraced the everlasting Gospel, was readily abandoned for the more perfect law of the Lord; and the false spirits were easily discerned and rejected by the light of revelation" (History of the Church, 1:146-47).

Who May Receive Revelation for the Church

Soon after the Lord's law was given through his authorized prophet, another person introduced confusion by "making great pretensions of revealing commandments, laws and other curious matters" (History of the Church, 1:154). Historian John Whitmer recorded:

"About these days there was a woman by the name of Hubble who professed to be a prophetess of the Lord and professed to have many revelations, and knew the Book of Mormon was true, and that she should become a teacher in the Church of Christ. She appeared to be very sanctimonious and deceived some who were not able to detect her in her hypocracy: others however had the spirit of discernment, and her follies and abominations were made manifest. The Lord gave Revelation that the saints might not be deceived [D&C 43]. . . .

"After this commandment was received, the saints came to understanding on this subject, and unity and harmony prevailed throughout the Church of God: and the Saints began to learn wisdom, and treasure up knowledge which they learned from the word of God, and by experience as they advanced in the way of eternal life" (Early History, pp. 42-44).

Mission to the Shakers

One religious movement of the early nineteenth century was the United Believers in Christ's Second Coming, commonly nicknamed the "Shakers." Members of this group lived in several communities in the Northeastern United States. One of these communities, North Union, was only a few miles southwest of Kirtland. It was to this group of Shakers that the revelation in Doctrine and Covenants 49 directed Leman Copley, a convert from the Shakers, and other elders to go as missionaries. Soon afterwards, the missionaries attempted to share the gospel with these people but did not find success.

Ashbel Kitchell, leader of this Shaker community, recorded in his journal the coming of the Mormon missionaries: "We continued on friendly terms in the way of trade and other acts of good neighborship untill the spring of 1831 when we were visited on Saturday evening by Sidney Rigdon and Leman Copley, the latter of whom had been among us; but not likeing the cross [the Shaker practice of celibacy] any to well, had taken up with Mormonism as the easier plan and had been appointed by them as one of the missionaries to convert us.

"They tarried all night, and in the course of the evening, the doctrines of the cross and the Mormon faith were both investigated; and we found that the life of . . . selfdenial corresponded better with the life of Christ, than Mormonism. . . . Thus the matter stood and we retired to rest, not knowing that they had then in possession what they called a revelation or message from Jesus Christ to us, which they intended to deliver to day (sabbath.) and which they supposed would bring us to terms.

"Sabbath morning, matters moved on pleasantly in sociable chat with the Brethren, untill I felt to give them all some council, which was for neither to force their doctrine on the other at this time; but let the time be spent in feeling of the spirit, as it was Rigdon's first visit, for it might be possible that he would yet see that the foundation he was now on, was sandy. . . .

" . . . A little before meeting, another one came from the Mormon camp as an assistant, by the name of Parley Pratt. He called them out, and enquired how they had got along? and was informed by Rigdon and Leman, that I had bound them to silence, and nothing could be done. Parley told them to pay no attention to me, for they had come with the authority of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the people must hear it, &c.

"They came into meeting and sat quietly untill the meeting was through, and the people dismissed; when Sidney Rigdon arose and stated that he had a message from the Lord Jesus Christ to this people; could he have the privilege of delivering it? He was answered, he could. He then said it was in writing; could he read it? He was told he might. He then read the following Message [The text of D&C 49, is here quoted with only a few minor wording changes from the way it appears in the Book of Comandments, chapter 52.].

"At the close of the reading, he asked if they could be permitted to go forth in the exercise of their gift and office.—I told him that the piece he had read, bore on its face, the image of its author; that the Christ that dictated that, I was well acquainted with, and had been, from a boy; that I had been much troubled to get rid of his influence, and I wished to have nothing more to do with him; and as for any gift he had authorized them to exercise among us, I would release them & their Christ from any further burden about us, and take all the responsibility on myself.

"Sidney made answer—This you . . . cannot do; I wish to hear the people speak. I told him if he desired it, they could speak for themselves, and steped back and told them to let the man know how they felt; which they did in something like these words; that they were fully satisfied with what they had, and wished to have nothing to do with either them or their Christ. On hearing this Rigdon professed to be satisfied, and put his paper by; but Parley Pratt arose and commenced shakeing his coattail; he said he shook the dust from his garments as a testimony against us, that we had rejected the word of the Lord Jesus.

"Before the words were out of his mouth, I was to him, and said; —You filthy Beast, dare you presume to come in here, and try to imitate a man of God by shaking your filthy tail; confess your sins and purge your soul from your lusts, and your other abominations before you ever presume to do the like again, &c. While I was ministering this reproof, he settled trembling into his seat, and covered his face; and I then turned to Leman who had been crying while the message was reading, and said to him, you hypocrite, you knew better;—you knew where the living work of God was. . . .

" . . . Leman tarried all night and started for home in the morning.

"He had a large farm, and about 100 Mormons were living with him, on it. When he got home, he found the Mormons had rejected him, & could not own him for one of them, because he had deceived them with the idea of converting us. He felt very bad;—was not able to rest;—came back to us and begged for union.

"After some consultation we concluded to give him union, and help him through; and to accomplish this, I went home with him, and held a meeting in the dooryard, among the Mormons; but few of them attended. They appeared to be struck with terror and fear lest some of them might get converted" (BYU Studies, Fall 1979, pp. 96-98).

Discerning Spiritual Manifestations

Doctrine and Covenants 46 and 50 deal specifically with gifts of the Spirit and how to detect false spiritual manifestations. Levi Hancock described the strange exercises of some converts in 1831: "Those elders ran into all manner of doings, receiving revelations and seeing angels. Falling down frothing at the mouth. . . . I have seen [one of them] jump up from the floor, strike his head against the joist in the Baldwins new house and swing some minutes, then fall like he was dead. After an hour or two he would come to. He would prophesy and tell what he had seen" ("Autobiography," p. 27).

Many years later, Elder George A. Smith recalled these problems in Kirtland. He declared that after the missionaries to the Lamanites left for Missouri and "Sidney Rigdon took a journey to the east, as did Edward Partridge for the purpose of visiting the Prophet" that "these strange spirits . . .began to manifest themselves in the churches and Branches which had been built up.

"There was at this time in Kirtland, a society that had undertaker to have a community of property; it has sometimes been denominated the Morley family, as there was a number of them located on a farm owned by Captain Isaac Morley. These persons had been baptized, but had not yet been instructed in relation to their duties. A false spirit entered into them, developing their singular, extravagant and wild ideas. They had a meeting at the farm, and among them was a negro known generally as Black Pete, who became a revelator. Others also manifested wonderful developments; they could see angels, and letters would come down from heaven, they said, and they would be put through wonderful unnatural distortions. Finally on one occasion, Black Pete got sight of one of those revelations . . . , he started after it, and ran off a steep wash bank twenty-five feet high, passed through a tree top into the Chagrin river beneath. He came out with a few scratches, and his ardor somewhat cooled.

"Joseph Smith came to Kirtland, and taught that people in relation to their error. He showed them that the Spirit of God did not bind men nor make them insane, and that the power of the adversary which had been manifested in many instances was visible even from that cause, for persons under its influence became helpless, and were bound hand and foot as in chains, being as immovable as a stick of timber. When Joseph came to instruct these Saints in relation to the true Spirit, and the manner of determining the one from the other, in a short time a number of those who had been influenced by those foul manifestations, apostatized" (Journal of Discourses, 11:3-4).

Parley P. Pratt also described behavior of the Saints that led him and others to seek counsel from the Prophet:

"As I went forth among the different branches, some very strange spiritual operations were manifested, which were disgusting, rather than edifying. Some persons would seem to swoon away, and make unseemly gestures, and be drawn or disfigured in their countenances. Others would fall into ecstacies, and be drawn into contortions, cramp, fits, etc. Others would seem to have visions and revelations, which were not edifying, and which were not congenial to the doctrine and spirit of the gospel. In short, a false and lying spirit seemed to be creeping into the Church.

"All these things were new and strange to me, and had originated in the Church during our absence, and previous to the arrival of President Joseph Smith from New York.

"Feeling our weakness and inexperience, and lest we should err in judgment concerning these spiritual phenomena, myself, John Murdock, and several other Elders, went to Joseph Smith, and asked him to inquire of the Lord concerning these spirits or manifestations.

"After we had joined in prayer in his translating room, he dictated in our presence the following revelation: [D&C 50]" (Autobiography, pp. 61-62). This revelation emphasized that the Lord's servants could discern the source of such manifestations by the Spirit and that spiritual gifts from God edify and help one to grow in light until reaching the "perfect day" (D&C 50:24).
