Richard O. Cowan, Milton V. Backman, Joseph Smith and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1992)

11

A Call to Zion

Doctrine and Covenants 52-63

After a special conference at Kirtland early in June 1831, the Lord directed the elders to hold their next conference in the consecrated land of Missouri, where he would reveal the location of their inheritances (D&C 52:2, 5). The next four revelations, Doctrine and Covenants 53 through 56, given during that same month, directed other Saints to go to Missouri. Joseph Smith and those traveling with him arrived there in July. During the next few weeks in Missouri, the Prophet received six revelations (D&C 57-62), all related in one way or another to establishing Zion in that land.

The Colesville Saints Move to Missouri

After Joseph Smith unfolded the law of consecration and stewardship (D&C 42:30-42), members of the Colesville branch who had settled in Thompson, Ohio, attempted to live this principle on land Leman Copley agreed to make available. Not long afterwards, however, he abruptly withdrew his offer, perhaps in the aftermath of his unsuccessful mission to the Shakers (see Chapter 10).

"At this time," John Whitmer recorded in his history, "the Church at Thompson Ohio was involved in difficulty, because of the rebellion of Lemon Copley who would not do as he had previously agreed, which thing confused the whole church" (Early History, p. 74). In the midst of this confusion, the Lord instructed Newel Knight to lead the Colesville Saints "unto the land of Missouri, unto the borders of the Lamanites" (D&C 54:8).

Complying with earlier revelations (D&C 37-38), Newel Knight had sold a choice farm in New York, which had lakes and streams, and moved to a wilderness in Thompson, Ohio. Traveling with the Colesville Saints, via the Ohio and Missouri Rivers, he reached the chosen land of Missouri and exclaimed, "our feelings can be better imagined than described, when we, found ourselves upon the Western frontiers. The country itself presented a pleasant aspect with its rich forests bordering its beautiful streams, and its deep rolling prairies spreading far and wide, inviting the hand of industry to establish for itself homes upon its broad bosom. And this was the place, where the Lord had promised to reveal unto us where . . . the New Jerusalem" should be built. (Classic Experiences, p. 71).

Dedication of the Center Place

Newel Knight continued: "We had not long to wait, for during the month the Lord gave a revelation to Brother Joseph [soon after he arrived in Missouri], designating the spot [D&C 57:1-3].

"Being no longer at a loss to know where the exact spot for the building of the temple and the city of Zion was, we immediately prepared for our labors. On the 2nd day of August, Brother Joseph Smith, Jun., the prophet of God, assisted the Colesville branch to lay the first log as a foundation for Zion in Kaw township [now in Kansas City], twelve miles west of Independence. The log was carried by twelve men, in honor of the twelve tribes of Israel. . . . This was truly a season of joy and rejoicing to all the Saints, who took part in, or witnessed the proceedings" (Classic Experiences, p. 71).

Sidney Rigdon dedicated the land on this same occasion for the gathering of the Saints. He asked the converts if they would covenant to keep the commandments of God. After they responded positively, he said, "I now pronounce this land consecrated and dedicated to the Lord for a possession and inheritance for the Saints (in the name of Jesus Christ having authority from him.) And for all the faithful Servants of the Lord to the remotest ages of time" (Whitmer, Early History, p. 79).

The next day, August 3, a group of elders assembled on the rise where a temple was to be erected, and Joseph Smith dedicated the site. John Whitmer recorded: "Joseph Smith, Jr., laid a stone at the Northeast corner of the contemplated Temple in the name of the Lord Jesus of Nazareth. After all present had rendered thanks to the great ruler of the universe, Sidney Rigdon pronounced [that] Spot of ground wholly dedicated unto the Lord forever" (Early History, p. 80).

The Gathering to Zion

Joseph Smith returned to Kirtland to find interest in Zion running high. In August 1831, the Lord declared that his Saints should "assemble themselves together unto the land of Zion" (D&C 63:24). The Lord had already directed Edward Partridge and his counselors in the bishopric to move with their families to Missouri (D&C 58:24-25). Consequently, the Partridge family were among the many Saints who migrated to Zion in the early 1830s. Reflections of Emily and Eliza, daughters of Edward and Lydia Partridge, reveal some challenges to the uprooted people. Born and raised in Painesville, Ohio, Eliza remembered that before her father was called to be bishop, he had a flourishing business, the family lived in a comfortable home, and she had "acquired a very good common education." When her father left his family to direct the business of the Church in Missouri in compliance with Doctrine and Covenants 58:24, he expected them to get along the best they could. "I was at that time, very sick," Eliza continued. Her father "had no expectation of seeing me again, but the Lord had called and he must obey. He showed his faith by his works and the Lord spared my life and the lives of the rest of his family for many years. He never went back to sell his place or settle his affairs, but left it for others to do which was done at a great sacrifice" (Lyman, "Autobiography," pp. 1-2).

Eliza's younger sister, Emily, also commented on the family's situation at the time of the move westward: "My mother felt that her trials had begun when my father was called to accompany the Prophet to Missouri [D&C 52:24]. . . . It was a new thing for her to be left alone in the hour of trouble, or to have any responsibility outside of her little family. . . .

"The next season mother with her family started for Missouri, in a company of Saints under the direction of W. W. Phelps and A. S. Gilbert. . . . We went down the Ohio River to Cincinnati in a keel boat. Then we took a steamboat and went up the Missouri River. . . . When we were within about one hundred miles of our destination we met the ice coming down the river so thick that the boat could not proceed and we were forced to land at a place called 'Arrow Rock.' On the banks of the river there was a log cabin occupied by Negroes. There were two rooms, with no windows. . . . These Negroes let mother and Sister Morley have one room. There was about fifteen in number in both families." There was a fireplace in the room in which they maintained a "good fire" that kept them from freezing. After living in the hut for a week or two, the families resumed their journey in a large Kentucky wagon. Emily remembered that the wagon in which she was riding was so tightly packed that she could hardly move when it stopped at Independence. Eventually, after some of the boxes had been unloaded and shifted, she succeeded in pulling herself out (Young, "Autobiography," pp. 7-9).

During the spring of 1832, Edward Partridge and his family moved into a house rented from Lilburn W. Boggs. Emily called it a small log room rather than a home. She remembered that because there was a shortage of homes in Independence during the winter of 1832-33, her father invited a widow with four children to live with his family. Consequently, twelve or thirteen people occupied one room. "Now don't think for a moment that we were crowded," Emily commented, "or that we children quarreled; perhaps we did, though I don't remember" (Young, "Autobiography," p. 10).

The family continued to live in that room until Bishop Partridge built a small log home near the temple lot, about one-half mile from the public square of Independence. It was constructed over a cellar and consisted of one room on the ground floor and one upstairs.

The Latter-day Saints assisted one another in building homes in the new land. Emily Partridge recorded that Church members periodically participated in "railings." After logs had been gathered and prepared, "men in the neighborhood would turn out and lay them up. Raisings with the men were something like the old-fashioned quilting was with the women. . . . Some of the houses were built very neatly, the logs being hewn on the outside and inside, and the comers sawed off smooth, and for a log house they looked very respectable" (Young, "Autobiography," p. 11).
