Richard O. Cowan, Milton V. Backman, Joseph Smith and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1992)

12

Revelations and Experiences in Hiram

Doctrine and Covenants 64-81

After returning to Kirtland from their first trip to Jackson County, Missouri, Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon moved their families to Hiram, Ohio, about thirty miles southeast of Kirtland. Joseph's family was invited to live in the farm home of John Johnson, and Sidney Rigdon moved into a small residence nearby.

The Johnson Family of Hiram, Ohio

John Johnson's home in Hiram, Ohio, was the headquarters of the Church for approximately six months, from mid September 1831 to late March 1832. During that time in Hiram, the Prophet Joseph Smith received fifteen revelations that are in the current edition of the Doctrine and Covenants (sections 1, 65, 67-69, 71, 73-74, 76-81, 133). Most of these revelations were received as he and his scribe, Sidney Rigdon, worked on the translation of the Bible. The revelations helped the Church members better understand the doctrines and administration of the restored Church.

Amos Hayden, a restorationist preacher and historian who was not a member of the Church, described an event that related to Joseph's being invited to move into the Johnson home: "Ezra Booth, of Mantua, a Methodist preacher of much more than ordinary culture, and with strong natural abilities, in company with his wife, Mr. and Mrs. Johnson, and some other citizens of this place [Hiram], visited Smith at his home in Kirtland, in 1831. Mrs. Johnson had been afflicted for some time with a lame arm, and was not at the time of the visit able to lift her hand to her head. The party visited Smith partly out of curiosity, and partly to see for themselves what there might be in the new doctrine. During the interview the conversation fumed on the subject of supernatural gifts, such as were conferred in the days of the apostles. Some one said, 'Here is Mrs. Johnson with a lame arm; has God given any power to man now on the earth to cure her?'

"A few moments later, when the conversation had turned in another direction, Smith rose, and walking across the room, taking Mrs. Johnson by the hand, said in the most solemn and impressive manner: 'Woman, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ I command thee to be whole,' and immediately left the room. The company were awe-stricken at the infinite presumption of the man, and the calm assurance with which he spoke. The sudden mental and moral shock—I know not how better to explain the well-attested fact—electrified the rheumatic arm—Mrs. Johnson at once lifted it up with ease, and on her return home the next day she was able to do her washing without difficulty or pain" (History of the Church, 215-16 n; see also Journal of Discourses, 11 :4-5).

Philo Dibble described details of the setting of this miracle and events that occurred at the time of the healing of Elsa Johnson: "When Joseph came to Kirtland his fame spread far and wide. There was a woman living in the town of Hiram . . . who had a crooked arm, which she had not been able to use for a long period. She persuaded her husband, whose name was Johnson, to take her to Kirtland to get her arm healed.

"I saw them as they passed my house on their way. She went to Joseph and requested him to heal her. Joseph asked her if she believed the Lord was able to make him an instrument in healing her arm. She said she believed the Lord was able to heal her arm.

"Joseph put her off till the next morning, when he met her at Brother [Newel K.] Whitney's house. There were eight persons present, one a Methodist preacher, and one a doctor. Joseph took her by the hand, prayed in silence a moment, pronounced her arm whole, in the name of Jesus Christ, and turned and left the room.

"The preacher asked her if her arm was whole, and she straightened it out and replied: 'It is as good as the other"' (Faith Promoting Classics, p. 79).

A Command to Forgive

Just before moving to Hiram, the Prophet had received a revelation in which the Lord emphasized the Saints' responsibility to forgive (D&C 64:3-12). Joseph Smith had ample opportunity to put the Lord's counsel into practice before he left Hiram. On the night of 24 March 1832, Joseph and Emma stayed up late to take care of their sick twins. Joseph recounted that he had fallen asleep but "was soon after awakened by her [Emma] screaming murder, when I found myself going out of the door, in the hands of about a dozen men; some of whose hands were in my hair, and some had hold of my shirt, drawers and limbs. . . . I made a desperate struggle, as I was forced out, to extricate myself, but only cleared one leg, with which I made a pass at one man, and he fell on the door steps. I was immediately overpowered again; and they swore by G,—they would kill me if I did not be still, which quieted me. As they passed around the house with me, the fellow that I kicked came to me and thrust his hand, all covered with blood, into my face and with an exulting hoarse laugh, muttered: 'Ge, gee, G—d—ye, I'l fix ye.'

"They then seized me by the throat and held on till I lost my breath. After I came to, as they passed along with me, about thirty rods from the house, I saw Elder Rigdon stretched out on the ground, whither they had dragged him by his heels. I supposed he was dead. I began to plead with them, saying, 'You will have mercy and spare my life, I hope.' To which they replied, 'G—d—ye, call on yer God for help, we'll show ye no mercy;' and the people began to show themselves in every direction; one coming from the orchard had a plank; and I expected they would kill me, and carry me off on the plank. They then turned to the right, and went on about thirty rods further; about sixty rods from the house, and thirty from where I saw Elder Rigdon, into the meadow, where they stopped, and one said, 'Simonds, Simonds,' (meaning, I supposed, Simonds Ryder [who had apostatized when the Prophet had misspelled his name in D&C 52:37],) 'pull up his drawers, pull up his drawers, he will take cold.' Another replied: 'Ain't ye going to kill 'im? ain't ye going to kill 'im?' when a group of mobbers collected a little way off, and said: 'Simonds, Simonds, come here;' and 'Simonds' charged those who had hold of me to keep me from touching the ground (as they had done all the time), lest I should get a spring upon them. They held a council, and as I could occasionally overhear a word, I supposed it was to know whether or not it was best to kill me. They returned after a while, when I learned that they had concluded not to kill me, but to beat and scratch me well, tear off my shirt and drawers, and leave me naked. One cried, 'Simonds, Simonds, where's the tar bucket?' 'I don't know,' answered one, 'where 'tis, Eli's left it.' They ran back and fetched the bucket of tar, when one exclaimed, with an oath, 'Let us tar up his mouth,' and they tried to force the tar-paddle into my mouth; I twisted my head around, so that they could not; and they cried out, 'G—d—ye, hold up yer head and let us giv ye some tar.' They then tried to force a vial into my mouth, and broke it in my teeth. All my clothes were torn off me except my shirt collar; and one man fell on me and scratched my body with his nails like a mad cat, and then muttered out: 'G—d— ye, that's the way the Holy Ghost falls on folks!'

"They then left me, and I attempted to rise, but fell again; I pulled the tar away from my lips, so that I could breathe more freely, and after a while I began to recover, and raised myself up, whereupon I saw two lights. I made my way towards one of them, and found it was Father Johnson's. When I came to the door I was naked, and the tar made me look as if I were covered with blood, and when my wife saw me she thought I was all crushed to pieces, and fainted. During the affray abroad, the sisters of the neighborhood had collected at my room. I called for a blanket, they threw me one and shut the door; I wrapped it around me and went in. . . .

"My friends spent the night in scraping and removing the tar, and washing and cleansing my body; so that by morning I was ready to be clothed again. This being the Sabbath morning, the people assembled for meeting at the usual hour of worship, and among them came also the mobbers; viz.: Simonds Ryder, a Campbellite preacher and leader of the mob; one McClentic, who had his hands in my hair; one Streeter, son of a Campbellite minister; and Felatiah Allen, Esq., who gave the mob a barrel of whiskey to raise their spirits. Besides these named, there were many others in the mob. With my flesh all scarified and defaced, I preached to the congregation as usual, and in the afternoon of the same day baptized three individuals.

"The next morning I went to see Elder Rigdon, and found him crazy, and his head highly inflamed, for they had dragged him by his heels, and those, too, so high from the ground that he could not raise his head from the rough, frozen surface, which lacerated it exceedingly . . . and he continued delirious some days. . . .

"During the mobbing one of the twins contracted a severe cold, continued to grow worse until Friday, and then died" (History of the Church, 1:261-65).

"The Vision" Of the Degrees of Glory

The Prophet and Sidney Rigdon pondered many questions about the gospel while they were "translating" the Bible. For example, they wondered how scriptural references to "many mansions" could be harmonized with the teachings of most Christian churches that there is but one heaven and one hell. While the Prophet was living in the Johnson home, some of the most distinctive truths of the Restoration were unfolded during a vision of the degrees of glory (D&C 76).

Philo Dibble, who happened to enter the room while the vision was being received, stated that when "Joseph and Sidney were in the spirit and saw the heavens open, there were other men in the room, perhaps twelve, among whom I was one during a part of the time—probably two-thirds of the time,—I saw the glory and felt the power, but did not see the vision.

"The events and conversation, while they were seeing what is written (and many things were seen and related that are not written), I will relate as minutely as is necessary.

"Joseph would, at intervals, say: 'What do I see?' as one might say while looking out the window and beholding what all in the room could not see. Then he would relate what he had seen or what he was looking at. Then Sidney replied, 'I see the same.' Presently Sidney would say 'what do I see?' and would repeat what he had seen or was seeing, and Joseph would reply, 'I see the same.'

"This manner of conversation was repeated at short intervals to the end of the vision, and during the whole time not a word was spoken by any other person. Not a sound nor motion made by anyone but Joseph and Sidney, and it seemed to me that they never moved a joint or limb during the time I was there, which I think was over an hour, and to the end of the vision.

"Joseph sat firmly and calmly all the time in the midst of a magnificent glory, but Sidney sat limp and pale, apparently as limber as a rag, observing which, Joseph remarked, smilingly, 'Sidney is not used to it as I am"' (Juvenile Instructor, 15 May 1892, pp. 303-4)

Whenever the Prophet restored additional doctrines, some members became disaffected and left the Church. Brigham Young recalled in August 1852 his own mixed reaction to some of the ideas revealed in Doctrine and Covenants 76: "Many things which were revealed through Joseph came in contact with our own prejudices: we did not know how to understand them. . . . After all, my traditions were such, that when the Vision [D&C 76] came first to me, it was directly contrary and opposed to my former education. I said, Wait a little. I did not reject it; but I could not understand it. I then could feel what incorrect tradition had done for me. Suppose all that I have ever heard from my priest and parents—the way they taught me to read the Bible—had been true, my understanding would be diametrically opposed to the doctrine revealed in the Vision. I used to think and pray, to read and think, until I knew and fully understood it for myself, by the visions of the Holy Spirit" (Journal of Discourses, 6:280-81).

Persecution in Hiram continued to increase. Finally, in the spring of 1832, Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon were forced to leave Hiram and return to Kirtland, which again became the headquarters of the Church and the residence of the Prophet until 1838.
