Richard O. Cowan, Milton V. Backman, Joseph Smith and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1992)

13

A Call to the Ministry

Doctrine and Covenants 82-84

Having endured the oppression in Hiram and learning of mob threats in Kirtland, in April 1832 Joseph Smith traveled to Missouri, from where he directed the affairs of the Church. Then, after receiving two revelations in Jackson County (D&C 82-83), he returned to Ohio. The Prophet and Sidney Rigdon moved to Kirtland with their families, and, believing that he would be protected by the Saints, Joseph settled there. From the summer of 1832 until January 1838, Kirtland was the major center of the Church and the base from which many missionaries were sent forth.

Church members remodeled the attic of Newel K. Whitney's store to make an apartment for the Prophet and his family. The store continued to be the private business of Newel K. Whitney and served as the local post office. When Newel Whitney was called to serve as the bishop of the Church in the East, his store became a bishop's storehouse. For several years, the building was also the headquarters of the Church and the site where Joseph Smith received many revelations and visions. In fact, between September 1832 and December 1833, sixteen revelations (84-98, 101) were received in Kirtland.

Even though Doctrine and Covenants 84 is often thought of as a "revelation on priesthood," another major theme is missionary work. Many were called by revelation to labor in the ministry. Section 84 was recorded in September 1832 when a group of elders returned from missions in the Eastern states and reported their activities. In this revelation, the Lord reminded the missionaries that their duty was to convert and baptize and that "signs would follow them that believe" (D&C 84:64-74). Reports by early missionaries described their success and attested that God's power was manifest among these elders and the members of the Church.

Missionaries and Miracles

One of the many elders who labored in 1832 and kept a journal of his experiences was Jared Carter: "We arrived in Kirtland on the evening of the 19th of October, 1832, where I met with some of my brethren and heard them read revelations which caused my heart to rejoice. . . . Now while I make this record," he wrote "I remember the goodness of the Lord to me in the mission that I have lately been to in the east. . . . All that have been baptized while I have been in the regions where I have been in this mission is 98 and many others have been convinced of the work, that sooner or later, I think, will obey the work. I have been directed by the Spirit to bless in the name of Christ in many places or houses and I have found even by what "I have seen and heard that the consequences of blessing has been like leavening among measures of meal and now I can say, 'Bless the Lord, O my soul, for the marvelous works that He has done since I have come to this work.'

"I have seen many marvelous manifestations of the power of God in more than eighty instances, by the instrumentality of myself and other elders in this Church of Christ. Many of which miracles I have recorded in my journals."

One such manifestation "took place in the town of Willsbury, New York State, Essex County. This was a woman that had been lame for some time. She was deprived of the use of her legs so that she could not walk. I conversed with her to convince her of the truth of the Book of Mormon and she became convinced but she could not walk therefore she could not obey the gospel. I asked her if she would obey if God would give her power to walk. She promised that she would. I then took her by the hand and commanded her, in the name of Jesus Christ, to walk and the God of heaven gave her power to walk. This woman was called by the name of French and I was informed by the people that she was not able to walk, only by the help of crutches and this she was enabled to do only by the following manner: by the help of two crutches, putting them one under each arm then bearing the weight of her body thereon to put both of her feet a short space forward and in this way she could move around some but now, notwithstanding, she could walk considerably well and she used her crutches no more as I ever heard of" ("Autobiography," pp. 20-21).

Jared Carter also included in his journal an account of the healing of John Tanner: "On Sunday we held a meeting at Brother Tanner's and found the pleasure of the Lord was powerfully manifested. After the meeting we baptized. We found while here the Lord had mercy upon a lame man by the name of Tanner, who was so lame that he could not bear his weight on one of his feet. He had been lame for months but we found that he was a believer in the Book of Mormon. I asked him to endeavor to walk in the name of Christ and he agreed to undertake. I then took him by the hand and commanded him in the name of Christ to walk and by the power of Christ he was enabled to walk. Brother Simeon was not that moment present but I found after this, at the very time he was healed, Brother Simeon had an exercise of faith for him in secret prayer to God" ("Autobiography," p 19).

Converts Share the Gospel

One of the converts taught by Jared Carter was Zera Pulsipher, who also described the faith-promoting incidents that led to and followed his conversion:

"In the summer of 1831 I heard a minister [speak of] an ancient record or Golden Bible in Manchester near Palmyra which remark struck me like a shock of electricity. At the same time [I] thought it might be something that would give light to my mind upon principles that I had been thinking of for years and many times I had remarked that if the pure church with its gifts and graces was on the earth, if so I had not found it. But I should be happy enough to find it in my day.

"I embraced it accordingly in the fall of 1831 there was a Book of Mormon brought in to town I succeeded in getting it. I directly read it through twice gave it a thorough investigation and believed it was true and the winter following Jerod Carter came that was from a mission to Vermont or Lake George. As soon as he came into town I, with two Methodist Preachers went to see him. After a reasonable introduction I questioned him upon the principles of the ancient gospel with all its gifts belonging to it. I asked him if he believed it, he answered in the affirmative. I asked him if he had ever laid hands on the sick and they had recovered. Yes, he said, he had in many instances.

"He preached the following evening to a crowded congregation, held up the Book of Mormon and declared it to be a revelation from God. I could not gain-say anything he had said, he sat down and gave liberty for remarks, the congregation seemed to be in amaze not knowing what to think of what they had heard. I arose and said to the congregation that we had been hearing strange things and if true they were of the utmost importance to us. If not true it was one of the greatest impositions and as the preacher had said that he had got his knowledge from heaven and was nothing but a man and I the same, that I had just as good a right to obtain that blessing as he, therefore I was determined to have that knowledge for myself which I considered it my privilege, from that time I made it a matter of fervent prayer.

"I think about the seventh day as I was thrashing in my barn with doors shut, all at once there seemed to be a ray of light from heaven which caused me to stop work for a short time, but soon began it again. Then in a few minutes another light came over my head which caused me to look up. I thought I saw the angels with the Book of Mormon in their hands in the attitude of showing it to me and saying 'this is the great revelation of the last days in which all things spoken of by the prophets must be fulfilled.' The vision was so open and plain that I began to rejoice exceedingly so that I walked the length of my barn crying 'Glory Hal-la-lu-ya to the God and the Lamb forever.'

"For some time it seemed a little difficult to keep my mind in a proper state of reasonable order, I was so filled with the joys of heaven. But when my mind became calm I called the church together [he was their minister] and informed them of what I had seen. I told them of my determination to join the Church of Latter Day Saints, which I did and a large body of my church went with me. I was ordained to the office of an elder and went to preaching with considerable success at home and abroad. I had the privilege of baptizing Wilford Woodruff on the 31st of December, 1833, at Richland, New York" ("Autobiography," pp. 5-7).

During his first mission in 1833, Zera Pulsipher and his companion, Elijah Cheney, introduced the gospel to Wilford Woodruff, who had been influenced by his friend Robert Mason to seek a restored church led by apostles and prophets. As explained in Wilford Woodruff's writings: "Father Mason did not claim that he had any authority to officiate in the ordinances of the gospel, nor did he believe that such authority existed on the earth. He did believe, however, that it was the privilege of any man who had faith in God to fast and pray for the healing of the sick by the laying on of hands. He believed it his right and the right of every honest-hearted man or woman to receive light and knowledge, visions, and revelations by the prayer of faith. He told me that the day was near when the Lord would establish His Church and Kingdom upon the earth with all its ancient gifts and blessings. He said that such a work would commence upon the earth before he died, but that he would not live to partake of its blessings. He said that I should live to do so, and that I should become a conspicuous actor in that kingdom" (Cowley, Wilford Woodruff, p. 16).

One day, when Wilford returned from working in his fields, his sister-in-law told him of a meeting being conducted by Mormon missionaries. "I immediately turned out my horses and started for the schoolhouse without waiting for supper. On my way I prayed most sincerely that the Lord would give me His spirit, and that if these men were the servants of God I might know it, and that my heart might be prepared to receive the divine message they had to deliver.

"When I reached the place of meeting, I found the house already packed. My brother Azmon was there before I arrived. He was equally eager to hear what these men had to say. I crowded my way through the assembly and seated myself upon one of the writing desks where I could see and hear everything that took place.

"Elder Pulsipher opened with prayer. He knelt down and asked the Lord in the name of Jesus Christ for what he wanted. His manner of prayer and the influence which went with it impressed me greatly. The spirit of the Lord rested upon me and bore witness that he was a servant of God. After singing, he preached to the people for an hour and a half. The spirit of God rested mightily upon him and he bore a strong testimony of the divine authenticity of the Book of Mormon and of the mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith. I believed all that he said. The spirit bore witness of its truth. Elder Cheney then arose and added his testimony to the truth of the words of Elder Pulsipher." After the meeting, Wilford began reading the Book of Mormon. "As I did so," he wrote, "the spirit bore witness that the record which it contained was true. I opened my eyes to see, my ears to hear, and my heart to understand. I also opened my doors to entertain the servants of God" (Cowley, Wilford Woodruff, pp. 33-34).

On December 31, the last day of the year 1833, Wilford and his brother Azmon requested baptism at the hands of the elders. They were baptized about eleven o'clock in the morning in the presence of a large number of people. The elders also baptized two young women who had been healed the day before. Wilford Woodruff recorded this event in his journal: "The snow was about three feet deep, the day was cold, and the water was mixed with ice and snow, yet I did not feel the cold" (Cowley, Wilford Woodruff, p. 35).

On 25 January 1834, Elder Pulsipher organized the Saints in Richland into a branch of the Church. He ordained Wilford Woodruff to the office of a teacher and gave him a written license that embodied the certificate of his baptism and his ordination. Wilford Woodruff prayed earnestly that he would receive a missionary call. Finally, in November 1834, Elias Higbee approached him and said, "Brother Wilford, the spirit of the Lord tells me that you should be ordained to go and preach the gospel." A few days later he was ordained a priest and was called to serve in Arkansas and Tennessee (Cowley, Wilford Woodruff, pp. 46-47). The convert Wilford Woodruff became one of the most successful missionaries in the history of the Church.
