Richard O. Cowan, Milton V. Backman, Joseph Smith and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1992)

14

"Stand Ye in Holy Places"

Doctrine and Covenants 86-88

In December 1832 while living in an apartment above Newel K. Whitney's store, the Prophet received three revelations (D&C 86-88) pertaining to conditions preceding the second coming of Christ. Section 87 is the often quoted "prophecy on war." Section 88 directs the elders to form the School of the Prophets so that they might be prepared to bear testimony to the world before the destructions and tribulations that will precede the Second Coming.

Prophecy on War

On Christmas Day, Joseph Smith received a revelation prophesying "wars that will shortly come to pass beginning at the rebellion of South Carolina" (D&C 87:1). He was well aware of rebellion already taking place in South Carolina: "the United States, amid all her pomp and greatness, was threatened with immediate dissolution. The people of South Carolina, in convention assembled (in November), passed ordinances, declaring their state a free and independent nation; and appointed Thursday, the 31st day of January, 1833, as a day of humiliation and prayer, to implore Almighty God to vouchsafe His blessings, and restore liberty and happiness within their borders. President [Andrew] Jackson issued his proclamation against this rebellion, called out a force sufficient to quell it, and implored the blessings of God to assist the nation to extricate itself from the horrors of the approaching end solemn crisis" (History of the Church, 1:301).

This "rebellion of South Carolina" did not directly lead to the American Civil War, however. South Carolina had objected to a high tariff proposed by the federal government, but no other states came to her side. In 1833, Congress enacted a compromise tariff bill, and the conflict subsided. More than a decade after receiving the revelation recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 87, the Prophet learned by inspiration that the Civil War would grow out of yet another crisis in South Carolina and over an entirely different issue (D&C 130:12-13).

The prophecy on war and manuscripts of the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible were in the possession of James Mulholland, Joseph Smith's private secretary, at the time of the Saints' expulsion from Missouri during the winter of 1838-39. While living at Far West, James Mulholland gave these records to one of his relatives, Ann Scott, for safekeeping. She wrote that the mob "frequently searched my father's house, and were very insulting in their deportment. They also searched other houses of the Saints, including that of President Joseph Smith, who at the time was confined in Liberty Jail. Joseph's confinement in prison, coupled with the ruthless invasions of the mob, caused his scribe, Elder James Mulholland, to seek a place of safety for important church papers in his possession. . . . Brother Mulholland requested me to take charge of these papers, as he thought they would be more secure with me, because I was a woman, and the mob would not be likely to search my person. Immediately on taking possession of the papers, I made two cotton bags of sufficient size to contain them, sewing a band around the top ends of sufficient length to button around my waist; and I carried those papers on my person in the day-time, when the mob was round, and slept with them under my pillow at night. I cannot remember now the exact length of time I had those papers in my possession; but I gave them to sister Emma Smith, the prophet's wife, on the evening of her departure for Commerce" ("Spiritual Reminiscences," in Autumn Leaves (1891), 4:18).

The School of the Prophets

On 27 December 1832, two days after Joseph Smith recorded the prophecy on war, a conference of high priests assembled in the translating room in the apartment above Newel K. Whitney's store. After the invocation, Joseph said, "To receive revelation and the blessings of heaven it was necessary to have our minds on God and exercise faith and become of one heart and of one mind" (Kirtland Council Minute Book, pp. 3-4). Therefore, he recommended, all present should pray separately and vocally to the Lord to receive his will regarding those present and the building of Zion. All knelt in prayer, after which all arose and spoke, describing their feelings and commitment to keep the commandments of the Lord. During that meeting, the Prophet received the revelation that is now Doctrine and Covenants 88.

In this revelation was a commandment to organize a School of the Prophets (D&C 88:70-80, 117-41) and build a house of the Lord (see Chapter 16). The School was organized during a period of spiritual manifestations in Kirtland. As explained in Joseph Smith's history: "This winter [1832-33] was spent in translating the Scriptures; in the School of the Prophets; and sitting in conferences. I had many glorious seasons of refreshing. The gifts which follow them that believe and obey the Gospel, as tokens that the Lord is ever the same in His dealings with the humble lovers and followers of truth, began to be poured out among us, as in ancient days. . . . On the 22nd day of January, I spoke to the conference in another tongue, and was followed in the same gift by Brother Zebedee Coltrin, and he by Brother William Smith, after which the Lord poured out His Spirit in a miraculous manner, until all the Elders spake in tongues, and several members, both male and female, exercised the same gift. Great and glorious were the divine manifestations of the Holy Spirit. Praises were sung to God and the Lamb; speaking and praying, all in tongues, occupied the conference until a late hour at night, so rejoiced were we at the return of these long absent blessings.

"On the 23rd of January, we [members of the School of the Prophets] again assembled in conference; when, after much speaking, singing, praying, and praising God, all in tongues, we proceeded to the washing of feet (according to the practice recorded in the 13th chapter of John's Gospel), as commanded of the Lord [D&C 88:74-75]. Each Elder washed his own feet first, after which I girded myself with a towel and washed the feet of all of them, wiping them with the towel with which I was girded. . . .

"I then said to the Elders, As I have done so do ye; wash ye, therefore, one another's feet; and by the power of the Holy Ghost I pronounced them all clean from the blood of this generation; but if any of them should sin wilfully after they were thus cleansed, and sealed up unto eternal life, they should be given over unto the buffetings of Satan until the day of redemption. Having continued all day in fasting, and prayer, and ordinances, we closed by partaking of the Lord's supper. I blessed the bread and wine in the name of the Lord, when we all ate and drank, and were filled; then we sang a hymn, and the meeting adjourned" (History of the Church, 1:322-24).

Zebedee Coltrin, who was present when the School of the Prophets was organized on 23 January 1833, stated that the salutation written in the Doctrine and Covenants (D&C 88:136-41) was carried out during the first meeting of the School of the Prophets and "at every meeting." "The washing of feet was attended to," he added, and "the sacrament was also administered at times when Joseph appointed, after the ancient order."

Zebedee Coltrin also recalled that "every time we were called together to attend to any business, we came together in the morning about sunrise, fasting and partook of the sacrament each time, and before going to school we washed ourselves and put on clean linen" (Minutes, Salt Lake School of Prophets, 3 Oct. 1883, p. 56).

A highlight of the School of the Prophets occurred on March 18. After Joseph promised members of the School that "the pure in heart should see a heavenly vision," a group of elders engaged "in secret prayer." Then "the promise was verified; for many present had the eyes of their understanding opened by the Spirit of God," Joseph testified, "so as to behold many things. I then blessed the bread and wine, and distributed a portion to each. Many of the brethren saw a heavenly vision of the Savior, and concourses of angels, and many other things, of which each one has a record of what he saw" (History of the Church, 1:334-35).

Zebedee Coltrin witnessed this vision. He recalled that while they were praying, they beheld two personages who were identified by the Prophet as the Father and the Son. He "experienced a sensation," he explained, like a "consuming fire of great brightness." The Prophet Joseph said this was the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. The Father "was surrounded as with a flame of fire, which was so brilliant that I could not discover anything else but his person. I saw his hands, his legs, his feet, his eyes, nose, mouth, head and body in the shape and form of a perfect man. . . . This appearance was so grand and overwhelming that it seemed I should melt down in his presence, and the sensation was so powerful that it thrilled through my whole system and I felt it in the marrow of my bones." Zebedee Coltrin further stated that the Prophet told them, "Brethren, now you are prepared to be the apostles of Jesus Christ, for you have seen both the Father and the Son and know that they exist and that they are two separate personages" (Minutes, Salt Lake School of Prophets, 3 Oct. 1883, p. 56).

The first session of the School of the Prophets closed in April 1833. Apparently, when a new group gathered in the fall, the elders did not continue participating in the ordinance of the washing of the feet. This rite was reintroduced among bearers of the priesthood a few days after the dedication of the Kirtland Temple (History of the Church, 2:430).
