Richard O. Cowan, Milton V. Backman, Joseph Smith and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1992)

15

The Lord's Law of Health

Doctrine and Covenants 89

One of the best-known revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants is section 89, the Word of Wisdom. The proponents of temperance had created a climate in which these divinely revealed principles could be accepted more readily.

Setting for the Revelation

In 1830, Sylvester Graham, a former Presbyterian minister who was serving as president of the Pennsylvania Temperance Society, delivered in Philadelphia a series of lectures on health. He said in essence that five poisons were afflicting the American public: liquor, tobacco, tea, coffee, and opium. He advanced a system of diet in which adults were to abstain from eating meat, gravy, spices, cheese, and eggs and to refrain from drinking milk. He further advocated that individuals should drink rain water and eat fresh fruits and vegetables and bread made from unsifted flour. Although his name has since been relegated to a few items on grocery store shelves, such as graham crackers and graham bread, Sylvester Graham became one of America's leading health advocates before the Civil War.

There is no evidence that Joseph Smith learned about the Graham system prior to unfolding the Word of Wisdom, but it is known that ideas popularized by Sylvester Graham were being discussed in various journals of health. Graham acknowledged that he was influenced by reading the writings of others. As a man, Joseph Smith did not have the education or the background necessary to select correct principles from the myriad of health ideas and fads that were being circulated by his generation; but, as a prophet, he recorded enduring principles of health that have been substantiated by twentieth-century research (Backman, Heavens Resound, p. 236).

The most detailed description of the immediate setting of the Word of Wisdom (Section 89) was given in a sermon by President Brigham Young in February 1868:

"When the school of the prophets was inaugurated, one of the first revelations given by the Lord to His servant Joseph was the Word of Wisdom. The members of that school were but a few at first, and the prophet commenced to teach them in doctrine to prepare them to go out into the world to preach the gospel unto all people, and gather the elect from the four quarters of the earth, as the prophets anciently have spoken. . . . I think I am as well acquainted with the circumstances which led to the giving of the Word of Wisdom as any man in the Church, although I was not present at the time to witness them. The first school of the prophets was held in a small room situated over the Prophet Joseph's kitchen, in a house which belonged to Bishop Whitney, and which was attached to his store, which store probably might be about fifteen feet square. In the rear of this building was a kitchen, probably ten by fourteen feet, containing rooms and pantries. Over this kitchen was situated the room in which the Prophet received revelations and in which he instructed his brethren. The brethren came to that place for hundreds of miles to attend school in a little room probably no larger than eleven by fourteen. When they assembled together in this room after breakfast, the first they did was to light their pipes, and, while smoking, talk about the great things of the kingdom, and spit all over the room, and as soon as the pipe was out of their mouths a large chew of tobacco would then be taken. Often when the Prophet entered the room to give the school instructions he would find himself in a cloud of tobacco smoke. This, and the complaints of his wife at having to clean so filthy a floor, made the Prophet think upon the matter, and he inquired of the Lord relating to the conduct of the Elders in using tobacco, and the revelation known as the Word of Wisdom was the result of his inquiry" (Journal of Discourses, 12:157-58).

Acceptance of the Word of Wisdom

Zebedee Coltrin remembered that after the Prophet came out of the translating room, he read the revelation on the Word of Wisdom to members of the School of the Prophets. "Twenty out of the twenty-one" present, he said, "used tobacco and they all immediately threw their tobacco and pipes into the fire" (Minutes, Salt Lake School of Prophets, 13 Oct. 1883, pp. 55-56).

Joel Johnson was present when the revelation was introduced to members of the Church, and he recalled some of the challenges and controversies that confronted members as they attempted to abide by this law of health:

"I was then [February 1833] thirty one years of age, and had used tobacco somewhat extravagantly for fifteen years. I always used some strong drink, and tea and coffee.

"I knew that God had spoken and condemned the use of these things, and, being determined to live by every word that proceeded from His mouth, I laid them all aside, and have not used them since.

"I well remember that, soon after the publication of the Word of Wisdom, the same excuse was made, by some of the people, for drinking tea and coffee that is now made—that hot drinks did not mean tea and coffee.

"On a Sabbath day, in the July following the giving of the revelation, when both Joseph and Hyrum Smith were in the stand, the Prophet said to the Saints:

"'I understand that some of the people are excusing themselves in using tea and coffee, because the Lord only said "hot drinks" in the revelation of the Word of Wisdom.'

"'The Lord was showing us what was good for man to eat and drink. Now, what do we drink when we take our meals?'

"'Tea and coffee. Is it not?'

"'Yes; tea and coffee.'

"'Then, they are what the Lord means when He said 'hot drinks.'

"Brother Hyrum Smith spoke to the same effect.

"It is said all wholesome herbs are ordained for the use of man. Physicians tell us that tea and coffee are not wholesome. And the Lord says they are not for the body or the belly.

"When children see that their parents slight the Word of Wisdom, they are apt to follow their example.

"I have recorded this testimony that all who read it may be without excuse. How pleasant it would be at last, if we could say to our Heavenly Father, 'I have obeyed all your counsels,' and hear these kind words in return: 'Well done! thou hast been faithful over a few things, be thou ruler over many"' (Voice from the Mountains, pp. 12-13).

Many members of the Church confirmed in their writings that the phrase "hot drinks" was interpreted as tea and coffee. Elizabeth Tanner recorded her response to the revelation: "When the Word of Wisdom was preached we discarded the use of tea, coffee, and spirituous liquors," for she and her husband, John Tanner, strove diligently to observe "all of the laws of the Church" ("Autobiography," p. 1).

Although various quorums of the Church voted that the Saints should totally abstain from using alcohol, tobacco, and hot drinks (tea and coffee), serious problems developed over a strict application of these policies. Because of the Saints' widespread use of these substances and their deep-seated attachment to them, by mid 1834 many emphasized that the preface said that this revelation was to be regarded as general advice, not as a commandment. Even so, zealous leaders and members pressed for compliance with the original meaning of the revelation, and, in early December 1836, a vote of the Saints in Kirtland unanimously banned "all liquors from the Church," even during sickness, except for wine for the sacrament and liquor for "external washing" ("Journal of Wilford Woodruff"; Backman and Cook, Kirtland Elders' Quorum Record, p. 32). The policy, however, continued to be a controversial issue, and many Saints believed that the use of stimulants during sickness, fatigue, and depression was not in violation of the Word of Wisdom. Subsequently, there are many casual references in Joseph Smith's history of Church members drinking wine.

Throughout the early history of the Church, many members struggled to discontinue smoking, chewing tobacco, and drinking tea, coffee, and alcoholic beverages. Mary Winters, whose mother married Parley P. Pratt after the death of Elder Pratt's wife, described her mother's plan to conquer her temptations: "In those early days, snuff-taking was quite fashionable. My father had given mother a very pretty snuff box, and though she had not practiced using snuff herself, she had the box filled and a nice vanilla bean in it to scent the snuff, and when old ladies came to see her, she would pass it around to them. It was also customary for people in trouble to smoke or take snuff to soothe their feelings and pass away the time (poor souls), and this course was urged upon mother. Smoking she could not think of, as it seemed too troublesome a habit, but she had become quite used to taking snuff before she heard the gospel sound. But now after hearing the Word of Wisdom taught, she must not partake of the forbidden snuff any longer. And in her patriarchal blessing too, Word of Wisdom was spelled with large letters, so now the sacrifice must surely begin. It was her habit, immediately after eating, to take a pinch of snuff, but now instead, she placed the snuff box on the chimney piece over the letters and above the crickets, and took the Book of Mormon and sat down to read until all desire for the snuff had passed—and thus she gained the victory, with the temptation in plain sight. And oh how thankful she was in after years for the knowledge of the evil, and for the strength to overcome it" ("Autobiography," p. 3).
