Richard O. Cowan, Milton V. Backman, Joseph Smith and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1992)

16

Building the Lord's House in Kirtland

Doctrine and Covenants 94-95

On 27 December 1832, in the revelation known as the Olive Leaf, the Saints were commanded to establish in Kirtland a house of prayer, fasting, faith, learning, glory, and order (D&C 88:119). This command was fulfilled with construction of the Kirtland Temple. In May 1833, the Saints were directed to plan two additional structures: a building for the presidency, and another for printing (D&C 94).

When the Prophet recorded the commandment to build a temple in Kirtland, there were only about one hundred members, or about twenty families, in that community, most of the earlier Saints having moved on to Missouri. Latter-day Saints living there were relatively poor—certainly none could be considered wealthy—and no Church members in Kirtland had the architectural skills essential for constructing a large building. Yet, the writings of contemporaries testify that amid poverty and persecution, Latter-day Saints sacrificed and performed a modern miracle.

The Lord Reveals the Design of the Kirtland Temple

On 1 June 1833, the Lord explained the functions of the two main auditoriums of the temple and promised to reveal how the building should be designed (D&C 95:14-17). Two days later, a council of high priests met to discuss how the building should be constructed. According to the Prophet's mother, Lucy Mack Smith, "In this council, Joseph requested that each of the brethren should give his views with regard to the house; and when they had all got through, he would give his opinion concerning the matter. They all complied with his request. Some were in favor of building a frame house, but others were of a mind to put up a log house. Joseph reminded them that they were not building a house for a man, but for God; 'and shall we, brethren,' said he, 'build a house for our God, of logs? No, I have a better plan than that. I have a plan of the house of the Lord, given by himself; and you will soon see by this, the difference between our calculations and his idea of things.'

"He then gave them a full pattern of the house of the Lord at Kirtland, with which the brethren were highly delighted. . . .

"After the close of the meeting, Joseph took the brethren with him, for the purpose of selecting a spot for the building to stand upon. The place which they made choice of was situated in the north-west corner of a field of wheat, which was sown by my sons the fall previous, on the farm upon which we were then living. In a few minutes the fence was removed, and the standing grain was levelled, in order to prepare a place for the building and Hyrum commenced digging a trench for the wall, he having declared that he would strike the first blow upon the house" (History, pp. 230-31.)

Other contemporaries testified that the plans of this building were revealed to the First Presidency through visions and revelations. Orson Pratt declared that the Prophet and others learned by revelation not only about the size of the house but about the "order of the pulpits" and "various courts and apartments." Joseph was "strictly commanded to build according to the pattern revealed from the heavens" (Journal of Discourses, 13:357).

Architect Truman O. Angell also attested to divine direction in designing the temple. He recorded a conversation between one of the workmen who built the temple and Fredrick G. Williams, a member of the First Presidency. One day when Frederick G. Williams was in the temple, "Carpenter Rolph said: 'Doctor [Williams], what do you think of the House?'

"He answered, 'It looks to me like the pattern precisely.' Then he related the following: 'Joseph received the word of the Lord for him to take his two counselors, [Frederick G.] Williams and [Sidney] Rigdon, and come before the Lord, and He would show them the plan or model of the house to be built. We went upon our knees, called on the Lord, and the building appeared within viewing distance: I being the first to discover it. Then all of us viewed it together. After we had taken a good look at the exterior, the building seemed to come right over us; and the make-up of this hall seemed to coincide with what I there saw to a minutia.'

"Joseph was accordingly enabled to dictate to the mechanics, and his counselors stood as witnesses" (Improvement Era, Oct. 1942, p. 630).

The Saints Unite to Build the Lord's House

The Lord has revealed that his Saints must sacrifice to build houses to his name (D&C 97:12). Nearly all the Latter-day Saints united in building the Kirtland Temple for the Lord. Eliza R. Snow wrote:

"With very little capital except brain, bone and sinew, combined with unwavering trust in God, men, women, and even children, worked with their might; while the brethren labored in their departments, the sisters were actively engaged in boarding and clothing workmen not otherwise provided for—all living as abstemiously as possible so that every cent might be appropriated to the grand object, while their energies were stimulated by the prospect of participating in the blessing of a house built by the direction of the Most High and accepted by him" (Tullidge, Women of Mormondom, p. 82).

When Heber C. Kimball arrived in Kirtland, he noticed that the Prophet didn't just direct the construction; he worked alongside the others in building the temple. "Joseph said, 'Come, brethren, let us go into the stone-quarry and work for the Lord.' And the Prophet went himself, in his tow frock and tow breeches, and worked at quarrying stone like the rest of us. Then, every Saturday we brought out every team to draw stone to the Temple, and so we continued until that house was finished; and our wives were all the time knitting, spinning and sewing, and, in fact, I may say doing all kinds of work; they were just as busy as any of us, and I say that those women have borne the heat and burden of those early and trying days and God will bless them for evermore" (Journal of Discourses,10:165).

Church membership increased from one hundred to nearly one thousand during the time the temple was being built, but the Saints' poverty persisted. Nearly all the converts gathered to Kirtland from other areas, many from New England and New York. Most had to leave belongings behind and to sacrifice financially to make the move. When they arrived, instead of buying land and homes or otherwise improving their own standard of living, many sacrificed a portion of their material means to support various Church programs, notably building the temple.

One immigrant to Kirtland, Jonathan Crosby, recalled an incident that illustrates the poverty of the Saints in 1836: "Shortly after our arrival in Kirtland, brothers Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and Parley P. Pratt, came to me to borrow money. I was in possession of nearly one hundred dollars at the time, and they were very destitute of provisions and comforts of life generally. Brother Young said he had nothing in his house to eat, and he knew not how to get anything. He said he had been standing in the door of the printing office thinking of his condition and felt so bad that the sweat rolled off of him. Soon Brother Parley came along, and he said to him, 'What shall we do I have nothing to eat, and I don't know how nor where to get it.' Brother Pratt said, 'There is a brother and his wife who have just arrived at my house, and he has got some money, and I think he will lend us some.' (I had lent Brother Pratt seven dollars before this.) So they all three came, and I lent them seventy five dollars; twenty-five for each, and they gave me their joint note" ("Autobiography," p. 16).

It appeared almost impossible that the commandment to build this temple could be fulfilled. Not only were the Saints poor, but their "enemies were raging and threatening destruction" upon them. "We had to guard ourselves night after night," Heber C. Kimball said, "and for weeks were not permitted to take off our clothes, and were obliged to lay with our fire locks in our arms" (Times and Seasons, 15 Jan. 1845, p. 771). Amid this poverty and persecution, Latter-day Saints realized that God would continue to aid them. "The Lord had promised [in D&C 64:21, given during the fall of 1831] to keep a stronghold in Kirtland for the space of five years; therefore," Joel Johnson testified, "we were warned of all the devices of our enemies in time to elude them until the temple was completed, the saints endowed and the five years expired" ("Autobiography," p. 5). The temple was dedicated in 1836 just before the promised five years ended.
