Richard O. Cowan, Milton V. Backman, Joseph Smith and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1992)

17

Conflict in Jackson County

Doctrine and Covenants 97-101

Doctrine and Covenants 97, 98, and 101 were given in Ohio, but they are concerned more with events in Missouri.

Counsel to the Persecuted Saints

Early in July 1833 hundreds of the Saints' enemies, including some of the most prominent religious, political, and economic leaders of Jackson County, signed a "secret constitution," which Latter-day Saints called "the manifesto of the mob." This document ordered the Mormons immediately to close their merchandizing stores, discontinue printing operations, stop further immigration, and leave Jackson County. An unusual aspect of this document was a list of grievances that the mob used to justify its actions. The manifesto described the Latter-day Saints as "fanatics, or knaves, (for one or the other they undoubtedly are)" who pretend "to hold personal communication and converse face to face with the Most High God; to receive communications and revelations direct from heaven; to heal the sick by laying on hands; and, in short, to perform all the wonder-working miracles wrought by the inspired Apostles and Prophets of old." Therefore, they vowed to remove the Mormons from their society, "peaceably if we can, forcibly if we must" (History of the Church, 1:374-76).

According to Parley P. Pratt, when Latter-day Saint leaders refused to agree to the terms of the manifesto, "the mob met at the court house on the 20th of July, and proceeded immediately to demolish the brick printing office and dwelling house of W. W. Phelps & Co., and destroyed or took possession of the press, type, books and property of the establishment;—at the same time turning Mrs. Phelps and children out of doors: after which they proceeded to personal violence by a wanton assault and battery upon the Bishop of the church, Mr. Edward Partridge, and a Mr. [Charles] Allen, whom they tarred and feathered, and variously abused. They then compelled Messrs. Gilbert[,] Whitney & Co. to close their store and pack their goods" (History of Persecution, p. 7). Copies of the nearly completed Book of Commandments were rescued courageously by two teenage Mormon girls (see Chapter 1).

When the Prophet received Doctrine and Covenants 97 and 98 about two weeks later in Ohio, he was not yet aware of how the mob had abused Church members and destroyed their property. Joseph could have known only by revelation that persecution had intensified. In these revelations, he was inspired to counsel the Saints not to neglect the temple, to be pure in heart, to renounce war, and refrain from seeking revenge.

The Saints are Expelled from Jackson County

When the leaders of the Missourians learned that the Latter-day Saints would not comply with the terms of the "manifesto," mobs again attacked, burning homes and beating Saints. Governor Daniel Dunklin called out the militia to establish peace, but they seized only the Mormons' guns and allowed the Saints' enemies to renew their depredations. Finally, in early November 1833, approximately one thousand Latter-day Saints were driven by mobs from Jackson County. In one of the first accounts of events that had preceded the expulsion of Saints from Jackson County, Parley P. Pratt stated:

"On Friday, the first of November, women and children sallied forth from their gloomy retreats, to contemplate, with heart-rending anguish, the ravages of a ruthless mob, in the mangled bodies of their husbands, and in the destruction of their houses and furniture. Houseless, and unprotected by the arm of civil law in Jackson County—the dreary month of November staring them in the face, and loudly proclaiming a more inclement season at hand—the continual threats of the mob, that they would drive every Mormon from the county—and the inability of many to remove because of their poverty, caused an anguish of heart indescribable.

"These outrages were committed about two miles from my residence. News reached me before day-light the same morning, and I immediately repaired to the place, and was filled with anguish at the awful sight of houses in ruins, and furniture destroyed and strewed about the streets; women, in different directions, were weeping and mourning, while some of the men were covered with blood from the blows they had received from the enemy; others were endeavoring to collect the fragments of their scattered furniture, beds, &c. . . .

"The same night (Friday) a party in Independence commenced stoning houses, breaking down doors and windows, destroying furniture, &c. This night the brick part of a dwelling house belonging to A. S. Gilbert, was partly demolished, and the windows of his dwelling broken in, while a gentleman lay sick in his house.

"The same night, the doors of the house of Messrs. Gilbert & Whitney were split open, and the goods strewed in the street, to which fact upwards of twenty witnesses can attest.

"After midnight a party of our men marched for the store, &c., and when the mob saw them approach, they fled. But one of their number, a Richard McCarty, was caught in the act of throwing rocks in at the door, while the goods lay strung around him in the street. He was immediately taken before Samuel Weston, Esq. and a warrant requested, that said McCarty might be secured; but his justiceship refused to do any thing in the case, and McCarty was then liberated.

" . . . Saturday night a party of the mob made an attack upon a settlement about six miles west of town. Here they tore the roof from a dwelling, broke open another house, found the owner, Mr. David Bennett, sick in bed. Him they beat inhumanly, and swore they would blow his brains out, and discharging a pistol, the ball cut a deep gash across the top of his head. In this skirmish one of their men was shot in the thigh" (History of Persecution, pp. 8-9).

At least one miracle occurred during a battle between the Latter-day Saints and their enemies. Philo Dibble recounted being shot and bleeding inwardly until his body was filled with blood: "I was then examined by a surgeon who . . . said that he had seen a great many men wounded, but never saw one wounded as I was that ever lived. He pronounced me a dead man.

"David Whitmer, however, sent me word that I should live and not die, but I could see no possible chance to recover. After the surgeon had left me, Brother Newell Knight came to see me, and sat down on the side of my bed. He laid his right hand on my head, but never spoke. I felt the Spirit resting upon me at the crown of my head before his hand touched me, and I knew immediately that I was going to be healed. It seemed to form like a ring under the skin, and followed down my body. When the ring came to the wound, another ring formed around the first bullet hole, also the second and third. Then a ring formed on each shoulder and on each hip, and followed down to the ends of my fingers and toes and left me. I immediately arose and discharged three quarts of blood or more, with some pieces of my clothes that had been driven into my body by the bullets. I then dressed myself and . . . from that time not a drop of blood came from me and I never afterwards felt the slightest pain or inconvenience from my wounds, except that I was somewhat weak from the loss of blood" (Faith Promoting Classics, pp. 84-85).

A most descriptive account of the tragic exodus of the Saints from Jackson County was written by Parley P. Pratt: "Thursday, November 7th, the shore began to be lined on both sides of the ferry with men, women, children, goods, wagons, boxes, chests, provisions, &c., while the ferry men were very busily employed in crossing them over; and when night again closed upon us, the wilderness had much the appearance of a camp meeting. Hundreds of people were seen in every direction—some in tents and some in the open air, around their fires, while the rain descended in torrents. Husbands were inquiring for wives, and women for their husbands; parents for children, and children for parents. Some had had the good fortune to escape with their families, household goods and some provisions: while others knew not the fate of their friends, and had lost all their goods. The scene was indescribable" (History of Persecution, p. 12).

Orange Wight, the son of Lyman Wight, remembered that after crossing the Missouri River, some of his family camped near a big sycamore log six feet in diameter. He and others "laid a few poles on one side on the top of the log" and placed the other end on the ground. Then they spread a quilt or two on the poles. "Under the quilts and poles by the side of the big log" his brother, Lehi Lyman Wight, was born. At that time, he added, a mob was chasing his father, threatening to kill him, and the family was almost in a state of starvation. For three weeks the family lived in fear, not knowing the fate of their father. Orange testified that the Lord then answered their prayers. Their father evaded the mobs, crossed the river, and located his family. Meanwhile, one of the Church members, John Higbee, secured an old flintlock gun (Missourians had previously seized the guns of the Mormons) and shot eleven deer. Members also found wild bee trees. "Hence," Orange concluded, "we lived on venison and honey" ("Autobiography," pp. 1-2).

The Saints built temporary homes as best they could, searching out and making habitable all the old shanties and hovels that could be found, endeavoring to keep as close together as possible. Edward Partridge and Elder John Corrill "procured an old log cabin that had been used for a stable and cleaned it up as best they could." The floor in this one-room cabin was nearly torn up, and Emily Partridge remembered that "the rats and rattlesnakes were too thick for comfort." Blankets were hung a few feet from the fireplace and the two families, fifteen or sixteen in number, gathered near the fire to keep from freezing. John Corrill's family occupied one side of the fireplace and Edward Partridge's the other. Emily added that "our beds were in the back part of the room" which reminded her of the "polar regions" (Woman's Exponent, 15 Feb. 1885, p. 138).

In December, after the Prophet learned of the expulsion, he inquired of the Lord and learned why the Lord had not intervened in the Saints' behalf. The Lord chastised the converts for their transgressions but assured them that he had not forgotten them. They still needed to prepare for the Millennium, and, through parables, the Lord told them what to do. The Saints were to maintain their interest in Missouri.

The Saints' Interest in Zion Continues

The exiles crossed the Missouri River from Jackson County into Clay County, and most settled there. When the Latter-day Saints established schools, some of the earlier settlers of Clay County sent their children to attend classes there. "Of course," Emily Partridge wrote, these children "were better dressed than the Mormon children, which caused them to sometimes sneer and make fun of our shabby clothes, but generally we got along very well. The Saints were very poor, and I sometimes wonder how they provided for their families the necessaries of life. My father being Bishop made the times much harder for him, for he not only had his family to provide for, but he had the poor to look after and provide for their comfort also" (Woman's Exponent, 15 Feb. 1885, p. 138).

Not all of the Saints moved from Jackson County to Clay County. Thomas Marsh located in Lafayette County, where he taught school. Others went to Ray and Van Buren counties. "We scattered in every direction," one Saint wrote. After moving to Van Buren County, some members were invited to settle in Clay County, where they "were treated with the utmost kindness" (Millenial Star, 11 July 1881, p. 439).

The migration of Latter-day Saints from other states to western Missouri continued after the expulsion of the Mormons from Jackson County. Edward Stevenson arrived in Clay County, a lonely teenaged boy from southern Michigan. Leaving what he referred to as a "desirable" situation—his mother, who had been recently widowed, owned a comfortable home and 240 acres of good land—he packed his belongings in a small box and, with only one dollar in his pocket, started walking alone toward Zion. He soon joined with other converts from Michigan who were heading to western Missouri and arranged with a family to drive their ox team. After arriving in Clay County, young Edward found himself alone amid strangers, but he was impressed with the new land. ("Autobiography," pp. 8-9).

In harmony with the Lord's counsel given in Doctrine and Covenants 101, Church members continued to gather in the Missouri frontier in anticipation of the day when Zion would be redeemed.
