Richard O. Cowan, Milton V. Backman, Joseph Smith and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1992)

18

Zion's Camp: A Test of Faith

Doctrine and Covenants 103; 105

After the Saints were driven from Jackson County, the Prophet was told that the governor of Missouri, Daniel Dunklin, would call out the militia to aid the Mormons in returning to their property if they would raise an army that could protect the people when the militia withdrew.

Recruiting Zion's Camp

On 24 February 1834, Joseph Smith received a revelation regarding the redemption of Zion, meaning the restoration of the Saints to their lands in Jackson County. The Lord specified in this revelation the plan of organization and the minimum numerical strength of the army that would march to Missouri. He also warned the Saints that the "redemption of Zion" would come only after much tribulation and would be delayed if Church members continued to "pollute their inheritance." Nevertheless, the Lord promised, ultimately, when the Saints were worthy, his angels and his presence would go before them that they might "possess the goodly land" (D&C 103).

After two and one-half months of recruiting, Church leaders were disappointed that only one hundred men, the minimum number set by the Lord, enlisted. Nevertheless, the recruits prepared to march westward. George A. Smith, one of the youngest of the group, recorded: "On Sunday, May 4th, Joseph preached to the Saints in Kirtland, under the shade of the new school house, which was partially enclosed. Many of those who were to form the 'camp of Zion' being present, he impressed upon them the necessity of being humble, exercising faith and patience, and living in obedience to the commandments of the Almighty, and not murmur at the dispensations of Providence. He bore testimony of the truth of the work which God had revealed through him, and promised the brethren, that if they would all live as they should before the Lord, keeping his commandments, and not like the Children of Israel murmur against the Lord and his servants, they should all safely return, and not one of them should fall upon the mission they were about to undertake" (Millennial Star, 15 July 1865, p. 439).

The March Begins

Many Kirtland Saints had mixed emotions and deep concerns as they left their families and friends to assist the afflicted in Missouri. Heber C. Kimball wrote: "We gathered clothing and other necessaries to carry up to our brethren and sisters who had been stripped; and putting our horses to the wagons, and taking our firelocks and ammunition, we started on our journey; leaving only Oliver Cowdery, Sidney Rigdon, and the workmen who were engaged at the Temple; so that there were very few men left in Kirtland. Our wagons were about full with baggage &c., consequently we had to travel on foot. We started on the 5th of May [1834], and truly this was a solemn morning to me. I took leave of my wife and children and friends, not expecting ever to see them again, as myself and brethren were threatened both in that country and in Missouri by the enemies, that they would destroy us and exterminate us from the land" (Times and Seasons, 15 Jan. 1845, p. 771).

The members of Zion's Camp gathered at New Portage, a community forty miles southwest of Kirtland. They were assigned responsibilities and, pooling their money, resumed their march on May 8.

In many respects, Zion's Camp was an unusual army. Called to action by revelation, the soldiers were led and instructed regularly by a modern prophet; they prayed frequently, and they were accompanied by heavenly messengers.

Parley P. Pratt rode his horse parallel with the army as he sought new volunteers. "On one occasion," he wrote, "I had travelled all night to overtake the camp with some men and means, and having breakfasted with them and changed horses, I again started ahead on express to visit other branches, and do business to again overtake them. At noon I had turned my horse loose from the carriage to feed on the grass in the midst of a broad, level plain. No habitation was near; stillness and repose reigned around me; I sank down overpowered with a deep sleep, and might have lain in a state of oblivion till the shades of night had gathered around me, so completely was I exhausted for want of sleep and rest; but I had only slept a few moments till the horse had grazed sufficiently, when a voice, more loud and shrill than I had ever before heard, fell on my ear, and thrilled through every part of my system; it said: 'Parley, it is time to be up and on your journey.' In the twinkling of an eye I was perfectly aroused; I sprang to my feet so suddenly that I could not at first recollect where I was, or what was before me to perform. I related the circumstance afterwards to brother Joseph Smith, and he bore testimony that it was the angel of the Lord who went before the camp, who found me overpowered with sleep, and thus awoke me" (Autobiography, pp. 114-15).

Fearing persecution if others learned about the army's mission, Zion's Camp took various measures to conceal its identity. George A. Smith recorded:

"Tuesday, May 20. We traveled about 25 miles; part of the road being bad, and had to pull our wagons through the mud by ropes. We camped near Greenfield, Hancock County. While at dinner today three gentlemen came riding up on very fine-looking horses and commenced inquiring of various brethren concerning our traveling in so large a body, asking where we were from, and where we were going. The reply was, as usual, some from the State of Maine, some from [New] York State, some from Massachusetts, and some from Ohio, and others replied, 'We are from the East and as soon as we have done eating dinner, we shall be going to the West.' They then addressed themselves to Dr. [Frederick G.] Williams to see if they could find out who was the leader of the Camp. The Dr. replied, 'We have no one in particular.' 'But,' said they, 'is there not someone among you whom you call your captain or leader, or superior to the rest?' He answered, 'Sometimes one and sometimes another takes charge of the Company, so as not to throw the burden upon any one in particular.' These same spies who had come from the West passed us several times that day and the next, changing their horses and clothes and disguising themselves in various ways, yet we knew them.

"Wednesday, May 21. We traveled 28 miles, passing through Indianapolis and crossing White River. We had frequently been threatened that the Governor of Indiana would stop us at Indianapolis. This excited fear in the breasts of some of the company, in consequence of which Joseph directed as many as could to get into wagons and then drive some distance apart, the footmen scattering through different streets. In this manner we passed through the City unobserved by its inhabitants who were wondering when the great company they had heard of was going to pass. This fulfilled Joseph Smith's prediction to the fearful that we would not be interrupted. . . .

"Sunday, June 1. At half-past 10 this morning our trumpet, a common brass, French Horn, sounded in the Camp for preaching. There were some two or three hundred of the people from Jacksonville and the surrounding country gathered under the trees within our camp, and a chest was brought out for the accommodation of the speakers, when Squire Cook (Joseph Smith) took the stand professing to be a liberal free-thinker. He spoke to the people very freely about one hour on his particular views; his manner and style were very unassuming and affable, and he was listened to with great attention, and those present remarked that he was one of the greatest reasoners they ever heard" (Instructor, Mar. 1946, pp. 116-17, 182).

Zion's Camp in Missouri

After arriving in eastern Missouri, Joseph's division was united with another group from Michigan and other northern states under Hyrum Smith's direction. The army now numbered more than two hundred men, plus a few women and children who were traveling with their husbands to Missouri. Elder Pratt rode ahead of Zion's Camp to Jefferson City and notified Governor Dunklin of the approaching army. Apparently fearing that any attempt to assist the Saints in regaining their land would lead to civil war, the governor, according to Elder Pratt, changed his mind and refused to call out the militia. The attempt to redeem Zion in 1834 was then postponed. Nevertheless, the army continued its march toward Clay County, where most of the refugees lived.

One of the participants in this march, Nathan Baldwin, recalled the threat and the miracle at Fishing River: "As we neared our place of destination, the excitement of the people in the surrounding country increased. Many threats were thrown out against us but none were consummated. At an early hour at evening, on the 19th of June we encamped on an eminence between two forks of Fishing River, near a Baptist meeting house, built of hewn logs. While we busied ourselves preparing for the night, several armed men rode by (as we were camped on one side of the road) and swore that we should see hell before morning, and they told us of companies that were coming from various places, report said sixteen hundred sworn to our utter destruction. Soon after these men left, a small black cloud appeared in the west and increased in size until shortly the whole blue arch was draped in black, presenting a vengeful appearance, while the rain descended in torrents, the winds bellowed and such vivid flashes of lightning and such peals of thunder are seldom seen and heard.

"The Lord had previously said he would fight the battles of his saints, and it seemed as though the mandate had gone forth from his presence, to ply the artillery of heaven in defense of his servants. Some small hail fell in the camp but from half a mile to a mile around, we were told by the inhabitants that the hailstones were as big as tumblers; and the appearance of their destructiveness showed that their size was not over-estimated. Limbs of trees were broken off, fence rails were marred and splintered and the growing corn was cut into shreds. But the casualties were all on the side of our enemies. While their gathering hosts were hastening to our destruction, the wrathful elements met them in a manner they had not been accustomed to in their previous deeds of darkness, while persecuting the Saints. Thus brought to a sudden stand, they crept under trees, wagons and anything that afforded shelter and they held their horses as long as they could stand the pelting of these chunks of ice on their arms and gunstocks, the maddened steeds broke loose from the grasp and left them to face danger on foot, while their would-be victims were secure from harm, with the exception of some few tents which were blown down and a few men were rained on, but others were safely housed in the meeting house before mentioned. All were conscious that God was engaged in the conflict, and thankful that they were under his special care and kind protection.

"Next morning the streams before and behind us were wonderfully swollen so that we could not advance, neither could our enemies reach us if they had had a mind so to do, but it appears from the sequel that they were so dumbfounded by this singular defeat that their anxiety and determination to kill Jo Smith and his army was considerably abated, so much so that they were hardly willing to hazard another battle when Jehovah fights.

"We moved our camp four or five miles north to a more convenient location and halted for a few days. On Saturday the 21st [June 1834], Colonel Sconce with two other leading men from Ray County came to see us, desiring to know what our intentions were, for, said he, 'I see that there is an Almighty power that protects this people, for I started from Richmond, Ray County, with a company of armed men, having a full determination to destroy you, but was kept back by the storm and was not able to reach you.' When he entered our camp he was seized with such a trembling that he was obliged to sit down to compose himself before he made known the object of their visit. But when a proper explanation was made by Joseph the Prophet in a lengthy speech, they were melted into compassion and cordially took Joseph by the hand and promised to use their influence to allay the excitement of the people in the surrounding country, which they afterwards fulfilled by riding amongst the people and made unwearied exertions to that effect.

"The next day Cornelius Gillium, the sheriff of Clay County, came to the camp to hold a consultation. He was granted an audience and his first inquiries were if Joseph Smith was in camp, as he had heard he was, and if so he would like to see him. Whereupon Joseph arose and said, 'I am the man.' Mr. Gillium replied that he took him to be Mr. Smith but someone had told him that it was Captain Bruce. This was the first time that he had been made known to strangers since leaving Kirtland, haying passed by several misnomers at different times. At first (and I suppose at his own instance) he was respectfully addressed as 'Esquire Cook', perhaps in consequence of his original name being Joseph Cook Smith, and discarding Cook at a more mature age.

"Mr. Gillium said the inhabitants were greatly excited in consequence of our appearance in the country and many inflammatory stories were told of us, amongst which was that the inscription on our banner was indicative of blood and carnage. Whereupon our flag was produced to his view, exhibiting a small white flag, right-angled triangle in shape, the extreme point tipped with red, and I think in large red letters was the word 'P E A C E' —the only letters on it.

"Mr. Gillium then gave some instructions concerning the manners, customs, and dispositions of the people, and what course would be policy for us to pursue in order to secure their favor and protection.

"On this ground was given the revelation [D&C 105:12-19] . . . in which we were told that God did not require at our hands to fight the battles of Zion. 'For,' said he, 'as I said in a former commandment, even so will I fulfill. I will fight your battles. But the strength of mine house has not hearkened unto my words, but inasmuch as there are those who have hearkened unto my words, I have prepared a blessing and an endowment for them, if they continue faithful. I have heard their prayers and will accept their offering; and it is expedient in me that they should be brought thus far, for a trial of their faith.' . . .

"This intelligence was the most acceptable to me of anything I had ever heard before, the gospel being the exception. But some of the camp was not pleased with it; and I think apostatized over it" ("Autobiography," pp. 12-14).

The dreaded disease of cholera tragically struck the members of Zion's Camp shortly before they arrived at Liberty. Seventy persons were afflicted, and of those, twelve soldiers and one woman died. In the midst of this illness, God's presence and intervention were again witnessed by the Saints, as testified by Wilford Woodruff: "After we had pitched our tents in Clay county . . . and many of the brethren had taken sick, and some had died, Joseph requested the camp to disperse, except enough to take care of the sick. All who had teams were required to leave the ground and go among the brethren. . . . Shortly, Joseph called the brethren together at Lyman Wight's, and told them if they would humble themselves before the Lord, and covenant to keep His commandments and obey His counsel, the plague should be stayed from that hour, and there should not be another case of cholera in the Camp. The brethren covenanted to do this, and the plague was stayed, and there was not another case in Camp" (Millenial Star, 25 Mar. 1865, p. 183).

Some critics regarded Zion's Camp as a failure because the army did not restore the Saints to their property in Jackson County. Nevertheless, the march strengthened the faith of the members of the camp, and from their number the original Quorums of Twelve and Seventy were called the following year. The Prophet declared, "Brethren, some of you are angry with me, because you did not fight in Missouri; but let me tell you, God did not want you to fight. He could not organize His kingdom with twelve men to open the Gospel door to the nations of the earth, and with seventy men under their direction to follow in their tracks, unless He took them from a body of men who had offered their lives, and who had made as great a sacrifice as did Abraham" (History of the Church, 2:182 n.).

Other participants recognized the great influence that Zion's Camp had on their lives. "We gained an experience," Wilford Woodruff attested in December 1869, "that we never could have gained in any other way. We had the privilege of beholding the face of the prophet, and we had the privilege of travelling a thousand miles with him, and seeing the workings of the Spirit of God with him, and the revelations of Jesus Christ unto him and the fulfilment of those revelations" (Journal of Discourses, 13:158). President Brigham Young stated in October 1853: "When I returned from that mission to Kirtland, a brother said to me, 'Brother Brigham, what have you gained by this journey?' I replied, 'Just what we went for; but I would not exchange the knowledge I have received this season for the whole of Geauga County; for property and mines of wealth are not to be compared to the worth of knowledge"' (Journal of Discourses, 2:10).
