Richard O. Cowan, Milton V. Backman, Joseph Smith and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1992)

19

Visions and Revelations During a Pentecostal Season

Doctrine and Covenants 109-10; 137

During one of the greatest pentecostal seasons in the history of the Restoration, Joseph Smith received three visions or revelations that became Doctrine and Covenants 137, 109, and 110. Between 21 January and 1 May 1836, probably more Latter-day Saints beheld visions and witnessed other unusual spiritual manifestations than at any other period in the history of the Church. During ten meetings held in the Kirtland Temple, Latter-day Saints reported seeing angels and even the Savior. Some communed with heavenly messengers, many prophesied, some spoke in tongues, and some received the gift of interpretation of tongues.

Summarizing events that transpired during the dedication of the temple, Orson Pratt declared in 1875: "God was there, his angels were there, the Holy Ghost was in the midst of the people, the visions of the Almighty were opened to the minds of the servants of the living God; the vail was taken off from the minds of many; they saw the heavens opened; they beheld the angels of God; they heard the voice of the Lord; and they were filled from the crown of their heads to the soles of their feet with the power and inspiration of the Holy Ghost. . . .

"It was in that Temple that the visions of the Almighty were opened to our great Prophet, Seer and Revelator, Joseph Smith, wherein the future was portrayed before him, wherein keys were committed to him in relation to this great Latter-day dispensation, and the power of God was made manifest through the holy Priesthood sent down from heaven. In that Temple, set apart by the servants of God, and dedicated by a prayer that was written by inspiration, the people were blessed as they never had been blessed for generations and generations" (Journal of Discourses, 18:132).

A Vision of the Celestial Kingdom

Oliver Cowdery described one of the first meetings in the newly completed Kirtland Temple: "Thursday, the 21st [January 1836]. . . . At about three o'clock P.M. I assembled in our office garret, having all things prepared for the occasion, with Presidents Joseph Smith, jr., F. [Frederick] G. Williams, Sidney Rigdon, Hyrum Smith, David Whitmer, John Whitmer and elder John Corrill, and washed our bodies with pure water before the Lord, preparatory to the annointing with the holy oil. After we were washed, our bodies were perfumed with a sweet smelling oderous wash" (BYU Studies, Summer 1972, pp. 418-19).

The Prophet recorded: "We attended the ordinance of washing our bodies in pure water. We also perfumed our bodies and our heads, in the name of the Lord.

"At early candle-light I met with the Presidency at the west school room, in the Temple, to attend to the ordinance of anointing our heads with holy oil; also the Councils of Kirtland and Zion met in the two adjoining rooms, and waited in prayer while we attended to the ordinance. I took the oil in my left hand, Father Smith being seated before me, and the remainder of the Presidency encircled him round about. We then stretched our right hands towards heaven, and blessed the oil, and consecrated it in the name of Jesus Christ.

"We then laid our hands upon our aged Father Smith, and invoked the blessings of heaven. I then anointed his head with the consecrated oil, and sealed many blessings upon him. The Presidency then in turn laid their hands upon his head, beginning at the oldest, until they had all laid their hands upon him, and pronounced such blessings upon his head, as the Lord put into their hearts, all blessing him to be our Patriarch, to anoint our heads, and attend to all duties that pertain to that office. The Presidency then took the seat in their turn, according to their age, beginning at the oldest, and received their anointing and blessing under the hands of Father Smith. And in my turn, my father anointed my head, and sealed upon me the blessings of Moses, to lead Israel in the latter days, even as Moses led him in days of old; also the blessings of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. All of the Presidency laid their hands upon me, and pronounced upon my head many prophecies and blessings, many of which I shall not notice at this time. But as Paul said, so say I, let us come to visions and revelations" (History of the Church, 2:379-80).

The Prophet quoted what is now Doctrine and Covenants 137 and then gave an account of yet another vision:

"I saw the Twelve Apostles of the Lamb, who are now upon the earth, who hold the keys of this last ministry, in foreign lands, standing together in a circle, much fatigued, with their clothes tattered and feet swollen, with their eyes cast downward, and Jesus standing in their midst, and they did not behold Him. The Savior looked upon them and wept.

"I also beheld Elder McLellin in the south, standing upon a hill, surrounded by a vast multitude, preaching to them, and a lame man standing before him supported by his crutches; he threw them down at his word and leaped as a hart, by the mighty power of God. Also, I saw Elder Brigham Young standing in a strange land, in the far south and west, in a desert place, upon a rock in the midst of about a dozen men of color, who appeared hostile. He was preaching to them in their own tongue, and the angel of God standing above his head, with a drawn sword in his hand, protecting him, but he did not see it. And I finally saw the Twelve in the celestial kingdom of God. I also beheld the redemption of Zion, and many things which the tongue of man cannot describe in full.

"Many of my brethren who received the ordinance with me saw glorious visions also. Angels ministered unto them as well as to myself, and the power of the Highest rested upon us, the house was filled with the glory of God, and we shouted Hosanna to God and the Lamb. My scribe also received his anointing with us, and saw, in a vision, the armies of heaven protecting the Saints in their return to Zion, and many things which I saw.

"The Bishop of Kirtland with his Counselors, and the Bishop of Zion with his Counselors, were present with us, and received their anointings under the hands of Father Smith, and this was confirmed by the Presidency, and the glories of heaven were unfolded to them also.

"We then invited the High Councilors of Kirtland and Zion into our room, and President Hyrum Smith anointed the head of the President of the Councilors in Kirtland, and President David Whitmer the head of the President of the Councilors of Zion. The President of each quorum then anointed the heads of his colleagues, each in his turn, beginning at the oldest.

"The visions of heaven were opened to them also. Some of them saw the face of the Savior, and others were ministered unto by holy angels, and the spirit of prophecy and revelation was poured out in mighty power; and loud hosannas, and glory to God in the highest, saluted the heavens, for we all communed with the heavenly host. And I saw in my vision all of the Presidency in the celestial kingdom of God, and many others that were present. Our meeting was opened by singing, and prayer was offered up by the head of each quorum; and closed by singing, and invoking the benediction of heaven, with uplifted hands. Retired between one and two o'clock in the morning" (History of the Church, 2:381-82).

Oliver Cowdery summarized the spiritual manifestations that took place during that meeting. He pointed out that the brethren "were annointed with the same kind of oil and in the man[ner] that were Moses and Aaron. . . . The glorious scene is too great to be described in this book, therefore, I only say, that the heavens were opened to many, and great and marvelous things were shown" (BYU Studies, Summer 1972, p. 419).

The apostles and the presidents of the seventy received their anointing the next day, after which many sew heavenly beings, members were blessed with the gift of tongues, and, as Joseph said, "angels mingled their voices with ours" (History of the Church, 2:383).

The spiritual manifestations continued. On Thursday, 28 January, during the meeting in which the Prophet "attended to the sealing of what they had done," Zebedee Coltrin saw the Savior, others beheld heavenly beings, and Joseph saw "a glorious vision" (History of the Church, 2:387). On Saturday, 6 February, the Prophet called all who had been anointed "together to receive the seal of all their blessings." Many who were obedient to his instructions received unusual blessings. Some saw visions. "Others were filled with the Spirit" and spoke in tongues, and some prophesied. "This was a time of rejoicing long to be remembered," Joseph said (History of the Church, 2:391-92).

The Lord's House is Dedicated

On Saturday, 26 March, Church leaders met in the president's room to prepare for the dedication of the Lord's house. The Prophet, directed by the Lord and assisted by others, including Oliver Cowdery, wrote the prayer for the dedication of the temple, now recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 109 (BYU Studies, Summer 1972, p. 426).

On the following day, Sunday, 27 March, the temple was dedicated, and Latter-day Saints experienced a spiritual feast. "The dedication was looked forward to with intense interest," Eliza R. Snow remembered, "and when the day arrived . . . a dense multitude assembled—the temple was filled to its utmost, and when the ushers were compelled to close the doors, the outside congregation was nearly if not quite as large as that within.

"Four hundred and sixteen elders, including prophets and apostles, with the first great prophets of the last dispensation at their head, were present—men who had been 'called of God as was Aaron,' and clothed with the holy priesthood; many of them having just returned from missions, on which they had gone forth like the ancient disciples, 'without purse or scrip,' now to feast for a little season on the sweet spirit of love and union, in the midst of those who had 'tasted of the powers of the world to come.'

"At the hour appointed, the assembly was seated. . . . At nine o'clock, President Sidney Rigdon commenced the services of that great and memorable day, by reading the ninety-sixth and twenty-fourth Psalms; 'Ere long the vail will be rent in twain,' etc., was sung by the choir, and after President Rigdon had addressed the throne of grace in fervent prayer, 'O happy souls who pray,' etc., was sung. President Rigdon then read the eighteenth, nineteenth, and twentieth verses of the eighteenth chapter of Matthew, and spoke more particularly from the last-named verse, continuing his eloquent, logical and sublime discourse for two and a half hours. At one point, as he reviewed the toils and privations of those who had labored in rearing the walls of that sacred edifice, he drew tears from many eyes . . .

"He admitted there were many houses—many sufficiently large, built for the worship of God, but not one, except this, on the face of the whole earth, that was built by divine revelation; and were it not for this, the dear Redeemer might, in this day of science, intelligence and religion, say to those who would follow him, 'The foxes have holes, the birds of the air have nests, but the Son of Man hath not where to lay his head.'

"After the close of his discourse, President Rigdon presented for an expression of their faith and confidence, Joseph Smith, Jr., as prophet, seer and revelator, to the various quorums, and the whole congregation of saints, and a simultaneous rising up followed, in token of unanimous confidence, and covenant to uphold him as such, by their faith and prayers.

"The morning services were concluded by the choir singing, 'Now let us rejoice in the day of salvation,' etc. During an intermission of twenty minutes, the congregation remained seated, and the afternoon services opened by singing, 'This earth was once a garden place."' Following the sustaining of Church leaders the dedicatory prayer was offered by Joseph Smith. . . .

"The choir then sang, 'The spirit of God like a fire is burning,' etc., after which the Lord's supper was administered to the whole assembly. Then President Joseph Smith bore testimony of his mission and of the ministration of angels, and, after testimonials and exhortations by other elders, he blest the congregation in the name of the Lord.

"Thus ended the ceremonies of the dedication of the first temple built by special command of the Most High, in this dispensation.

"One striking feature of the ceremonies, was the grand shout of hosanna, which was given by the whole assembly, in standing position, with uplifted hands. The form of the shout is as follows: 'Hosanna—hosanna—hosanna—to God and the Lamb—amen—amen, and amen.' The foregoing was deliberately and emphatically pronounced, and three times repeated, and with such power as seemed almost sufficient to raise the roof from the building.

"A singular incident in connection with this shout may be discredited by some, but it is verily true. A notice had been circulated that children in arms would not be admitted at the dedication of the temple. A sister who had come a long distance with her babe six weeks old, having, on her arrival, heard of the above requisition, went to the patriarch Joseph Smith, Sr., in great distress, saying that she knew no one with whom she could leave her infant; and to be deprived of the privilege of attending the dedication seemed more than she could endure. The ever generous and kind-hearted father volunteered to take the responsibility on himself, and told her to take her child, at the same time giving the mother a promise that her babe should make no disturbance; and the promise was verified. But when the congregation shouted hosanna, that babe joined in the shout. As marvelous as that incident may appear to many, it is not more so than other occurrences on that occasion.

"The ceremonies of that dedication may be rehearsed, but no mortal language can describe the heavenly manifestations of that memorable day. Angels appeared to some, while a sense of divine presence was realized by all present and each heart was filled with 'joy inexpressible and full of glory"' (Tullidge, Women of Mormondom, 82-95).

In the evening following the dedication, priesthood leaders experienced another unusual service. "The Spirit was poured out," Oliver Cowdery recounts, and "I saw the glory of God, like a great cloud, come down and rest upon the house, and fill the same like a mighty rushing wind. I also saw cloven tongues, like as of fire rest upon many, (for there were 316 present, ) while they spake with other tongues and prophesied" (BYU Studies, Summer 1972, p.426).

Although the temple ordinances as we know them today were not performed at Kirtland, keys of the priesthood, including those related to temple service, were restored in that house of the Lord. On Easter Sunday, just one week after the temple was dedicated, four glorious messengers appeared there. The last entry in Joseph Smith's 1835-36 Kirtland Diary described the setting and the vision in which Christ accepted the sacrifices of the Saints, and Moses, Elias and Elijah restored priesthood keys (see D&C 110).

Spiritual Manifestations Continue

Spiritual manifestations continued after the dedicatory services. "In Kirtland . . . we enjoyed many very great blessings, and often saw the power of God manifested," Prescindia Huntington wrote. "On one occasion I saw angels clothed in white walking upon the temple. It was during one of our monthly fast meetings, when the saints were in the temple worshipping. A little girl came to my door and in wonder called me out, exclaiming, 'The meeting is on the top of the meeting house!' I went to the door, and there I saw on the temple angels clothed in white covering the roof from end to end. They seemed to be walking to and fro; they appeared and disappeared. The third time they appeared and disappeared before I realized that they were not mortal men. Each time in a moment they vanished, and their reappearance was the same. This was in broad daylight, in the afternoon. A number of the children in Kirtland saw the same.

"When the brethren and sisters came home in the evening, they told of the power of God manifested in the temple that day, and of the prophesying and speaking in tongues. It was also said, in the interpretation of tongues, 'That the angels were resting down upon the house.'

"At another fast meeting I was in the temple with my sister Zina. The whole of the congregation were on their knees, praying vocally, for such was the custom at the close of these meetings when Father Smith presided; yet there was no confusion; the voices of the congregation mingled softly together. While the congregation was thus praying, we both heard, from one corner of the room above our heads, a choir of angels singing most beautifully. They were invisible to us, but myriads of angelic voices seemed to be united in singing some song of Zion, and their sweet harmony filled the temple of God" (Tullidge, Women of Mormondom, pp. 207-8).

When Nancy Tracy later reflected on her spiritual experiences in Kirtland, she observed that such remarkable manifestations would not continue. Nevertheless, she suggested that these blessings had prepared Latter-day Saints for the trials that awaited them. "We have the opposing element to contend with," and we "shall be made perfect through [our] suffering" ("Autobiography," p. 9).
