Richard O. Cowan, Milton V. Backman, Joseph Smith and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1992)

20

The Saints Move to Northern Missouri

Doctrine and Covenants 113-16

Seven revelations in our Doctrine and Covenants were recorded by the Prophet at Far West, Missouri, in 1838. Three were received in March or April (sections 113-15), and four more (117-20) were given in July. Most of the Saints living in Clay and surrounding counties had moved to the less populated sections in the northern part of Missouri because of increasing mob threats. The legislature responded to the large migration into northern Ray County by creating two new counties—Caldwell and Daviess. Far West, in newly created Caldwell County, became the principal gathering place by 1837, and from there Bishop Edward Partridge continued to direct the financial affairs of the Church. The Prophet left Ohio and located in Far West early in 1838. Another gathering place in Daviess County was named Adam-ondi-Ahman in a revelation received in May 1838 (D&C 116).

The Saints Build Far West

Bishop Partridge's daughter Emily recalled her family's move from Clay County to northern Missouri: "Father moved his family into a piece of timber, about three miles from the place where Far West was afterwards located. Father and the brethren that were with him built log huts and prepared us as well as they could for the coming winter. The timber in which we were camped was mostly hickory, with some black walnut, and hazle bushes were plentiful, and all were loaded with nuts, and when the frost came they dropped from the trees and lay so thick on the ground all around us that the children were kept pretty busy gathering them up. We gathered several bushels, and feasted on nuts through the winter, if with little else. As father's eldest children were all girls, my sister Harriet and I had to act the part of boys and help him with his work, such as milking the cows and going to the prairie and assist him in loading hay, and sometimes we would carry the chain when he surveyed the land.

"After Far West was laid out father built another house and we moved into the city. The Saints from all parts of the world, where the Gospel had been preached, began to gather in, and the place was rapidly built up" (Woman's Exponent, 15 June 1885, p. 10).

The Prophet Joseph Smith described the background of his move to Missouri from Ohio: as "a new year [1838] dawned upon the Church in Kirtland," the "spirit of apostate mobocracy" raged until he was "obliged to flee from its deadly influence, as did the Apostles and Prophets of old." Quoting the Savior, the Prophet said that "when they persecute you in one city, flee to another." On the night of 12 January 1838, Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon fled Kirtland, Ohio, to escape persecution. Joseph went to Far West, Missouri, and during the ensuing seven months, nearly all the Saints in Kirtland (more than sixteen hundred) were also forced to abandon their homes and their temple.

After a "long and tedious journey," Joseph Smith and his family arrived at Far West, Missouri, on 14 March 1838. Many Saints gathered to meet his family and welcomed them "with open arms." Two or three days later, his brother Samuel arrived with his family, and while the Prophet was "walking with him and certain other brethren," the "sentiments occurred to [his] mind" that were recorded as Doctrine and Covenants 113, which is the Prophet's answers to questions on scripture (History of the Church, 3:9).

The following month, Joseph received two revelations. One was for David Patten (D&C 114), calling him on a mission the following spring, but he was killed in October 1838, one of the casualties of the battle of Crooked River. In the other revelation (D&C 115), the Lord identified the official name of the Church. When the Church was organized in 1830, it was called the "Church of Christ." That name created problems for early missionaries because many churches and congregations employed this same name. To identify the movement led by the Prophet Joseph Smith, members began referring to their church as the Church of the Latter-day Saints. The revelation at Far West resolved this problem (History of the Church, 3:24 n.). But the main thrust of the Lord's instructions in Doctrine and Covenants 115 was to build up Far West.

Every family that arrived along the northern Missouri frontier faced similar challenges. Mosiah Hancock, son of Levi and Clarissa, remembered traveling from Ohio to Missouri in the spring of 1838, when he was four years old. Because his parents' wagon was so loaded with goods, he walked during most of the journey westward. He was barefoot during that trip; in fact, he "never knew the luxury of having a pair of shoes until I was seven years of age, then my Uncle Allah made me a present of a pair." He further remembered that when the family arrived near Plum Creek towards the end of March 1838, there were "approximately eight inches of snow on the ground, and not having a tent we were forced to camp in the open for awhile." He also recalled that one night he slept in a bed with sixteen other children. Most of the time during that late spring, however, he slept on the ground while his grandfather and grandmother and some of the children slept in a wagon.

Shortly after their arrival, the family built a log home. "The house," Mosiah wrote, "was daubed inside with clay, and chinked and daubed outside. Shakes were put on the roof; and a chimney was laid up of sticks and daubed inside and outside with clay mud. A pinion-floor was made. A bedstead was made out of tree limbs and posts so that mother might be as comfortable as possible while her baby was being born."

Mosiah Hancock also remembered experiences in Missouri with Joseph Smith: "It was the disposition of the Prophet Joseph when he saw little children in the mud to take them up in his arms and wash the mud from their bare feet with his handkerchief. And oh how kind he was to the old folks as well as to little children. He always had a smile for his friends and was always cheerful" ("Autobiography," pp. 3-4).

David Osborn, another convert who gathered with the Saints in Missouri, met Joseph Smith for the first time during a visit to Far West in 1838. "There were but three houses in town at that time," he wrote. "On the south side of the elder Peter Whitmer's house was a wagon with a box on [it]. Here were seated Joseph, Sidney Rigdon and others. There was quite a congregation including old residents (Gentiles) of Caldwell County. I remember many of his sayings. . . . Said he, 'You have heard many reports about me. Some perhaps are true and others not true. I know what I have done and I know what I have not done. . . . You may hug up to yourselves the Bible, but except through faith in it you can get revelation for yourself, the Bible will profit you but little. . . . The Book of Mormon is true, just what it purports to be, and for this testimony I expect to give an account in the day of judgment. . . . If I obtain the glory which I have in view I expect to wade through much tribulation."'

"In closing his remarks the Prophet asserted, 'The Savior declared the time was coming when secret or hidden things should be revealed on the house tops. Well,' says he, 'I have revealed to you a few things, if not on the house top, on the wagon top"' (Juvenile Instructor, 15 Mar. 1892, p. 173).

Primarily as a result of increased immigration, the Latter-day Saint population continued to swell in 1838. The price of land increased sharply, and some members became involved in land speculation. Recognizing that many Latter-day Saints had made great sacrifices to move to Missouri, the Prophet did not approve of Church members making unusual profits at the expense of the new immigrants. Edward Stevenson noted that in 1838 high councils and bishop's courts were active in disciplining members not only for speculation but for disobeying the Word of Wisdom. He also stated that many small stores were then in operation, and dealers in intoxicants and tobacco were frowned upon and their businesses were not considered "legitimate" ("Autobiography," p. 24).

Adam-Ondi-Ahman

Doctrine and Covenants 116 is a selection from Joseph Smith's history added to the Doctrine and Covenants in 1876 that identifies a place near Wight's Ferry at Spring Hill in Daviess County, Missouri, as a site where Adam lived and will visit in the future. As Latter-day Saints sought new areas for expansion during the spring of 1838, the Prophet traveled northward:

"Friday, May 18, [1838].—I left Far West . . . with . . . many others, for the purpose of visiting the north country, and laying off a stake of Zion; making locations, and laying claim to lands to facilitate the gathering of the Saints, and for the benefit of the poor, in upholding the Church of God. We traveled to the mouth of Honey Creek, which is a tributary of Grand river, where we camped for the night. We passed through a beautiful country the greater part of which is prairie, and thickly covered with grass and weeds, among which is plenty of game, such as deer, turkey, and prairie hen. . . .

"Saturday, 19.—This morning we struck our tents and formed a line of march, crossing Grand River at the mouth of Honey Creek and Nelson's Ferry. Grand River is a large, beautiful, deep and rapid stream, during the high waters of Spring, and will undoubtedly admit of navigation by steamboat and other water craft. At the mouth of Honey Creek is a good landing. We pursued our course up the river, mostly through timber, for about eighteen miles, when we arrived at Colonel Lyman Wight's home. He lives at the foot of Tower Hill (a name I gave the place in consequence of the remains of an old Nephite altar or tower that stood there), where we camped for the Sabbath.

"In the afternoon I went up the river about half a mile to Wight's Ferry, accompanied by President Rigdon, and my clerk, George W. Robinson, for the purpose of selecting and laying claim to a city plat near said ferry in Daviess County . . . which the brethren called 'Spring Hill,' but by the mouth of the Lord it was named Adam-ondi-Ahman, because, said He, it is the place where Adam shall come to visit his people, or the Ancient of Days shall sit, as spoken of by Daniel the Prophet [D&C 116]. . . .

"Monday, 21. . . . In the evening, I called a council of the brethren, to know whether it was wisdom to go immediately into the north country, or tarry here and hereabouts, to secure land on Grand River, etc. The brethren spoke their minds freely on the subject, when I stated to the council that I felt impressed to tarry and secure all the land near by, that is not secured between this and Far West, especially on Grand River. President Rigdon concurred, and the council voted unanimously to secure the land on Grand River, and between this and Far West" (History of the Church, 3:34-36).

In the summer of 1838, Latter-day Saints began settling Adam-ondi-Ahman. Lyman Wight's son, Orange Wight, remembered that his family was one of the first to move to the community that had been identified by Joseph Smith as a place where Adam had offered a holy sacrifice.

Orange Wight also remembered occasions when Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon visited his family. Joseph "was very kind and sociable with both young and old. We often bathed in the limpid waters of Grand River. Although but a boy I was invited to bathe with them. . . . We had a jolly time. . . . There was Joseph the Prophet, my father, Sidney Rigdon and several others. Our amusement consisted in part [of] seeing Brother Rigdon swim. He was so corpulent that he was forced to lay on his back to swim, he would swim in that way until his shoulders would strike the sand bar. Then he would turn but would flop back in deep water" ("Autobiography," p. 4).

Eliza R. Snow was another early settler of Adam-ondi-Ahman. She remembered that the old settlers placed "an embargo on all of the flouring mills" in that area, preventing the Latter-day Saints from obtaining meal they desired. "Our father had abundance of wheat, but could get no grinding. In this dilemma we had to resort to graters, made by perforating tin pails and stovepipes, on which we grated corn for bread material" (Biography, pp. 41-42).

About the middle of October 1838, Edward Stevenson visited Adam-ondi-Ahman and later recalled a conversation with the Prophet about that sacred site:

"The Prophet said it had been manifested unto him that here [Jackson County] was where our Father Adam was placed, and where his home was until his fall, when he was driven out into the dreary world, and from thence he took his departure northeast about seventy miles, to where a stake of Zion was located, and it was named Adam-Ondi-Ahman by revelation. This knowledge makes this land, which is good and greatly blessed, all the more attractive to the Saints, and creates a desire to cherish . . . the memory of the land. . . .

" . . . I was with the Prophet Joseph Smith . . . [and] others on the hill Adam-Ondi-Ahman. The Prophet said, pointing to a mound of stones:

"'There is where Father Adam built an altar when he was driven from the Garden of Eden and offered up sacrifice unto the Lord.'

"He further said that the Garden of Eden was in or near Independence, the center stake of Zion. I thought it a great privilege to be at that time with the Prophet, and to hear his words regarding the mound and pile of rocks laid up at so early a period of the world's history" (Reminiscences of Joseph, pp. 40-41).
