Richard O. Cowan, Milton V. Backman, Joseph Smith and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1992)

21

The Saints Move to Far West

Doctrine and Covenants 117-20

At a conference in Far West, Missouri, on 8 July 1838, Joseph Smith not only presented for the first time three revelations he had received the day before fleeing from Kirtland (none of which are in our Doctrine and Covenants) but also received four more revelations, which are recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 117 through 20 (History of the Church, 3:44). These revelations were unfolded during a period of celebration and spiritual rejuvenation. Five days earlier, "on 3 July 1838 there was a general meeting of the Saints in Far West, [and] about 1500 met and had a grand time. Ground was broken for a temple, 110 feet by 80 feet, a house of the Lord to be reared in this, our day, and on this holy land once occupied by our father Adam. It seems like a dream almost to me that I should be so favored to be one of this most happy and favored assemblage for it is fresh to my mind and especially on the following day, the honored 4th of July. Several Missourians manifested their independence by being baptized into the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" (Edward Stevenson, "Autobiography," pp. 24-25).

The celebration continued on July 4. Early in the morning the Saints erected a "liberty pole" made from the largest tree they could find in the surrounding forest. The Stars and Stripes fluttered from the top. Joseph Smith recalled: "The day was spent in celebrating the Declaration of Independence of the United States of America, and also by the Saints making a 'Declaration of Independence' from all mobs and persecutions which have been inflicted upon them, time after time, until they could bear it no longer; having been driven by ruthless mobs and enemies of truth from their homes, and having had their property confiscated, their lives exposed, and their all jeopardized by such barbarous conduct. The comer stones of the House of the Lord, agreeable to the commandments of the Lord unto us, given April 26, 1838 [D&C 115:10], were laid" (History of the Church, 3:41). Under the waving folds of the banner of freedom, the Latter-day Saints laid the cornerstone of a temple of God and dedicated the land and themselves and their families to Him who had presented them in all their troubles.

Sidney Rigdon then addressed the Saints. He reminded them of the suffering they had endured at the hands of their enemies. He reminded them of their constitutional rights as American citizens and expressed a determination to resist, from that time forth, all oppression. He concluded by urging the Saints to maintain their rights and freedom, "according to the holy principles of liberty, as guaranteed to every person by the Constitution and laws of our country" (Pratt, Autobiography, p. 173).

Settling Financial Affairs in Kirtland

After the Independence Day celebrations, Church leaders directed a three-day conference beginning 6 July. On the final day of the conference, 8 July, the Prophet received four revelations. The Lord instructed William Marks and Newel K. Whitney to settle promptly their business affairs in Kirtland and move to Missouri. Because most of the Saints had already left Kirtland, and many were traveling westward in a group known as Kirtland Camp, the Prophet undoubtedly learned by revelation that these two men had tarried. Consequently, they were commanded to repent of their "covetous desires" and journey "from the land of Kirtland" before it snowed (D&C 117:1-5). Meanwhile, Oliver Granger was called on a mission to settle Church "business affairs" in Ohio. Joseph Smith explained, "As I was driven from Kirtland without the privilege of settling up my business, I . . . employed Colonel Oliver Granger as my agent, to close all my affairs in the east." In fleeing from mobs in Kirtland, Joseph had left debts and was accused of "running away" and "cheating [his] creditors" (History of the Church, 3:164). Oliver Granger sought contributions, collected money, moved to Kirtland, and attempted to pay all debts that Joseph had contracted on behalf of the Church.

A Mission for the Twelve

During the July conference, the Prophet sought direction concerning the Twelve. Four of the original members of that quorum had been excommunicated (William E. McLellin, Luke S. Johnson, John F. Boynton, and Lyman E. Johnson), and four were called by revelation (D&C 118) to fill those vacancies. Another vacancy was created when David W. Patten was killed in the Battle of Crooked River. Twenty-year-old George A. Smith, who was called to fill that position, described how he first learned of his appointment.

"About the first of February I ascertained by accident that Brothers Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball were going to Liberty to visit the prisoners [including the Prophet; see Chapter 22]. As they mounted their horses I joined them and asked permission to accompany them, which was readily granted. . . . I felt delicate about asking them for the privilege of accompanying them. On the way, Brother Kimball told me I was named to be one of the Twelve. . . .

"We traveled . . . to Liberty, and put up at a hotel, and waited until the victuals were carried in towards evening to the prisoners, when Judge [Samuel] Tillery, the Jailer, permitted us to go in and see the prisoners. We were locked in with them for about an hour. Joseph told me of my calling to the Apostleship and inquired how I liked it. I replied, 'I was pleased with the appointment, and would do my best to honor it.' He spent most of the time conversing with Brothers Brigham and Heber, and I have always regarded it as a blessing that I had the privilege of being locked up with those who were imprisoned for the kingdom of heaven's sake, if it was but for an hour" (Instructor, Mar. 1947, pp. 119, 142).

Doctrine and Covenants 118 also directed the Twelve to meet at Far West on 26 April 1839, the day construction on the temple was to resume, and depart from there "to go over the great waters" to serve a mission in Great Britain (compare D&C 118:4-5 with D&C 115:11). Because the Saints had been driven from Missouri during the winter of 1838-39 under threat of extermination, many of their enemies boasted that none of the Twelve would dare return to Far West on the appointed date—thus making Joseph Smith a false prophet. The Twelve themselves had mixed feelings about returning. John Taylor noted that they would have to "go among a people that would kill everyone of us as quick as they would rattlesnakes" (Journal of Discourses, 24:198). Under these conditions, some of the Apostles felt that the Lord would excuse them from going back to Missouri. Nevertheless, in the spirit of his new calling as president of the Quorum of the Twelve, Brigham Young determined that they would fulfill the Lord's commandment literally.

"Early on the morning of the 26th of April [1839], we held our Conference, cut off 31 persons from the Church and proceeded to the building spot of the Lord's House, where Elder Cutler, the master workman of the house, then re-commenced laying the foundation agreeably to revelation, by rolling up a large stone near the southeast corner. . . .

"[We] proceeded to ordain Wilford Woodruff and George A. Smith to the office of the Twelve, to fill the places of those who had fallen. . . .

"The Twelve then offered up vocal prayer. . . after which we sung 'Adam-ondi-Ahman,' and then we took our leave of the following Saints, agreeably to the revelation." After the meeting, Theodore Turley, who had accompanied the apostles to Far West, knocked on the door of Isaac Russell, one of the apostates who had insisted that the Twelve would not show up on the appointed date. "His wife answered, 'Come in—it is Brother Turley.' Russell replied, 'It is not; he left here two weeks ago,' and appeared quite alarmed; but on finding it was Turley, asked him to sit down; but he replied, 'I cannot; I shall lose my company.' 'Who is your company?' inquired Russell. 'The Twelve.' 'The Twelve?' 'Yes; don't you know that this is the twenty-sixth, and the day the Twelve were to take leave of their friends on the foundation of the Lord's House, to go to the islands of the sea? The revelation is now fulfilled, and I am going with them.' Russell was speechless, and Turley bid him farewell.

"Thus was this revelation fulfilled, concerning which our enemies said, if all other revelations of Joseph Smith were fulfilled that one should not, as it had day and date to it" (Millenial Star, 12 Sept. 1863, pp. 583-84).

Nine of the Twelve responded to the call and went on their mission to Great Britain. Wilford Woodruff later described the success of their labors: "We went to England, and we baptized, in the year 1840, something like seven thousand people, and established churches in almost all the principal cities in the kingdom. Brother Pratt established a branch in Edinburgh, Scotland. Brother Kimball, George A. and myself built up a branch in London, and several branches in the south of England. We baptized eighteen hundred persons in the south of England in seven months; out of that number two hundred were preachers belonging to different denominations of that land. We opened an emigration office, published the Book of Mormon and gathered many to Zion. God was with us, and I may say that He has been in all the labors of this Church and kingdom" (Journal of Discourses, 13:160).

The Law of Tithing

Finances became an increasing problem for the Church as the Saints settled in their new homes in northern Missouri. In fact, Bishop Partridge had personally assumed responsibility for a thousand dollars in Church expenses. Consequently, during the spring of 1838, Church leaders were giving attention to ways of raising funds. Tithing was one idea they considered.

The Prophet went to the Lord: "O Lord! Show unto thy servant how much thou requires" of the properties of thy people for a tithing?" The third revelation received on 8 July 1838, now Doctrine and Covenants 119, came in response. This revelation he "read to the public" (History of the Church, 3:44). Because the people had been living the law of consecration, in which they were to give a surplus each year, the revelation directed them first to fulfill this responsibility as the "beginning of the tithing of my people" and then to contribute one tenth of their income thereafter (D&C 119:3-4). On that same day, Joseph received a fourth revelation (D&C 120) relating to the disposition of properties received as tithes.

Brigham Young spoke of the Saints' varying acceptance of the law of tithing: "The brethren wished me to go among the Churches, and find out what surplus property the people had, with which to forward the building of the Temple we were commencing at Far West. . . .

" . . . I found the people said they were willing to do about as they were counselled, but, upon asking them about their surplus property, most of the men who owned land and cattle would say, 'I have got so many hundred acres of land, and I have got so many boys, and I want each one of them to have eighty acres, therefore this is not surplus property.' . . . It is a laughable idea, but is nevertheless true, men would tell me they were young and beginning the world, and would say, 'We have no children, but our prospects are good, and we think we shall have a family of children, and if we do, we want to give them eighty acres of land each; we have no surplus property.' . . .

" . . . You would once in a while find a man who had a horse that he considered surplus, but at the same time he had the ringbone, was broken-winded, spavined in both legs, had the pole evil at one end of the neck and a fistula at the other, and both knees sprung.

"This is the description of surplus property that some would offer to the Lord" (Journal of Discourses, 2:306-7).
