Richard O. Cowan, Milton V. Backman, Joseph Smith and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1992)

22

Revelations from a Prison-Temple

Doctrine and Covenants 121-23

Amid intense persecution of the Saints in western Missouri, Joseph Smith wrote a long letter from the Liberty Jail that included Doctrine and Covenants 121, 122, and 123. In some respects the Prophet reached a new degree of greatness as he unfolded the truths of these revelations. "During his incarceration . . . the Prophet Joseph Smith received some of the most rich and remarkable revelations ever given to any prophet. The double walls, four feet thick, kept Joseph and his companions in, but they could not keep the Spirit and revelation out. . . . The . . . prison-temple becomes a unique window itself through which to view Joseph and the process of revelation and soul stretching evident during this particular period of the Restoration" (Maxwell, Small Moment, p. 1). The remarkable truths unfolded by the Lord to a Prophet who had been humbled by severe trials are better understood and appreciated as one considers the oppression of the Saints in late 1838 and early 1839, including the experiences which led to the Prophet's being imprisoned at Liberty.

The Saints' Suffering

Emily Partridge vividly describes the fall of Far West: "On the morning of the 1st of November, [1838] the bugle sounded for the brethren to assemble. Every man went well armed and was paraded and delivered over to the mob.

"The brethren were surrounded and required to surrender their arms and were guarded all day, while the soldiers went from house to house, plundering, pillaging, destroying and driving, in some instances, women and children from their homes.

"Before the mob disbanded, after securing the arms of the brethren, they rode through the city, and passed so close to our house that we could hear their remarks. . . . I felt no fear, for I had got pretty well used to seeing mobocrats by this time" (Woman's Exponent, 1 July 1885, p. 18).

More than fifty Saints were taken prisoners. They were forced to gather in a small circle on the public square and were surrounded by a strong guard. Some, according to Lyman Wight, "were exhibited in a wagon in the town. . . . The aged father and mother of Joseph Smith were not permitted to see his face, but to reach their hands through the curtains of the wagon, and thus take leave of him. When passing his own house, he was taken out of the wagon and permitted to go into the house, but not without a strong guard, and not permitted to speak with his family but in the presence of his guard and his eldest son, Joseph, about six or eight years old, hanging to the tail of his coat, crying father, is the mob going to kill you? The guard said to him, ' . . . You will see your father no more"' (Times and Seasons, 15 July 1843, p. 268).

The brethren were forced to march south from Far West. The weather was cold, and when they camped for the night, they lay upon the muddy, wet ground. Some were without a blanket to protect them from the cold and frost.

The Mormon leaders were publicly displayed in the various towns through which they passed. Upon their arrival in Richmond, Parley P. Pratt complained, "Here, as usual, we had to endure the gaze of the curious, as if we had been a caravan of exhibiting animals. We were conducted, with some military parade, into a block house, and immediately put in chains" (History of Persecution, p. 25). Most of the leaders were confined in that community for almost one month while they awaited a decision by a court of inquiry, many having been charged with treason.

Parley recalled how one night the guards at the Richmond Jail obscenely boasted of how they had plundered, raped, and murdered the Mormons: "I had listened till I became so disgusted, shocked, horrified, and so filled with the spirit of indignant justice that I could scarcely refrain from rising upon my feet and rebuking the guards; but had said nothing to Joseph, or any one else, although I lay next to him and knew he was awake. On a sudden he arose to his feet, and spoke in a voice of thunder, or as the roaring lion, uttering, as near as I can recollect, the following words:

[Joseph Smith and the Doctrine and Covenants: Revelations From A Prison-Temple, page 124] "'SILENCE, ye fiends of the infernal pit. In the name of Jesus Christ I rebuke you, and command you to be still; I will not live another minute and bear such language. Cease such talk, or you or I die THIS INSTANT!'

"He ceased to speak. He stood erect in terrible majesty. Chained, and without a weapon; calm, unruffled and dignified as an angel, he looked upon the quailing guards, whose weapons were lowered or dropped to the ground; whose knees smote together, and who, shrinking into a comer, or crouching at his feet, begged his pardon, and remained quiet till a change of guards" (Autobiography, pp. 210-11).

Moved to Liberty

After weeks of delay, the court found probable cause for charging Joseph Smith and several others with "'overt acts of treason' in Daviess and Caldwell counties." Four more, including Parley P. Pratt, were charged with murder in Ray County. Since there were not "adequate jail facilities in the counties where the alleged crimes took place," those accused of treason were sent to the Liberty Jail in Clay County, and those accused of murder were retained in the Ray County Jail at Richmond (Jessee, Personal Writings, pp. 373-74).

On 1 December 1838, six leaders were transported by wagon to Liberty and placed in a small, twenty-two-foot square jail. Lyman Littlefield, a member of the Church, witnessed the incarceration of the men at that jail: "They were all in one large, heavy wagon with a high box, which, as they were seated, hid from view all of their forms, except from a little below the shoulders. They passed through the center of the town, across the public square, in the center of which stood the court house. After crossing this square the wagon containing them was driven up the street northward about the distance of two blocks, where, at the left hand side of the street, was a vacant piece of ground, upon which, close to the street, stood the Liberty Jail, ever to be rendered famous by the entrance into it of these illustrious prisoners. . . .

"The inhabitants of Liberty, and many from the surrounding country, were out to witness the entrance of the prisoners into the place, and many, on that occasion, in my hearing, expressed their disappointment that the strangers should so much resemble all other men of prepossessing appearance. . . .

"The prisoners left the wagon and immediately ascended the south steps. . . . The door was open, and, one by one, the tall and well proportioned forms of the prisoners entered. The Prophet Joseph was the last of the number who lingered behind. He turned partly around, with a slow and dignified movement, and looked upon the multitude. Then turning away, and, lifting his hat, he said in a distinct voice, 'Good afternoon, gentlemen.' The next moment he had passed out of sight. The heavy door swung upon its strong hinges and the Prophet was hid from the gaze of the curious populace who had so eagerly watched. . . . Finally the excitement subsided, the people dispersed, and the prisoners were left to seek the best rest their hard, dark, and cheerless prison quarters might afford them" (Reminiscences, pp. 79-81).

Liberty Jail was divided into two rooms. A dim light passed through two small windows on the upper floor, and the lower floor was a damp, dark, dreary dungeon. The Prophet was confined in that prison for four months, from 1 December 1838 to 6 April 1839, and during that period approximately ten thousand Latter-day Saints were forced to leave Missouri.

The trials that the Saints experienced during their expulsion from Missouri are vividly reflected in a letter Emma Smith wrote to her husband on 7 March 1839: "I shall not attempt to write my feelings altogether, for the situation in which you are, the walls, bars, and bolts, rolling rivers, running streams, rising trills, sinking vallies and spreading prairies that separate us, and the cruel injustice that first cast you into prison and still holds you there, with many other considerations, places my feelings far beyond description. Was it not for conscious innocence, and the direct interposition of divine mercy, I am very sure I never should have been able to have endured the scenes of suffering that I have passed through, since what is called the Militia, came into Far West, under the ever to be remembered Governor's notable order. . . . No one but God, knows the reflections of my mind and the feelings of my heart when I left our house and home, and allmost all of every thing that we possessed excepting our little children, and took my journey out of the State of Missouri, leaving you shut up in that lonesome prison. But the recollection is more than human nature ought to bear. . . . The daily sufferings of our brethren in traveling and camping out nights, and those on the other side of the river would beggar the most lively description. The people in this state [Illinois] are very kind indeed, they are doing much more than we ever anticipated they would; I have many more things I could like to write but have not time and you may be astonished at my bad writing and incoherent manner, but you will pardon all when you reflect how hard it would be for you to write, when your hands were stiffened with hard work, and your heart convulsed with intense anxiety. But I hope there is better days to come to us yet" (Jessee, Personal Writings, pp. 388-89).

Epistles from Liberty Jail

Shortly after Joseph received his wife's letter, along with letters from two of his brothers and from Bishop Partridge, he responded by "'writing an epistle to the church.' . . . The lengthy letter produced on March 20 was signed by all the prisoners in the Liberty Jail and contained sentiments that were later published as sections 121-123 of the Doctrine and Covenants. Although this epistle was addressed to the 'church . . . scattered abroad and to Bishop Partridge in particular,' Joseph sent it to his wife with instructions for his family to have the first reading and then convey it to the Church" (Jessee, Personal Writings, p. 389).

On 21 March 1839, the day after the Prophet wrote his inspired letter to the Church, he wrote specifically to Emma:

"Affectionate Wife,

"I have sent an Epistle to the church directed to you because I wanted you to have the first reading of it and then I want Father and Mother to have a coppy of it keep the original yourself as I dictated the matter myself and shall send an other as soon as possible I want to be with you very much but the powers of mobocra[c]y is to many for me at present . . . my Dear Emma I very well know your toils and simpathise with you if God will spare my life once more to have the privelege of takeing care of you I will ease your care and indeavour to comfort your heart [p. 1] I wa[n]t you to take the best care of the family you can which I believe you will do all you can I was sorry to learn that Frederick was sick but I trust he is well again and that you are all well I want you to try to gain time and write to me a long letter and tell me all you can and even if old major [Joseph's dog] is alive yet and what those little pratlers say that cling around you[r] neck do you tell them I am in prison that their lives might be saved I want all the church to make out a bill of damages and apply to the united states court as soon as possible . . . I blieve that there is a way to git redress for [such] things but God ruleth all things after the council of his own will my trust is in him the salvation of my soul is of the most importants to me . . .

" . . . Dear Emma do you think that my being cast into prison by the mob renders me less worthy of your friends=ship no I do not think so but when I was in prisen and ye viseted me inasmuch as you have don it to the least < these you have don[e] it to me these shall enter into life Eternal but no more your Husband J Smith Jr" (Jessee, Personal Writings, pp. 408-9). Within a month, Joseph and his companions were able to escape and rejoin the Saints in Illinois.
