Richard O. Cowan, Milton V. Backman, Joseph Smith and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1992)

23

A Temple in Nauvoo

Doctrine and Covenants 124; 127-28

After escaping from Missouri, the Prophet Joseph Smith established a new place of gathering on a bend in the winding Mississippi River. The name chosen for the new city was Nauvoo, a Hebrew word meaning "beautiful." Nearly two years had passed since the revelations recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants as sections 121 through 123 were given at Liberty. The next revelation recorded in the Doctrine Covenants was given at Nauvoo. That communication, as well as other revelations and teachings of the Prophet which unfolded during the last four years of his life, were related to temple worship, covenants, teachings, ordinances, and blessings.

The Doctrine of Baptism for the Dead is Restored

Although the doctrine of salvation for the dead had been unfolded in Kirtland in 1836 (D&C 137, 110), vicarious ordinances were not performed until four years later at Nauvoo. Joseph Smith first taught the practice of vicarious baptisms for the dead on 15 August 1840 at the funeral of Seymour Brunson, a faithful member of the Nauvoo high council (History of the Church, 4:179; see also 124:132). He indicated that the Saints could "now act for their friends who had departed this life, and that the plan of salvation was calculated to save all who were willing to obey the requirements of the law of God" (Ehat, Words, p. 49). Soon afterwards, the Saints began receiving this ordinance in the Mississippi River in behalf of deceased loved ones. On a later occasion, Joseph warned: "Those Saints who neglect it in behalf of their deceased relatives, do it at the peril of their own salvation" (History of the Church, 4:426).

With such a warning, the Saints eagerly were baptized for their departed loved ones, usually members of their immediate families. In Joseph Smith's own family, for example, Hyrum was baptized for his brother Alvin; Emma received the ordinance for her father, mother, two sisters, an uncle, and an aunt; Lucy was baptized for a sister, her parents, and all four of her grandparents; and Samuel H. Smith was baptized for an uncle (see Cowan, Temples, p. 46).

Elder Wilford Woodruff later reflected on the enthusiastic spirit in which these ordinances were first performed: "How did we feel when we first heard the living could be baptized for the dead? We all went to work at it as fast as we had an opportunity, and were baptized for everybody we could think of, without respect to sex. I went and was baptized for all my friends, grandmothers, and aunts, as [well as for] those of the male sex; but how was it? Why, by-and-by, it was revealed, through the servants of the Lord, that females should be baptised for females, and males for males" (Journal of Discourses, 5:85).

Directions to Build the Temple

On 19 January 1841, approximately one month after the governor of Illinois signed charters providing guidelines for establishing Nauvoo, Joseph Smith unfolded a revelation (D&C 124) of "monumental importance . . . because its fulfillment engaged nearly every waking moment of the Prophet's time until his death" [Cook, Revelations, p. 243). This revelation dealt with the building of Nauvoo in general but gave particular emphasis to the construction of the temple.

The Prophet testified that the basic design for the Nauvoo Temple had been given to him by revelation. For example, when architect William Weeks questioned placing round windows on the side of the building, Joseph explained that "one light at the centre of each circular window would be sufficient to light the whole room; that when the whole building was thus illuminated, the effect would be remarkably grand. 'I wish you to carry out my designs,"' the Prophet insisted. "'I have seen in vision the splendid appearance of that building illuminated, and will have it built according to the pattern shown me"' (History of the Church, 6:196-97). This was one fulfillment of the Lord's promise to show the Prophet "all things pertaining to that house" (D&C 124:42).

The January 1841 revelation declared that the ordinance of baptism for the dead should be performed in the Lord's house and that he had temporarily allowed the Saints to perform this ordinance outside the temple (such as in the Mississippi River) only in the days of their poverty. He therefore commanded them to provide an appropriate font in the temple. He would grant them "a sufficient time" to accomplish that, curing which period he would continue to accept the baptisms performed in the river (D&C 124:25-32).

The Saints took this revelation seriously, so they hastened the construction of the temple. On 2 October 1841 the Prophet emphatically declared: "There shall be no more baptisms for the dead, until the ordinance can be attended to in the Lord's house; and the Church shall not hold another general Conference, until they can meet in said house. For thus saith the Lord!" (History of the Church, 4:426). Soon, the temple basement was covered over, and on November 8, Joseph Smith dedicated a temporary wooden font there. On Sunday, November 21, a large congregation gathered in the temple basement to witness the first baptisms for the dead in this new font. Elders Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and John Taylor baptized about forty persons in behalf of their ancestors. Elders Willard Richards, Wilford Woodruff, and George A. Smith performed the confirmation ordinances. Thereafter, the Prophet and members of the Twelve frequently officiated in the temple (History of the Church, 4:446-47, 454, 486).

The Saints Sacrifice to Build a Temple

Constructing an edifice as magnificent as the Nauvoo Temple required considerable sacrifice on the part of the Saints. Because they had little money to give, they willingly donated their labor. Some skilled workmen were hired to work on the temple, sometimes without guarantee of compensation.

Newlywed George Morris was more specific than most journal-keepers in describing how he survived while building the temple: "I received [for working on the temple] flour, cornmeal, bacon, firewood, lumber, brick and now and then a little molasses. I got a little sugar a few times from Charles Allen for digging and tending his garden nights and mornings after working all day on the brickyard. . . . I had money enough left to buy five hundred feet of lumber and I got the privilege to lean a shanty against the house that Brother William Anderson lived in. . . .

"I was not able to get shingles to cover it with so I had to cover it with boards, and the roof being rather flat and the boards being pretty [small]. When it rained it was a little worse than being out of doors. We got along pretty well with that rolling the bed up in as small a compass as we could and putting it in as dry a place as we could find and throwing something over it to keep it dry ("Autobiography," pp. 41-42).

President Brigham Young, speaking at the laying of the cornerstone of the Salt Lake Temple, described the sacrifices of the Nauvoo Saints: "But what of the Temple in Nauvoo? By the aid of sword in one hand, and trowel and hammer in the other, with fire arms at hand, and a strong band of police, and the blessings of heaven, the Saints, through hunger, and thirst, and weariness, and watchings, and prayings, completed the Temple" (Journal of Discourses, 2:32).

On a later occasion he again spoke of the Saints' sacrifice: "The last year we staid in Nauvoo, I planted from ten to twelve acres of corn, and I never saw one day, from the time it was planted until it was harvested, in which to spend an hour amongst it. My teams were wanted at the Temple, and, said I, 'Let the corn go.' If they had the teams ready to attend to the corn, the word was, 'Go to the Temple,' and I do not suppose there was a greater crop of corn raised in all Hancock County. I said to the brethren who plowed and planted the land, 'Paul plants and Apollos waters, and if God does not give the increase I can do without it"' (Journal of Discourses, 2:271).

The sisters also were involved in building the temple. Sarah M. Kimball's seamstress, Miss Cook, wanted to help, but had no means to contribute. "I told her I would furnish material," Sarah recalled, "if she would make some shirts for the workmen." These sisters realized that others "might wish to combine means and efforts," so they invited some neighbors "to come and consult with us on the subject of forming a Ladies' Society." These discussions resulted in the formation of the Relief Society on 17 March 1842 in Joseph Smith's red brick store (History of Relief Society, p. 18). The Relief Society sisters more than met the challenge to contribute one cent per week to purchase nails and glass for the temple.

The Lord directed the Saints to gather precious materials for building the temple (D&C 124:26-27). Louisa Decker recalled how her mother sold their best china dishes and a fine quilt to raise funds (Woman's Exponent, Mar. 1909, p. 41). Another example of sacrifice for building the temple was that of Joseph Toronto, a convert from Sicily, who donated his entire life's savings. Brigham Young later remembered: "It was difficult to get bread and other provisions for the workmen to eat. I counseled the committee who had charge of the temple funds to deal out all the flour they had, and God would give them more; and they did so; and it was but a short time before Brother Toronto came and brought me twenty-five hundred dollars in gold . . . so I opened the mouth of the bag and took hold at the bottom end, and gave it a jerk towards the bishop, and strewed the gold across the room and said, now go and buy flour for the workmen on the temple and do not distrust the Lord any more; for we will have what we need" (Roberts, Comprehensive History, 2:472).

Other Ordinances and Further Instructions

Joseph Smith continued to receive revelations related to the temple ordinances, including the endowment and celestial marriage, during the construction of the Nauvoo Temple. Although the Saints had received a preliminary or partial endowment in Kirtland, in Nauvoo this ordinance was unfolded more fully. That was accomplished in the large assembly room on the second floor of Joseph Smith's red brick store on 4 May 1842, just seven weeks after the Relief Society was organized.

Joseph Smith recorded: "I spent the day in the upper part of the store . . . in council with [seven brethren], instructing them in the principles and order of the Priesthood, attending to washings, anointings, endowments and the communication of keys pertaining to the Aaronic Priesthood, and so on to the highest order of the Melchisedek Priesthood, setting forth the order pertaining to the Ancient of Days, and all those plans and principles by which any one is enabled to secure the fullness of those blessings which have been prepared for the Church of the First Born, and come up and abide in the presence of the Eloheim in the eternal worlds. . . . The communications I made to this council were of things spiritual, and to be received only by the spiritual minded: and there was nothing made known to these men but what will be made known to all the Saints of the last days, so soon as they are prepared to receive, and a proper place is prepared to communicate them, even to the weakest of the Saints; therefore let the Saints be diligent in building the Temple" (History of the Church, 5:1-2). This, in part, fulfilled the Lord's promise to "restore" priesthood ordinances and to reveal "all things" pertaining to his house (D&C 124:28, 42).

The Prophet wrote two letters (D&C 127 and 128) during the first week of September 1842, giving further instructions on work for the dead. At this time, the Prophet was in hiding somewhere in Nauvoo because an attempt had been made on the life of Missouri's Governor Boggs and officials from that state accused Joseph Smith of being involved. In his letters, the Prophet emphasized that there must be "a welding link of some kind or other between the fathers and the children" and that vicarious ordinances for the dead were the means of establishing it (D&C 128:15, 18).

The Saints' Eagerness to Receive Temple Blessings

After the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith on 27 June 1844, the Saints realized they would soon be forced to leave Nauvoo and their temple. Nevertheless, they were willing to sacrifice their time and means to complete the house of the Lord. By the end of November 1845, the attic story was sufficiently completed that it could be dedicated and prepared for giving sacred ordinances. Partitions and furnishings were arranged in the attic story of the temple to represent various stages of man's progress back to the presence of God. When Joseph Fielding first entered the area representing the celestial kingdom, he felt as though he had truly "gotten out of the world" (BYU Studies, Winter 1979, pp. 188-89).

Endowments were given beginning December 10. Under the personal leadership of the Twelve, scores of people participated in these blessings each day. Even on Christmas day some 107 individuals received the endowment.

Because of the growing pressure on the Saints to leave Illinois immediately, Church leaders decided to commence the exodus early in February rather than wait until spring. This decision further intensified the Saints' eagerness to receive temple blessings before leaving Nauvoo. On January 12 Brigham Young recorded: "Such has been the anxiety manifested by the saints to receive the ordinances [of the Temple], and such the anxiety on our part to administer to them, that I have given myself up entirely to the work of the Lord in the Temple night and day, not taking more than four hours sleep, upon an average, per day, and going home but once a week" (History of the Church, 7:567).

As the time for the exodus drew closer, the pace of work in the temple became even more intense. On February 3 Brigham Young wrote:

"Notwithstanding that I had announced that we would not attend to the administration of the ordinances, the House of the Lord was thronged all day, the anxiety being so great to receive, as if the brethren would have us stay here and continue the endowments until our way would be hedged up, and our enemies would intercept us. But I informed the brethren that this was not wise, and that we should build more Temples, and have further opportunities to receive the blessings of the Lord, as soon as the saints were prepared to receive them. In this Temple we have been abundantly rewarded, if we receive no more. I also informed the brethren that I was going to get my wagons started and be off. I walked some distance from the Temple supposing the crowd would disperse, but on returning I found the house filled to overflowing.

"Looking upon the multitude and knowing their anxiety, as they were thirsting and hungering for the word, we continued at work diligently in the House of the Lord" (History of the Church, 7:579).

During the eight weeks before the exodus, approximately fifty-five hundred individuals were endowed. Erastus Snow concluded: "The Spirit, Power, and Wisdom of God reigned continually in the Temple and all felt satisfied that during the two months we occupied it in the endowments of the Saints, we were amply paid for all our labors in building it" (BYU Studies, Spring 1979, p. 374).

After many and perhaps most of the Saints had left Nauvoo, the temple was dedicated in a private service on the evening of 30 April 1846. Elder Wilford Woodruff described the service in his journal: "In the evening of this day I repaired to the Temple with Elder Orson Hyde and about twenty other elders of Israel. There we were all clothed in our priestly robes and dedicated the Temple of the Lord. . . . Notwithstanding the predictions of false prophets and the threat of mobs that the building should never be completed nor dedicated, their words had fallen to the ground. The Temple was now finished and dedicated to Him." Elder Hyde repeated the dedicatory prayer in a public service the next day (Cowley, Woodruff, pp. 247-48).

Wandle Mace reflected the feelings of the Saints who had been forced to abandon their precious temple: "Farewell to the temple upon which I have labored with so much pleasure, the second temple erected to the only true and living God, in which the ordinances of the Holy Priesthood might be administered to the living and for the dead, in this generation. The order of architecture was unlike anything in existence; it was purely original, being a representation of the Church, the Bride, the Lamb's wife. John, the Revelator in the 12 chapter, first verse says, 'And there appeared a great wonder in heaven; a woman clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve stars.' This is portrayed in the beautifully cut stone of this grand temple which cost about two million dollars. The cost was so great, it was said by some that the state of Illinois could not have built such a costly building without bankrupting the state. Yet this was built by the energy, tithes and offerings of an honest, although a poor, persecuted people" ("Autobiography," p. 207).
