Richard O. Cowan, Milton V. Backman, Joseph Smith and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1992)

25

Contributions of a Latter-Day Prophet

Doctrine and Covenants 135

All the revelations studied thus far were given through the Prophet Joseph Smith. His brutal murder in the Carthage Jail on 27 June 1844 led many to predict the imminent demise of the work he had founded. That, of course, did not come to pass. Still, that tragic event provided the occasion to assess the significance of Joseph Smith's role as prophet of the Restoration.

The Martyrdom

Events leading to the Martyrdom began when the Nauvoo city council ordered that the slanderous, anti-Mormon newspaper, the Nauvoo Expositor, be closed down because it was a "nuisance." Joseph Smith was targeted by his enemies because as mayor he had signed the order to destroy the press, and they immediately began plotting ways to take his life. Believing that the mob wanted only him, Joseph decided to spare the Saints by crossing the Mississippi River and heading an expedition to the West. Joseph remarked to a close associate, "If I and Hyrum were ever taken again we should be massacred, or I was not a prophet of God." After learning that some in Nauvoo believed he was cowardly for running away, the Prophet said, "If my life is of no value to my friends it is of none to myself" (History of the Church, 6:546, 549). He returned to Nauvoo, where he surrendered to the militia, which escorted him to Carthage for trial, going "like a lamb to the slaughter" (D&C 135:4). Joseph Smith was held illegally in the Carthage Jail on a trumped-up charge of treason, which provided his enemies an opportunity to murder the Mormon leader.

Benjamin Ashby's recollections captured the feelings of the Saints at that critical time in Church history: "I was in my father's garden one morning . . . when he [Joseph Smith] rode past on his way to Carthage. Never shall I forget the look of deep sorrow that covered his noble countenance—that was the last time I saw him alive. . . . I sat upon the steps of my father's house on the evening of the day that he was shot until twelve o'clock and never did I hear before such an uproar and noise that seemed to pervade the very atmosphere; dogs howling, mingled with confused noises as though all the legions of the damned were in commotion.

"Not dreaming of the tragedy that had been enacted that afternoon, I went to bed but at the dawn of morning the sad tale was brought to our ears and the grief and sorrow of a whole people cannot be pictured in language; for days, a man, woman or child could not be met but they were in tears for the loss of their beloved leader. Soon the wagons containing the two brothers arrived in the city and passed down to the Mansion House where we visited and viewed their marred features as they lay in the hallowments of the grave" ("Autobiography," pp. 9-10).

Parley P. Pratt, who was on a mission in the East at the time of the Martyrdom, described his feelings on that occasion: "A day or two previous to this circumstance I had been constrained by the Spirit to start prematurely for home, without knowing why or wherefore; and on the same afternoon I was passing on a canal boat near Utica, New York, on my way to Nauvoo. My brother, William Pratt, being then on a mission in the same state (New York), happened, providentially, to take passage on the same boat. As we conversed together on the deck, a strange and solemn awe came over me, as if the powers of hell were let loose. I was so overwhelmed with sorrow I could hardly speak; and after pacing the deck for some time in silence, I turned to my brother William and exclaimed—'Brother William, this is a dark hour; the powers of darkness seem to triumph, and the spirit of murder is abroad in the land; and it controls the hearts of the American people, and a vast majority of them sanction the killing of the innocent. My brother, let us keep silence and not open our mouths. If you have any pamphlets or books on the fulness of the gospel lock them up; show them not, neither open your mouth to the people; let us observe an entire and solemn silence, for this is a dark day, and the hour of triumph for the powers of darkness. O, how sensible I am of the spirit of murder which seems to pervade the whole land.' This was June 27, 1844, in the afternoon, and as near as I can judge, it was the same hour that the Carthage mob were shedding the blood of Joseph and Hyrum Smith, and John Taylor, near one thousand miles distant. . . .

"The steamer touched at a landing in Wisconsin, some fifty or sixty miles from Chicago, and here some new passengers came on board and brought the news of the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith. Great excitement prevailed on board, there being a general spirit of exultation and triumph at this glorious news, as it was called. . . .

"Many passengers now gathered about me and tauntingly inquired what the Mormons would do now, seeing their Prophet and leader was killed.

"To these taunts and questions I replied, that they would continue their mission and spread the work he had restored, in all the world. Observing that nearly all the prophets and Apostles who were before him had been killed, and also the Saviour of the world, and yet their death did not alter the truth nor hinder its final triumph" (Autobiography, pp. 331-32).

The Law of Witnesses Fulfilled

An uncommon characteristic of the Restoration was an emphasis on witnesses, consistent with biblical teachings in 2 Corinthians 13:1. Unlike other religious leaders, Joseph Smith surrounded himself with an array of witnesses who substantiated many of his religious experiences.

As far as we know, when the priesthood and various keys of the priesthood were restored to the earth, another witness was always present and received the same powers conferred upon Joseph. Oliver Cowdery was present during the restoration of the lesser and the higher priesthoods. He was also present and received along with Joseph Smith the keys restored by Moses, Elias, and Elijah (Joseph Smith-History 1:72; and note on pp. 57-58; D&C 13; 110). Thus, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery were the two witnesses of the restoration of priesthood authority.

At the time of the Martyrdom, Hyrum Smith not only was the Patriarch of the Church but also occupied the unique office of Associate President. He had been called to this office three years earlier to stand as a witness in the place of Oliver Cowdery, who had apostatized (D&C 124:91-96). Hence, the two who died at Carthage were the two witnesses of the Restoration who sealed their testimony through the shedding of their blood (D&C 135:5; Hebrews 9:16-17).

Uncommon Contributions of Joseph Smith

After the Martyrdom, John Taylor wrote a tribute to the Prophet in which he emphasized that Joseph Smith had sealed his testimony with his blood and had done more for the salvation of mankind than any other person, save Jesus Christ (D&C 135:3). Joseph Smith's contributions are not only distinct from those of any other mortal but also from any other prophet. He headed the dispensation of the fullness of times, in which all truths from former ages were restored to the earth. Unlike most "restorationists" of the early nineteenth century, who sought to emulate a pattern of belief and worship described in the New Testament, Joseph Smith taught that the restoration which he directed was much more, that it was in fact a restitution of all things spoken by the mouth of all of God's prophets since the world began. Joseph Smith explained that the prophecy in Acts 3:21 had been fulfilled with a restoration by means of heavenly messengers and modern revelation of all doctrines, covenants, ordinances, blessings, authority, and power unfolded and held by all ancient prophets from the time of Adam to the days of Peter, James, and John (Ehat, Words, pp. 10, 39, 43-44, 246).

The Prophet brought forth many historical and doctrinal truths that were not found in the Old and New Testaments. That information is found in Joseph Smith's Inspired Revision or "New Translation" of the Bible, as well as in other latter-day scriptures.

One unusual record brought forth by the Prophet Joseph Smith was the Book of Mormon. This work, unlike any other book, declares that it was written by ancient American prophets for a later generation. It also contains an unusually powerful description of the gospel of Jesus Christ as embraced by those early Americans.

A second book brought forth by Joseph Smith was the Doctrine and Covenants. Building upon the foundation of the Book of Mormon, this book of latter-day scripture contains scores of revelations that unfold, in even more detail, the basic principles, ordinances, and practices of the gospel.

John Taylor affirmed in April 1878 that one of the greatest contributions of Joseph Smith was his inauguration of the dispensation of the fullness of times, "a dispensation in which all other dispensations are merged or concentrated. It embraces and embodies all the other dispensations that have existed upon the earth wherein God communicated himself to the human family" (Journal of Discourses, 21:94). After John the Baptist and Peter, James, and John had restored the Aaronic and the Melchizedek priesthoods to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, "Adam, Noah, Abraham, Moses, Elijah, Elias, and many other leading characters mentioned in the Scriptures, who had operated in the various dispensations, came and conferred upon Joseph the various keys, powers, rights, privileges, and immunities which they enjoyed in their times." President Taylor further emphasized that the knowledge, intelligence, priesthood, powers, and revelations which had been conferred upon various prophets in different ages were "restored to the earth by the ministration and through the medium of those who held the holy Priesthood of God in the different dispensations in which they lived" (Journal of Discourses, 23:48-49).

Many aspects of Mormon history cannot be understood without recognizing the unusual belief of Latter-day Saints regarding Joseph Smith's distinct contributions. While members of this religious community experienced greater persecution than adherents of any other Christian church in the young American republic, their faith in the Restoration was the motivating power that enabled them to endure the refiner's fire and cross and tame a vast desert. Their faith was also the dominant force propelling self-supporting missionaries to serve throughout the world. Moreover, it was the power that motivated converts to participate in one of the unusual episodes in world history, the worldwide gathering of a religious community. Like a few other groups, Latter-day Saints gathered to seek refuge, to learn doctrines, to be purified and to prepare for the Second Coming. But unlike others, they gathered to receive blessings in sacred temples. The Latter-day Saints believe that these and other blessings were restored by the Prophet Joseph Smith during the dispensation when there truly has been a restitution of all things.
