Richard O. Cowan, Milton V. Backman, Joseph Smith and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1992)

26

Revelation Continues

Doctrine and Covenants 136; 138; Official Declarations 1-2

Enemies of the Saints were confident that with the death of Joseph Smith, "Mormonism," as they termed it, would quickly collapse. That, however, was not to be the case.

Brigham Young: Successor to Joseph Smith

As the shock of the Martyrdom wore off, the Saints wondered who could take the place of "brother Joseph" as their prophet-leader. As early as 1832, on the very day that Joseph Smith first met Brigham Young, the Prophet had said, "the time will come when brother Brigham Young will preside over this Church" (Millenial Star, 11 July 1863, p. 439).

In 1841, the Lord had urged the construction of the temple so that he might restore "the fullness of the priesthood" (D&C 124:28). During the closing year of his life, the Prophet Joseph Smith made sure that the Twelve and others received the highest blessings available through temple ordinances so that the authority necessary to roll forth the Lord's work would remain on the earth. Elder Orson Hyde later recalled that Joseph Smith "conducted us through every ordinance of the holy priesthood, and when he had gone through with all the ordinances he rejoiced very much, and says, now if they kill me you have got all the keys, and all the ordinances and you can confer them upon others, and the hosts of Satan will not be able to tear down the kingdom" (Times and Seasons, 15 Sept. 1844, p. 651).

Nearly a half century later, President Wilford Woodruff recalled the Prophet's instructions: "He stood upon his feet some three hours. The room was filled as with consuming fire, his face was as clear as amber, and he was clothed upon by the power of God. He laid before us our duty. He laid before us the fullness of this great work of God; and in his remarks to us he said: 'I have had sealed upon my head every key, every power, every principle of life and salvation that God has ever given to any man who ever lived upon the face of the earth. . . . 'Now,' said he addressing the Twelve, 'I have sealed upon your heads every key, every power, and every principle which the Lord has sealed upon my head. . . .

"'. . . I tell you, the burden of this kingdom now rests upon your shoulders; you have got to bear it off in all the world, and if you don't do it you will be damned"' (Deseret News Weekly, 19 Mar. 1892, p. 406).

After the martyrdom of Joseph Smith, the apostles who were serving missions returned to Nauvoo. On 7 August 1844, the morning after Brigham Young returned, he and other apostles met at the home of John Taylor, who was recovering from wounds he had received in the Carthage Jail. They discussed the claims of Sidney Rigdon, who contended that he should replace Joseph Smith as "guardian" of the Church. The apostles then called a meeting that afternoon for all high priests. During that meeting Brigham Young said, "I have the keys and the means of obtaining the mind of God on the subject [of succession to the presidency]. . . . Joseph conferred upon our heads [the Twelve] all the keys and powers belonging to the Apostleship which he himself held before he was taken away" (History of the Church, 7:230).

The following day, 8 August, the Saints gathered at ten in the morning at a special meeting called by William Marks, president of the Nauvoo Stake. It was a cold, rainy day. Because the wind was blowing towards the stand from where the Saints had gathered, Rigdon left the stand and climbed on a wagon behind the congregation so that they could better hear his voice. The crowd of about five thousand turned around on their benches and faced the wagon. After Rigdon spoke for about one and a half hours, presenting his claim to the presidency, Brigham Young spoke briefly, comforting the Saints. During his speech, many Saints testified, they beheld a miracle. Benjamin Johnson recalled that "President Brigham Young arose and spoke. I saw him arise, but as soon as he spoke I jumped upon my feet, for in every possible degree it was Joseph's voice, and his person, in look, attitude, dress and appearance was Joseph himself, personified; and I knew in a moment the spirit and mantle of Joseph was upon him" (Benjamin Johnson, My Life's Review, pp. 103-4).

Helen Mar Whitney said that she could bear witness "with hundreds of others who stood that day under the sound of Brigham's voice, of the wonderful and startling effect that it had upon us. If Joseph had risen from the dead and stood before them, it could hardly have made a deeper or more lasting impression. It was the very voice of Joseph himself. This was repeatedly spoken of by the Latter-day Saints. And surely it was a most powerful and convincing testimony to them that he was the man, instead of Sidney Rigdon, that was destined to become the 'great leader,' and upon whose shoulders the mantle of Joseph had fallen" (Woman's Exponent, 1 Feb. 1883, p. 130).

Succession in the Presidency and Continuing Revelation

Thus it was Brigham Young, at the head of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, who led the Saints in their epic trek to the Rocky Mountains. Doctrine and Covenants 136 was given through him to organize the pioneers and instruct them how to deal with each other.

In 1847, after Brigham Young had led the Saints to Utah and returned to Winter Quarters, he selected two counselors, and a First Presidency once again presided over the Church. Upon President Young's death in 1877, John Taylor, at the time president of the Twelve, succeeded him as president of the Church. Similarly, Wilford Woodruff became the fourth president of the Church upon the death of President John Taylor. Wilford Woodruff was thus the prophet and president of the Church in 1890 when he was inspired to write the Manifesto (Official Declaration 1), announcing that the contracting of plural marriages was to be discontinued. The fifth prophet, Lorenzo Snow, was similarly inspired as he called on the Saints to be more faithful in paying their tithing. Near the end of his life, Joseph F. Smith, the sixth prophet, received the remarkable vision of the Savior's ministry in the spirit world that is recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 138.

Revelation to an Expanding Church

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints entered a period of unprecedented growth in the second half of the twentieth century (see Richard O. Cowan, The Church in the Twentieth Century, chapters 14 and 21). This expansion brought the Church into contact with an increasing number of ethnic groups and cultures worldwide. For example, beginning in 1975 Church members of African descent were actively involved in fund-raising and other activities connected with constructing the temple in Sao Paulo, Brazil. Helvecio Martins, a member of the Church and a respected black business executive and educator from Rio de Janeiro, was appointed to coordinate public relations for the temple project. On one occasion he recounts, "I went onto the Temple construction with my wife, walking among the construction metals and wood and stopped at a certain place. We felt an unusually strong spirit at that time. We held each other and cried for some time. We realized later we were standing at the exact spot of the Celestial Room of the Temple. We felt a strong undescribable feeling in that place. Impressive! Extraordinarily strong. It was one of the most spiritual experiences of our lives" (Martins, interview, p. 16). When President Spencer W. Kimball was in Sao Paulo for the temple cornerstone laying in March 1977, he saw Brother Martins in the audience and asked him to come to the stand briefly. The President said, "Brother, what is necessary for you is faithfulness. Remain faithful and you will enjoy all the blessings of the Church" (p. 23). Martins returned to his seat wondering what the prophet meant (pp. 16, 23).

During this time, Church leaders pondered the policy according to which blacks were not permitted priesthood ordination. President Kimball recalled: "I went to the temple alone, and especially on Sundays and Saturdays when there were not organizations in the temple, when I could have it alone. It went on for some time as I was searching for this, because I wanted to be sure. We held a meeting of the Council of the Twelve in the temple on the regular day [1 June 1978]. We considered this very seriously and thoughtfully and prayerfully.

"I asked the Twelve not to go home when the time came. I said, 'Now would you be willing to remain in the temple with us?' And they were. I offered the final prayer and I told the Lord if it wasn't right, if He didn't want this change to come in the Church that I would be true to it all the rest of my life and I'd fight the world against it if that's what He wanted.

"We had this special prayer circle, then I knew that the time had come. I had a great deal to fight, of course, myself largely, because I had grown up with this thought that Negroes should not have the priesthood and I was prepared to go all the rest of my life till my death and fight for it and defend it as it was. But this revelation and assurance came to me so clearly that there was no question about it" (Church News, 6 Jan. 1979, p. 4).

Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote of this sacred occasion: "It was during this prayer that the revelation came. The Spirit of the Lord rested mightily upon us all; we felt something akin to what happened on the day of Pentecost and at the dedication of the Kirtland Temple. From the midst of eternity, the voice of God, conveyed by the power of the Spirit, spoke to his prophet. The message was that the time had now come to offer the fulness of the everlasting gospel, including celestial marriage, and the priesthood, and the blessings of the temple, to all men, without reference to race or color, solely on the basis of personal worthiness. And we all heard the same voice, received the same message, and became personal witnesses that the word received was the mind and will and voice of the Lord. . . .

"In the days that followed the receipt of the new revelation, President Kimball and President Ezra Taft Benson—the senior and most spiritually experienced ones among us—both said, expressing the feelings of us all, that neither of them had ever experienced anything of such spiritual magnitude and power as was poured out upon the Presidency and the Twelve that day in the upper room in the house of the Lord" (Priesthood, p. 128).

One week later, 8 June 1978, the First Presidency approved the official announcement of this revelation (Official Declaration 2). The Sao Paulo Temple was dedicated in October that same year. President Kimball was gratified to see Brother and Sister Martins there: "I don't know when I have ever been as touched as I was to see that man and his wife in the congregation when we were dedicating the Sao Paulo Temple, and to see them wipe their eyes all through the session. They were so thrilled to be permitted to have the blessings" (Church News, 6 Jan. 1979, p. 4). On 31 March 1990 Helvecio Martins was sustained as a member of the Quorums of the Seventy, becoming the Church's first black General Authority.

Many people believe that revelation ceased with the publication of the Bible. Nevertheless, insisted President Kimball, we do not accept the idea "that the Old Testament constituted the total words of God's prophets; nor do we believe the New Testament to be the end of revelation. We testify that rather than an end of revelations of God, they continue to pour forth from God for the welfare and benefit of men." After the time of the Savior and his apostles, there were centuries of spriritual darkness known as the great apostasy. But, continued President Kimball, "I bear witness to the world today that more than a century and a half ago the iron celling was shattered; the heavens were once again opened, and since that time revelations have been continuous." The young man Joseph Smith "broke the spell, shattered the 'heavens of iron' and reestablished communication. . . . A new prophet was in the land and through him God set up his kingdom, never to be destroyed nor left to another people—a kingdom that will stand forever. . .

"Since that momentous day in 1820, additional scripture has continued to come, including the numerous and vital revelations flowing in a never-ending stream from God to his prophets on the earth. Many of these revelations are recorded in another scripture called the Doctrine and Covenants. . . .

"There are those who would assume that with the printing and binding of these sacred records, that would be the 'end of the prophets.' But again we testify to the world that revelation continues and that the vaults and files of the Church contain these revelations which come month to month and day to day. We testify also that there is, since 1830 when The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was organized, and will continue to be, so long as time shall last, a prophet, recognized of God and his people, who will continue to interpret the mind and will of the Lord" (Ensign, May 1977, pp. 76-78).
