Neal A. Lambert, Richard E. Cracroft, Believing People: Literature of the Latter-day Saints ( 1979)

FOREWORD

In the conventional wisdom of scholars and laymen it has been a truism that Mormons are concerned with the practical, Draining a swamp in Illinois to build a city-state, irrigating the desert regions of the West to found a theocratic empire, proselyting the world to establish an international religious community-these have required sacrifice, calculation, and single-mindedness. It is so easy to think of Mormons as missionaries, colonizers, businessmen, and politicians that the existence of a Mormon poet or novelist seems almost subversive to Mormon practicality and industry. The stereotype has deceived both Mormons and non-Mormons into denigrating the importance and significance of literature in Mormon culture.

The gospel of Jesus Christ, of course, assumes that people are motivated by both prudential and romantic value systems. That is, we are expected to count the costs and compare the benefits of alternative courses of action; we are also expected to express our own natures and personalities in artistic and spiritual ways. One function of the Church is to help us maintain the two in proper balance. The New Testament example of Mary and Martha is instructive. While Jesus was entertained at the house of these sisters, Mary sat at the feet of Jesus listening to his word while Martha feverishly prepared the food. Martha complained to Jesus about Mary's selfish adoration. Christ replied that although Martha's housekeeping was important, Mary had chosen the good part, for she was listening to things eternal (Luke 10:38).

Our bodies are fed by bread and milk, and our souls by the good, the true, and the beautiful. In the context of both ancient and modern revelations, it is clear that the Lord loves all his children, whether they are children of Martha or of Mary. Amid our struggles for occupational security, modern creature comforts, and high rates of activity in the Church-the Martha concerns-we should also take time to become lovers of beauty and truth-to take inspiration from the example of the Marys.

Almost from its inception, the philosophy of Mormonism has encouraged an enjoyment of good literature. In July 1830 the Prophet Joseph Smith announced a revelation to his wife Emma, in which the Lord commanded her to make a selection of sacred hymns, saying, "the song of the righteous is a prayer unto me..." (D&C 25:11, 12). Since the meaning of the word "song" included poetry adaptable to music, this revelation served as an encouragement for the writing and appreciation of poetry. In December 1832 another revelation urged the Saints to seek knowledge of all things pertaining to heaven and earth and to seek wisdom out of the best books available (D&C 88:78-79, 118). Ten years later the Prophet Joseph Smith expressed this sentiment in the more familiar article of faith, "If there is anything virtuous, lovely, or of good report, or praiseworthy, we seek after these things."

Manifestations of the creativity implicit in Latter-day Saint philosophy have been as diverse as the eloquent letters of Joseph Smith from Liberty Jail celebrating the majesty of God; thexivplaintive diary entries of Mary Goble Pay which evoke an awareness of the courage, determination, and the pathos of the handcart pioneers; the salty anecdotes of J. Golden Kimball; the elegant artistry by which Orson Pratt captures the essential elements in the Plan of Salvation; and the stately magnificence of James E. Talmage's description of the death and burial of Christ.

All of this suggests that in our striving for spiritual alignment with God it is important that we cultivate our minds and feelings by involvement in literature and the arts. That this has been understood by loyal Latter-day Saints is evidenced by both their writings and their actions, the former so plentifully illustrated in this anthology.

Richard Cracroft and Neal Lambert are ideally equipped to prepare an anthology of Mormon literature. Both have experimented with the writing of poetry, fiction, history, and literary criticism. They have pioneered in teaching a course in Mormon literature at Brigham Young University. They have shown an appreciation for the growing body of imaginative literature by Latter-day Saints, some of it well worth study as literature and most of it significant as an attempt to recreate and understand the Mormon experience.

In this volume Professors Cracroft and Lambert have continued an association begun over a decade ago when they were graduate students at the University of Utah. They have lectured and published widely in their specialties in American literature, their works appearing in American Quarterly, American West, Modern Fiction Studies, Western American Literature, Western Humanities Review, Utah Historical Quarterly, Brigham Young University Studies, Dialogue, and other books and journals. Their work, some of it joint and some of it individual, has also appeared in the Ensign and the New Era. Both are active members of the LDS Church.

Readers both young and old will be edified and entertained by the selections Cracroft and Lambert offer in this volume. They will also be treated to an aesthetic experience which will heighten their spirituality-their kinship with their fellow beings and with God.

Leonard J. Arrington Church Historian The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints 1
