Neal A. Lambert, Richard E. Cracroft, Believing People: Literature of the Latter-day Saints ( 1979)

Chapter 34

I suppose by this time the reader has either forgotten the circumstances in which he took leave of myself, or else is somewhat weary with the winding of the narrative and impatient for it to come to a close. The only apology I have to offer for the many digressions and wanderings through which he has been led is, that I consider it impolite and disrespectful to get myself out of a bad place until I have first seen my friends all safely out. True, I did not strictly observe this rule of good breeding in the escape itself; therefore it becomes me to take the more care to observe it now, when there is no danger, excepting that of being deserted by some of my readers before I am safely out. However, if youstill wish to accompany me in all the windings of my wearisome and dangerous adventure we will now turn to the happy valley, where you recollect leaving me on the morning of the fifth of July in the act of breakfasting on a small biscuit, while, to all appearances, I was lost to myself and to all mankind.

After resting a few minutes I arose and travelled onward, without any way to determine the course I was travelling. After some miles, I came to a house in the woods, and ventured to inquire of the woman the way to Columbia, and what course it lay from there. By this means I learned that l was fourteen miles distant from the prison in a northerly direction. I then took a course directly opposite to her directions, and soon found myself among settlements, and in a kind of road, but very indirect and winding among fields and woods, or in the language of that county, among "clarens" and "timber." I paid but little respect to the road, but rather wandered around among the forests, and made my course as well as I could without being seen.

At last the clouds thickened and it began to rain. In the meantime I had again plunged into the depths of an unknown forest, and lost all idea of the true point of the compass. The air now became dense with thick clouds and mist, and the rain was pouring in torrents. At first I thought that rather than expose myself by another inquiry, I would sit down at the bottom of a large oak and wait patiently for the clouds to break away, so that I could see the sun, and thus determine my course, as to travel in uncertainty would exhaust my strength for naught. I accordingly sat down; but after waiting for a length of time, I found there was no prospect of seeing the sun, moon, or stars for some days to come. In the meantime I was becoming wet and cold, lame and stiff jointed from the effects of my exertions the night previous. I was also aware that hunger would soon be preying upon me, as I already felt very much in need of refreshment. I, therefore, arose and wandered on till I saw another house in the distance. I there ventured another inquiry, by which I was enabled to make my way through the windings of the forest, and finally to enter upon a vast prairie or untimbered plain without inhabitants. Through this plain there was a direct road to a place called Paris, which was now some twenty miles distant and directly on my way. Here I could travel in solitude, and have no difficulty in finding my way either by night or day; and should I chance to meet a traveller in pursuit, I could see him for some miles distant in the day time, and have time to leave the road and hide myself in the grass before he could be near me.

It was now drawing towards evening, and the rain was still pouring in torrents, while the wind blew almost to a tempest. I was weary and exhausted with fatigue and hunger, and chilled and benumbed with the rain and wind which had drenched me for some hours. It had been my intention to travel through the night, but I now saw it was impossible. I would be obliged to rest my weary limbs somewhere; and to sit or lie down without shelter in such a tempest, and benumbed as I then was, would be death; or at least it would be what I could not endure; and to lodge at any house would expose me to be discovered and taken by my pursuers. As night approached I hesitated for some time whether to continue to brave the tempest and to pass the night in the rain, or to run the risk of being taken by turning off the road and going a mile or two through the wet grass to a settlement which was in sight, in the borders of the wilderness, on the left of my road. At last l was compelled by the severity of the storm to choose the latter. I accordingly made for a house; but how was I to account for being a traveller, and on foot-as nearly all men in that country travel on horseback? However, my ingenuity soon prepared me a way to account for this suspicious circumstance.

As I drew near the house the owner stood in the door looking out upon the tempest and watching my approach it being rather strange to see a person from the open plain amid such a tempest. As I drew near, all wet and dripping, l cried out very sociably, saying: "Sir, can you entertain a drowning man here this terrible night?" The answer was, "I reckon we mout; come in, stranger, you seem in a mighty bad fix." I hobbled in as well as I could, being very28lame with walking, as well as benumbed with the storm; and without giving time for any more inquiry, I began to complain of the fatigue of walking, and how it had lamed me; at the same time observing that my horse had played a very bad trick with me; he had got away from me and strayed into the timber, where I could not find him. "Ah," said he, "how did you happen to lose him?" "Why," said I, "I am from Indiana, and have been out in your wild woods back here looking for land. I had been in the habit of letting my horse bait a little occasionally, as he never seemed inclined to leave till, last evening, he of a sudden wandered out of my sight in the woods, and dark coming on, I could not track him, and finally lost him; and, what is worse, he carried off my clothing and all the fixings I had with me, even to my shooting irons and ammunition. I shall now have to go clear to Paris on foot, and then remain there a few days till I can advertise him and obtain him again."

"Oh!" exclaimed he, "it's a pity you should have such a heap of trouble. Where did you stay last night?" I replied "the devil himself could hardly answer that; for in hunting my horse I got benighted, and lost myself instead of finding him; however, I made my way out to the first cottage I could find, and took up with very curious fare, I assure you." "What part of Indiana are you from?" continued he. "From near Terre Haute," replied I. "What is the price of land in that country now?" he inquired. I replied that it had risen very much since the completion of the great national road; "indeed," said I, "as a specimen of the rise of property, I could now take twenty-five dollars per acre for my little place in the backwoods, which a few years ago only cost me three dollars and seventy-five cents, so I thought I would just mount my nag and ride west here, and take a look in Illinois and Missouri, and if I could suit myself I would go home and sell out, and come out here and purchase." "Well," said he, "I reckon you must do a heap better here than there, as we've a smart chance of land here that's very cheap, besides," continued he, "we can make corn here so easy; and then, agin, there's a power of range for cattle and horses." In this kind of conversation the evening passed off very sociably. After eating a hearty supper I retired to bed.

In the morning I awoke much refreshed, and found the storm had subsided, and the sun shining in his strength. I tarried to breakfast, which consisted of a good cup of coffee and a fowl, with some corn bread or "dodger." After breakfast I vented my spite once more, with angry and impatient words about my poor horse; grumbled sorely at being so lame, and regretted very much at having to go on foot all the way to Paris; "and," said I, "I get so hungry and faint in walking over these lonesome plains, where the houses are a dozen miles apart, I believe, with your leave, I'll just pocket the remainder of the dodger and chicken. "O, yes," said the good woman, "take it and welcome. You mout want it, and then agin you mout not; and although its coarse fare, yet we've seen a heap o' times in this new country that we couldn't get as good." I thanked her, and then settled my bill with her husband, and making her a present of a quarter of a dollar, I took leave, and soon found my way back to the road I had left the evening before. On arriving at the road I found a fresh horse track had been made since the rain, and immediately concluded one of my pursuers had passed in pursuit, which I afterwards learned to be the fact.

I would here remark that some persons will perhaps be disposed to censure me for saying that which was not strictly true in all its points, in order to avoid discovery, and make good my escape. But I can say, from the bottom of my heart, that I feel perfectly justified in so doing, not only because it accomplished a good object, and seemed according to wisdom, but we have numerous instances in Scripture where God's prophets and people acted in a similar way for a similar end. For instance, the New Testament justifies Rahab, and even commends her, and includes her in the sum of the faithful, because she hid the spies under the flax and deceived their pursuers by stating that they had left the city and fled to the mountains; and thus she became an accomplice, or an alder and abettor of the people and purposes of God. David also, who was the Lord's anointed, and a man after29his own heart, dissembled a number of times to save his life. At one time he deceived the national priest, and thus obtained both bread and armor, under pretense of being on the king's errand, while he was in fact an outlaw, then in the act of fleeing for his life from that same Saul. And Jesus himself mentions this to the Jews, and justifies it. At another time he feigned himself insane, by figuring on the wall and letting his spittle drizzle down on his beard, in order to escape the Philistine judges. 0h, yes, says one, but he was the Lord's anointed, and, therefore, had a right to save his life at all hazards to fulfil God's purposes. To this I reply, that I am also God's anointed, and have a greater reason for living and a more worthy object to accomplish than he had. That may be, says the objector, but who believes it?<_P> I answer, one hundred people believe me in the days of my trouble and humility where one believed David. And well they may; for I have a greater work to accomplish than he ever had. But the world may blame unjustly. I care not a straw for their judgment. I have one only that I serve, and him only do I fear. The hypocrite who censures me may yet be placed under similar circumstances, and then judge ye how he would act.

But, to drop the argument and resume the history; I now pursued my way until I entered upon a public road called the Louisiana road, as it was connected with a ferry on the Mississippi at a place called by that name. I had traveled that road before, and I was not a little rejoiced to find myself on ground I was so well acquainted with that I could travel by night without any danger of missing my way. I was now in a part of the State which was comparatively thickly inhabited, and, therefore, considered it unsafe to proceed in the daytime, as the news of our escape must by this time have spread far and wide. I, therefore, spent the day either in concealment among the thickets, or in slowly progressing on my journey with much caution and many deviations from the road, in order to shun plantations and houses; but at night I pursued my way with all the strength I had.

On the third or fourth day after my escape from prison I found myself in the neighborhood of a settlement where I had formed some acquaintances years before, and where once lived a small branch of the Church, but they had all moved West, and, as I supposed, were driven out of the State with the others. But I recollected a family by the name of Ivy, who would still be living on the road, and who had been members, but were now dissenters. I was now very hungry and wanted a friend, but was in doubt whether they would befriend or betray me, as they had once been my friends, and not only so, but their near kindred had suffered in the general persecution, and had shared the common banishment. I hesitated, prayed, and at length came to the conclusion that I would venture past their door in open day, and if no one discovered or recognized me I would take it as a Providence, and conclude it was wisdom in God, as I would not be safe with them; but if, on the other hand, I was saluted by them, then I would think it a sign which Providence had given me as a witness that I could trust to them. I accordingly walked past their dwelling on Sunday evening, about two hours before sundown. As I got nearly past, the little children who were playing in the front door yard discovered me and cried out with surprise and joy, "there is brother Pratt!" At this a young man came running out to me, who proved to be one of my acquaintances, who was still a member of the Church, and who had been driven from the upper country; but, instead of going to Illinois with the rest, he had come back and settled in his old neighborhood. I asked him where Mr. Ivy, the man of the house, was. He replied that he and his wife had gone to a neighbor's, two or three miles distant, on a visit; "and," continued he, "I also am here on a visit at the same time, and by this means I have very unexpectedly met with you; and I am very glad, for the news has just reached here that the prisoners had escaped, and that they burst a cap at one, and took another and carried him back to prison. The other two have not been found." This was the first news I had heard either of myself or the others. I then requested him to go and charge the children strictly not to mention that they had seen me, and then come with me into the woods. 30

He did so. I then told him I was very hungry, faint and weary; and not only so, but so lame I could hardly move; besides, my feet were blistered, skinned and bloody. He said that his brother, who was also a member, and had been driven with him from the upper country, lived in an obscure place in the woods, some two miles distant, and that his brother's wife and children were as true and genuine Mormons as ever lived. He then took me on his horse and conducted me through a pathless wild for two miles, and, coming in sight of his brother's house, I dismounted and hid myself in a deep valley, whose sides were nearly perpendicular and formed of craggy rock, while he went to reconnoitre the house, and to get something ready for me to eat. He soon returned, informing me that his brother was out, and would not be in till dark; but the family wished very much that I would come in, as the children would hold their tongues, and it was thought to be perfectly safe. I declined, however, for the present, and he brought me out some bread, milk and cream, on which I refreshed myself till they prepared a more substantial supper.

As evening came on, being pressed to come in, I finally consented. On entering, I was received with joy by the family, and sat down to supper. One of their neighbors, a young man, soon came in and seemed determined to tarry till the arrival of the man of the house, as he had some errand with him. This embarrassed me very much, for I was fearful that he would arrive and salute me as an old acquaintance, and call my name in the presence of the young man. But the little children (bless their souls) took good care for that matter, they watched very narrowly for the arrival of their papa, and when they saw him they whispered to him that brother P. was there, and, being just out of prison, he must not know him till Mr.-had gone.

The man came in, and I looked up with a vacant stare, or rather with a strange and distant air, and inquired if he was the man of the house? He nodded coolly in the affirmative. I then inquired of him if he had seen any stray "nags" in his neighborhood? I then went on to describe my horse which had strayed from me, and observed that I was out in search of him, and, being weary and hungry, I had stopped to get some refreshment with him. He said I was welcome to his house, and to such fare as he had; but he had not seen any nags, except what was owned in the neighborhood.

The young man soon did his errand and withdrew. We then shook each other by the hand most heartily, and, with a burst of joy and smiles, inquired after each other's welfare. I told him I was well nigh exhausted and worn out, and, withal, very lame, but still I had some hopes of making my escape out of the State, and of living to see my friends once more in a land of liberty. I then begged of him to exchange with me, and take my fur cap and give me a hat in its stead, which he did, and then saddled his horse with a side saddle, as the young man who was in had just borrowed the other saddle, and, placing me on horseback, he ran before me and by my side on foot, to take me on my journey. In this way we travelled till twelve o'clock at night, when I dismounted, and he bid me farewell, in order to reach his home again before the neighbors would arise and find him missing.

He had given me directions which would lead to the Mississippi River much nearer than the Louisiana ferry, and also more in the direct course towards my family, who resided at Quincy, and besides all these advantages, the route was more obscure, and, therefore, safer for me. I now pursued my course the remainder of the night with renewed courage and strength, although so very lame, foot sore, and so much exhausted that, in lying down to refresh myself, I could not again rise and put myself in motion short of extraordinary and repeated exertion, sometimes having to crawl on my hands and knees till I could get sufficiently limbered to arise and walk, and frequently staggering and falling in the attempt.

At length the day began to dawn, and I must soon be under the necessity of hiding in the thickets, or making deviations from the road, in order to avoid discovery in passing the settlements. I, therefore, wished to push my way with all speed while it was yet too early for people to be stirring; but sleep now completely31overpowered me. As I was walking along the road I could scarcely open my eyes for a moment to look my way for a few rods ahead, and they would then close in sleep in spite of all my powers. I would then proceed a few paces in my sleep till I stumbled, or till I had need to take another look at the road before me; then I would open my eyes and take one glance, and the lids would fall again as powerless as if I had no life. In this way I walked on, alternately sleeping and waking, till, I presume, I had more than fifty naps without ceasing to walk; and each time I opened my eyes and came to my senses I firmly resolved to keep them open and run no further risk; but while this resolution was still passing in my mind sleep would again steal over me, not exactly unawares, for I realized it each time, but had no power to prevent it.

At length the twilight gave place to the full blaze of the morning; the sons of the earth were again in motion; I therefore retired, like the owl, to the thicket, and took a morning rest. When I awoke the sun was high in the heavens, and, feeling somewhat refreshed, I arose from the ground and wandered slow and solitary amid the wilds of oak, interspersed with hazel and underwood-sometimes stopping to pick and eat a few unripe blackberries, and sometimes resting beneath the shade of a spreading tree.

I had now great hopes of having to pass but one more night in the land of enemies, as I could easily reach a small town in the course of the day, which was then only two or three miles distant; and then, if I could by any means get on to the right track before night, I would only have about eight or ten miles' travel for the whole night, which would bring me to a small town on the Mississippi. I wandered on amid the wilds, but at length about half a mile of open plain or prairie intervened between me and the town. To pass this in a public road, in open day, would be running a great venture, and to wait for the cover of darkness would perhaps keep me wandering another night, for the want of being started in the right road from the town before me to the landing on the river. I, therefore, concluded to venture across the plain, along the public highway, in the day time, and should I be discovered I would sell my life as dear as possible sooner than be taken back to prison. I, therefore, walked boldly on. I had proceeded about to the middle of the plain, when, on a sudden turn of the road, two men appeared on horseback, each with a rifle on his shoulder. They were then too near for me to retreat, or to make any other shift than to meet them. As soon as they discovered me they both halted as if surprised, and one said to the other, "there he is now." They then rode on towards me, and I expected every moment that they would hail and attempt to stop me. In such a case I felt determined to seize one of their rifles, and overpower or frighten them, or die in the struggle.

I at length passed between them in the middle of the road, and looked as calm and unconcerned as if I hardly knew they were there. Either from this circumstance or some other, unaccountable to me, they never spoke to me at all, but rode on, and I saw them no more. I soon passed the plain, and made my way into a small thicket of trees which lay adjoining the little town. I then crept up near the court house, which occupied a public square in the centre, and endeavored, without being discovered or noticed by any person, to ascertain as well as I could, by my own judgment, which of all the roads would seem to lead off towards the river. After reconnoitering the town and the various bearings of the roads, I retreated back into the wilderness, with the satisfaction that I had not yet been discovered by the citizens; I had also the satisfaction of seeing the highlands and the hilly, broken country which evidently bordered on the Mississippi. The river, therefore, could be but a few miles distant, and as it was yet several hours to sundown I concluded that I could take my course, and, without any particular regard to roads, reach some spot on the river that evening, as nothing was to be so much dreaded as a public ferry-for there I knew my enemies would set their traps.

I immediately took my course, and after wandering for an hour or two, with great fatigue, among thickets of brush, briars and vines almost impassable, I at length descended a steep32decline of perhaps two hundred feet, and then came down to what is called in that country the "river bottom," covered with the growth of thick forest, and appearing in some places somewhat swampy and gloomy; but still I pushed on with all speed, supposing I was not many miles from the river Mississippi. After travelling for some distance in this disagreeable and swampy wild, what was my surprise and disappointment, when on a sudden I came to a dark, deep, and muddy looking river, some forty rods wide, and rolling with a swift and turbulent current. This surely could not be the Mississippi; and yet it was something that intervened between me and that great river, and seemed to present an impassable barrier. I then heaved a deep sigh, and feeling exhausted and almost discouraged, I exclaimed to myself half aloud, how long shall I wander and find no rest? It does seem as though an enchanted ground lay between me and liberty. I turned round, and with the little strength that then remained I made my way back to the town. When I arrived again in sight of the town the sun was setting, and another wearisome night was approaching, in which I must reach the river, or I would probably be exhausted with hunger and fatigue, so as to be entirely disabled.

I now resolved to venture boldly into a public highway, and to ascertain the right road before it would be too dark to find my way or choose my course. There would not only be danger of exposure by inquiring, but although I knew there was a little town on the Mississippi, near the place I was then in, yet I had never heard the name of it; and to appear like a stranger who did not know the country, and yet be on foot and without a parcel or valise, or anything which travellers are accustomed to carry, and withal a beard near a week old, together with sweat and dirt over my clothes from lying and tumbling on the ground, would altogether make me seem like a very suspicious character; but yet I must venture an inquiry, which I determined to do the first providential opportunity which occurred. I walked along the edge of the town and struck into a public highway which seemed to lead the right course. I had not travelled far when l came to a branch of the same river which I had encountered in the swampy bottom. On one side of the road a mill was situated on its bank, and on the other side a dwelling house. Several persons were about the mill, and it was not yet dark.

I was now determined to pass by boldly, and if any one passed near me to speak to them and inquire the way, and then pass on so quick that they would have no time to have suspicion or to question me. Just as I was passing between the house and the mill, I said, "Good evening, sir. How do you cross this river?" He replied, "that the teams and horsemen ford it, but a footman may chance to cross it on the mill dam, yonder." Said I, "is this the right road to-to what the plague is it you call that little town yonder-your nearest landing on the dyer-what is its name; I can seldom think of it?" "Oh, Saverton-Saverton," replied he. "Oh, yes; Saverton," I repeated. "Yes," said he, "this is the direct road to it." I replied, "Thank you, sir. How far is it?" "Nine miles," said he. By this time I was some distance past him, and in another moment I was balancing my clumsy and worn out body on the edge of the dam, while the waters were roaring and foaming beneath me.

I got safely over, and now pursued my way with increasing hope and certainty. However, I had not gone to exceed half a mile before I came to another fork of the river, larger and swifter than the one I had just crossed, and, withal, neither dam nor bridge. I soon forded boldly into it, determined either to sink, swim, or ford it. It proved to be about a yard deep, with a strong current, and several yards wide; but I forded it in safety, and still pursued my way. After wandering for a mile or two along the bottom lands, I ascended a high bluff of several hundred feet, and thus entered upon the high, rocky and unsettled wilds which intervened between the bed of the river and the great Mississippi.

It was now dark, and I was fairly under way for my night's journey, which at most could not exceed seven or eight miles, and feeling extremely exhausted and also at leisure, I stepped aside from the road and laid me down at the foot of a tree, with a block of wood for a33pillow, where I intended to sleep for an hour or two. It was a wild scene in which to slumber; no human abode was near, no voice or sound stole upon the stillness of the evening. The stars shone forth in unwonted splendor in the heavens, while wild and grassy hills, and rocky steeps pierced with deep vales and chasms, extended far and wide on all sides, as if reposing in eternal and undisturbed quiet and loneliness. Ah! thought I, as I lay in silent meditation and contemplated the scene, here is peace, here is rest, here is a solitude of grand and sacred repose, scarcely polluted by the bloodthirsty dwellers upon the degraded earth. And were it not for the ties of wife, children, and duties which bind me to society, how gladly would I seek a lone cavern or some unknown retreat amid these romantic wilds, and never more feet the ills and suffer the evils which now distract and disturb the peace of a poor, miserable world. As I had finished these meditations and was about to fall asleep I turned to my side and made a slight movement in adjusting my wooden pillow, when I heard the well known rattle of a rattle snake (eez, eez, eez,) close by my side, as if disturbed in his repose, or as if I had more than my portion of the bed. I then recollected the old proverb, that "travelling makes strange bedfellows," and also the Scripture which says, "If two lie together there is heat, but how can one be warm alone?" Said I, "old friend, I'll not argue with you as my first mother did with your venerable ancestor, and rather than quarrel or keep you awake, we will part." With this, I arose and very condescendingly sought out another bed, where I was so fortunate as to remain in undisturbed possession till the chill of the night air admonished me to be again on the move.

I then arose, and, after much exertion, became at length able to use my limbs, and thus continued my journey. Early dawn found me standing on a height which overlooks the little village of Saverton and the broad river, which was the only barrier between me and safety from my enemies. As the rays of the morning began to expand with increasing light, the dark outlines of the wooded bottoms of Illinois were distinctly visible. I had now seen with my eyes the land of peace, and a land which contained family, friends, and all that was dear to me; but oh, if I should be intercepted at the ferry, and thus lose at once my labor and my hope! I now knelt down and prayed fervently to God for deliverance, and thanked Him for the past, and for His mercy and providence which had preserved me thus far.

I then descended from the height and entered the town, the people yet being wrapt in repose. I examined the shore and soon convinced myself that no public ferry was kept there. I was extremely glad to learn this fact-being fully aware that by this time all the ferries would be watched. I next tried to find some road or path up the river bank, so as to pass along and obtain the use of some chance canoe, but this was impossible. Huge rocks and mountainous steeps, with alternate ditches or patches of mire, rendered it impossible, even for a footman, to pass up the bank of the river. I then made my way down along the sandy beach which lay before the town, and just as the people were beginning to stir, I left the town and continued down along the river for some five miles, sometimes climbing steep and rocky spires of the bluffs, and sometimes wading through mire and marsh.

At length I came to a dwelling on the banks of the river, and saw several canoes lying in the water before it. I entered the house and inquired of the lady whether I could get a passage over the river in a canoe. She replied that her husband sometimes set people across, but owing to the swift current, and a large island several miles in length, which lay in the middle of the river, it was a tedious job, for which he never charged less than a dollar; but, however, he was very busy in the harvest field, about a mile distant, and owing to the hurry of the harvest, she did not think he could be prevailed on to do it at any price. I was now ready to faint from extreme heat, and exertion, and hunger, and to walk another mile and back upon an uncertainty was altogether out of the question, to say nothing of the danger of the exposure to which it would subject me.

I cast my eyes towards the canoes and they looked very tempting, and I know not but I34might have been tempted to charter one without the leave of the owner, but just then I saw a boy of ten or twelve years of age playing about the water. I asked him if he was accustomed to paddling a canoe. He replied, yes. I then offered him a good price if he would set me across the river. He refused to do this, saying that his parents would whip him for so doing. "But," said he, "I will set you over on to yon big island, which is one mile from here; you can then walk a mile or two through the woods and come to the opposite shore of it, and then shout and make signs to the people on the Illinois shore, who will come across their half of the river and take you from the island." He observed that people had often crossed over in this way. I hardly believed him, but still I thought an uninhabited island was preferable to staying another minute in Missouri.

The boy soon set me over and left me on the shore of the island, pointing out my course as well as he could. l paid him well, and then commenced my overland journey, among nettles, flies, mosquitoes and heat. I was soon entangled in thickets of hazel, thorn and grape vines, which made my progress very slow, as well as extremely laborious and difficult. These, however, were soon intersected with sloughs of mire and water, which could only be crossed with the utmost difficulty, by picking my way on old logs and wood, and sometimes wading in mire and water. After crossing several of these I at length came to one much larger, which I judged was navigable for a steamboat, and I now found, to my inexpressible horror and disappointment, that he had deceived me. I had now no alternative left but to make my way back through the same difficulties I had just passed, and to the shore where he had just left me, and then I should have no other chance but to call and make signs to the Missouri shore, which I had just left with so much joy, and, as l hoped, forever. This was at length accomplished, and I had the inexpressible joy of seeing my sign answered by the same boy, who soon came paddling to me. As soon as his canoe touched the island I bounded into it, and said to him with a determined tone and manner, "you have deceived me, my boy, so now you have to go to the opposite shore if you never went before, and I will then pay you another dollar, which will pay you, even if your parents chasten you for going." We now headed up the current, and, after a painful and laborious exertion of an hour or two, we doubled the cape at the head of the island, and shot off across the river at a rapid rate.

We soon landed in the woods in a low bottom, with no signs of inhabitants, although while crossing I had seen some houses on the shore a mile or two below. I now paid the boy his dollar, and he pushed off and commenced his way back exceedingly well pleased. I immediately stepped a few paces into the woods, and, kneeling down, kissed the ground as a land of liberty, and then poured out my soul in thanks to God. I then arose and made my way down the river for some two miles through woods and swamps, and finally came to a house. I entered it, determined to call for something to eat; no one was in but a little boy, but he said his mother would be in in two or three minutes. I asked him for some milk, and he gave me a vessel which was full, probably containing between one and two quarts. I intended only to taste of it to keep me from fainting, and then wait till the woman came, and ask her leave to drink the remainder, as it was all she had; but once to my famishing mouth it never ceased to decrease till it was all swallowed; I now felt somewhat abashed and mortified at what I had done, but concluded money would pay all damages. Hearing the footsteps of the woman at the door, I was fixing my mouth for an awkward apology, when I heard a sudden scream; on looking up, Mrs. Sabery Granger stood before me, with both hands lifted up in ecstacy of amazement. I said to her, "be not afraid-handle me and see, for a spirit hath not flesh and bones as you see me have." She exclaimed, "why, good Lord, is that you? Why all the world is hunting you both friends and enemies; they had almost given you up." She then flew around, scolded the children, talked to the ducks and chickens to keep out of the house and out of the garden, and not stray off. She washed my feet, gave me some clean stockings, got me some dinner, told me a thousand35things about our friends, asked five hundred questions, laughed, cried and again scolded the children and chickens.

This over and dinner eaten, she on with her bonnet and accompanied me to her husband, who was clearing a small spot of land near by. (I had forgotten to say that this woman had been one of our nearest neighbors in Ohio for several years.) Her husband now dropped his work, and accompanied me as a guide for five miles across a wet, low, untimbered bottom, covered mostly with high grass and stagnant water, and entirely destitute of shade or refreshment of any kind. The air was now extremely sultry, and the sun poured in scorching beams, while we could get no water to drink, nor any rest or retreat for a moment. To sit down in the tall grass under these scorching rays, without a breath of wind, would be overwhelming.I had not proceeded more than a mile or two before I became so weak and faint that I could hardly speak or stand, and parched with a burning thirst. I was upon the point of lying down in the hot and stagnant water, but he took me by the arm and partly supported me, and drew me along for some distance, exhorting and begging of me to try my utmost to hold up a little longer. In this way I finally reached the upland and the shade of a fence, within about half a mile of a settlement of the Saints and other citizens, which extended along the bluff. I dropped down under the shade of this fence, and fainted entirely away; the man ran to the house of a Brother Brown and got some cool spring water and a little camphor, and was returning with it. Sister Brown, who had never seen me, came running before him to my relief; while they were yet distant I had partly come to, and feeling a dreadful faintness at my stomach, and a raging thirst which knew no bounds, I made an effort to arise and run towards them, at the same time making signs for them to hasten; I staggered a few paces like a drunken man, and again fell to the earth. This singular appearance, and my dirty clothes and long beard so frightened the woman that, instead of hurrying, she halted till the man came up with her, and then she exclaimed, "It cannot be Elder Pratt, of whom I have heard so much-it must be some old drunkard." But the man assured her it was me, and they then came on together. They bathed my temples and wrists in cold water and camphor, and finally gave me a spoonful or two at a time to drink. In about half an hour I was so far revived as to be able to arise and be led to the house. I then shaved and washed myself, and borrowed a change of linen, and got into a comfortable bed.

Next morning I felt quite refreshed, and, after resting through the day, I was so far recruited as to be able to mount a horse at evening and ride towards Quincy, which was still twenty-five miles distant. Brother Brown furnished me a good horse and saddle, and himself another, and we started for Quincy in high spirits just as the sun was setting. We rode on at a brisk rate, and arrived in Quincy at about two o'clock the next morning. Riding up to the dwelling which (from the partial recollection of Mr. Brown, as well as from the fact of my two Missouri cows lying before it quietly chewing their cud) we judged was my wife's residence, we dismounted and gave a gentle knock at the door. She had watched for four successive nights and most of the fifth, and had now just lain down and given up all for lost. On hearing the knock she sprang from bed and opened the door, and in another instant I had clasped her in my arms. 36

John Taylor [^1] The Martyrdom: June 27, 1844

I do not remember the names of all who were with us that night and the next morning in jail, for several went and came; among those that we considered stationary were Stephen Markham, John S. Fullmer, Captain Dan Jones, Dr. Willard Richards, and myself. Dr. Bernhisel says that he was there from Wednesday in the afternoon until eleven o'clock next day. We were, however, visited by numerous friends, among whom were Uncle John Smith, Hiram Kimball, Cyrus H. Wheelock, besides lawyers, as counsel. There was also a great variety of conversation, which was rather desultory than otherwise, and referred to circumstances that had transpired, our former and present grievances, the spirit of the troops around us, and the disposition of the governor; the devising for legal and other plans for deliverance, the nature of testimony required; the gathering of proper witnesses, and a variety of other topics, including our religious hopes, etc.

During one of these conversations Dr. Richards remarked: "Brother Joseph, if it is necessary that you die in this matter, and if they will take me in your stead, I will suffer for you." At another time, when conversing about deliverance, I said, "Brother Joseph, if you will permit it, and say the word, I will have you out of this prison in five hours, if the jail has to come down to do it." My idea was to go to Nauvoo, and collect a force sufficient, as I considered fire whole affair a legal farce, and a flagrant outrage upon our liberty and rights. Brother Joseph refused.

Elder Cyrus H. Wheelock came in to see us, and when he was about leaving, drew a small pistol, a six-shooter, from his pocket, remarking at the same time, "Would any of you like to have this?" Brother Joseph immediately replied, "Yes, give it to me," whereupon he took the pistol, and put it in his pantaloons pocket. The pistol was a six-shooting revolver, of Allen's patent; it belonged to me, and was one that I furnished to Brother Wheelock when he talked of going with me to the east, previous to our coming to Carthage. I have it now in my possession. Brother Wheelock went out on some errand, and was not suffered to return. The report of the governor having gone to Nauvoo without taking the prisoners along with him caused very unpleasant feelings, as we were apprised that we were left to the tender mercies of the Carthage Greys, a company strictly mobocratic, and whom we knew to be our most deadly enemies; and their captain, Esquire (Robert F.) Smith, was a most unprincipled villain. Besides this, all the mob forces, comprising the governor's troops, were dismissed, with the exception of one or two companies, which the governor took with him to Nauvoo. The great part of the mob was liberated, the remainder was our guard.

We looked upon it not only as a breach of faith on the part of the governor, but also as an indication of a desire to insult us, if nothing more, by leaving us in the proximity of such men. The prevention of Wheelock's return was among the first of their hostile movements.

Colonel Markham went out, and he was also prevented from returning. He was very angry at this, but the mob paid no attention to him. They drove him out of town at the point of the bayonet, and threatened to shoot him if he returned.37He went, I am informed, to Nauvoo for the purpose of raising a company of men for our protection. Brother Fullmer went to Nauvoo after witnesses. It is my opinion that Brother Wheelock did also.... We all of us felt unusually dull and languid, with a remarkable depression of spirits. In consonance with those feelings, I sang a song, that had lately been introduced into Nauvoo, entitled, "A Poor Wayfaring Man of Grief," etc.

The song is pathetic, and the tune quite plaintive, and was very much in accordance with our feelings at the time, for our spirits were all depressed, dull, and gloomy, and surcharged with indefinite ominous forebodings. After a lapse of some time, Brother Hyrum requested me again to sing that song. I replied, "Brother Hyrum, I do not feel like singing;" when he remarked, "Oh, never mind; commence singing, and you will get the spirit of it." At his request I did so. Soon afterwards I was sitting at one of the front windows of the jail, when I saw a number of men, with painted faces, coming around the corner of the jail, and aiming towards the stairs. The other brethren had seen the same, for, as I went to the door, I found Brother Hyrum Smith and Dr. Richards already leaning against it. They both pressed against the door with their shoulders to prevent its being opened, as the lock and latch were comparatively useless. While in this position, the mob, who had come upstairs and tried to open the door, probably thought it was locked and fired a ball through the keyhole. At this Dr. Richards and Brother Hyrum leaped back from the door, with their faces towards it. Almost instantly another ball passed through the panel of the door, and struck Brother Hyrum on the left side of the nose, entering his face and head. At the same instant, another ball from outside entered his back, passing through his body and striking his watch. The ball came from the back, through the jail window, opposite the door, and must, from its range, have been fired from the Carthage Greys, who were placed there ostensibly for our protection, as the balls from the firearms, shot close by the jail, would have entered the ceiling, we being in the second story, and there never was a time after that when Hyrum could have received the latter wound. Immediately, when the ball struck him, he fell flat on his back, crying as he fell, "I am a dead man!" He never moved afterwards.

I shall never forget the deep feeling of sympathy and regard manifested in the countenance of Brother Joseph as he drew nigh to Hyrum, and, leaning over him, exclaimed, "Oh! my poor, dear brother Hyrum!" He, however, instantly arose, and with a firm, quick step, and a determined expression of countenance, approached the door, and pulling the six-shooter left by Brother Wheelock from his pocket, opened the door slightly, and snapped the pistol six successive times. Only three of the barrels, however, were discharged. I afterwards understood that two or three were wounded by these discharges, two of whom, I am informed, died, I had in my hands a large, strong hickory stick, brought there by Brother Markham and left by him, which I had siezed as soon as I saw the mob approach; and while Brother Joseph was firing the pistol, I stood close behind him. As soon as he had discharged it he stepped back, and I immediately took his place next to the door, while he occupied the one I had done while he was shooting. Brother Richards, at this time, had a knotty walking-stick in his hands belonging to me, and stood next to Brother Joseph a little farther from the door, in an oblique direction, apparently to avoid the rake of the fire from the door. The firing of Brother Joseph made our assailants pause for a moment. Very soon after, however, they pushed the door some distance open, and protruded and discharged their guns into the room, when I parried them off with my stick, giving another direction to the balls.

It certainly was a terrible scene. Streams of fire as thick as my arm passed by me as these men fired, and, unarmed as we were, it looked like certain death. I remember feeling as though my time had come, but I do not know when, in any critical position, I was more calm, unruffled, energetic, and acted with more promptness and decision. It certainly was far from pleasant to be so near the muzzles of those firearms as they belched forth their liquid flames and deadly balls. While I was engaged in parrying38the guns, Brother Joseph said, "That's right, Brother Taylor, parry them off as well as you can." These were the last words I ever heard him speak on earth.

Every moment the crowd at the door became more dense, as they were unquestionably pressed on by those in the rear ascending the stairs, until the whole entrance at the door was literally crowded with muskets and rifles, which, with the swearing, shouting, and demoniacal expressions of those outside the door and on the stairs, and the firing of the guns, mingled with their horrid oaths and execrations, made it look like pandemonium let loose, and was, indeed, a fit representation of the horrid deed in which they were engaged.

After parrying the guns for some time, which now protruded farther and farther into the room, and seeing no hope of escape or protection there, as we were now unarmed, it occurred to me that we might have some friends outside, and that there might be some chance of escape in that direction, but here there seemed to be none. As I expected them every moment to rush into the room-nothing but extreme cowardice having thus far kept them out-as the tumult and pressure increased, without any other hope, I made a spring for the window which was right in front of the jail door, where the mob was standing, and also exposed to the fire of the Carthage Greys, who were stationed some ten or twelve rods off. The weather was hot; we all of us had our coats off, and the window was raised to admit air. As I reached the window, and was on the point of leaping out, I was struck by a ball from the door about midway of my thigh, which struck the bone and flattened out almost to the size of a quarter of a dollar, and then passed on through the fleshy part to within about half an inch of the outside. I think some prominent nerve must have been severed or injured, for as soon as the ball struck me, I fell like a bird when shot, or an ox when struck by a butcher, and lost entirely and instantaneously all power of action or locomotion. I fell upon the window sill, and cried out, "I am shot!" Not possessing any power to move, I felt myself falling outside of the window, but immediately I fell inside, from some, at that time, unknown cause. When I struck the floor, my animation seemed restored, as I have seen it sometimes in squirrels and birds after being shot. As soon as I felt the power of motion I crawled under the bed, which was in the corner of the room, not far from the window where I received my wound. While on my way and under the bed, I was wounded in three other places; one ball entered a little below the left knee, and never was extracted; another entered the forepart of my left arm, a little above the wrist, and, passing down by the joint, lodged in the fleshy part of my hand, about midway, a little above the upper joint of my little finger. Another struck me on the fleshy part of my left hip and tore away the flesh as large as my hand, dashing the mangled fragments of flesh and blood against the wall.

My wounds were painful, and the sensation produced was as though a ball had passed through and down the whole length of my leg. I very well remember my reflections at the time. I had a very painful idea of becoming lame and decrepit, and being an object of pity, and I felt as though I would rather die than be placed in such circumstances.

It would seem that immediately after my attempt to leap out of the window, Joseph also did the same thing, of which circumstance I have no knowledge only from information. The first thing that I noticed was a cry that he had leaped out of the window. A cessation of firing followed, the mob rushed downstairs, and Dr. Richards went to the window. Immediately afterward I saw the doctor going towards the jail door, and as there was an iron door at the head of the stairs adjoining our door which led into the cells for criminals, it struck me that the doctor was going in there, and I said to him, "Stop, Doctor, and take me along." He proceeded to the door and opened it, and then returned and dragged me along to a small cell prepared for criminals.

Brother Richards was very much troubled, and exclaimed, "0h! Brother Taylor, is it possible that they have killed both Brother Hyrum and Joseph? It cannot surely be, and yet I saw them shoot them;" and elevating his hands two39or three times, he exclaimed, "Oh Lord, my God, spare Thy servants!" He then said, "Brother Taylor, this is a terrible event;" and he dragged me farther into the cell, saying, "I am sorry I can not do better for you;" and, taking an old, filthy mattress, Ire covered me with it, and said, "That may hide you, and you may yet live to tell the tale, but I expect they will kill me in a few moments!" While lying in this position, I suffered the most excruciating pain.

Soon afterwards Dr. Richards came to me, informed me that the mob had precipitately fled, and at the same time confirmed the worst fears that Joseph was assuredly dead. I felt a dull, lonely, sickening sensation at the news. When I reflected that our noble chieftain, the Prophet of the living God, had fallen, and that I had seen his brother in the cold embrace of death, it seemed as though there was a void or vacuum in the great field of human existence to me, and a dark gloomy chasm in the kingdom, and that we were left alone. Oh, how lonely was that feeling! How cold, barren, and desolate! In the midst of difficulties he was always the first in motion; in critical positions his counsel was always sought. As our prophet he approached our God, and obtained for us his will; but now our prophet, our counselor, our general, our leader, was gone, and amid the fiery ordeal that we then had to pass through, we were left alone without his aid, and as our future guide for things spiritual or temporal, and for all things pertaining to this world, or the next, he had spoken for the last time on earth.

These reflections and a thousand others flashed upon my mind. I thought, why must God's nobility, the salt of the earth, the most exalted of the human family, and the most perfect types of all excellence, fall victims to the cruel, fiendish hate of incarnate devils?

The poignancy of my grief, I presume, however, was somewhat allayed by the extreme suffering that I endured from my wounds.

Soon afterwards I was taken to the head of the stairs and laid there, where I had a full view of our beloved and now murdered brother, Hyrum. There he lay as I had left him; he had not moved a limb; he lay placid and calm, a monument of greatness even in death; but his noble spirit had left its tenement, and was gone to dwell in regions more congenial to his exalted nature. Poor Hyrum! He was a great and good man, and lily soul was cemented to his. If ever there was an exemplary, honest, and virtuous man, an embodiment of all that is noble in the human form, Hyrum Smith was its representative.

While I lay there, a number of persons came around, among whom was a physician. The doctor, on seeing a ball lodged in my left hand, took a penknife from his pocket and made an incision in it for the purpose of extracting the ball therefrom, and having obtained a pair of carpenter's compasses, made use of them to draw or pry out the ball, alternately using the penknife and Compasses. After sawing for some time with a dull penknife, and prying and pulling with the compasses, he ultimately succeeded in extracting the ball, which weighed about half an ounce. Some time afterwards he remarked to a friend of mine that I had "nerves like the devil" to stand what I did in its extraction. I really thought I had need of nerves to stand such surgical butchery, and that, whatever my nerves may be, his practice was devilish.

This company wished to remove me to Mr. Hamilton's hotel, the place where we had stayed previous to our incarceration in jail. I told them, however, that I did not wish to go. I did not consider it safe. They protested that it was, and that I was safe with them; that it was a perfect outrage for men to be used as we had been; that they were my friends; that I could be better taken care of there than here.

I replied, "I don't know you. Whom am l among? I am surrounded by assassins and murderers; witness your deeds. Don't talk to me of kindness or comfort; look at your murdered victims. Look at me! I want none of your counsel nor comfort. There may be some safety here; I can be assured of none anywhere, etc."

They G- d- their souls to hell, made the most solemn asseverations, and swore by God and the devil, and everything else that they could think of, that they would stand by me to40death and protect me. In half an hour every one of them fled from the town.

Soon after a coroner's jury were assembled in the room over the body of Hyrum. Among the jurors was Captain Smith of the "Carthage Greys" who had assisted in the murder, and the same justice before whom we had been tried. I learned of Francis Higbee as being in the neighborhood. On hearing his name mentioned, I immediately arose and said, "Captain Smith, you are a justice of the peace; I have heard his name mentioned; I want to swear my life against him." I was informed that word was immediately sent to him to leave the place, which he did.

Brother Richards was busy during this time attending to the coroner's inquest, and to the removal of the bodies, and making arrangements for their removal from Carthage to Nauvoo.

When he had a little leisure, he again came to me, and at his suggestion I was removed to Hamilton's tavern. I felt that he was the only friend, the only person, that I could rely upon in that town. It was with difficulty that sufficient persons could be found to carry me to the tavern, for immediately after the murder a great fear fell upon all the people, and men, women, and children fled with great precipitation, leaving nothing nor anybody in the town but two or three women and children and one or two sick persons.

Daniel W. Jones [^2] Some Early Mormon "Fast-Days"

The mail company went down fifty miles to Platte bridge to winter. Marshal Heywood decided to remain with us and live or die, as the case might be, preferring to be with his brethren. There were no provisions to be had at the Bridge, for three of us had been down to see if we could get supplies. We barely got enough to last us back. The mountaineers there had some cattle but no bread, they lived by hunting.

Game soon became so scarce that we could kill nothing. We ate all the poor meat; one would get hungry eating it. Finally that was all gone, nothing now but hides were left. We made a trial of them. A lot was cooked and eaten without any seasoning and it made the whole company sick. Many were so turned against the stuff that it made them sick to think of it.

We had coffee and some sugar, but drinking coffee seemed to only destroy the appetite, and stimulate for only a little while. One man became delirious from drinking so much of it.

Things looked dark, for nothing remained but the poor raw hides taken from starved cattle. We asked the Lord to direct us what to do. The brethren did not murmur, but felt to trust in God. We had cooked the hide, after soaking and scraping the hair off until it was soft and then ate it, glue and all. This made it rather inclined to stay with us longer than we desired. Finally I was impressed how to fix the stuff and gave the company advice, telling them how to cook it; for them to scorch and scrape the hair off; this had a tendency to kill and purify the bad taste that scalding gave it. After scraping, boil one hour in plenty of water, throwing the water away which had extracted all the glue, then wash and scrape the hide thoroughly, washing in cold water, then boil to41a jelly and let it get cold, and then eat with a little sugar sprinkled on it. This was considerable trouble, but we had little else to do and it was better than starving.

We asked the Lord to bless our stomachs and adapt them to this food. We hadn't the faith to ask him to bless the raw-hide for it was "hard stock." On eating now all seemed to relish the feast. We were three days without eating before this second attempt was made. We enjoyed this sumptuous fare for about six weeks, and never had the gout.

In February the first Indian came to our camp. He was of the Snake tribe, his people were located a day's travel up the river. At the time of his arrival we were out of everything, having not only eaten the hides taken from cattle killed, but had eaten the wrappings from the wagon-tongues, old moccasin-soles were eaten also, and a piece of buffalo hide that had been used for a foot mat for two months.

The day the Indian came was fast-day, and for us fast-day in very truth. We met as usual for we kept our monthly fast-day. During meeting we became impressed that there were some wrongs existing among the brethren in camp that should be corrected, and that if we would make a general cleaning up, and present our case before the Lord, He would take care of us, for we were there on His business. On questioning some of the company privately, we found that several had goods in their possession not belonging to them. When we felt satisfied all goods were replaced we went en masse and cut a hole in the ice on the river. There were several carcasses of cattle that had died lying near the fort, that the wolves had not devoured. Some of the boys, contrary to counsel, had cut steaks from them during the time we were eating the hides; it made them quite sick. There was a pile of offal in the butcher shop from the poor cattle killed. But what looked more tempting than all to starving men was a pile of more than one hundred fat wolf carcasses, skinned, piled up and frozen near the fort. They looked very much like nice fat mutton. Many of the company asked my opinion about eating them. I told them if they would all do as I advised we would have a good clean supper of healthy food; that these carcasses were unclean; that we were on the Lord's service, and did not believe He wanted us to suffer so much, if we only had faith to trust Him and ask for better.

We all became united in this feeling. Accordingly we hauled all these carcasses of cattle, the wolves, also the offal from the store-house and shoved them into the hole cut in the ice, where they floated off out of our reach. We then were and washed out our store-house and presented it before the Lord empty, but clean.

Near sundown the Indian spoken of came to our quarters. Some of the boys hunted up a small piece of raw hide and gave it to him. He said he had eaten it before. None of us were able to talk much with him; we invited him to remain with us over night. Evening came on and no supper; eight o'clock, no word from any one. And the word had been positively given that we should have supper. Between eight and nine o'clock all were sitting waiting, now and then good-naturedly saying it was most suppertime. No one seemed disheartened.

Bro. Heywood was still with us. All at once we heard a strange noise resembling human voices down the road. Brother Heywood rushed out exclaiming, "Here comes our supper." The voices were loud and in an unknown tongue. Bro. H. came back a little frightened saying there was something strange going on down the road. Several of us, taking our arms, started in the direction of the noise. On getting nearer we recognized the voices. The Magraw party under Jesse Jones was making another effort to get through with their coaches; they had got stuck in a snow drift and the noise we heard was Canadian Frenchmen swearing at their mules. We helped them out and guided them into the fort. It was a bitter cold night but we had good houses with rousing fires.

After unhitching and turning out Jesse said, "I am glad to get here." I replied, "I am as glad to see you." "Why are you so glad to see us?" he asked. I told him we had not a mouthful of anything to eat, nor had we tasted food that day, "Then what are you stopping here for?" I replied, "We were waiting for you to bring our supper." He laughed and said, "Well you shall have it if it takes the last bite we have got." He42gave to our cook all of his provisions. About ten o'clock twenty-six hungry men sat down to about as thankfully a received supper as was ever partaken of by mortal man.

In January when this party passed through to Platte bridge, I sent word by them to the mountaineers there that we would pay a good price for meat brought to us. Two of the best hunters, Messrs. Maxim and Plant, made the attempt to get us meat, but failed, almost starving themselves on the hunt. They never reached our fort but returned to their homes on the Platte.

When Jesse Jones left us going down we had but little provisions on hand, Maxim and Plant's failure to reach us with food caused the people at Platte bridge to suppose we had all perished. Jesse told me he fully expected to find our skeletons.

Some may ask why we did not leave. There was no time during the winter but what the attempt would have been certain death to some of us. The company at no time was strong enough to make the trip to Platte bridge, neither did we wish to abandon our trust that we had accepted with our eyes wide open to the perils around us.

About this time another Y. X. company, trader Porter Rockwell and John Murdock, arrived going east. They gave us a little flour and other provisions; they also brought us letters telling us when the relief train would arrive. With the three head of cattle and what this company furnished us, we felt safe for supplies until time for the relief trains.

Here I will give an account of a little personal matter that may seem like boasting, but I do not intend it so. This company stayed with us two nights. They were picked men, thirty in number, able-bodied, tough boys. On hearing of our sufferings many remarks were made showing deep sympathy for us.

At this time we were well recruited, having had plenty of meat for some time but scarcely any flour for some five months. Bread we had hardly tasted. In fact, the first biscuit I got almost choked me, I had entirely lost my appetite for it.

The morning the Y. X. company were getting ready to start on, a young man, Mr. Eldredge, who was going down as a passenger, expressed much indignation, saying that there could be no excuse for leaving men to suffer as we had. I did not like to hear this said, for I knew there were justifiable reasons for leaving us to take care of the goods. I also knew Brothers Grant and Burton would have sent us help if they could. It was expected that the cattle left would have been better beef than they turned out to be.

I had neither time nor disposition to explain all these things, so to stop the talk that I had got a little tired of hearing, I said to Mr. Eldredge, "We do not need your sympathy; we are all right now; none of us have died, and I am a better man than any of your company, picked men as you are."

"How do you propose to prove this, Mr. Jones? Will you pull sticks with our best man? I will not allow you rawhide-fed fellows to banter the corn-fed boys that way."

I was a little fearful that I was "sold," for I knew there were some stout men in their company; but as the banter was made, to back out would be worse than to get beat, so I said, "Bring him on; I will hoist him."

Mr. Eldredge came back with John Murdock, who was smiling. Now I really wished I had not made the banter, for John was an old friend who was hard to pull up.

A ring was formed, both companies helping to form a circle. "Rawhide against corn" was the cry. We sat down and got an even start. It was a hard pull, but "Rawhide" won, and we got no more pity from that company.

Making a close estimate of the food we now had, we found it would last us till the promised provisions could arrive, which would be about the lst of May.

There were twenty of us now. We quit rationing and ate all we wanted. As may be imagined, some big eating was done. Now the food soon began to diminish very fast. At this time we could go to the Platte bridge and get provisions, but on calling the company together all hands agreed to make the meat last by again rationing. We could do this quite easily, allowing one and a half pounds per day. We lived a43few days on these rations and all seemed content.

One day Brother Hampton and I were out and on returning to the fort we learned that a small herd of buffalo had been seen passing within three miles of the fort. All hands were excited, as they were the first seen for a long time. The boys were all sure that Ben and I could get meat and we could again go to feasting. We started out and soon came in sight of the buffalo feeding. We dismounted and crept close to them, but just as we got in shooting distance it commenced to snow so hard that we could not see to shoot with any certainty. We sat there trying to get sight of a buffalo until our fingers were too much benumbed to hold our guns. I had brought an extra gun in anticipation of having to chase the buffalo on horseback. We concluded to blaze away, hit or miss, and then take to our horses and have a running shot. At the crack of our guns all the herd ran away. We mounted and started in pursuit.

The horse I was riding could easily outrun the buffalo, but for the life of me I could not get him up along side of one. When I would follow straight behind he would get within about twenty-five yards, but when I would try to get him up nearer he would bolt and run off to one side. This game we kept up for some time. Occasionally the buffalo would get two or three hundred yards away from me, when the horse would start in after them and soon run up to about the same distance, then he would bolt again. I felt almost like blowing his brains out. I finally commenced shooting at the buffalo, but to no purpose. As none were killed we had to give up the chase and go home without meat, feeling quite chagrined.

We had not been in camp long until I was informed that there was a great dissatisfaction being manifested by some of the company about the rations. I immediately called the company together to see what was the trouble. Several expressed themselves quite freely, finding fault for being rationed when provisions could now be had, and saying that they thought I ought to go and get something to eat and not have them suffer any more. This grieved me very much as l had a kindly feeling towards all the company. We had suffered everything that men could suffer and live. We had often been on the point of starvation. Sometimes becoming so weak that we could scarcely get our firewood, having to go some distance to the mountain for it. We were now all in good health and had, as I understood, willingly agreed to be rationed for a few days, until relief came from Salt Lake City. I did not care so much for the trouble of going for provisions, but I felt a great deal of pride in the grit of the company and this was a sore disappointment for me, for no one had just reason to find fault. All I said was, "Well, brethren, I will go and get you all you want. Now pitch in and eat your fill. I will have more by the time you eat up what is on hand."

Brother Hampton felt very indignant at the faultfinders. He told them that they would soon be ashamed of themselves; spoke of the hardships we had endured uncomplainingly, and of the hard labors in hunting, and many efforts made to keep alive. Now when we were about through and no one suffering, some had shown their true colors, and marred their credit for being true men. Ben got warm and finally said, "You will regret this. Instead of having to wait twelve days there will be plenty of provisions here inside of twelve hours, and then you will wish you had kept still." At this he ceased talking, sat down and turned to me saying a little excitedly, "What do think? Will it come?"

I said "Yes," for I felt the prophecy would be fulfilled. Sure enough that same evening twenty men arrived at our camp bringing nearly a ton of flour and other provisions.

This company had been sent to strengthen our post. They informed us that there was a large company of apostates on the road led by Tom S. Williams. Before leaving Salt Lake some of this company had made threats that indicated danger to us.

The circumstances leading to the threats were these. The goods we were guarding belonged to the last season's emigrants. The wagon companies freighting them through agreed to deliver them in Salt Lake City. These goods were to be taken in and delivered as by44contract. Some of the owners had become dissatisfied with "Mormonism" and were going back to the States. As their goods had not arrived in Salt Lake City, they demanded that they should be delivered at Devil's Gate. Quite a number settled their freight bills and brought orders for their goods and received them all right. Others refused to settle, but threatened that if the goods were not given up they would take them by force. Tom Williams' company was composed largely of this class and their backers. They numbered about fifty men. The twenty men coming to our relief were sent under the emergency. This is the way Brother Hampton's prophecy came to be fulfilled.

Tom Williams knew nothing of this company, as they had slipped out and got ahead of him and arrived long enough before him for us to get everything ready. We now had forty men well armed, the twenty sent us being picked for the occasion. As I cannot remember all their names I will simply say for the purpose they were all first-class men. Our old company were reliable. As Ben had said they would be, they were a little ashamed, but nothing farther was said, and the boys showed their repentance by doing their duties now.

Our instructions were to deliver no goods to anyone unless they presented an order from the right parties.

When Williams' company arrived they made camp near our fort. Most of our men were kept out of sight. There were rooms each side of the front door, where we had a guard placed.

A person that claimed a lot of goods had come on the evening before and presented an order that was not genuine. He had reported to his friends our refusing to let him have his goods. Soon Williams anti a few others came up and said if we did not give up the goods that they would tear down the fort or have them. Williams was well known to most of us; by marriage he was my wife's uncle. I informed him that we intended to obey instructions. He raved and threatened considerable, but to no purpose. He started to his camp with the avowed intention of returning and taking the goods.

I now got my company ready for fight if necessary. We had prepared port holes in front of the fort and here I stationed some of the best shots.

Brothers Hampton and Alexander took charge of our company, The company that came to strengthen us working together under their leader. Soon we saw Tom Williams approaching with his backers. As he supposed double our number, but in reality near the same. I did not wish blood shed, and fully believed that Tom was playing a "bluff," so concluded to try and beat him at the game. I instructed some of the best marksmen what to do in case shooting had to be done.

As Williams approached I went out alone and stood about thirty yards from the fort, having only my pistol. As the company came up near me I placed my hand on my pistol and told them to halt. They halted but commenced to threaten and abuse the whole fraternity sparing none. I explained our situation, being simply custodians of the goods, not knowing whose they were; but only knew who left us there, and we could not consistently recognize any orders except from those under whose instructions we were acting. My reasoning had no effect whatever, but Tom called on his crowd to say if the goods should be taken. The vote was to take them.

Now that no one may suppose that I wish to appear brave, I will say that the way I had my men placed, and the instructions given, if a weapon had been drawn on me, half Williams' company would have been shot dead before I could have been harmed.

I said to Williams just hold on one minute and hear what I have to say: "We have been here all winter eating poor beef and raw hide to take care of these goods. We have had but little fun, and would<_P> just as soon have some now as not; in fact would like a little row. If you think you can take the fort just try it. But I don't think you can take me to commence with; and the first one that offers any violence to me is a dead man. Now I dare you to go past me towards the fort." This seemed to take them back. I meant what I said, and some of them knew my disposition, which in those days, was not the most Christian-like when a white man45was before me as an enemy.

After looking at me a moment Tom said, "For your family's sake I will spare you, for I think you d-d fool enough to die before you would give up the goods." I thanked him and said I believed as he did.

After this we had no more trouble. Many times I have thought I should have shown our force openly to have deterred Williams, but he was such a known bully and so conceited that I felt just like "taking him down a notch," and this did it.

S[cipio] A[fricanus] Kenner<_P> [^3] Indian Episode of Early Days

In the year of our Lord 1868, the writer was a telegraph operator in the town of Beaver. The Deseret line had been completed several months before, and the people were now getting so accustomed to it that they no longer visited the office out of curiosity, and very seldom for any other purpose, and there was a perceptible shrinkage in the consequence which formerly hedged about the youth in charge, rendering the post much less attractive than was its wont; these circumstances, in connection with the other, that money was seldom passed, that the roughness and unconventional ways of the early days were still measurably in vogue, that the business had become tedious and monotonous, while the boy himself was disposed to be active and restless, and, above all, that Salt Lake was too far away, caused him to hand in his resignation and depart. Replacing an operator in those days in out-of-the-way places was no easy matter, and, in order to be straightforward in the premises, the writer had, for about three months prior to his departure, had in training in the art of telegraphy a couple of young and capable men to take his place. These were "coached", and received practical training, the field of their practice gradually expanding until finally between them they could handle the limited business of the office very well. One of these (William Ashworth) became a regular operator and afterwards occupied a much more responsible station. All this, however, is but preliminary and incidental. The central fact is that I got out, and so much of interest as the story contains is embraced in what follows.

By engaging persistently, and at times painfully, (because of lacking skill) in the principal means of effecting exchanges in those days, I had become the proud possessor of a pony, a saddle, bridle and revolver. Having an uncle, an aunt and several cousins in the "Dixie" country who had not been seen for some time, it was decided to pay them a visit. Advice was freely given that it was a foolish thing to make such a trip alone, as the Indians were marauding and murdering at various points in Southern Utah, Sanpete and Iron counties (the latter of which would have to be passed through going to Dixie) being the principal sufferers. The line between Beaver and Iron counties is about the central part of a range of low-lying mountains running due east and west, and the lowest part of these is where the state and county road runs. This is known as the pass, and a more fitting place for an Indian attack could not have been chosen even by old Blackhawk himself. In order to take up as much of the acclivity as possible, the road is exceedingly tortuous, with little knobs or peaks continually intervening, so that in places, the path can be seen but for a short distance ahead, while on all sides are46tolerably dense growths of cedar and pinon pine trees. When one is alone, it is about the lonesomest place in the world. At any point for a distance of several miles, shots could be fired at a traveler from a hundred different places and not one of the assailants be seen. But the advice given, which was almost identical with that which the old man imparted to the youth in the poem "Excelsior," to try not the pass, was received in the same way, and the journey set out upon.

Did the reader ever try anything of that kind? If so, he will of course remember that his high spirits are only maintained at a heroic altitude while surrounded by civilization; with this behind him, with a landscape presenting about the same features which it bore when the great upheaval subsided, and a solitude so profound that the smallest bird is a welcome visitation, all this before him, with dangers all the more pressing because unseen and unknown all about him, his courage is likely to subside in an inverse ratio to the progress made, so that, by the time the mid-point between the safety place behind and the safety place ahead is reached, all showy and boastful forms of self-reliance have entirely evaporated. Tire individual at last realizes that at any point in life, and particularly the one he happens just then to be occupying, he is a creature of circumstances with no more relative strength at one time than another; and without the protecting care of a Providence which is too often unthought of until actually needed, he is not of much consequence anyway.

The southern side of the pass is much shorter than the other; in fact, it is not to exceed a mile's span, while the other is four or five miles; so that when the apex is passed, the time spent in reaching the open country again is brief. But what availeth it to reach the open at such times? There is still nothing in sight but barrenness, flanked by ridges with dense growths of trees impenetrable for any distance to the eye, and traversed all along by gullies which are usually dry, but, by reason of rainfalls and melting snows, have been cut deep into the porous soil. The chances for attack from a concealed or an unconcealed foe were not one whit lessened despite the broader range of view, while the all-pervading solitude lent to each darkened brush and half-hidden stump an awful, soul-saddening feeling. But, as one of these mystical terrors after another dissolved in the view of closer inspection, something akin to returning boldness was experienced by reason thereof. We have all been there. After our fears are shown to be groundless, we are slower to be frightened by the same things again. This condition long enough continued would build us up to the same pinnacle of vainglorious self-sufficiency with which we set out on our expeditions in life, and from which we are at times, as in my case, so unceremoniously toppled. Then we see how it is that man continually needs admonishment, example and discipline to be kept in the straight and narrow path, and is apt to depart from it as soon as the corrective agencies are withdrawn.

An old and homely backwoods maxim is to refrain from "hollering" till you are out of the woods, and this is deserving of a much wider application than it has received. When we think the crisis passed, we are sometimes just upon the verge of it. Thinking all obstacles are overcome, we care not for the greatest of all which may be lying in wait for us. It was so with me on the occasion spoken of. My perplexed fancy had become so relaxed that I was mentally ridiculing myself for being so easily shaken, when from a ravine to the south, I saw a cloud of dust arising and spreading. The first impulse was naturally one of curiosity, this being succeeded at once by something a little more disturbing to the nervous system. Was the appearance caused by a band of sheep or cattle, or was the dust raised by a draft of air caused by the shape of the fissure? Like the cloud no bigger than a man's hand, of which we have read, this one grew apace and carne nearer. My heart beat with greatly increased rapidity for a moment, and then seemed to suspend operations altogether, as from the jaws of the defile, half a mile off, emerged, with a dash, a band of mounted Indians! The poverty of the English language, even to a master of it, would be strikingly shown, were he to attempt to place in words a full showing of the things thought, the feelings felt, and the nothingness done by the47writer of these lines at that time! And even in the midst of this orgie of desperation, when reason was measurably suspended, there at once ensued as one of the contradictions with which the psychical sometimes confronts the physiological existence, a greater degree of judgment than ordinarily obtains. In such cases, especially when the means of doing so are at hand, the first impulse is to seek safety in flight, but that would have been as fatal a thing to do as to have placed myself in battle array and begun firing upon the Indians. The wisdom which the supreme court is supposed to have at all times, comes to the humblest of people, as a flash of superior intelligence, sometimes, and so it was then. "Distilled almost to jelly with the act of fear," as Shakespeare writes it, I was yet impelled to assume a boldness which nature, for some reason or other, had neglected to place among my physical effects. The band were upon me in an instant, gibbering, jangling and discordant; they halted in front of me, instead of surrounding me, as I expected they would do, and seeing that I was (apparently) as cool as a cucumber, they went to "sizing me up" in Indian style before saying anything. This didn't take long, and then one who seemed to be the leader said:

"Where oo go?"

With a mighty effort I said with seeming tranquility-

"Oh, just below here, to see the folks."

"Huh! Where oo live?"

"Oh, just back here in Beaver."

"Huh! You fight'em Injin?"

"No, never fight any Indians at all."

"Huh! You 'Mo'mon?'"

"You bet your life!"

They all looked me over carefully once more, and then, after a little chattering among themselves, passed me by and sped along in the direction they were going when the interview began. I made the pony jog along indifferently until the savages were well out of sight, and then the whole situation changed. I had never ridden much on a horse, lately not at all, and would gladly under ordinary circumstances have dismounted and walked awhile, but not now. If the poor animal had made his pace equal to the mighty dash of a limited express train, had he been the modern Bucephalus with a speed many times multiplied, if he had been a Pegasus in real life able to fly as well as run, he would at such a time have seemed a huge, crippled snail, half asleep. He must have made at least twelve miles an hour, but oh, how stationary the landmarks on either side of the road did seem! And how very tired I was, yet how splendidly was the weariness kept in subjection! What a luxury would have been a walk of a mile or so!

At this point, a little moralizing is permissible. Almost every event in life, beyond the common, furnishes materials for this, and, if our philosophy would only enable us to find it out, much real profit might be realized from apparently unprofitable and seemingly unfortunate incidents. The greatest of lawgivers and protectors has admonished us not to despise the small things of life; the fact that the giant oak grows from the tiny acorn, and the mighty ocean maintains its bulk by trickling tributaries, shows in some measure the wisdom and justice of the admonition. Now, had I been a "plumed knight," a "whiskered pandoor" or a "fierce hussar," the chances are decidedly that I would have been taken into captivity or sent beyond the reach thereof, and my little property have been converted to the use of the "noble scions of the forest," without due process of law. But it seems that even they have some appreciation of the fitness of things. Being a noncombatant, very young, correspondingly tender, and without the slightest trace of aggressiveness or resistance, the red men concluded that the "game would not be worth the candle," and as each of them had a horse and equipment worth a good deal more than mine, they didn't care to burden themselves with the latter, especially as the animal was tired, hungry and thin, and his trappings were old, uncertain, and far from gaudy.

"Some people are born great, others achieve greatness, and others still have greatness thrust upon them." There should be added to tiffs that sometimes the greatness fits and sometimes it doesn't. Now and then, it is a means of protection or exemption from consequences by reason of the respect or awe which it inspires;48but occasionally, it is a lightning rod which deflects the destroying fluid from the path it would otherwise pursue, and brings the whole volume upon itself. It may not be destroyed by the visitation, neither is it benefited, and anything in the world is much safer when bolts of lightning give it the go-by and pounce upon something else. We find that the loftiest trees in a grove, the highest poles in a town, and the tallest man in a group, if all are possessed of equal attractiveness, will nearly every time be the recipient of the electric fluid when it descends upon their immediate locality. "Death loves a shining mark," but its agents in the shape of aerial electricity, and hostile red men, are not so particular about the shining, if the object only has some other qualifications, chief among which is prominence. Lacking that, there is sometimes (but not always) safety. There was in my case, and for a few hours at least, I would not have traded stations with the Prince of Wales, the President of the United States, nor even the conductor of any street car on which I have ever traveled, and nothing could emphasize the desperateness of the situation more than that. All these thoughts, and a good many more, occurred to me as I sped along, the mental exercises being interspersed with occasional glances over my shoulder and urging the faithful beast to still greater effort. Of course, I realized that the Indians I had encountered were not all there were in the country, and one interview like the last one, in the course of a day, or a lifetime for that matter, was quite ample. But there was no further interruption. After a long, needful rest at Paragoonah, the "great moral ride," as it has been called, was resumed, and Parowan reached in safety. This town is and was generally a quiet, pastoral place, not increasing much in population, nor at all given to indulgence in the spectacular or the sensational, but it was different on this occasion. The Indian situation was acting like an effervescing agency, and everybody was visible, and all were active, a condition of things which increased rather than diminished as time went along. The red men were stealing stock continually, and were ready to fight whenever opposition appeared. Military preparations, on as large a scale as the means at hand would admit of, were being made, and the day after my arrival as strong a detachment as was considered proper (the safety of the town as well as effective operations in the field being duly regarded) went out under experienced leaders, all mounted, of course. Not being, by this time, in so much of a hurry as when I left Beaver, it was thought advisable to lay over for a while. At such times and in such places, all hands must "stand in," and generally they do so with alacrity if not with cheerfulness. To me was assigned a position as one of the night guard, the duties being to take a post a little beyond the outer fringe of houses, keep a sharp lookout for suspicious indications, and give the alarm if necessary. There were several of us out at a time, and we were stationed two or three hundred yards apart. There had been fighting a few miles away, during the afternoon, the shots being distinctly heard in the town, and the necessity for the most extreme vigilance was realized by all. Nobody but the children slept. In front of my post, about fifty yards away, was a dense growth of scrub oak, or some similar vegetation, and a good-sized army, by exercising caution, could have approached near enough for effective operations without being seen or heard. This circumstance had a very stimulating, agreeable effect upon me, and occasionally, as the ragged fleeting clouds passed from the face of the moon and left her smiling as brightly and beautifully as though in ignorance of what was going on below, it occurred to me how pleasant it would be to be translated all at once to her peaceful, Indianless realm!

Occasionally, a slight noise from the thicket would dispel all musings and imaginings, and was the means of accomplishing what I was afraid would take place by other agencies-the raising of my hair. And, as on the day previous, these figments of the fancy were hurriedly, abruptly, excruciatingly crystalized into a hard, concrete realization. There was a sound this time! No mistake about it-would, oh would that there were! Another, and nearer, its awful realness impinging upon my sense of hearing with a forceful, fateful thud! I did not reach for49my revolver, because it had never been out of my hand for an instant, a kind of false security being felt by reason of its presence. There was another noise-a footstep, unmistakably, and close to the margin of the thicket. It was time to prepare for action. One step more, and, in accordance with instructions, I called out with as much distinctness and vehemence as circumstances would permit -

"Who's there?

"No reply.

Again: "Who's there?"

Dread silence, most awful, prevailed. On the next putting of that terrible question, with no reply following, I was to shoot in the direction of the noise and then act as judgment (or the total suspension thereof) suggested. The fateful words were about to find expression when the thicket parted, and there emerged into the open-a cow !The moon smiled (apparently), the scurrying clouds pursued their aimless, flecky way, the light breezes chanted amid the tangled shrubbery a miserere for the dying day, the kine trudged unmolested to her lair, and "left the world to darkness and to me."

Florence A. Merriam Bailey<_P> [^4] Grandma

The brownies' faithful care of the old grandmother, and the sight of the troop of little grandchildren carrying flowers to the old grandfather's grave, gave me a tender interest in the poor old lady, who, they said, was "grieving" so sorely in the little house behind the trees across the street.The old people had been married "most sixty years," our school-teacher told me, "and they were never separated but two days in all that time-when grandpa went to see his son in Salt Lake."

Now the little grandmother was left alone. It was too late to uproot her, she could never be content even in her children's homes; so they went to take care of her in the old house. I was touched by the thoughtful tenderness with which they cherished her. Her daily cup of tea was carried over-"so mother won't have to build a fire at noon-it's so hot;" at the baking an extra loaf was set to rise "so she won't have to bake;" some one went to sit with her at her lonely meals, "she misses father so, to eat alone;" and she was never left long by herself in the desolate house, "she grieves so, all the time."

When I went to see her, I found her in her little kitchen. There were two big rocking-chairs, one on either side the stove-one empy now. A pathetic old pipe still lay on the mantelpiece, an old hat and coat still hung against the wall; later, her children put them tenderly out of her sight. "I couldn't bear them," the dear old soul said, tremulously."

He was so kindly to me," she sobbed, when telling me of her desolation. "He was so kindly to me-always so kind. Since I was took with the lameness-two year this April-he always had my stockings warm for me in the morning-always so kind. Oh! nobody knows, nobody knows the miss of it!" she cried out in her loneliness.

When less borne down by her grief she rambled on about their happy life together. All her memories of sixty years were bound up with the thought of "father." She told me that when the old man used to go out in the yard, the hens would all follow him,-seventy-five or more,-and the neighbors going by would stop at the fence and laugh.

Then her mind would wander back to the early days of their married life in England, and she would recall with tender pleasure how, "before I had any children, my husband would bring me young birds and lambs, for I always50wanted something young-always must have something to love."

She told me how rich they might have been if her husband had gone to Australia to raise sheep-"he was always such a hand with sheep." But the Mormon missionary found them, and they came to America. "Not all the gold in California," the old lady said impressively, "not all the gold in California would have taken us from our home, but we come for the gospel, and so were happy in doing right;" and her beautiful face bore out the testimony.

She had had a remarkably varied and interesting life, and I liked to get her to talk about it when I went to sit with her. At first she used to ask me to go into the front room where the "Book of Mormon" lay on the centre-table, and a bust of Brigham Young stood on the mantelpiece. But I preferred the spotless sunny kitchen, where I could draw up my big rocker opposite hers, and watch her dear old face as she talked.

Her smooth white hair fell in curls beside her cheeks under bunches of purple flowers that decorated her black English cap. After all her troubles not a line of her face bespoke impatience or complaint-the record was of a life of loving-kindness. What she said made little difference to me. When she ran on with the garrulousness of old age, it was enough simply to sit and look at her serene old face.

When telling about England, her old eyes lit up with memories of her girlhood; and she fell easily into the quaint English dialect when talking to her family, though with me she rarely used the old expressions.

She had lived in one of the watering places frequented by the royal family, and it had been a familiar sight of her childhood to see Queen Victoria, herself a child then, riding her donkey about the hills "Oh, such a handsome donkey !"When in her teens, she had been lady's maid for a child of the royal family. "Lady-always dressed me in Swiss muslin. The foot-men in livery waited on us, and we waited on the ladies," she told me with pride; exclaiming, "Oh, I tell them I've been with the highest and I've been with the lowest-with the royal family and in a tent on the plains."

Her stories of court life were like pictures from an old novel. One romance she liked to dwell on. A handsome headstrong boy of noble blood had fallen in love with a wealthy tradesman's daughter who was visiting the baths; and on the spot he swore he would marry no one else. Grandma evidently had a soft spot in her heart for the handsome boy who had confided his love affairs to her fifty years ago, and it was interesting to hear her talk about him and the "beautiful lady," and wonder why it should be a sorrow to his family to have him marry her; though she moralized that there was a difference between the real gentry and the rich trades-folk; you could tell by the way they treated their servants, the nobles were so simple and kind.After she left court life and had married the tollgatherer, and her boy was a baby, the royal physician came to get her to nurse a "great heir." She recited with a touch of pride the interviews with the grand personages, telling how the "great physician" begged, and the "dowager" cajoled, and how she refused with spirit at first, only compromising at last on half her time, because, "I wouldn't starve my baby for nobody."

Her native independence, increased perhaps by her American life, made it possible for her to criticise hesitatingly the customs of the "gentry," whom she still held in reverence. She told with disapproval how the mother of "the great heir" came into the grand nursery merely to pass down orders about her child, never offering to take her little one in her own arms. "She was no mother," the dear old grandmother concluded, sadly.

With her next breath, however, she would tell me how she used to dress her little girls in their pretty pink and blue frocks, and when "the great ladies" would drive by, they would stop to admire the pretty children. She remembered with pleasure that Lady-, whose maid she had been, once came to see her, and actually drove to the apothecary's herself for a lotion she found was needed.

She liked to tell me about the old English customs, the church fasts and feasts; the day51when "the clubs walked,"-a procession of some society that carried gilt-headed clubs and walked past the castle gates to the church; after the service joining in the games and merrymaking.

She said there was great strife among the carol singers to see who would get to the house first on Christmas morning, for the one who came first got the best present.

It was considered bad luck to have a girl come first, she said. After she came to Utah, two girls "came first," one year. "They did not mean any harm, but came on an errand; and though father went down cellar and cut them a rasher of bacon, he always said we had bad luck all that year-our girl died that year." "There may not be anything in it," the old lady acknowledged, "but I love to see a boy come first."

When I looked through the window at the new moon she shook her head with disapproval-it was bad luck to see it through glass. "Father used to laugh at me and tell me it was an old woman's notion, but he would call me outside to look at the moon."In her old English home there had been a tradition of a neighborhood giant who had "fallen in the moat and been drowned." "I couldn't say as it was so," she confessed, but the dear old soul evidently had a relish for the tale.

She loved to talk about the "shady lanes" of England, and the "nightingale that used to sing in our yard. Father and I used to listen to it moonlight nights," she recalled tenderly; adding, "There isn't any here; you don't have them here. Father used often to say, 'Oh, there is no nightingale here.'" Again and again, she told me with a smile that when they left England, "on the 26th of March, the sweetbriar hedges were in bloom."

She liked to remember the voyage over. "I love the sea," she exclaimed, with a noble light in her eyes. "We had a terrible storm, but no Latter-Day Saint was ever lost at sea, which shows that we were guided and blest-doesn't it?" she confused me by asking, in her sweet straightforward way.

It was like reading a page of history to hear her tell about crossing the plains. At Iowa they left the railroad and took to emigrant wagons. Their company was a wealthy one of fifty teams, and they had a merry time in crossing the plains. Even after traveling all day they were not too tired to dance at night. "We had splendid singers in our band," grandma said with a smile of pleasure at the memory of those happy days. But it was not all brightness. They met with one of the tragedies so common in pioneer life-their oxen stampeded and killed a number of women and children. Grandma pressed her own children thankfully to her heart, and the mourners buried their dead on the lonely plain and went on their way.

Grandma came over with a rich "Independent Company," but one day while I was sitting with her, an old woman came in and told us her experiences with a "hand-cart company;" one of the poorer companies that walked and drew part of their baggage in hand carts instead of having it carried by ox teams.

As the woman was very lame-just out of a hospital-she did not draw a cart as the other women did, though she walked most of the way.

She had a thrilling story to tell, and we drew up our chairs to listen, grandma often breaking in with some sympathetic explanation or pertinent question suggested by her own experience.

The company made their first five hundred miles very comfortably, walking about fifteen miles a day. But then a herd of buffalo stampeded the oxen, and they were forced to put cows before the wagons, transferring part of the baggage to the already loaded hand carts.

At Laramie, where they had expected to find provisions, they found nothing but a few barrels of sea biscuit. The company had left Iowa too late. They reached the mountains to find them deep under winter snows, and they had to go on with insufficient clothing for the cold weather, and with systems enfeebled by low rations."

At last we got so that we had only fourteen ounces apiece, for a three days' allowance. Some of the people boiled raw hide and ate it."

"Yes, I know you did," grandma exclaimed sympathetically. 52

"How did it taste?" I asked."

I ate it once, and I never wanted any more," she replied."We slept in the snow," she explained, and, when I exclaimed in horror, added ironically, "Snow is warm. You get up in the morning and there is a steam around you. The only way I kept from freezin' in the daytime was by taking the blankets I slept in and wrapping them around my shoulders. Eleven froze to death in one night." Seventy died in all. Those who survived became so hardened from suffering, they were hardly like human beings. "The sight of a dead dog would be more to me now than a dead man then," the poor woman told us. She said, "I saw a woman fall dead at table and her husband go on eating as if nothing had happened."

"Oh! you suffered shockin'," grandma cried with a sad shake of the head; mourning, "Such hardships as the Mormons have been through!" Brigham Young sent out a rescuing party as soon as he heard how late they started, but when it reached them, nearly a fifth of their company were already dead. The early emigrants found Utah very different from the country they had left. Grandma told me how they suffered. "It was a wilderness of sagebrush" then, she said,-"nothing but sagebrush!" But still she spoke no word of complaint. "It was all different from anything we'd been used to," she said patiently.

The house grandma came to from her spacious English home had but two rooms and was covered with a mud roof. "Father used to say it rained hardest after the rain was over," she said to an old neighbor, and he nodded his head emphatically, exclaiming, "That it did-that it did."

The mud dropped down on grandma's white counterpanes-she had never seen colored patchwork quilts till she came to America, she told me with pride; they seemed so "curious" when she first saw them.

Under the dripping mud roofs there was no place for the fine linen she had brought from England, and the settlers were in great need of clothing; so she consented to sell them some of hers. "The women told me they had never seen so many white blankets," she said with house-wifely satisfaction, adding, "and you know they were no good to me then. The women gave me a great deal of gold for my clothes. There were no four-posted bedsteads here, so I took my fine white dimity curtains, and had them dyed to make dresses for my girls."

The "plague" of grasshoppers came soon after grandma came to Utah. The men went out in bands and made ditches, into which they drove the grasshoppers, making the young hop into open sacks. "If they lay their eggs with us, we've got to support them," grandma explained.

After the "plague" came the "famine," when the crops having been destroyed, the starving settlers had to go "down on the bottoms for roots," and up in the mountains for service berries and the bulbs of the sago [sic] lily. "They ate everything of the vegetation, grandma declared,-"everything."

Money could buy little in those days. "The first pound of sugar I bought," she said, raising her forefinger and shaking it emphatically,-"the first pound of sugar I bought I paid one dollar for; and I didn't think it was much of a pound, either." She paid the dollar willingly, however, for "father was sick and couldn't eat, but said to me, 'I think I could eat a cup of sop,'"-an old country mixture of sugar and bread and milk.

The dear old lady's rambling talk threw strong side lights on the way in which she took up this new life, accepting uncomplainingly all that was strange and hard; bravely carrying the burdens of her whole family; and going out to minister to her neighbors whose sufferings were greater than her own.

Once a terrible snowstorm overwhelmed the village, and for two days she and her family had to stay in bed to keep from freezing. Even then her little children grew chilled in her arms. Her mother's heart was full of dread and anguish, but she kept up the courage of her husband, and quieted the little ones, hiding her tears from them. "I never let him see me cry," she said protectingly of father-"that would have distressed him." In the same way in going about among the sick of the village she would "never53tell them how sick they looked, the way some folks do, but always tried to cheer them up."

Her loving heart was ready to respond to any appeal. At Christmas time in the year of the "plague," she found a poor sick neighbor grieving because she had nothing for her children for Christmas. "I couldn't have it that those children shouldn't have anything in their stockings," she said; so she came home, baked some little English cakes at night, and filled their stockings with cakes and apples. "I think one of the girls was hearkening, but the rest didn't know,"-smiling at the memory,-"and the mother never forgot it."

"Everybody in the village loved grandpa and grandma," our school-teacher told us. And I could see the respect that must have been mingled with that love. The old lady spoke with kindly sympathy to the old serving-woman to whom she sold her eggs, but the woman asked their price with timid deference. Even now there was a touch of authority and a strain of simple dignity in her bearing. When her little grandsons, the brownies, came into her kitchen, they stood behind the stove with their hats in their hands, abashed before the little white-haired grandmother. She held a position of dignity in the neighborhood. She was the mother of a respected race-thirty great-grand-children blessed her memory. She had lands and cattle, and kept her private accounts, holding in mind the business of "the estate."

But mixed with her sound common sense and ability were the sterling virtues of a noble old English woman, while her whole nature was beautified by the deeply religious spirit that enabled her to idealize the gospel of Mormonism.

Her homely piety was touching in its simplicity. One day, when the family had left her in our care, I went over to sit with her at her lonely meal. The scene reminded me of a picture by one of the old Dutch painters. She drew her rocking-chair to the table, in her little kitchen, and spreading her loaf, bowed her dear white head and prayed, not a meaningless grace, but a fervent prayer for pardon for "sins thy pure eyes see." Afterwards, without a word, she raised her head and quietly began her meal.

She had been brought up in the Church of England, and in talking with her you might have thought her merely a devout believer in the Christian doctrines. The Book of Mormon and the words of Joseph Smith and Brigham Young had been merely added to the faith of her childhood.In telling me of her happy life with father, she said: "At eight o'clock we would have prayers, and then he would take his light and go to bed, and at nine I would shut up the stove and follow. My husband used to talk about the judgment day, when we'd be sitting here at night alone in the dark. He'd say it would be a wonderful time of great joy and great sorrowing, when we come up to be judged for the deeds done in the body, good or evil. He used to talk beautiful about it," the dear old wife said reverently.

Then she wandered on, as we sat in the twilight, talking about life and death and her faith. "It is such a short time here," she said; "life is so short-seems as though but a breath-and then there is all eternity. I never could have borne what I have-lost my children my Alice," her voice always grew tremulous when she spoke of this daughter; "and now the great trial-separated from my beloved husband," her voice breaking, "I never could have borne it all if it had not been for my hope, my great hope." 54

Karl G. Maeser [^5] How I Became a "Mormon"

Only in compliance with the counsel of President F. D. Richards have I reluctantly yielded to the repeated solicitations of the editor to relate briefly in the columns of the Era the incidents preceding and accompanying my conversion to the great work of the latter days, and my baptism into The Church, at Dresden, Saxony, October 14, 1855.

As "Oberlehrer" at the Budich Institute, Neustadt, Dresden, I, like most of my fellow-teachers in Germany, had become imbued with the scepticism that characterizes to a large extent the tendency of modern higher education, but I was realizing at the same time the unsatisfactory condition of a mind that has nothing to rely on but the ever changing propositions of speculative philosophy.

Although filled with admiration of the indomitable courage, sincere devotion, and indefatigable energy of the great German Reformer, Martin Luther, I could not fail to see that his work had been merely an initiatory one, and that the various protestant sects, taking their initiative from the revolutionary stand of the heroic monk at Wittenberg and Worms, had entirely failed to comprehend the mission of the reformation. The only strength of Protestantism seemed to be its negative position to the Catholic church; while in most of the positive doctrines of the multifarious protestant sects their antagonism to one another culminated only too often in uncompromising zealotry. These ideas illustrate in the main my views on religious subjects, at that time, and are explanatory of the Fact that scepticism had undermined the religious impressions of my childhood days, and why infidelity, now known by its modern name as agnosticism, was exercising its disintegrating influence upon me.

In that dark period of my life, when I was searching for a foothold among the political, social, philosophical, and religious opinions of the world, my attention was called to a pamphlet on the "Mormons," written by a man named Busch. The author wrote in a spirit of opposition to that strange people, but his very illogical deductions and sarcastic invectives aroused my curiosity, and an irresistible desire to know more about the subject of the author's animadversion caused me to make persistent inquiries concerning it. There were no "Mormons" in Saxony at that time, but, as I accidentally found in an illustrated paper, they had a mission in Denmark. Through an agent, I obtained the address of Elder Van Colt, then President of the Scandinavian mission. My letter addressed to that gentleman brought the answer that neither he nor his secretary could understand much German, but that Elder Daniel Tyler, President of the Swiss and German mission at Geneva, would give me all information I should desire on the subject of "Mormonism." I addressed myself, therefore, to that gentleman.

What I now relate in this paragraph, I never learned until twelve years later, at Beaver City, Utah, where Brother Tyler related it in my presence, at a meeting of the Relief Society. When my letter arrived at Geneva, headquarters of the mission, one of the traveling Elders suggested to President Tyler to have nothing to do with the writer of the letter, but to send it back without any answer, as it was most likely only a trick of the German police to catch our possible connections in that country. President Tyler declared that as the letter was impressing him55quite differently, he would send it back as suggested, but that it would come back again with more added to it, if the Lord was with the writer. Thus I got my letter back without any explanation or signature, only in a new envelope addressed to me. I felt insulted, and sent it with a few words of inquiries about this strange procedure, to Elder Van Cott, at Copenhagen. By return mail I received an apology from President Van Cott, stating that there must be a mistake somewhere, as Elder Tyler was a good and wise man. He had, however, sent my letter again to Geneva with an endorsement. This led to a long correspondence between Elder Tyler and myself. Pamphlets and some books were forwarded to me. Having some conceited notions in those days about illiteracy, and no faith in Bible or religious doctrines, correspondence and publications had no other effect upon me than to convince me that "Mormonism" was a much bigger thing than I had anticipated. I therefore expressed a desire for having an Elder sent to me.

A few weeks after that request had been made, Elder William Budge, now President of Bear Lake Stake, arrived at my house. It was providential that such a man was the first "Mormon" I ever beheld, for, although scarcely able to make himself understood in German, he, by his winning and yet dignified personality, created an impression upon me and my family which was the keynote to an indispensable influence that hallowed the principles he advocated. After about eight weeks' sojourn in our family, during which time my brother-in-law, Brother Edward Schoenfeld, and wife, and another teacher at one of the public schools in Dresden, had become interested in the teachings of the "Mormon" Elder, Elder F. D. Richards, then President of the European mission, and Elder William Kimball, arrived in Dresden. A few interviews at which Elder Budge acted as interpreter, led to the baptism of eight souls in the river Elbe; the first baptisms after the order of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in that country.

On coming out of the water, I lifted both of my hands to heaven and said: "Father, if what I have done just now is pleasing unto thee, give me a testimony, and whatever thou shouldst require of my hands I shall do, even to the laying down of my life for this cause."

There seemed to be no response to my fervent appeal, and we walked home together, President Richards and Elder Budge at the right and the left of me, while the other three men walked some distance behind us, so as to attract no notice. The other members of the family were baptized a few days later. Our conversation was on the subject of the authority of the Priesthood, Elder Budge acting as interpreter. Suddenly I stopped Elder Budge from interpreting President Richards' remarks, as I understood them, and replied in German, when again the interpretation was not needed as President Richards understood me also. Thus we kept on conversing until we arrived at the point of separation, when the manifestation as suddenly ceased as it had come. It did not appear to me as strange at all while it lasted, but as soon as it stopped, I asked Brother Budge what that all meant, and received the answer that God had given me a testimony. For some time afterwards, whenever I conversed with President Richards, in England, we could understand each other more readily than when I was conversing with others, or rather trying to converse, until my progress in the English language made this capacity unnecessary.

This is the plain statement of the power of the Holy Spirit manifested to me by the mercy of my Heavenly Father, the first one of the many that have followed, and that have corroborated the sincere conviction of my soul, that the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is of God and not of man. 56

Juanita Brooks<_P> [^6] Home Reminiscences of Uncle Will Brooks

I was born April 23, 1881, in St. George, Utah, the fifth child and second son of George and Emily Cornelia Branch Brooks.

My father was a stonecutter by trade; he had been trained by his foster father, Edward L. Parry, who was the master mason for both the Tabernacle and the Temple.

My mother was a skilled housewife and a sweet-tempered, cheerful person. Her hands were never idle. When she sat down to rest after cooking or washing, she would pick up a piece of mending, or fancywork, or knitting. In the evening she often read to us, or played her organ.

My parents were comfortable in the new rock house on the hill, although its two rooms were already becoming crowded.

I was the third child to be born in the new house. My sister Josephine (Dode) was first, then came my brother George. Emma and May, the two older girls, had been born in rented homes downtown. On the day my brother George was born, December 21, 1879, Father brought home two locust saplings from where he was working away down on 165 West Fourth South and planted them in honor of the birth of his first son. It was a long hike uphill at the end of a day's work, even without the extra load. In telling of it later, Pa always said, "They were about six feet long and as big around as my middle finger." This same tree is now 12 feet in circumference, and a plaque labels it an historic tree.

These trees were important to us, and also were the mulberry trees that were put in a few years later when the people were counseled to raise silk worms. Each tree was planted beside a solid cedar stake to which it was tied with a wide denim string, and woe to anyone who disturbed it in any way.

The Tabernacle steeple and spire with the bell and clock, also had special meaning for us. Our top step was on a direct line with the ball on top of the steeple. We often had our friends look along the top of the stone to prove it, and to show how high our house was. We could read the Town Clock easily, and we always checked our own to see if it was running right. In the quiet morning hours we could hear the big clock strike, if we were out of doors. The same was true at night.

Besides ringing for all of the regular meetings, the bell was tolled for funerals. Mostly that just meant that it was rung very slowly, but when Old Brother Pymm died, it was struck with a hammer, slowly, waiting for the sound to die, one stroke for every year of his long life. I thought they would never get through.

No matter what went on outside, our home was a pleasant place in which our mother's sunny disposition colored everything. Evenings during the winter were spent before the fireplace in the living room; in the summer we played in the yard. As each new baby arrived every two years, we all rejoiced and loved it and moved up one notch to make room. I have no memory of any special preparations beforehand or any talk about it. When the day arrived, we were all sent down to Aunt Pal Miles' house just off the hill and across the street, and when we came back there would be a little new brother or sister.

My little world soon extended to the corral and to all the farm animals. I remember especially the large stone pig troughs, cut wide and deep enough to hold several buckets of water or slops. There were two of them, one in each pen, for the pigs were very important in our economy, and the brood sow must have a special place away from the growing or fattening pigs. These stone troughs could not be pushed around or turned over. Some people thought them expensive, but lumber was scarce, and Father's business was cutting stone. The57horses also had scooped out, hollowed stone feeders from which they ate their grain.

The corrals and sheds were a challenge to a climbing child, for in this hot climate the pigs must have a shelter of cottonwood boughs covered with straw, beneath which was a "waller hole." The horse shed was high and covered with cane bagasse. Only the cows had no shelter, for they were turned out each day to the pasture or to the herd's boy. So the horses, cows, pigs and chickens, and the garden beyond the row of fig trees along the east fence were my little world. On the front it was bounded by the ditch. Father had built the ditch in a series of falls, one of them high enough to put the big water bucket under for filling the barrel. This fifty-gallon barrel had to be filled every day for drinking water and for our culinary use. It was a task so hard that as soon as we were large enough to lift a bucket to the top, we all took turns filling the barrel. Father's real reason for the fall, though, was that he liked to hear the sound of running water. He called it part of "the music of the spheres."

For the first four or five years of our lives we were kept consistently on our own lot. Only those past five years of age went down the hill to Primary and Sunday School. Mother would stay home to keep the younger ones and have dinner ready when the others came back. The Tabernacle bell would ring out loudly a half-hour before the service was to start as a reminder to all the people in the valley that it was time to be on the way. The strokes of the Town Clock announced the beginning of the service. During the half-hour between, the older Brooks children would start down the hill, all washed and starched and ironed, shoes soot-polished, hair beribboned or greased into place.

Our nearest neighbors across the street and out the lane a short distance were the Samuel Adams family. I remember them especially because I wore Nell's shoes when we had our family picture taken. Mother did not want posterity to see me dressed up and barefoot; it was better to have borrowed shoes though they were girl's shoes.

Our first visit unattended came when Mother let George and me go by trail over the hill west and south to the John E. Pace home on Second West. Here was a large family of children in what seemed to me a very large house. One mother had died, and the other had taken in all of the children along with her own. As we came near the fence, we hesitated, for we were strange, and several boys on the other side were eyeing us closely.

George, always quick to rise to any occasion, took me by the hand and said, "Come and see!" As they drew near, he held up my left hand with the third joint of the little finger cut off.

They were all held by this strange sight-a short little finger without a nail. Then George told them the story of how, before I was even two years old, I had dragged a chair up to the table, which during the summer had been kept in front of the fireplace. I climbed from the chair to the top of the table. By stretching hard, I could reach to the top of the mantel piece, where I could barely touch Uncle Henry's razor. It was in a case, which I opened. Then taking the razor out, I opened it, looking at the sharp blade like the one I had seen Father scrape over his cheeks. Father always wore a mustache, and in telling the story later we were always careful to say that it was Uncle Henry's razor. This fact relieved our father of any guilt of carelessness. But George warmed to his story:

"He was just going to try to shave himself, when he heard someone coming, so he hurried to close the razor and put it back into its place. But that sharp blade shut exactly in the top joint of that little finger and WOOPS! it fell to the floor, and blood spurted all over the place."

Later the story became embellished to add that the severed little joint bounced and wiggled on the floor, like the end of a snake's tail that has been cut off. The real story was better. After the doctor arrived post haste to dress the wound, he wanted the missing end to bind back on, in the hope that it might grow into place. It was not to be found! They looked everywhere, and after the wound was dressed and the doctor left, Mother found it clutched in her own palm, held securely by her middle finger. 58

Told by George on this warm afternoon, the story held the listeners captivated, and I felt a sudden sense of importance, of being different. This stubby little finger was something no one else had, and often in my early years I would show it as a sort of conversation piece. It was my one claim to fame.

Actually, it meant nothing. I was just the fifth one of a family of twelve, taking my place and my little responsibilities as I grew up and sharing my experiences with those older and younger than I. Always there was a kind, understanding Mother to turn to, and a firm, just Father to follow about and work with as I grew up.

Some of our happiest evenings were during the winter when Father would have a big sheet of paper on the table-heavy paper like butcher paper-and would be trying out designs of lettering or decoration for headstones. We would all coax him to draw us a "story." It became a game. He would put down a little mark here and a few others in another place and still others in different parts, and we would try to guess what he was going to make. "A tree," "a horse," "a dog" we would call out. Then with two or three heavy strokes, the picture would be finished. He worked with charcoal for many of these, so they were large and plain. The story of Farmer Brown and his pig was done so often that any of us could do it. It began with Farmer Brown, who lived in a little three-cornered house with a window and a door. He searched up hill and down dale for that lost pig, thinking he saw it here, but it was something else, thinking it was there, returning home discouraged, looking out of the window, and going directly to the place, where "he cracked his whip, and started it home," and the tail went on with a curl and a flourish. That would end the entertainment, and we must all go to bed so that Pa could go on with his serious work.

Often Mother would read to us from our Bible Stories book the stories of David and Goliath, the Three Hebrew Children, and others, or she would drill us in little verses. In summer we would play on the grass in the front yard, or play running and hiding games. On Saturday evenings, after he had taken his bath and had supper, Father often got out his fiddle, moved the low, rawhide-bottomed chair out under the trees-we had mulberry trees now, besides the locust, and a plum tree-and played his fiddle. He played only by ear and he played the old country tunes, but it was real music to us. Now we did not play noisy games, but lay on the grass to hear the music. We all knew the story of how as a boy, he had traded his pony for that violin, when it didn't have a single string on it, so we sensed how precious it was. I think no music has ever sounded better to me than some of those "concerts" on a summer evening under a high moon, especially at the nesting time of our little bird, when the father bird sang along, too. We always claimed these birds as our special ones, and they came back year after year. Even to this day Ed and I will note their return. "I see that my bird is back," Ed said to me this spring. "What do you mean, your bird," I answered. "That has been my bird for as long as I can remember." We make a joke of it, but we both know how many memories that night-singing bird brings back.

We learned early that while we could not go down town except on an errand from which we had to hurry right back, the youngsters of town came to us. That is, the boys in their teens came. Too young to be on regular jobs, they often wandered in the hills to the north. The Sugar Loaf was a favorite place, and right on the trail was the Brooks pond, formed from the spring on our lot. Often their trip ended right there. The pond was emptied twice a day, morning and evening, to water the garden. By mid-afternoon it would be deep enough to swim in, and by sundown it would be a real challenge. During the hot months it was a favorite gathering place.

Father saw to it that we learned to swim soon after we could walk, for that open pond was a real hazard. Some told the story that he threw each child in on its second birthday, and forced him to swim or drown. That, of course, was not true, but we could all swim well when we were quite young. Only a few months ago (October 1968) I went to visit my old friend, Athele Milne, at Washington. When I introduced59my wife to him, he said, "You see, Mrs. Brooks, I've known Billy Brooks all his life. He's the kid that damn-near drowned me the first time I went to the Brooks Pond to swim. I was older'n him and bigger, but I hadn't been where I could learn to swim, and as I walked out into the pond, he jumped at me from the bank and rode me under. I had a bad time gittin' out-a there alive."

I didn't remember the incident, myself, but it was likely true, for we enjoyed introducing new kids to our pond. I do remember how, when I went to be baptized at the Temple, Mother got me all ready in the regular outfit and sent me out. I climbed the high steps up to the edge of the font, and when I looked into that big clear pool, I just dove right in and started swimming about. Poor Brother Granger-he stood beside the steps with his hand out ready to help me down, and coax me in, as he had to do with so many of the little eight-year-olds. He thought I had fallen in, and was catching about frantically trying to save me!

I did stop and he baptized me properly, but not before I had made a round or two in the font. What I started to say was that our pond was a drawing card that brought lots of boys up the hill. Many little girl groups came, too, but not to swim. They would bring lunches and start on a hike up the hill. Some would go on up to the Sugar Loaf, but to others, by the time they reached our place the shade and grass looked so inviting that they often ate their lunch right here. The water barrel and tin cup was another advantage over drinking from a stream. So from May through September we had many callers. No matter what age they were, we had Brooks children the same age, all ready and willing to play at any games, or to just sit and visit. Quite often the callers would help us finish our jobs-pulling so many rows of weeds from the garden or cleaning up the yards or cutting wood-so that then we could play.

Dode was our chief entertainer during our early years. She loved to dress us up, put on programs, tell stories. She ordered us about and we obeyed her gladly. If it was only to make paper caps and get stick guns, we marched and sang and counted off "hay-foot-straw-foot" around the yard. But her real genius lay in story telling. I can still chill a little at her "Sister Annie, Sister Annie can yon see them coming yet?" Of course there were the "Three Bears" and "Little Red Riding Hood," but there were also impromptu tales in which witches and goblins and especially "Old Shiney Eyes," held us spellbound.

Stories of Dode and her doings always entertain family gatherings to this day, for as long as she lived she meant the unusual, the surprise, the joke on somebody. Although the tale of her narrow escape from being drowned has been told so often, I must include it here.

She loved to visit, to go to one home or another with a girl of her age and get to playing until she would forget the time. Suddenly she would realize that it was after sundown, which was her deadline for being home. It was actually dark. She would hurry up the hill, running across the yard to fall breathless in at the front door. Again and again she had been scolded and warned and threatened. Always she promised solemnly-"cross my heart and hope to die"-that she would get home right after school. And for a while she would keep the promise, but it was usually because she had persuaded some friend to come up with her.

Then came the unlucky night when she was even later than ever. Supper was over, the dishes washed, the littlest baby in bed, and the three or four others of us ready for bed. The days were so short now; dark came too early. Dode came in panting and crying a little, to meet a very stern father.

"Well, Dode," he said, "Your mother and I have decided that you are not worth raising. You lie to us all the time. You say that you will come home before sundown, but you never do. And here it is past bedtime." Dode's cries raised to wails, but Pa was unmoved.

"We've talked it over and decided that it would be better to drown you now than to raise you up to be a person that no one can believe or depend on. Don't bother about getting yourself any supper. You won't need any tonight. We'll go right up to the pond now and get it over."

Now the whole family of children burst into60tears. Emma and May began to promise that they would help Dode and remind her and see that she did get home. But Pa was unmoved. Taking Dode firmly by the hand, he started up the path to the pond. The dismal crying procession followed behind, while Dode's cries wakened the echoes.

He did not stop until we had reached the edge of the pond, when he made a quick move, picked her up and stepped back as if to toss her in. Now the shrieks of all the others joined in. Pa set her down. For the first time he seemed to listen, to pay any attention.

"Well," he said at last. "If you will all help Dode, and if she will remember herself, maybe we can give her one more chance. But we just don't want to raise a girl who can't keep her promises."

Instantly we all felt better; the three older girls turned and hurried back, Dode way ahead of the others, lest Pa should change his mind. George and I followed, while Pa picked up Zillie and carried her back. All the time this was going on, Mother had not said a word or stopped her knitting. It was so good to run back from the threatened disaster to the warm room, the fireplace, and Ma there busy and cheerful. It was always like this. Pa had different ways of managing and disciplining the children, but she never interfered once.

At another time he used a novel method of learning who was guilty of cutting down a young almond tree. This tree was the one he had purchased especially because it was a soft-shell and valuable. He had taken great care in planting it and putting a protective stake beside it, and here it was, whacked off clean. Naturally he was angry. He called the whole crowd around him, and asked each in turn if he had cut down that almond tree, or if he knew who had. George and Sam and I were all there, and five or six neighbor youngsters. No one would admit he had done the deed; no one would say that he had seen someone else do it. Yet it had been done within the last few hours for Pa himself had put a bucket of water around it just at noon.

Father walked away to something else for a few minutes and then came back by the tree and called us all together again. Now he had a round rock about the size of a hen's egg. "Look here, all of you. Come here and line up against the wall. Do you see this rock that I have in my hand?<_P> It is a magic stone. I call it my 'true stone,' because it will not hit anyone who tells the truth, but it goes straight to the one who is telling a lie. Now you all stand right still. Don't move, and you'll not be hurt. But the one that cut that tree down had better look out! He'll get it! He'll get it sure!"

He stepped back twelve to fifteen feet and began winding up his arm, still cautioning us all not to move. As he raised his arm to fling, one little fellow dashed out and ran for home as fast as he could go, bawling at the top of his voice. Now we all knew who had cut the tree down.

We all loved our father, but we knew enough to obey him promptly. We each had our chores, and while we might bargain with each other as to whose turn it was to fill the barrel or cut the kindling or carry in the wood, these tasks must be done, and done on time. I don't think he ever whipped one of us further than a cuff that would send us reeling, or a swift kick, or a cut with a willow. But we never dared him or defied him or talked back to him. We did as we were told at once, and then later made explanations or protests, for we knew that he would be fair with us.

My first trips down town were with the older girls and George to go to Primary on Saturday afternoon. Primary was really just a preparation for Sunday, for it meant that we would all be run through the big wooden tub in the middle of the kitchen floor. Mother would oversee the scrubbing; from the shampoo of our hair down to the toenails, we were scoured and dug out and trimmed up. Then with clean underwear, we put on our best every-day outfit to go to Primary. It was only for children under twelve, but it was good training.

These Saturday afternoon excursions were wonderful for us. We went leisurely, and explored as we went along. At the bottom of the hill we cut across Diagonal Street to Johnson's corner where the printing shop was, past Croft's Trunk Manufacturing Company, then Morris's Store, to the Riding Tin Shop on the corner. It61occupied the site of the Big Hand Cafe today, and was a most interesting place to get into, for tin pans and tin cups of different sizes, wash dishes, candle molds, colanders-there seemed no end to the things Brother Riding made from tin, and he didn't mind if you came in and looked around.

The center of most of the business in St. George was the Wooley, Lund & Judd store, which had been built for the first Social Hall in the valley. Across the street to the east was the Big House, three full stories high and awe-inspiring it was so grand. There were always horses tied to hitching posts, or an occasional wagon stopped by the sidewalk. We often peeked into the St. George Co-op because its double-doors were flush on the sidewalk and the screens a little ajar.

The Tithing Office was always a busy place, but no children ever got into there unattended, and from there on down to the corner and all across the bottom of that block was a high stone wall. It looked terribly high to us, though it was only six feet. We knew that it enclosed the Tithing Office yard, the storage for grain, and hay, and all the other things people brought in.

Across the street was the Tabernacle-safe inside its white picket fence that went all the way around the block with trees on the outside edge of the sidewalk all the way around the block too, like a double edge of decoration around the building. I liked to rub my hands across the stone as we hurried around to go in at the back door, for Primary was held in the basement. This is the house Pa built, I always thought, though perhaps a few others helped.

So it was week after week during these early years. From my home to the Tabernacle and back became a regular pattern every Saturday afternoon and Sunday morning.

I was only six years old when Sam was born, and was with the other children down to Aunt Pal's house, when word came that we had a new little brother. I have heard the story many times of how at his birth Sam was Mother's largest child, weighing 13 pounds and 8 ounces. Sister Church, the midwife, had a hard time managing the delivery. Though Sister Church was still busy with her. Mother could see at once that the child wasn't breathing.

"Look, George! The baby! He isn't breathing! Get the doctor, quick! Do something, somebody! The baby needs help!"

Pa ran from the corral to get old Bonnet and ride for the doctor, when by the grace of the Lord, there was old Dr. Higgins coming down the road in his little buggy. Pa ran out, stopped his horse, and told him to hurry to the baby. He would take care of the horse himself.

Dr. Higgins immediately started mouth-to-mouth resuscitation, and soon literally breathed the breath of life into Sam's limp, quiet body. From that instant Sam seemed to thrive. A large baby at birth, he had a prodigious appetite; all food agreed with him. He loved the world and everything and everyone in it. With five sisters and two brothers to pay attention to him, he had a happy babyhood. He fairly glowed with good health and good spirits. He seemed the eternal optimist.

But he was clumsy; he would fall down. When he was just cleaned up and started down the hill, Mother always admonished us to, "Keep hold of Sam's hand. Don't let him fall down and get all dirty." Rare was the time when Sammy reached his destination un-smirched on the front.

Dode took over Sam as her special charge. One day she persuaded Ma to let her take him to school. There was to be a program after recess, and school out at noon, so she could manage fine. Ma consented reluctantly, but Dode insisted, so they dressed him up in kilts with braid trimming, and Dode set out with him, his gold-blond hair smooth as silk, his fair pink skin shining. Sam always wore a smile, for he looked out upon the world with the highest expectations. Dode took him down in the little wagon; she knew that his chubby little legs could not negotiate that hill, either down or back. He was not yet two years old.

When they reached the schoolhouse, Dode lifted him out and brushed him off. She was more than gratified with his reception. He was a beautiful child; everyone, even the teacher, said he was a beautiful child. So for a while things were rosy. Dode was having such a good time62that she neglected to notice certain signs in Sammy's behavior which would have prevented the disaster. She was brought back to reality with a start when a big boy at the back of the room stood up and called out in a loud voice, "P-H-I-E-WOO! Let me outta here!" And out he charged, followed by another boy, and another. Sammy, innocent of offense, stood in the midst of the evidence and smiled.

Poor Dode! There is no way to measure her humiliation. We shall not go into detail, but the teacher dismissed the group for a short, early recess, and one way and another Dode managed to get the baby into a condition where she could put him into the wagon and take him home. The teacher was kind, though not very helpful. She did give Dode access to the janitor's bucket and some cleaning rags for the floor.

For a while after that Dode did not offer to take Sammy along when she went anywhere, but she soon forgot. Later when he was so trainable in acting the part of the bear in a little stunt she put on again and again, she became all the more attached to him.

About this time there came to St. George a man who called himself Professor Manseneeta. He had a small display of various animals, but his prize actor was a dancing bear. He would have it do a few little tricks, and then pass the plate for contributions. Dode, always a mimic, put on his identical act with Sam as the bear. She dressed in some of George's things-shirt, pants, coat and shoes. Then she stuffed her hair up under a little hard-boiled derby hat, pasted on a small mustache, got her long, sharp stick, and assumed the same poise and tone of voice. Little rolly-polly Sam was willing to try anything; he enjoyed this business as much as she did.

With a coverall suit, stockings on his hands, and his hood arrangement boasting some pinned-on ears, he made a good little imitation bear. At least he was always a pleasant one. "Professor Manseneeta" would give his initial announcement in a loud voice, and then proceed to show off his world-famous bear. She would begin with him on all fours and then order him onto his hind legs, with some poking and prodding.

"Roll over like a drunken man," she would call out, at which he would fall down and roll onto his back with all four feet in the air. "Stand up tall. Smile at the folks," and Sam would do the perfect grin. "Now dance in a ring, jig-a-te-jig," and he did a good imitation of a bear's shuffling, after which he passed the plate in all seriousness and expected something to be put into it, if only a button or marble or bit of rock.

A family joke was the story of his being sent to herd the cows, and not to bring them in until the sun was in the Devil's saddle on the black hill. He got very weary. "I cried three times, but the sun didn't move," he reported. At home one cry usually got him what he wanted.

I remember well the time of the polygamy raids, when the two federal officers, Jim McGeary and Johnny Armstrong, came to town. They always traveled in the same little one-seated, black-topped buggy and put up at the Big House at the bottom of the hill. We didn't have to worry about them because Pa had only one wife, but we knew that some of the families were pretty concerned. Everyone in town recognized the outfit and the officers in it, and all were curious to know which men they caught-if they got any. It was like a grown-up game of hide-and-seek, and all of us were interested in the ones who had to hide. Most of them were our church leaders.

I knew that some of the families on Swiss Block down near where I herded the cows on the Rodd Lots were plural wives of men who lived in Santa Clara. They would be far enough away so that the officers would not know who they belonged to. The plural families in St. George had their own special hideout places for the father, places that even their own children did not always know.

One thing was certain. Every polygamist in St. George was warned before the officers got here. They had to stop at Silver Reef to rest and feed their team. That would take several hours, and the trip from there down would take four or five hours longer. Well, as soon as they drove into Silver Reef, the boy at the telegraph station would wire to the one in the St. George63Tithing Office to "send me up two chairs." That was the code to say that there were two officers on their way, or if there would be another man along on horseback, as there often was, the order would be for three chairs. Word would be sent out at once to every family where the father had more than one wife so that he could plan his get-away.

I remember one time when I was playing with Stephen Whitehead down in front of the Co-op Store. The officers drove up and got out. As they passed us, McGeary stopped and took hold of Stephen's arm and asked, sharp like, "What is your name?"

"Stevie Wells," he answered promptly and clearly. Stevie had been trained what to tell strangers. His mother was a Wells, and he was to use her name.

I remember, too, a song that the youngsters would sing about the officers. It was a long one, with a verse for several of the local men. D. D. McArthur was our stake president, and his verse went like this:

"McGeary searched McArthur's house Goodbye, my lover, goodbye And all he could find was the tail of a mouse Goodbye, my lover, goodbye. Bye-lo, my baby. Bye-1o, my baby. Bye-lo, my baby. Goodbye, my lover, goodbye."

Many stories were told of how the officers had been outwitted. One man rolled up in his bedding under the springseat, and had his boys drive the wagon right through town and down to the field. Dudley Leavitt was at the Washington factory when the black-topped buggy drove up, and the officers got out. One of the clerks said to him, "There they are! McGeary and Armstrong! Run, Brother Leavitt! Quick! Hide!"

But it was too late to run, and there was no place to hide. Dudley just jerked off the cap of one of the employees and put it on, took his oil can, and proceeded to oil the machinery, climbing up a ladder to get at the intricate parts. The officers were not hunting for him especially, but for whoever was there that belonged to the wagon stopped outside. They looked everywhere-in the cotton bins, behind the stacked sacks, around the house, but did not suspect the busy employee who was oiling the machinery.

We heard the story of Brother John S. Stucki at Santa Clara. He had not gone into hiding at all, for it was harvest time, his fruit was ripe, and he must save his crop. The officers drove up to his place in the late forenoon, as he was coming in with a bucket of grapes. He went up to the buggy, greeted them, and offered them a bunch of grapes. Then he invited them to the orchard and told them to help themselves to the peaches that were ripe, giving them some to take along with them.

"I think the girls have dinner ready," he said at last. "Would you like to join us?"

The officers were glad to accept. Both wives were there, the youngest with a small boy. They served a good nourishing meal. The visitors talked about the weather and crops, but did not mention their real business. At the end, they thanked them all, Brother Stucki and his family, and went away without any mention of arrest. Nor did they ever trouble Brother Stucki again.

They did arrest and take Doctor Higgins soon after Sam was born, and took him to court at Beaver, where he was sentenced to two years in the state prison. I remember well when the doctor came home in the fall of 1888. All the town went out to meet him, for he was one man that everybody loved and trusted.

Pa took us in the wagon-the older girls went with friends, I think-and we drove out to the east end of town where the band was and the choir and all the town officers. They had their wagons arranged, and waited until some horsemen, carrying flags, came with Brother Higgins' outfit. The band played before and played again after; the choir sang a number or two, the leaders made short speeches, and Dr. Higgins responded. Then he went through the crowd shaking hands with everybody.

The next Sunday Dr. Higgins made a report64in the Tabernacle, and the Brooks family down to and including me, was present. I think Dode stayed home to tend the younger ones, for there were four, and Edith, the baby, was just three months old.

I don't know how many men from our town served time in the "pen" for polygamy. The other one that I remember going out to greet was Brother Hardy, the man with the carpenter shop and turning mill at the east end of town. He made our toys, too, and had worked with Pa on the Tabernacle and Temple. This time was about like the welcome home for Doctor Higgins, only that this time I was horseback. That meant that I was more free to do as I pleased. Brother Hardy waved at us and called out our names, and I was surprised that he should remember us. He himself looked so different with his beard shaved off, that I don't think I would have known him if I met him alone on the street.

Since I have grown older and my wife has done some research on this subject, I have become interested in the hiding places of these brethren, and in their code for keeping in touch with each other and warning each other. I think an interesting study could be done on this subject. 65

John Taylor (1808-87) was third president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Born in Milnthorpe, Westmoreland, England, Taylor emigrated to the United States in 1828 or 1829. A fervent Methodist, Taylor heard of Mormonism from Parley P. Pratt. He and a number of his friends were baptized in 1836. Ordained an apostle in 1838, he fulfilled a mission in England (1838-41), then returned to edit the Times and Seasons and the Nauvoo Neighbor. A staunch defender of Joseph Smith, Taylor was with the Smiths at the time of their deaths in Carthage Jail. It was Taylor who sang, on the request of Hyrum Smith, "A Poor Wayfaring Man of Grief" moments before the mob arrived. After fulfilling missions to England, France, Germany, and other European Countries, Taylor became active in the territorial legislature. He presided over the Church in the eastern States, where he published The Mormon, a newspaper advocating the Mormon cause against a hostile government. After the death of Brigham Young, this poet and hymnist became the third president of the Church, presiding from 1880 until his death in 1887, at which time he was a fugitive from government officials who desired to bring him to trial for violation of the Edmunds-Tucker Act.This account can be found in HC, 7:99-108.

Daniel W. Jones (1830-1915) was born in Boonslick, Howard County, Missouri. During the Mexican War he enlisted and spent some "wild and reckless" days in Mexico. He learned the Spanish language, and, after leaving the army, traveled as a sheepherder to Utah. Accidentally wounded near Provo, he was nursed to physical and spiritual health by the Mormons, whom he joined. He subsequently aided in translating the Book of Mormon into Spanish, presided over the Mexican mission, preached the gospel among the "Lamanites" and wrote the account of his remarkable life, Forty Years Among the Indians, from which this selection has been taken. He died in Mesa, Arizona. In the excerpt presented here, Jones demonstrates the remarkable resiliency of wit and spirit that sustained him through many difficult experiences. Having volunteered to join the rescue effort to save the freezing and dying handcart immigrants, he volunteered again, this time to remain all winter in the mountain s as leader of the group protecting the goods abandoned by the unfortunate people of the handcart companies.

Scipio Africanus Kenner ( 1852-1913) was born in Missouri, crossed the plains with his parents in 1860, but was not baptized a member of the Church until 1865. He became a journeyman printer with the Deseret News, later holding at one time or another almost every job associated with that paper from typesetter to editor. He subsequently became a telegraph operator in Utah and Nevada, a member of the Bar, city attorney, county attorney, Church attorney and assistant United States attorney. He held public office as a justice of the peace and state legislator and gained public attention as an orator and author of wit and eloquence. Besides his numerous editorials and articles, he published several books, including The Practical Politican and Utah As It Is. This account was published in the 1901 Improvement Era.

Florence A. Merriam Bailey ( l863-1942), a non-Mormon, was an ornithologist of wide renown. Born in New York State and educated at Smith College and Stanford University, Mrs. Bailey is the author of Birds through an Opera Glass (1889) and several other volumes of bird lore, including Among the Birds in the Grand Canyon (1939). She spent a few months in Utah in 1893, about which she wrote My Summer in a Mormon Village (1894). The village was most likely Bountiful, a few miles north of Salt Lake City. We include this section of her book because it is full of rich insights into a Mormon life.

Karl G. Maeser (I 828-1901), one of Mormondom's most beloved educators, was born in Meiszen, Saxony, Germany. Well educated, Dr. Maeser became a successful German educator. He was baptized into the Church in 1855, after which he resigned his position and moved with his family to London, where he labored among German-speaking residents, building up a branch of the Church. In 1856, he emigrated to Philadelphia, where he labored for the Church until 1860, then moved to Utah and began teaching school. In 1864 he was called to become tutor to Brigham Young's family. Later, in 1867, while he was serving as an organist for the Tabernacle Choir, he was called to preside over the Swiss and German mission, where he founded the Church journal, Der Stern. In 1876 Brigham Young called Dr. Maeser to establish the Brigham Young Academy in Provo, Utah (later BYU), where he worked until his death, a leader in the Church Sunday School system and in the higher education program of the Church. This account of his conversion was published in the 1889 Improvement Era.

Juanita Brooks (1898- ),a well-known historical scholar and writer of remarkable charm, is the mother of a large family trod is a pioneer of sorts. She is the author of Mountain Meadows Massacre and biographies of Dudley Leavitt and John D, Lee. She also edited the diaries of Lee and the journal of Hosea Stout. A frequent contributor to local and national journals, she has published most recently Uncle Will Tells His Story (1970), a biography of her husband, from which the above has been excerpted.
