Neal A. Lambert, Richard E. Cracroft, Believing People: Literature of the Latter-day Saints ( 1979)

2 LETTERS

I would write to you from time to time and give you information in relation to many subjects. Joseph Smith, Doctrine and Covenants 128:167

INTRODUCTION

To the modern Mormon, as to his non-Mormon contemporaries, letter writing has become, virtually, a lost art. Even the Mormon missionary, long a source of vital and vivid Mormon epistles, is turning more and more to recording on tape his weekly letter to his loved ones at home. In Mormondom, as elsewhere, the reading of letters is left to the historian.

Such was not always the case. Joseph Smith, as the History of the Church attests, was a prolific letter writer who employed numerous scribes to record his ideas, his instructions to the Saints in outlying branches of the Church, his legal and doctrinal debates with enemies of the Church, and his mundane instructions to his associates in the Church and in municipal and national government. His letters, though understandably objective because of his use of scribes, demonstrate his love for his people and for his wife and family as well as his compassion for the sinner and his deep and sincere faith in God and in his own prophetic calling.

Similarly, Brigham Young's letters demonstrate a steadfast devotion to Joseph Smith and the Church. Indeed, in President Young's letters, as in Joseph Smith's, we see a pattern: a combination of the practical and the pragmatic with the ideal and the spiritual; the product comes near to defining that Yankee transcendental American Christianity which lies at the heart of Mormonism. Both Joseph Smith and Brigham Young found in the combination the key to the hearts of their people, and their letters are strong indicators of the charisma which the Mormon people enjoyed, and continue to enjoy, in the lives of their leaders.

The letters of other Mormons from the rank and file tell us, in often rough but poignant and telling prose, just how it was to walk through the busy and destined streets of Nauvoo; how it was to prepare, in the chaotic impermanence of Winter Quarters, for the uncertainties of the trek to the West; how it was to set up housekeeping in a wilderness; and, finally, how it was, amidst all of these hardships, to wish and pray for one's comfortable family to catch the vision of Mormonism and flee from Babylon to Zion-and to all of the hardships which accompany such a flight.

In Ellen Spencer Clawson's writing we see one more hardship required by the new faith-that a loving wife share her husband with other loving wives. Still, in her letter, typical of many, she demonstrates the pattern-the Latter-day Saint willingness to keep-Joseph- and Brigham-like-her eye of faith bright and clear, while her flesh might show a nagging human reticence to submit to the realities of the vision.

Mormon letters, generally uncollected and unread, provide treasures, rich insights, and marvelous stories of great and minor defeats and great and minor triumphs; and they demonstrate, to us who live in a softer age when the pattern is more blurred, the power of faith to move men and women far beyond accepted limits of human endurance. Mormon letters go far toward explaining the mystique which has attracted so many to Mormonism, regardless of the cost.6869

Joseph Smith To Emma Smith [^1] June 6th Greenville, Floyd County[Indiana] 1832

Dear Wife:

I would inform you that Brother Martin has arrived here and brought the pleasing news that our families were well when he left them which greatly cheered our hearts and revived our spirits. We thank our Heavenly Father for his goodness unto us and all of you. Martin arrived on Saturday the same week he left Chagrin having a prosperous time. We are all in good health. Brother Whitney's leg is gaining and he thinks he shall be able to perform his journey so as to get home about the 20th.

My situation is a very unpleasant one although I will endeavor to be contented, the Lord assisting me. I have visited a grove which is just back of the town almost every day where I can be secluded from the eyes of any mortal and there give vent to all the feelings of my heart in meditation and prayer. I have called to mind all the past moments of my life and am left to mourn and shed tears of sorrow for my folly in suffering the adversary of my soul to have so much power over me as he has had in times past but God is merciful and has forgiven my sins and I rejoice that he sendeth forth the Comforter unto as many as believe and humbleth themselves before him.

I was grieved to hear that Hiram had lost his little child. I think we can in some degree sympathize with him but we all must be reconciled to our lots and say the will of the Lord be done.

Sister Whitney wrote a letter to her husband which was very cheering and being unwell at that time and filled with much anxiety it would have been very consoling to me to have received a few lines from you but as you did not take the trouble I will try to be contented with my lot knowing that God is my friend; in him I shall find comfort. I have given my life into his hands. I am prepared to go at his call. I desire to be with Christ. I count not my life dear to me only to do his will ....I am happy to find that you are still in the faith of Christ and at Father Smiths. I hope you will comfort Father and Mother in their trials and Hiram and Jerusha and the rest of the family. Tell Sophronia I remember her and Kalvin in my prayers. My respects to the rest. I should like to see little Julia and once more take her on my knee and converse with you on all the subjects which concerns us, things I cannot is not prudent for me to write. I omit all the important things which could I see you I could make you acquainted with. Tell Brother Will that I and Brother Whitney will arrange the business of that farm when we come. Give my respects to all the Brethern, Br. Whitney family, tell them he is cheerful and patient and a true brother to me.

I subscribe myself your husband. The Lord bless you. Peace be with [you] so farewell until I return.

Joseph Smith Jr. 70

Joseph Smith To Emma Smith (August 16, 1840) [^2]

My dear Emma. I embrace this opportunity to express to you some of my feelings this morning. First of all, I take the liberty to tender you my sincere thanks for the two interesting and consoling visits that you have made me during my almost exiled situation. Tongue cannot express the gratitude of my heart for the warm and true-hearted friendship you have manifested in these things towards me. The time has passed away, since you left me, very agreeably thus far; my mind being perfectly reconciled to my fate, let it be what it may. I have been kept from melancholy and dumps, by the kind-heartedness of Brother Derby, and his interesting chit-chat from time to time, which has called my mind from the more strong contemplation of things and subjects that would have preyed more earnestly upon my feelings.

Last night Brothers Hyrum, Miller, Law and others came to see us. They seemed much agitated, and expressed some fears in consequence of some maneuverings and some flying reports which they had heard in relation to our safety; but after relating what it was, I was able to comprehend the whole matter to my entire satisfaction, and did not feel at all alarmed or uneasy. They think, however, that the militia will be called out to search the city; and if this should be the case, I would be much safer for the time being, at a little distance off, until Governor Carlin could get weary, and be made ashamed of his corrupt and unhallowed proceedings ....Brother Miller again suggested to me the propriety of my accompanying him to the Pine Woods, and then he return, and bring you and the children. My mind will eternally revolt at every suggestion of that kind, more especially since the dream and vision that was manifested to me on the last night. My safety is with you, if you want to have it so .... If I go to the Pine country, you shall go along with me, and the children .... I do not wish to exile myself for the sake of my own life; I would rather fight it out. It is for your sakes, therefore, that I would do such a thing ....Tell the children it is well with their father as yet; and that he remains in fervent prayer to Almighty God, and for you, and for them.

Tell mother Smith that it shall be well with her son, whether in life or in death; for thus saith the Lord God. Tell her that I remember her all the while, as well as Lucy, and all the rest. They all must be of good cheer.

Tell Hyrum to be sure and not fail to carry out my instructions; but, at the same time, if the militia does not come, and we should get any favorable information, all may be well yet.

Yours in haste, your affectionate husband until death, through all eternity, forevermore.

Joseph Smith.

Brigham Young To Joseph Smith (April 16, 1840) [^3]

To President Joseph Smith and Counselors:

Dear Brethren: You no doubt will have the perusal of this letter and minutes of our conferences; this will give you an idea of what we are doing in this country.

If you see anything in or about the whole affair that is not right, I ask, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that you would make known unto us the mind of the Lord and His will concerning us.

I believe that I am as willing to do the will of the Lord, and take counsel of my brethren, and be a servant of the Church as ever I was in my life; but I can tell you I would like to be with my old friends; I like new friends, but I cannot part with my old ones for them.

Concerning the Hymn Book-when we arrived here, we found the brethren had laid by their old hymn books, and they wanted new71ones; for the Bible, religion and all is new to them. When I carne to learn more about carrying books into the states, or bringing them here. I found the duties were so high that we never should want to bring books from the states.

I request one favor of you, that is, a letter from you, that I may hear from my old friends. I trust that I will remain your friend through life and eternity. As ever,

Brigham Young

Joseph Smith To W. W. Phelps (July 22, 1840) [^4]

Dear Brother Phelps:-I must say that it is with no ordinary feeling, that I endeavor to write a few lines to you in answer to yours of the 29th ultimo; at the same time I am rejoiced at the privilege granted me.

You may in some measure realize what my feelings, as well as Elder Rigdon's and Brother Hyrum's were, when we read your letter-truly our hearts were melted into tenderness and compassion when we ascertained your resolves. I can assure you, I feel a disposition to act on your case in a manner that will meet the approbation of Jehovah (whose servant I am), and agreeable to the principles of truth and righteousness, which have been revealed; and, inasmuch as long-suffering, patience and mercy, have ever characterized the dealings of our Heavenly Father towards the humble and penitent, I feel disposed to copy the example, cherish the same principles, and by so doing, be a savior to my fellow men.

It is true that we have suffered much in consequence of your behavior-the cup of gall, already full enough for mortals to drink, was indeed filled to overflowing, when you turned against us. One with whom we had oft taken sweet counsel together, and enjoyed many refreshing seasons from the Lord-had it been an enemy, we could have borne it ....However, the cup has been drunk, the will of our Father has been done, and we are yet alive, for which we thank the Lord. After having been delivered from the hands of wicked men, by the mercy of our God, we say it is your privilege to be delivered from the powers of the adversary, be brought into the Liberty of God's dear children, and again take your stand among the Saints of the Most High, and by diligence, humility, and love unfeigned, commend yourself to our God and your God, and to the Church of Jesus Christ.

Believing your confession to be real, and your repentance genuine, I shall be happy once again, to give you the right hand of fellowship, and rejoice over the returning prodigal.

Your letter was read to the Saints last Sunday, and an expression of their feelings was taken, when it was unanimously resolved, that W. W. Phelps should be received into fellowship.

"Come on, dear brother, since the war is past, For friends at first, are friends again at last."

Yours as ever,Joseph Smith, Jun. 72

Brigham Young To the Brethren Returning from Missions [^5]

G. S. L. City

May 8th, 1854

To the brethren supposed to be on the road to this city from their missions:

Dear Brethren: We improve the present opportunity of writing by the escort sent with Colonel Kane to communicate with you. We have to say that, so far as we are acquainted, your families are all well, and we trust that you will be able to elude the grasp of our enemies who are on your path, and come to us in peace and safety.

We advise you to take the "Sublette cut-oft" to Bear River, and then travel up that river until you come to the trail leading to the head of Echo, unless you get information of the movement of the U.S. army subsequent to this date; in which case you will have to act according to the existing circumstances; but dodge them, if possible, and take every precaution not to fall into their hands.

As you approach Green River you must watch out for Indians as well as mountaineers, and especially the latter. The Indians from the north have been committing depredations and are at present on Bear River and will probably be straggling along towards Bear Lake; the Green River Indians, and all the Indians, more or less, are also excited and liable to be influenced to deeds of blood and plunder. The mountaineers, however, are more to be feared than the Indians; concerning them you will get more information from Brother Howard, but you must never for a moment relax your watchfulness over yourselves and animals.

We intend to provide you, if possible, with passports from Governor Cumming, who at present is with us and really seems disposed to take hold of the thread of justice and is endeavoring to set us right before the government and the people generally. He has officially contradicted the burning of the records, library, etc. If, unfortunately, you should fall into the hands of the army, you may find them of use to you. Our faith is that you will come safely through; that the Lord will guide you aright. Be of good cheer and be humble and prayerful, and watch as well as pray. Be vigilant, and, as you approach the vicinity of the troops, keep your scouts well in advance, that you do not go blindly into the enemey's camp, or fall into the hands of their scouting or patrolling parties.

The news you will learn by the bearers of this letter. Suffice it to say that all is well with us. The Lord is at the helm of the old ship "Zion," and she sails well.

May God bless and preserve you, and bring you all safely and speedily into our midst, is the daily prayer of your brother in the Gospel of Christ,

Brigham Young Brigham Young's Last Will and Testament [^6]

I, Brigham Young, wish my funeral services to be conducted in the following manner

When I breathe my last I wish my friends to put my body in as clean and wholesome state as can conveniently be done, and preserve the same for one, two, three or four days, or as long as my body can be preserved in a good condition. I want my coffin made of plump 11/4 inch boards, not scrimped in length, but two inches longer than I would measure, and from two to three inches wider than is commonly made for a person of my breadth and size, and deep enough to place me on a little comfortable cotton bed, with a good suitable pillow for size and quality; my body dressed in my temple73clothing, and laid nicely into my coffin, and the coffin to have the appearance that if I wanted to turn a little to the right or to the left, I should have plenty of room to do so. The lid can be made crowning.

At my interment I wish all of my family present that can be conveniently, and the male members wear no crepe on their hats or on their coats; the females to buy no black bonnets, nor black dresses, nor black veils; but if they have them they are at liberty to wear them. The services may be permitted, as singing and a prayer offered, and if any of my friends wish to say a few words, and really desire, do so; and when they have closed their services, take my remains on a bier, and repair to the little burying ground, which I have reserved on my lot east of the White House on the hill, and in the southeast corner of this lot, have a vault built of mason work large enough to receive my coffin, and that may be placed in a box, if they choose, made of the same material as the coffin-redwood. Then place fiat rocks over the vault sufficiently large to cover it, that the earth may be placed over it-nice, fine, dry earth to cover it until the walls of the little cemetery are reared, which will leave me in the southeast corner, This vault ought to be roofed over with some kind of a temporary roof. There let my earthly house or tabernacle rest in peace, and have a good sleep, until the morning of the first resurrection; no crying or mourning with anyone as I have done my work faithfully and in good faith.

I wish this to be read at the funeral, providing that if I should die anywhere in the mountains, I desire the above directions respecting my place of burial to be observed; but if I should live to go back with the Church to Jackson County, I wish to be buried there.

Brigham Young

President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints,

Sunday, November 9th, 1873,

Salt Lake City, Utah.

The Hascall-Pomeroy Correspondence [^7] Irene Hascall Pomeroy

To Miss Ophelia M. Andrews North New Salem Franklin Co., Mass.

Postmarked: Nauvoo Ills. Sept 21 [1845]

[July 4, 1845]

Beloved Cousin It is independence day.<_P> [^8] We celebrated that day in the east but we think now the independence of the United States is too near gone to raise the flag of liberty, if not of the whole community, of the mormon people. If we could be in each others society today I think we would enjoy independence in the superlative degree. If we were at New Salem I think we would ramble through the woods and over the hills and dales of some of the rocky pastures; or perhaps we might open our Commonplace Book or write a piece of poetry or composition. What fine times! All this is passed; perhaps forever.

If you would step into Nauvoo, enter at the lower landing, pass up Main St then Munson St until you came to a one story and half brick house very pleasantly situated between two others of similar description. Step into the74front entry open the door on the right (without knocking) there you would see Irene; it is not yet three months since we parted but it seems a long long while. I am very happy and contented but have not forgotten old friends. Well after we have talked over things which have transpired since our separation we would "take a walk." Where would we go; to view the great and beautiful temple. O now I think! We would go down to the beautiful Mississippi and take a pleasure ride; we think some of going this afternoon. Will you join us? If not otherwise engaged, I think you would gladly.

Sabbath morning Sep, 21st I think you must excuse me this once for delaying so long this letter as I never did before. I never before commenced a letter without finishing it immediately. I would think tomorrow perhaps there will be a better opportunity. It is, has been so very warm it was as much as a Yankee would like to do to keep from "roasting." I have been engaged in domestic affairs this morning; but thought I must omit some things until I could finish this letter as the mail goes out this afternoon. I have delayed sending it of late on account of the persecution which has been raging against the "Mormons" in the neighboring villages.<_P> [^9] I presume you have seen the accounts in the daily papers. I believe in most instances their lives have been spared but they have burned their houses their barns filled with grain and drove those out that were sick and not able to get out without help exposed to the hot sun. Such cruelty! The mob said they were going to drive every Mormon from the state. They could [not] raise force enough to attack the City so they took the adjoining towns. One hundred and twenty teams were sent from here to Lima <_P> [^10] to rescue the people and bring them with their goods and grain to Nauvoo from the hands of such a band of ruthless Mobbers. They were so enraged at the Sheriff <_P> [^11] because he took measures to stop them from burning and destroying that he was obliged to come to Nauvoo procure one or two hundred armed horsemen to protect himself and family to Nauvoo for safety. He has removed his family here as the only safe place; but the mobbers under force of the law have been compelled to disperse though not until several of them were killed. I think I have written as much of this as will be interesting to you.

I have been quite well and healthy ever since I have been here; husband was sick when we first came but he is now quite well. How I wish you could make me a visit, what happy times we would have. I made a visit last week to Cousin Cate's on [the] prairie. She has a fine son born 11th Sep. She calls his name John. Mr Woodbury's family all have the fever and ague or chill fever but are none of them very sick. Mr. Aikin's family are well I believe generally. Mrs send love to Grandma Andrews in particular and all other friends. All the people from New Salem are generally well. Mr Ponds family all well. Abby sends love and Lizzy. Abby wishes she could see you a little while but shall [she?] has changed like all others although she is not married but still there is a little Abby left yet. I have not and will not I think at present if ever.

Emeline is well is teaching school has thirty or forty schollars [at] dollar and half per week. She is same as she used to be though not quite.

I received a letter from Mother the fourteenth. She wrote Mirancy was going back. Perhaps you will go to. I would [like] to have you take a trip up the Mississippi and make me a visit. I shall be too late for the mail if I write much longer and I want to write a line for Mother. I hope when you write me you will75finish your letter the same month certain. Write all news. I hope you get along with your school pleasantly and other matters. Love to all. Love to you and Uncle Oliver especially.

[No signature but in the handwriting of Irene]

Ursulia B. Hascall

ToCol. Wilson Andrews North New Salem Franklin Co., Mass.

Postmarked: Boston 5 cts 16 JUL

Camp of Israiel, Winter quarters

Indian Territory April 1847

Dear Brother, and sister, I fear you have not received my last letter as I have not received an answer, I went to the office found a letter I thought it must be from you, but it was from Francis mother, I was disappointed. I assure you the time has now arrived that we are preparing to pursue our journey. Expect to arrive at our place of rest, before we stop again, only for repairs &c, about two hundred pioneers started two weeks ago, they calculate to get there and put in seed of various kinds long before we get there, the teams were mostly mule and horses. Francis was among the number <_P> [^12] and Thales is to be our teamster. He thinks he can manage three yoke of oxen. Irene says he is a young man, he has grown tall and stout, his flesh is hard and health good. If he only had Albert here to go hunting with him he thinks they should kill lots of prairie hens wild turkeys geese ducks and maybe a deer or buffalo, his business this winter past has been chopping the wood at the door, and the care of one cow. Our other cattle have wintered on rushes forty miles up the Missouri river with five or six hundred others. There was ten men chosen to herd them, and keep the indians from killing them, Francis was one of the ten, had 2 dollars per head. We have lived in our log cabin through the winter very comfortably. We have a brick chimney and hearth, (two thirds of the people have them made of sods and they do very well), a window with four lights of glass 10 by 12, gave eight cents a light, the furniture consists of sacks barrels chests trunks and two wild bedsteads with curtains from eaves to floor, my chest for a table, We have had plenty of provisions except vegetables, we have had beans enough and some potatoes, this spring there is abundance of wild onions and artichokes first rate, there is a store opposite of us with every necessary, English and west Indies, goods coffee sugar, salaratus all fifteen cents per pound. First best sugar house mollasses one dollar per gallon, I think we shall get along first rate, there is companies organized of hundred, and Captains of fifties and tens, we are going in brother Wallace's Company of fifty. <_P> [^13]

The Woodburys are going with the same company. They are twenty miles from here. Thomas has been here and staid over night. Where William is they do not know. Brother Aikins family are at Garden Grove some distance back, Samuel came on with brother Ponds family and died here away from father and mother, I suppose you have heard of the deaths in brother Ponds family. The children are all dead but Elizabeth [and] Loenza, when they were on the way here they turned from the main road into a settlement where he and Samuel could earn two dollars per day with their teams. It proved to be an unhealthy place, They were all taken sick and76they came away as soon as they could, but they were unable to take care of themselves on the road and suffered for the want of care, Lowell died before they arrived, the rest lived to get here and then dropped away one after another, Sister Pond has not recovered and I fear sire never will, Brother Ponds health is very poor. Sister Clark died on the way here. She wore her self out with hard work I think, I never saw a female that could live and do as she did, The children came on with P. Rockwell <_P> [^14] they have the first rate families to live in. Hiram lives in the same family with Emiline. She thinks them the best people in the world. She is as happy as a queen, has everything to eat, drink [and] wear. She instructs the children has the care of their clothes and does as much or as little as she pleases. Tell mother sister Murdock is here with her family. Where brother Harris is we do not know. Sister Brimhall is well. Sine did not grieve much for the Prichards loss. We have now and then a newspaper front New York. Shall we believe the cracking asunder of the Union of the United States, Yes, sooner or later the Lord will avenge the blood of his martyred Prophets and persecuted Saints, Unless they repent and restore their right. Irene read President Polks message. It's as harmless as milk and water. I think he is as Eliza Smith said about my going to singing school - I should not do any hurt if I did not any good. The ship Brooklyne has landed we hear and printed a paper.<_P> [^15] I suppose Uncle Sam has received one by this time. I expect Francis will see husband before we shall. [How are all the people in the old neighborhood? Still by the ears or has Mr Orcutt left them to their destruction. I should be happy to see him and wife and little Dwight [as] he runs and talks by the side of his father. Give my love to them and all the rest that inquire. How is mother. Has she had one of her hard colds, if she has I fear she had not recovered, how is her lame toes, tell her to enjoy herself and be prepared for a part in the first resurection, and live and reign with Christ on the earth a thousand years, if it not worthy of our whole time and talent. How is dear Waldo and all the rest of your little ones. Kiss them and tell them Aunt Lula sent it to them. I am not Aunt Lula here, it is sister Hascall, mother and grandmother. Francelle runs about and takes hold of my dress and wants I should take her, she looks like your children, very much as Phebe did at her age. Give my respects to Grandfather and mother Andrews. Tell them the mormons have built one of the best grist mills that ever was seen in the States. Although this is the indian territory when they leave it the next company will use it and so on untill all the mormons have passed along. It ground twelve bushel of corn an hour the first few hours. but they took it down to six bushels when they made a business of it. You spoke about dancing. I filled my other sheet before I thought of it but now I will tell you. The Mormons (as they are vulgarly called) do not have any guess work, in their exercises, they have a rule and the order of God, for all their movements, Thales attended dancing school this winter, they open their school with prayer and so they always do at their dancing parties or feasts. They have all the good and fat things they can procure for supper, I never saw a larger supply at any place. Each grade had a feast until they went through the camp, I went with the wives of the elders that are sent on missions, widows and soldiers wives. There is some of the smartest and best men and women here there is in the world, They dress superior to your New Salem people if they have had to winter in log cabins. I send this [letter] by a77sister that is going to Boston to visit her friends. [She] returns in october. Her name is Sabra Granger. direct your letters to Francis M, Pomeroy Huntsakers Ferry Austin postoffice Atchinson County Missouri, to be forwarded to the Camp of Israel. I send you a piece of my new sun bonnet the handsomest one you have seen.

Your affectionate U B H

Irene Hascall Pomeroy

ToMiss Ophelia M. Andrews North New Salem Franklin County Massachusetts(Care of Col. Wilson Andrews)Postmarked:Kane 10. May 16 1848[in manuscript]Great Salt Lake City March 5th 1848.Cousin Ophelia, having a little leisure from domestic cares I thought [I would] write you a few lines knowing you would be very anxious to hear from us. We are all well contented and happy. We have a log house made of hewed logs sixteen by eighteen and covered with planks and slabs. Our fireplace is made of clay pounded into one corner and the fireplace cut out just such shape as you please. The rest is sticks plastered Outside and in which makes it quite nice. We have quite a nice door made of fir boards which were sawed since we arrived. We have nothing but the boards of our wagon for floor yet. We have a window with five squares of ten by twelve glass and one of cloth pasted on. There is two beds at the east end of the room and curtains drawn across the room in front of the beds and a little chamber floor over the beds where we keep our provisions. Picture to your self Irene sitting in such a room as this writing on her same chest which stood in her chamber in Mass. Mr Pomeroy and Thales have gone to what is called the Cotton woods for poles to fence the land. Francelle is filling the little creampitcher (your mother and mine used to play) with water and washing it in the washdish. Mother is knitting. (I will fill this page with family concerns now I have come so near to it, and tell you on the next how we came hear and what kind of place it is). We have two yoke of oxen, two cows two heifers (two years old) a pair of horses three hells two chickens and a dog. We have killed one yoke of oxen for beef. We expect to have a garden in front of our house. Our farming land is five or six miles from hear. The houses are built adjoining each other and in the form of squares enclosing ten acres each. It was thought wisdom to have them in this manner for this season because we could better defend ourselves from all kinds of danger.<_P> [^16] When the companies arrive next Summer we expect to commence a brick house. There will be a city laid out then and each building will have land for all necessary purposes and a large garden and the farming land will be with out the city. When Mother wrote you at Winter Quarters we were preparing for our journey still farther west. Thales went down into Missouri with Br Wallace and bought a new supply of provisions and we left Winter Quarters June 17th and l can assure you we passed through a variety of scenes a distance of ten hundred and sixty miles from W. Q. Rivers, brooks, mudholes, mountains, plains, woods, broken waggons Indians, Buffaloes, wolfs, deer, antelope, wild dogs,bears &c. The Indians were very friendly. They do not hurt if we kept strong guard out so they could not steal our horses and cattle in the night; We passed through some places where it [was] almost impassable, mountains of cragged rocks seeming as it were bending over us on either side of the road, at another time we would be on the side of a mountain below us on one side of the road 50 or 100 feet straight down as Grandmother says, on the other side a mountain and seeming every moment as if the waggon would be upset. This was the last part of the road. The first 1000 miles was mostly praries, see nothing but land as far as the eye could reach; You can look on the map and see where we came; We came nearly the whole of the length of the Platte river and camped on its bank most every [night]. We walked a great part of the way where there were bad roads (Catherine says tell them I could walk 10 or 15 miles per day). We generally travelled from 10 to 15 miles in a day sometimes 20 and once or twice 25. We did not travel on sundays on the whole we had quite a pleasant journey. We would (about half a dozzen) go on ahead of the waggons, find some place of curiosity and wait for the teams to come up. How really many [times] mother and I would say how Aunt Samanthy would love to see this and that. Grandmother might have come if she had thought so. There is some older than she here. I presume you have heard of Richardsons bitters. The old man's son is here and his sons mother came from Vermont. Emeline is yet in W. Q. When we came away she was teaching school in the same family where she has been.

There was about 600 waggons came last summer.<_P> [^17] Such only came as could buy provisions, the rest staled to raise it. We expect a much larger company tiffs season. Well after all this long journey, when we were coming over mountains and between them all at once a little narrow passage between the mountains (called a cannian <_P> [^18] think I have not spelled it right) opened into a beautiful valley. This is our place of residence. It is in the midst of the rocky mountains surrounded on every side by impassable mts. and just one passage in and another on the west side which will not take much labor to stop an army of ten thousand. Now let the mobbers rage. The Lord has provided this place for us and if we are faithful the troubles and calamities of the Gentile nation will not harm when all is past, we will step forth from our hiding place the secret chambers spoken of in the bible. I wish you would come and stay with [us]. You would if you [could] see the future. But live in darkness, we know this is true, what you call mormonism. If we ever meet in the resurrection you cannot say I never told you. What I say to one I say to all who shall here it, and read it to every one you can (this part if nothing more) for I say it again I know it is truth and I say it by the spirit of God. I would die in one minute for this gospel if necessary or required of the Lord. Remember what I say to you, I expect Augustus before long. He said he should come when he was twenty one. The journey does not seem to us now as it did in Mass. Wily we [would] not think any more of coming back than we used to do of going to New York city. There is a large salt lake lying in the northwest part of the valley called on the map lake Timpanagus.<_P> [^19] Its water is more highly impregnated with salt than those of the ocean. They make some of the nicest salt you ever saw. They can shovel up bushels of coarse [salt] on the bank. The mountains near the city are covered with vegetation. Those at a distance look rough and rocky. The timber is mostly on or near the mountains. Streams of beautiful water run from the mountains and empty into a79river called Jordan which empties into salt lake. Some of the mountains are covered with perpetual snow. The climate is thought to be warmer here than in New England. The winter has been very pleasant. Feed for cattle all winter. Those that ran at liberty were grew fat all winter.

People have commenced plowing and planting some but it freezes a little [at] night. We have not had any snow to last long. There are some maple trees here, poplar fir cotton wood oak birch spruce and a species of hemlock. Br. Woodburys family are here and all much better than when they left Nauvoo.

Catherine is well and children. Elizabeth and Loenza are well send love, Loenza is married to Joseph Kingsbury. I [suppose] you know that Abby is dead. When they left Nauvoo they went off the road into a very sickly town because they could get great wages and thought they would earn something. They were all taken with chills &c. and none but Br Pond E[lizabeth] and L[oenza] survived the disease. Br Aikins family are yet at W. Q. and William W. was on his way there last we heard from them and Mrs. Russel Maria Ellen and Hiram Clark. W[hile] at winter Q. H lived with Emeline.

You have heard of dressing in skins. I will send you a specimen. Francis has a coat and pantaloons and Thales pantaloons. We can wash it and stretch it while it dries. Thales says ire wants to see George & Waldo Albert and the rest of the boys very [much]. He is almost a young man, taller than I. We have heard father is on California shore and have wrote to him and expect he will come here this season. Tell Grandmother she would laugh to see Francelle talk and motion it out with her head like Aunt Phebe.

Francelle has been putting my ink on her hair calling it oil. Mother says tell Grandmother and S. she [has] not been out of coffee yet and drinks it most every day. We have got company a lady from Cape Cod. I know you are a good scholar so I think you can read this. I have not time to read my letter you must guess at what is not here. It is a very healthy place.

I have not much room for compliments. Love to all who know us. I think perhaps you are married. If you are love to your husband. Write as soon as possible. When you write pay postage or it will not come.

Irene

Let grandmother have the skin if she wants it.

[Note: One the back of the folded letter appears this notation-"Miss Andrews was this postage paid? P.M."]

Ursulia B. Hascall

ToCol. Wilson Andrew North New Salem Franklin Co Mass

Postmarked:Salt Lake Cal.

July 16 [in manuscript]Great Salt Lake City July 6th 1849

Dear Sister, we received your letter dated Jan 1 and Ophelias dated February by the mail that came in, July 1, glad indeed to hear that you were all alive and well. I was afraid that mother and Waldo had been taken from your society as one was old and the other feeble. The last letter we had was Oct 1847, the mail will now be more regular, but it is impossible to pass through the rocky mountains in winter without people and animals both perishing. We are all well, Irene has a beautiful son born January 10th. Bright black eyes, white skin looks like the Hascalls especially Green and Thales.

Francelle is a very interesting child, her face and head very round, fat and chuby looks as Phebe did at her age, except her head is exactly the shape of Ophelias. She is very handsome and can talk as fast as her great grandmother and her daughters. The City is divided into blocks and lots, Every lot has one acre and quarter, Francis and Thales have each a lot joining and as much land out of the city as they please. We have moved our cabin from the fort80to the lots, shall live in that until we can build as we like, Francis has a cartage and a span of the largest and best horses in the city. We ride to meeting every sabbath. Do you think we are getting up in the world. Well we are. Thales had two cows. A few days ago he sold a cow and calf for thirtyfive dollars cash and his Mexican colt that he exchanged his pony for that he gave eighteen dollars for, for a yoke of cattle and thirty dollars, he is going to buy another [horse] of the indians. I kept one yoke of oxen at my own disposal that we came into [the] valley with. I gave forty dollars for them, sold one for beef (the fattest ox I ever saw) for forty dollars in gold dust. I am going to have spectacle bows and thimble made of some of it. if I can find a goldsmith. The Woodburys are doing well. Brother Pond has married Abigail Thorn [is] doing first rate. Elizabeth is married. Loenza has a daughter. Sister Akins sends her love to you and family to mother Andrews in particular and her family.-arrived here rather poor, she braids hats, gets two to three dollars a piece. They are getting along well. Calvin has a son. Catherine has no more children, [she] lived with us eight weeks until Thomas could build his house on his city lot, Sister Murdock is here-she that was Sally Stacy, is neighbor to us-as strong a mormon as I ever saw, when Lucy Harris has a letter from her she will have the whole of her mind for she is not afraid to speak it or write it, brother Patricks family have not yet arrived.

Now for the gold mine the topic of conversation through out the world. It is a fact the Mormons found a gold mine not in the rocky mountains. but in the California mountains eight hundred miles from this city, and two hundred from the bay of Francisco, the bretheren were on their way home from the Mexican war. They went back to Francisco and s[h] owed the ore to Elder Branan. He found it to be pure gold. They dug each a thousand or so and came to enjoy the way of the saints rather than dig gold when they could dig a hundred dollars a day with ease, and already there and small expense for living. It has made Brannan incalcubally rich. The best time is now over as it requires double the labor now that it did then. There is gold, enough no mistake. It is to be found for five hundred miles is not doubted. Fifteen thousand have started from the States for the mines. Hundreds and hundreds came through this city worn down with fatigue, cattle and horses failing on the way with their burden of clothing and provisions. They have been obliged to throw out hundred of dollars worth to be wasted by the way side. When they get here they sell some of their waggons clothing provisions &c pack their mules and horses and proceed on with light loads and heavy hearts.<_P> [^20] I do not say that all are heavy hearted to say, two thirds is no exaggeration, the thousands that have gone by water has not been ascertained, think of the desperation of society in such a place with waves of inert and very few women. Already has small bands of robbers concealed themselves in and about the mountains to rob and murder the gold diggers, this we hear from newspaper authority. Now dear brother and sister you have heard the gospel preached by our elders time after time and have not obeyed. (remember that no other elder but those of the Church of Jesus Christ of latter day saints preach the gospel) I call upon you to repent of your sins and flee to this City and be baptized for the remission of the same, by those who have authority from Jesus Christ, and I call upon all relatives and acquaintances and every one that ever knew Ursulia B Hascall was and is a Mormon to do the same, I call upon you thus that you may [not] rise up and say Ursulia you knew all this why did you not tell your only sister and her family before it was too late. Ophelia did I not show the prophecy spoken by Joseph Smith by the authority of Jesus Christ concerning the overthrow of the United States. The destruction of the states as a81nation is just as sure as the sun will ever rise and set. It is near at hand. It is all ready to burst upon it. May the God of Israiel bless and protect you and bring you into his kingdom is the prayer of your sister.

Ursulia B. Hascall

Ellen Spencer Clawson To Ellen Pratt McGary [^21]

Great Salt Lake City, Nov 4th 56

Dear Ellen

Your letter commenced with a wedding so mine shall be 'ditto.' Just ten days ago Hiram brought home a new wife, no more or less than Miss Alice Young, the governor's daughter. Our house is all in confusion, being remodelled to make room for her, and it also being my week to superintend the housework, I was afraid I should not be able to answer your letter this mail. But I thought you would be disappointed if I did not, and I wanted to be the first one to tell the news (for I expect it will be news) and as they have just gone out riding on horse back and I am alone, I feel as though it would do me good to write, for my heart is rather heavy. I never thought I could care again if Hiram got a dosen wives, but it seems as though my affections return with double force, now that I feel as if I had lost him but I expect he thinks as much of me as ever, only in a different way-you know a new wife is a new thing, and I know it is impossible for him to feel any different towards her just at present, still it make[s] my heart ache to think I have not the same love, but I console myself with thinking it will subside into affection, the same as it is with me, for you know the honey-moon cannot always last at least if you dont know it now you will sometime perhaps.

I think perhaps Margaret feels worse than I do for she was the last, and I suppose thought he would never get another, the same as I did, and "misery loves Company<_P>" you know. "Well" Hiram is kinder than ever, if possible, to us, and I do know one thing certain, there never was a better husband in this world, and I know he means to do right, and I want to help him to do so[,] all that lays in my power, I do not want him to think so much more of me, that lie cannot treat the rest as Ire aught, although it is womans nature to be jealous.

But excuse me for dwelling on this subject so long, "Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh" and I forgot myself. I happened to be out in the buggy the day before your letter came to hand, and called on "Sister Hutchinson for some books of mine. I was in a great hurry and had no time to talk with her, she lives nearly a mile from here, and to tell you the truth I am not quite as able to walk as usual, so I dent know when I shall see her again, to try for your likeness, but I will "do my endeavor" when I do see her. "Well" there is "lots" more I want to say but Catharine has come, with Hiram and Alice, and it is getting so dark, and supper time and all, that I shall have to close in a hurry, with Kate's love and Ellen C Clawson.

Ill try to do better nxtime I must take time to tell you that Hiram is representative for Salt Lake County and takes his new wife to Filmore this winter, to be gone two months. "Brig" and "Kate" are going too E.C.C.[An Ellen Pratt McGary letter, written at this point, is not preserved].8283

This letter from Joseph to Emma was written from Greenville, Indiana, where Joseph was nursing Bishop Newel K. Whitney, who had been injured in a coach accident. While attending Whitney, Joseph was poisoned, vomiting so heavily as to dislocate his jaw. He was instantly healed by Bishop Whitney. The letter to Emma, written during the four weeks Bishop Whitney was bedfast, is a rich glimpse in to the Prophet's constant struggle to remain worthy. See LaMar C. Berrett, "An Impressive Letter from the Pen of Joseph Smith," BYU Studies 11 (Summer 1971): 517-23. Unlike the other letters included here, this letter was written in Joseph's own hand.

Written in hiding. See HC, 5:103.

Originally in the Manuscript History of the Church, this letter was reprinted in Preston Nibley's Brigham Young, the Man and His Work (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1936), p. 33.

W. W. Phelps had left the Church and testified against it during the Missouri persecutions. He wrote to Joseph Smith, expressing great sorrow with his course, asking to be reinstated as a member. Here is Joseph's revealing response.

Col. Thomas Kane set out for the east, accompanied by Governor Cumming, who was going to the soldiers' camp for his family. Young sent this letter with the party, directed to any returning elders they might encounter.

Brigham Young's wishes were carried out to the letter, following his death on August 28, 1877.

Irene Hascall Pomeroy (1825-61), Ursulia B. Hascall (1791-1875). This and the following three letters are taken from the Hascall-Pomeroy correspondence, The mother (Ursulia) and daughter (Irene) were baptized in 1842. Irene and her husband arrived in Nauvoo in 1845 and were followed the next year by Ursulia and her son Thales. Ursulia's husband, Ashbel Green Hascall, went with Samuel Brennan on the ship Brooklyn. He died before reaching Salt Lake City. Irene, the mother of eight children, suffered a burned hand and subsequent amputation. She died at thirty-six at the home of her friend, Emeline B. Wells. Ursulia reared the children until Francis, Irene's husband, became well located in Paris, Idaho. Ursulia remained in Paris until her death in 1875. The letters represented in this book were selected from the twenty-four written between 1845-1850 and published in the Utah Historical Quarterly, 25 (1957). Footnotes are those supplied in that publication.

In a letter dated July 26, 1845, Irene states that she had begun a letter to Ophelia. This is probably the one started on July 4.

Anti-Mormon violence was resumed in September, 1845, which led to the exodus of the Saints from Nauvoo early in 1846.

The Morley Settlement where much of the anti-Mormon activity took place was located in Lima Township, Adams County, about 25 miles south of Nauvoo.

Jacob Backenstos, sheriff of Hancock County, obtained for himself a secure place in Mormon history by his defense of law and order in these troubled times.

Francis Pomeroy was a member of the original band of pioneers, numbering 143 men, 3 women, and 2 children, which left the Missouri River on April 14, and arrived in the Salt Lake Valley on July 24, 1847.

George B. Wallace was converted to the LDS Church by Joseph Smith. In 1844 he traveled extensively throughout the country electioneering for the Prophet for the presidency of the United States. In Nauvoo he was an undertaker and followed that occupation later in the Salt Lake Valley. Wallace was a captain of fifty in the A. O. Smoot Company, and upon arrival in the valley on September 26, 1847, built one of the best houses in the Old Fort. Many important meetings of the General Authorities of the Church were held in his cabin during that first winter. He was among the first missionaries in the valley who were called to go abroad.

Porter Rockwell was a close associate of the Prophet Joseph Smith. He was also a member of the original pioneer band, in fact, a member of Orson Pratt's advance company which entered the valley ahead of the others. He was closely associated with the Overland Mail and the Pony Express, one of the stations being at his home twenty-five miles southwest of Salt Lake City. He served as deputy marshal of Salt Lake City for a number of years.

Samuel Brannan and his company of 238 Saints, 70 men, 68 women, and 100 children, sailed on the Brooklyn from New York, February 4, 1846, by a coincidence the same day that the Nauvoo people fled across the Mississippi for the unknown West. The press on which was printed The Prophet and The Messenger was stowed aboard. Upon arrival in California (Yerba Buena) on July 31, 1846, the Saints set up the press. It was used for various kinds of printing, and the California Star, the first paper in San Francisco was issued.

"Monday, March 6, 1848. The G.S.L. City fort contained 423 houses and 1,671 souls. Adjoining farming field consisted of 5,133 acres of land of which 875 acres were sown with winter wheat." Andrew Jenson, Church Chronology (Salt Lake City, 1914), p. 35.

According to B. H. Roberts, CHC, 3:291, between the middle of September and October 10, 1847, 2,095 people had arrived in the valley. Irene, Eugenia Francelle, Ursulia, and Thales are listed among the Four Hundred, with G. B. Wallace Captain of Fifty and James Smith captain of the first ten. See also Kate B. Carter, comp., Heart Throbs of the West, 8:439.

Emigration Canyon.

Irene here indicates the confusion prevalent regarding the topography of the Great Basin. For a map of the area in 1826, see Hubert Howe Bancroft, History of Utah, p. 19. On his journey through the Utah country in 1776, Escalante gave the name Timpanogos to present-day Utah Lake for the Timpanogos Indians who lived in the region.

The disposal of merchandise by the gold rushers at cut-rate prices brought the first substantial amounts of goods into the Salt Lake Valley. The influx of people also provided a market for locally produced goods and agricultural products.

This letter is from "'Dear Ellen': A Utah-California Correspondence, 1856-57," edited by S. George Ellsworth and published in Western Humanities Review, 13 (1959). Ellen Spencer Clawson, daughter of Orson Spencer and first wife of Hiram B. Clawson, was, as was her friend Ellen Pratt McGary, an intelligent and talented young woman. In the letter Ellen Clawson describes her feelings concerning the marriage of her husband to Alice Young, daughter of Brigham Young and Mary Ann Angell. Hiram B. Clawson was later to marry Emily Young, President Young's daughter by Emily Partridge. The correspondent, Ellen Pratt McGary, was the recent (and only) wife of William McGary, of San Bernardino, California. Ellen P. McGary's life was not as happy as that of Ellen S. Clawson, who was married to a successful and prominent citizen. Three of her four children died in infancy. She and William separated, and she married again. In her last years she and William were reunited. She was a teacher for much of her life.
