Neal A. Lambert, Richard E. Cracroft, Believing People: Literature of the Latter-day Saints ( 1979)

3 JOURNALS AND DIARIES

... I know that the record which I make is true; and I make it with mine own hand; and I make it according to my knowledge.I Nephi 1:3Book of Mormon85

INTRODUCTION

In the same New England spirit which compelled so many of their puritan forebears, the Saints of Mormondom have been inveterate diarists. Often with makeshift pens and fragments of pencils, sometimes by candlelight, sometimes by moonlight, these diarists inscribed the account of God's dealings with his modern-day Israel onto the pages of individual journals and diaries. Sometimes these pages are, in their lack of explanation, frustratingly vague. On the other hand, they are sometimes florid with a profuse "literary" prose. But at their best, when directed and informed by the immediate impress of the events themselves, the journals, diaries, and personal accounts of early Mormondom comprise one of the most distinctive and remarkable bodies of literature to come from the first hundred years of the Church.

Guided by their own understanding of the significant, and building out of materials supplied by their own senses, these people wrote passages that are often rich with the passionate apprehension of the feel, smells, and sights of life itself. Indeed, at their best the writings in these journals anticipate the terseness and concrete renderings that have come to be hallmarks of twentieth-century literary style. And the power of that style gives memorable impact to the pages of these works of unsophisticated art.One cannot expect to find in these writings the tight structure that unifies most longer works of imaginative literature, such as the novel. But attempts to edit and improve the journals and diaries should be undertaken with care. For while the editor may wish to bring certain events closer together for a more dramatic juxtaposition, he may do so only at the expense of something that is perhaps more significant: a structure dictated by time itself, the inexorable progress of days lived one by one. The result of this structure is, for the reader, the experience of a life shared-anticipations and hopes both realized and forgotten, fears and disappointments confronted and endured.

The journals presented here represent a wide range of styles and experiences. From the unsophisticated, childlike recollections of Mary Goble Pay to the learned and voluble account of William Clayton, all these writers are artists in their own right. Their experiences are sometimes delightfully humorous without intending to be; they are sometimes innocently pathetic without consciously trying to evoke our tears. But above all, they manifest an artistic honesty which is not only refreshing but profound in its revelations about living not only as "Mormons" but as believing human beings.

Of course, journal keeping in the Mormon Church does not end with the nineteenth century. Even now on the shelves of many missionary apartments are those ubiquitous green or blue books with the blank pages waiting for the pen. Hopefully in the hearts of at least some of these twentieth-century journalists stir the same devotion to the record and the same honest ability to see and sense clearly that characterize the journals and diaries represented here.8687

Hosea Stout [^1] Crossing the Plains

Friday May the 8th 1846. Clear & cool good weather. This fore noon I assisted Br E. T. Benson to hew some timber to be sawed into plank to fix his waggons to move on West. In the after noon was not able to be out. The mail came in to day from Nauvoo bringing news that Br O. P. Rockwell had been taken prisoner in Nauvoo and taken to Carthage but have not learned the particulars I suspect that there has been some treachery used by some or he could not have been taken as it seems to me.Good clear dry weather. I was sick in the fore noon. In the after noon I went out in company with Benjn Jones into the wood being very lonesome and was talking over our feelings when I was sent for and informed that my little son Hyrum was dying. I returned immediately home and found the poor little afflicted child in the last agonies of death. He died in my arms about four o'clock. This was the second child which I had lost both dying in my arms. He died with the hooping cough & black canker He had worn down ever since he first took it as before mentioned. I shall not attempt to say anything about my feelings at this time because my family is still afflicted. My wife is yet unable to go about & little Hosea my only son now is wearing down with the same complaint and what will be the end thereof. I have fearful forboding of coming evil on my family yet. We are truly desolate & and afflicted and entirely destitute of any thing even to eat much less to nourish the sick & just able to go about my self. Arraingements were made to bury him this evening.

Business was lively at this time. There was a long string of log houses now being put up on the East & on the west of the farm for the accommodation of those who were going to stay which gave the appearance of a civilized country again.

Sunday May the 10th 1846. Warm clear and dry weather.

Attended to the funeral obsequeys of my child about ten or Eleven o'clock

About the same time meeting commenced Jeddediah M. Grant spoke on the first principles of the gospel. There was quite a number of Gentile men & women here today at meeting & hence his sermon I was at meeting a short time and went home. There was another meeting in the after noon. President B. Young spoke on the subject of the ownership of the Farm least there might be some difficulty about it hereafter. It was however voted by the congregation that as it was made by those who were going on for the benefit of the poor who should follow that those who go on should own it subject to the Presidency who should be left in charge of affairs here.

Monday May the 11th 1846. I was uncommonly sick this morning & had some bodily symptoms of being confined with a hard spell of sickness consequently by the advice of Doctor Chandler Rogers I consented to take a regular course of Lobelia.<_P> [^2] This was the first time ever I had taken it. & it made me so weak & nervous that I could not raise my head and my stomach so irritable that I could not take all that was designed for me It however helped me. William Hunter came from grand river with some meal for me which was indeed greatly needed 88

Tuesday May the 12th 1846. I was very sick and feeble yet. Jesse D. Hunter came home from Grand river to day with the teams which we sent there from Locus Creek by J. W. Binley to fed on corn and prepared for the journey but instead of that he had rode the horses down & they came back much reduced instead of being improved. In fact I learned from Hunter what had been reported ever since he was gone, that is he was acting the rascall in every thing he went about. Instead of making reports to me as he was to as he had charge of my men he reported to President Young & endeavoured thus to make court to him by running by me & telling my men all the time that it was understood between him & me & that he was recieving letters of instructions from me from time to time which was a most palpable lie When Hunter went down there he settled all difficulties between him and the men as he did not wish the work to be stayed notwithstanding Binley's rascality but more hereafter I was able to walk to the East of the farm today and my health and strength improving A part of the camp commenced to move today and crossed the bridge and most of the ballance were preparing to go. About dark it clouded up and rained again to the great anoyance of those who intended to move

Wednesday May the 13th 1846. Most of the camp moved on to day Just as President Young was starting<_P> [^3] he called at my tent and enquired into my & Hunter's circumstances & we told him He then said for us to do the best we could to move on and he would send back for us as soon as he could and that he wanted me to continue to keep charge of the public armsThis entirely broke up our arraingements for there had been nothing said to me or Hunter about what was required of us & we were like to be left here without any requisition upon us by the authorities in the event of which we intended to tarry here and raise a crop as our means were now about exhausted, but this order made it obligatory on us to go on so we had to calculate accordingly My health was better to dayI sent Green Taylor & William C. McLelland back today with the two waggons which I moved here in leaving me without any but the gun waggons to move in & they were full of the publick arms hence I was in a poor situation to move. In the evening it rained again William H. Edwards died today. He was one of the pioneers and was appointed Contractor for the first 50 in the Second hundred as organized at or near Chariton on the 27th of March last. He was one of the "old Police at the time that it was first organized under Joseph Smith Mayor and Johnathan Dunham High Police man in December 1843 and served as such untill he was led away with James Emmett in his uncouncilled exit to the wilderness in the fall of 1844. He was in all the troubles in June when our prophet & patriarch Joseph & Hyrum was assassinated & stood firm in all these difficulties I have faced the chilling blast many a winter night with him in Nauvoo guarding the city against our foes from within & without. He left Emmett and returned to Nauvoo in 1845 and seemed willing to do his duty faithfully from that time till his death This was a wet night

Thursday May the 14th 1846. Cold North wind today & cloudy but clear in the afternoon

This last requisition of President Young yesterday made it necessary for Hunter and me to calculate fast so we concluded for him to go to Grand river again for another supply of provisions before we went on and he accordingly started to day in the meintime I was to keep every thing right in camp as well as I could although I was yet very weak and feeble ....Saturday, Sunday, Monday & Tuesday the 23rd, 24th 25th & 26th of May. I was in and about home weak and feeble & just able to look after my cows and horses. No news of importance.

During this time my little & only son Hosea seemed to be growing worse & his cough seemed to be settling on his lungs I repaired89little Hyrum's grave on Tuesday as I expected to start soon & never see it again.

Wednesday May the 27th 1846. This evening we had as unusual hard rain storm The water came down in torrents wetting almost every thing in the tents which made my child worse

In the midst of the rain & gross darkness Pleasant Green Taylor, my wife's brother came to the tent wet thoroughly. It was very unexpected to us. He said that his mother and all his folks were eight miles from here and on their way to the next farm. He said also that there was a war between the United States and Mexico and a great excitement in the state about raising troops to March to the relief of General Taylor in Texas who had already had two battles with the Mexicans. I confess that I was glad to learn of war against the United States and was in hopes that it might never end untill they were entirely destroyed for they had driven us into the wilderness & was now laughing at our calamities.

Thursday May the 28th 1846. The weather was warm & pleasant with broken clouds. Job Hall & William Taylor returned with the teams after Hunter had arrived in safety to the next camp. So we immediately set about being off About ten o'clock we started and went eight or nine miles and camped in the prairie. It rained some to night but not so as to distress us.

Today my wife was able to walk a short distance and occasionally ride on horse back which was the first time she was able to move otherwise than in a bed made down in a waggon

It seemed like new life to see her even thus recovering from a long sickness ....Sunday May the 31st 1846. This morning all was well & I concluded to go on to camp on horse back it being about 15 miles for I had understood that President Young was going on tomorrow & I wanted to see him before he went on to know what he wanted me to do next as I had now fulfilled his last order to me which was to come on I started about 9 o'clock and came into camp about twelve and found the Saints at meeting all seemed cheerful

This was a wet disagreeable evening All things in relation to Hunter and myself were about as usual

This evening Br Noah Rogers died. He was a captain of ten in the guard He returned home to Nauvoo from a three years mission last winter to the Sandwic islands He was a good man and a faithful captain while under me in the guard. I staid at Benjamin Jones all night.

Monday June the 1st 1846. It rained and blew very hard till noon and then ceased. My family came in the evening. They camped last night on a hill in the prairie and had a very disagreeable time of it. I went to the North of this place to hunt a location with Chandler Rogers and came back and went East with Hunter and there found one to suit me

It was in a beautiful grove of small hickory and formed a pleasant shade and was a delightful place. Here Hunter and myself intended to build & put in a crop such as would come to maturity at this late time of planting.

This place was called Mount Pisgah and the main settlement was situated on a long ridge running North & South. To the west was a large deep valley or bottom land of good prairie and was now being plowed & planted while all the adjoining glades and groves were teeming with men & cattle engaged in the busy hum of improving and planting The whole woods & prairie seemed alive to business & a continual streem of emegration pouring in which looked like the entire country would be inhabited as a city in a short time

Tuesday June the 2nd 1846. President Young started to day to the Council Bluffs. Some of his teams however were gone before about four miles and encamped. He did not say any thing to us as to what we must do. So we went to arraingeing matters for farming in good earnest

About noon General Charles C. Rich came to me with a written order signed by Brigham as Lieutenant General ordering him to take the public arms into his possession and put them in good order and send them on by "Col Stout or some trusty officer" He wanted to know what I could do I told him the situation of my family and circumstances and he thought it could not be required of me to leave my family under such circumstances and thus released me from going & I then went and90showed him the guns and desired him to take them away. He had a like order to take the artillery from Scott.I confess that I did not understand the object of this move neither did I care for it released me from all public care and responsibility and I felt like a free man with nothing on my mind but to contrive how to take care of my family for the best Accordingly Hunter and myself went and laid the foundation of a house a piece on our beautiful location and was going to move to it as soon as our cattle could be found. But however before our cattle were found President Young having returned to this place came to see us. He wanted us to go on with the guns and leave our brailles here and wanted to know what we could do about it We told him we were always ready to obey him, and would do any thing which our circumstances would permit He then enquired into our situation very particularly & found us to be very destitute, and after giving Hunter some money as he had none fold us to buy provision for our families untill we could return and come as soon as we could and left us. Here again we were entirely disconcerted and now all together gave tip the idea of raising a crop and it seemed that it was designed by some other ruling power that we should not "Sow nor reap" neither enjoy the peace and happiness of a private life any more. We saw nothing but a long train of public cares and responsibility banging over us for we knew it Would not end at the Bluffs.

Wednesday June the 3rd 1846. This morning Br George W. Harris left me and went on because matters took such a turn that he thought it would be to long & uncertain to wait for us to go.In the evening with Br Miles Anderson I went to where Brigham was encamped four miles on ahead to see him about how to arrainge for my family. He told me to bring them along or any part of them if I could for it would save having to send back for them and that Genl Rich had orders from him to fit me out so I came home and commenced to fix to go as soon as I could.

Thursday Julie the 4th 1846. I went to see General Rich this morning about the waggons for the guns and having lumber sawed for preparing them according to Brigham's orders and was engaged at it most of the day. Alen Stout went to the settlements today with his father-in-law Miles Anderson and was going to stay there and take care of some cattle for him untill he went to Nauvoo after his family when Anderson would bring him on. I sent B. Jones along to Bring up a yoke of church oxen which were there to draw the gun waggons.

Friday June the 5th 1846. Was hunting after some one to saw some lumber today as we had prepared logs and trying to obtain help from Rich who never even used his influence to assist me much less fit me out as Br Brigham had ordered him.

Saturday June the 6th 1846. Was after Br Rich again to no purpose for he still evaded any help or using any influence However I got some lumber sawed and commenced work at my waggons.

Sunday June the 7th 1846. Was at meeting Br O. Hyde was there and spoke to the people Most of the time was taken up in procuring teams & means to fit out the Twelve This was according to council But there was nothing said about the guns and I plainly saw that Br Rich did not intend to do any thing for meIt appeared that he thought that I was obliged to take them any how & if I got no help it would only be my own trouble.

Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday the 8th, 9th and 10th of June. I was engaged in preparing the waggons.

Saturday June the 20th 1846. This morning I went some three miles to Henry Mours [Mowers] camp to see Br. S. Wixom to try and get Some meal for hunger began to grin hard around us but I got none and was now entirely out and knew not where the next meal would come from so my wife went to preparing our dinner which might be properly called our "ultimatum" It consisted of a small portion of seed beans & a little bacon boild and made into soup we had flour enough to set it out & in fact we this last time as it seemed had a more luxurious & sumptious table than usual which made to a stranger an appearance of plenty. Just as it was91ready Elder Henry G. Sherwood & Jas W Cummings rode up very hungry I invited them to stop and turn out their horses & rest and take dinner to which they readily consented little thinking that they were going to help make away with all I had and then leave me in this wild & desolate place to risk the kind hand of Providence for the next. We had a joyful time and plenty to eat but none left They were on their return to Nauvoo after their families in case they did not meet them on their way. Br Jas W Cummings was now on his return from the mission with John L. Butler to James Emmett as mentioned on the 25th of last march at the Chariton, Br Cummings reported that when he got there he found that Emmett was absent having gone to some of the neighbouring Indians to trade off some horses and consequently he had no trouble with him. But some of his company were yet strong advocates for him & some as hard against him among the latter was his wife who was tired of his oppression & tyranny.

The two parties were about equally divided. Some of the party however having gone before to the settlements near or above Fort Leavenworth. They managed to get all of those who were yet there to move down to where we were to cross the Missouri at the Bluffs not however without considerable opposition from Emmetts adherents. Suffise it to say that they all left and came off and brought every thing with them and left Emmett to guess at what had happened & follow on or do whatever else he thought best. They had all come to the Council Bluffs & Emmett followed on and was here striped of his kingdom and him & all his followers put under Bishop Miller and sent on to Grand Island. Thus ended the reign of this man who sought to divide and to lead off the Saints &c

After our "ultimatum" was ultimately used up & we had all joyfully feasted & enjoyed ourselves sufficiently they went on & I also prepared to go by attaching my little waggon to one of my large ones for the want of a harness & one of the girls took charge of the horses Thus arranged we started slowly on our way. Previously to our starting however I made out to procure of those who had encamped here last night some bread stuff to last a day or so. We started about three o'clock leaving them here for their waggon was broke down. Dailey had lied most shamefully about there being a good camping place three miles ahead for we traveled on untill night & went about eight miles & encamped in the praire and no signs of timber yet

Sunday June the 21st 1846. We started very earley this morning on our way we met Thomas Williams. who was on his way from the Council Bluffs to Pisgah with an express to Genl Rich. He said that it was to raise men to send over the Mountains. That it was contemplated to raise a guard of four hundred men, a sufficient number, as it was deemed, to protect those who were moving, against the depredations of the Indians and this was the object of the express There could not be the requisite number raised at the Bluffs because there had not a sufficient number come on & hence the express. They intended to go on in time to put in wheat this fall.

We traveled on very steady untill about noon and came to a beautiful little grove in the midst of a boundless praire as it looked Here we found Br Billings and those who were with him encamped They had sloped to was and fix up and so we overtook them. The prairie which we had last passed was 15 or 20 miles across. Mostly a level good road.

We put up here for the day & found Br Billings and most of those with him very kind and accomodating and more especially when they found that we were sick and afflicted as we were

In the evening Brs Orson Spencer & C. Shelton came on and encamped here also. which made a very large company.Monday June the 22nd 1846. This morning we all went on and made a good day's travel going perhaps 18 or 20 miles. We crossed the Little Platte to day and went on two or three miles and encamped in the prairie on a smallstream.

Tuesday June the 23rd 1846. We also made a good days travel to day and came to the Nodaway and there encamped

We passed by Henry W. Miller's company to 92day who were encamped while they went down to the settlements to trade for provisions. Here we saw several Indians which was the first that we had seen since we left Nauvoo Today was a dark day at times raining some but good for traveling.

Wednesday June the 24th 1846. We lay up to day it being a wet day. In the evening Bunnell & Clark drove up in the rain with their companies. this now made a very large encampment

Thursday Jane the 25th 1846. The weather was still heavy and like for rain There was quite a number of Indians came to camp to day some we fed They were all friendly

Little Hosea was all this time on the decline and the laying on of hands seemed to do but little or no good ....The water came in torrents & the wind blew hard. In a few minutes our lent was down & the water ran through the waggon covers and thus every thing we had was wet almost before we knew it.The beds were also wet and Hosea was soon discovered by his mother to be lying in water so fast did it come in on the bed. He was immediately taken worse and thus our last hopes for him vanished

The rain continued an hour or so and before dark the Nodaway was out of its banks notwithstanding it is a stream That is very deep being about twenty feet banks. The bridge across it is about 8 or nine feet below the surface of the level ground and it was thought by us before this rise that the water would never come up to the bridge. At dark the bottom was like one continued sea and some of the tents and waggons standing in the water.

Friday Julie the 26th 1846. To day the weather was cloudy & sunshine alternately The Nodaway had not fallen much. The ground yet flooded and the whole camp seemed to be driping in water.

There was many friendly Indians came & went to day. My child was more dangerously ill. Br William Clayton came here from the Bluffs going to Pisgah & Thomas Williams on his return from Pisgah to the Bluffs both water bound

Br Clayton crossed by flotting his things over in his waggon bed & swimming his horses which took a long time for there could be but little taken in at once & Williams swam his horse & thus both crossed to day. There was a continual crossing of the Indians all day swimming their horses which seemed to be but little disadvantage to them to come to a stream out of its bands.The stream before night had fallen some five or six feet.

Saturday June the 27th 1846. Clear and warm. My child was still worse The water falling very slowly. It had not yet uncovered the bridge

Some of the brethren went today to the next creek about four miles to see what was the prospect of crossing there and found it much larger than the Nodaway and still rising and the bridge either gone or damaged so that we could not cross on it

There was plenty of Indians here today They were going to the Buffalo country to kill their winter meat It is about one hundered miles and among the Souix Indians with whom all other tribes are at war These are Pottawottamies & Musquakas. They not only expect to kill all the buffalo they can but also all the Souix. So it is a war expidition as well as a buffalo hunt.

My child seemed strangely affected to night after laying hands on him we found him to [be] troubled with evil spirits who I knew now were determined on his destruction He would show all signs of wrath to wards me & his mother and appearantly try to talk. His looks were demoniac accopanied by the most frightful gestures I ever saw in a child. His strength was greater than in the days of his health.At times I felt almost to cowl at his fierce ghastly & horrid look and even felt to withdraw from the painful scene for truly the powers of darkness now prevailed here. We were shut up in the waggon with nothing to behold or contemplate but this devoted child thus writhing under the power of the destroyer It was now late in the night & he getting worse when we came to the conclusion to lay hands on him again that the powers of darkness might be rebuked if he could not be raised up. Thus alone93my wife & me over our only and dearest son struggled in sorrow and affliction with this last determination that we would not yield with the portion of the Priesthood which we had to the evil spirits After laying hands on him and rebuking the evil spirits he took a Different course He ceased to manifest a desire to talk & his ghastly and frightful gestures and with a set and determined eye gazed at the as if concious of what had been done

We thus beheld him a long time until finally he became easy and went to sleep Late at night we went to sleep also leaving a burning candle in the waggon.

Sunday June the 28th 1846. I awoke very early this morning and immediately discovered my child to be dying. tie seemed perfectly easy and now had given up to the struggle of death and lay breathing out his life sweetly. The evil spirits had entirely left him and he now had his natural, easy, pleasant, calm and usual appearance but death was in his contenance and his little spirit now in the enjoyment of its own body only seemed loth to give it up as almost every one seemed involuntary to observe who was present. He gradually and slowly declined untill forty minutes after seven when its spirit took its leave of its body without any appearant pain but seemed to go to sleep.

Thus died my only son and one too Oil whom I had placed my own name and was truly the dearest object of my heart. Gone too in the midst of affliction sorrow & disappointment In the wild solitary wilderness. Surrounded by every discouraging circumstance that is calculated to make man unhappy and disconsolate. Without the necessarys of life, Without even our daily bread and no prospects for the future. There in this wild land to lay him where the silence of his peaceful grave would only be broken by the savage yells of the natives seemed to come in bold relief before us. Discouraged, desolate & such frequent disappointments as had lately been my lot and no reason to expect any thing better in future could now only occupy my mind & the mind of my wife the bereaved mother We had now only one child a daughter left & that was born on the road & what was its fate was it to be laid by the way side also & we left uterly destitute & disconsolate

I have often heard people tell of 1oosing the darling object of thier heart. I have often heard of people mourning as for the loss of an only son But never untill now did I fully feel and realize the keen & heart rending force of their words. I have once lost a companion for life and left without a bosom friend Left alone to lock sorrow and disappointment up in my own breast. Left to smile in the midst of the merry & happy but to smile truly to hide and disguise the effects of an overflowing heart of woe. But not then did I feel the loss or mourn as for an only son. This last loss. This loss of my only son. This my hopes for comfort in my old age. This the darling object of my heart gone seemed to cap the climax of all my former misfortunes and seemed more than all else to leave me uterly hopeless. But I shall ceace to indulge in my feelings any longer

Suffice it to say that every attention and kindness was now proffered to me that I needed on the occasion. There was a good coffin made for him. After which we all moved on and buried him on a hill in the prairie about one mile from the Nodaway where there was the grave of an infant of Br John Smith and then pursued our journey leaving the two lovely innocents to slumber in peace in this solitary wild untill we should awake them in the morn of the resurrection We traveled four miles and encamped on a ridge in sight of one of the Pottawattamy villages. In the evening some of the brethren went to the next creek or river to see what the prospects were for crossing and found the bridge impassable and decided to build a new one This stream is called the Nishanabothany by the whites and Nickanabotany by the Indians and is a very large stream and now out of its banks and very deep and muddy.Br Phinehas R. Wright came on to day from Pisgah He informed me that there were some officers of the United States Army at Pisgah with a requisition from the President of the United States, on us for 500 soldiers to march to Santa Fe against Mexico & from thence to California & there to be discharged and their94arms given in at the expiration of one year. This officer's name was Jas Allen Capt of the First Dragoons He had issued a circular to the mormons making known the object of his visit

We were all very indignant at this requisition and only looked on it as a plot laid to bring trouble on us as a people. For in the event that we did not comply with the requisition we supposed they would now make a protest to denounce us as enemies to our country and if we did comply that they would then have 500 of our men in their power to be destroyed as they had done our leaders at Carthage. I confess that my feelings was uncommonly wrought up against them This was the universal feelings at Pisgah and Genl Rich sent me word by Br Wright to keep a sharp look out for him as be passed and see that be did not get any knowledge of the public arms which I had. For he supposed that he might be looking after them. Such was our feelings towards the President &c This officer passed here today but I did not see him as I was encamped some distance from the road.

In the evening There was large numbers of Indians came into camp all friendly and seemed to understand perfectly well the nature of our move and also our ultimate union with them & our return to the lands of our inheritants &c &c

Monday Julie the 29th 1846. To clay all the inch who possibly could leave their camps went down to work at the bridge I did not go but staid at home to fix up anti arrainge my affairs as they were now much out of order

Tuesday June the 30th 1846. Today I worked on the bridge. There was plenty of hands even more than could work to advantage. They had appointed a Foreman but all would not yield their oppinions to him and consequently there was much contention and confusion amongst them & but little done. They under took to build a Frame bridge and this evening failed to sink a bent into the deep water and abandoned it & thus lost all that had been done thus far

This morning Elder Parley P. Pratt came here accompanied by Solomon Hancock <_P> [^4] on their way to Pisgah to try and forward the expidition to the Mountains and instructed us to push on with all possible speed that if we did not get to the Bluffs by the time that he returned it would be needful for us to go on and leave our families such was the necessity to push forward this expidition. The reason of which we could not imagine Neither did he as the sequel will soon prove.

As Elders Pratt & Hancock came here this morning they came to creek about one mile the other side of the indian village the bridge of which was also gone & our hand [s] now building it as well as this one. In an attempt to cross it by swimming his mule Br Pratt & the mule came very near being drowned. He floted to shore and was so was exhausted that he could not get out. After resting awhile he attempted it again and came near being drowned the second time. I believe he was finally assisted over by sonic indian boys, not however untill they were satisfied that they were "Good Mormonee" as they called us. He left Br Hancock & went on but he came on and followed as soon as he could. Br Pratt was in such a hurry that he would not wait an hour or so for Br Hancock such was the emergency of his mission.

Wednesday July the 1st 1846. To day all hands went to work at the bridge. Earley in the morning a lot of them met there before the rest and appointed a new Foreman and commenced work. But as soon as the rest came they were95not satisfied with him and so they had a new election and appointed a new one again this was Raymond Clark. He was more fortunate than the to others who preceeded him. For all hands went to work under him appearantly well satisfied. His plan was to rebuild the old bridge or in other words to build on the place where the old one was which was on a large raft or as some call it a drift on which the former bridge was built. He succeeded in uniting all the bands in his opinion so that they all went to work and about sun down finished it. This might have been done the first day had the matter been planed & executed as it was today by a competent foreman. At noon I went home and stayed there the rest of the day. On my way home I met a large company of hands coming to work on the bridge these were the men belonging to Henry W. Millers company which had just arrived and encamped Our encampment now was very large The hills were frill of our tents & waggons and seemed to be nearley as large as the first camp when it started in February.

Thursday July 2nd 1846. We commenced moving again to day There was a general rush to cross the bridge. Every one seemed to be afraid that he could not get over before it would be gone. Which created a great deal of confusion and some feelings In fact the bridge looked as though it would not last long for as the water [rose] it put in something of a "bad fix"

The next bridge which was about one mile ahead and had also been finished yesterday came very near breaking down. But it was soon arrainged so that it was safe

There was large companies of Indians followed us today for several miles and in fact they thronged around us all the time we were building the bridge & at times would come in droves to the camp but they were very civil friendly & good natured and done none of us any injury while we were here.

They would amuse themselves sometimes by swimming in the creek in large numbers and sometimes at playing cards at which they seemed to be very dexterous. They appeared to be ranch interested at our opperations while at work which seemed to be a great novelty to them.

We travelled about 18 miles today and encamped in the prairie just after crossing a small deep stream. Here we found a good cool, clear spring of water.

William Clayton [^5] Arriving in Zion

Saturday, [July] 17th [1847]. Arose to behold a fine pleasant morning, my health much better. This is my thirty-third birthday. My mind naturally reverts back to my family and my heart is filled with blessings on their heads more than my tongue is able to express. The richest blessings that ever were bestowed upon the head of woman or child could not be more than I desire for them, whatever be my lot. President Young is reported as having had a very sick night. A forge was set up and some repairs done to wagons and Brother Chamberlain's repaired also. The cattle and mules seem very uneasy and continue lowing and braying all the morning. I suppose it is in consequence of the singular echoes, they no doubt thinking they are answered by others over the mountains. At 9:40 the camp renewed the journey and one mile farther arrived at the Red fork of the Weber River. We also seem to have a wide space to travel through and now turn to the right in a western course, the ravine having run mostly southwest. The distance we have traveled through this narrow pass is twenty-three miles. Yesterday was the first day we have beenout of sight of snow a whole day since we arrived at Fort John. We could not see it for the high mountains although surrounded by it. On arriving at this stream we see it again on the mountains to the east. This stream is about four rods wide, very clear water and apparently about three feet deep on an average. Its banks lined with cottonwood and birch and also dense patches of brush wood, willows, rose bushes, briers, etc. By stepping to the top of a small mound at the bend of the road, the mouth of the canyon can be seen very plainly, as also the mountains between which we pass to avoid it. The canyon appears to be about eight or ten miles west of us. I should judge not over that. President Young being so very sick found he could not endure to travel farther. Accordingly Elder Kimball and some others went to select a camping ground and soon returning reported a place a little farther. The camp moved on and formed encampment on the banks of the river having traveled two and a half miles, the day very hot and mosquitoes plentiful. Several of the brethren have caught some fine trout in this stream which appears to have many in it. In the afternoon Elders Kimball, Richards, Smith, Benson and others went onto a mountain to clothe and pray for President Young who continues very sick. On returning they rolled down many large rocks front the top of the mountain to witness the velocity of their descent, etc. Some would roll over half a mile and frequently break to pieces ....In the evening Elders Kimball, G. A. Smith and Howard Egan rode down the river to visit the canyon. They returned about ten o'clock and said they had been eight miles down the river but at that distance did not arrive at the canyon and being late they concluded to return to camp.

Sunday, 18th. This morning the camp was called together and addressed by Elder Kimball. He reports President Young as being a very sick man. He proposed to the brethren that instead of their scattering off, some bunting, some fishing, and some climbing mountains, etc., that they should meet together and pray and exhort each other that the Lord may turn away sickness from our midst and from our President that we may proceed on our journey. It was decided to assemble at ten o'clock and at the sound of the bugle the brethren met in a small grove of shrubbery which they have made for the purpose opposite the wagons. During the meeting, Elder Kimball proposed to the brethren that all the camp, except President Young's and eight or ten other wagons with brethren enough to take care of him, etc., proceed on tomorrow and go through, find a good place, begin to plant potatoes, etc., as we have little time to spare. The proposition was acceeded to by unanimous vote and after a number had expressed their feelings the meeting adjourned till two o'clock at which time they again assembled and listened to remarks from a number of the brethren. Elder Kimball again gave much good instruction and prophecied of good things concerning the camp. The bishops broke bread and the sacrament was administered. Good feelings seem to prevail and the brethren desire to do right. A number yet continue sick, but we expect all will soon recover. The day is very hot with very little air moving. Elder Kimball consented for me to go on tomorrow with the company that goes ahead.

Monday, 19th. Morning fine and warm, President Young considerably better. At 7:45 we started onward leaving President Young and Kimball's wagons and several others. We found the road very rough on account of loose rocks and cobble stones. After traveling two and a quarter miles, we forded the river and found it about eighteen inches deep but proceeded without difficulty. Soon after we were over, Elder Snow came up and said the camp were requested to halt awhile till Dr. Richards came. One of his oxen is missing and he wished to go on. We concluded to move on a little to where the road should turn off between the mountains to avoid the canyon. Elder Pratt went three miles out of his road and had to return again. Three-quarters of a mile from the ford we found the place to make the cutoff and there halted awhile. I put a guide board up at this place marked as follows: "Pratt's Pass to avoid canyon. To Fort Bridger 741/4 miles." Brother Pack, having charge of the company,97concluded to move on slowly and be making our way up the mountains. We accordingly started and after traveling a mile from the forks began to ascend and wind around the mountains. We found the road exceedingly rough and crooked and very dangerous on wagons. Three and a half miles from the forks of the road the brethren made a bridge over a small creek over which we crossed having passed a number of springs near the road. Two and a quarter miles farther we arrived on the summit of the dividing ridge and put a guide board up, "80 miles to Fort Bridger." At tiffs place Elders Kimball, Woodruff, G. A. Smith and H. Egan rode up to view the road, etc. The descent is not very steep but exceedingly dangerous to wagons being mostly on the side hill over large cobble stones, causing the wagons to slide very badly. After traveling a little way, G. A. Smith's wagon wheels gave way going down a steep pitch. The spokes are loose in the hub, and worked about so that when the wagon slides they dish inward, etc. At two o'clock, we halted beside a small creek to water teams, having traveled ten and a half miles over exceedingly rough road. A wagon was unloaded and sent for G. A. Smith's loading which is reported to be two miles back. While they were gone, many turned out their teams to graze. At 3:30 the men returned with the wagons, putting the loading into several so as to proceed and at 3:35 we started forward, the road turning suddenly to the right for about three-quarters of a mile and then a southwest course again. Here we ascend a very long steep hill for nearly a mile, then descend by a very crooked road. I think a better road might be made here and this high hill avoided and save a mile's travel. After traveling a little over three miles, we crossed a creek about a rod wide and eighteen inches deep, pretty steep going down but good going out. We went on a little farther and at half past five camped on a small spot surrounded by willow bushes full of mosquitoes, having traveled this afternoon three and a quarter miles and during the day thirteen and three-quarters. The day has been hot and no wind. Teams sweat much and it has been a pretty hard day's travel. There is not much grass here, but is said to be more plentiful a little farther. Several accidents have happened to wagons today but nothing serious except Brother G. A. Smith's. Dr. Richards' wagons arrived in camp at the same time the rest did. The sick are getting better. In the evening file brethren picked up a lot of dry willows and made a coal pit to set G. A. Smith's tire before we can leave tomorrow. The evening and night were very cold.

Tuesday, 20th. This morning fine and warm. The coal pit is burned and Burr Frost set Elder Smith's wagon tire and did various other repairs to a number of other wagons which took till nearly eleven o'clock, about which time the camp started onward. One of Brother Crow's men returned from Elder Pratt's company and reported that their camp is about nine miles from here. He is bunting stray cattle. He says the road is very rough from here and about a mile beyond where they are camped the road begins to ascend over a high range of mountains. Elder Pratt has been to the top but cannot see the Salt Lake from there. Their company is gone on. I walked ahead of the camp nearly four miles and picked many gooseberries nearly ripe. They are very plentiful on this bottom. The brethren spent much time cutting brush wood and improving the road. After traveling four miles, halted about half an hour to water teams and eat dinner. The road over which we have traveled is through an uneven gap between high mountains and is exceedingly rough and crooked. Not a place to be met with scarcely where there would be room to camp for the dense willow groves all along the bottom. We then proceeded on and traveled over the same kind of rough road till a little after 5:00 p.m. then camped on a ridge, having traveled today seven and a quarter miles. The last three miles has been the worst road of the two, it being through willow bushes over twenty feet high, also rose and gooseberry bushes and shaking poplar and birch timber. Although there has been a road cut through, it is yet scarcely possible to travel without tearing the wagon covers. We have crossed this creek which Elder Pratt names Canyon Creek eleven times during the day and the road is one of the most crooked I ever saw, many sharp turns in it98and the willow stubs standing making it very severe on wagons. As we proceed up, the gap between the mountains seems to grow still narrower until arriving at this place where there is room to camp, but little grass for teams. There are many springs along the road but the water is not very good. In one place about a mile back there is a very bad swamp where the brethren spent some time cutting willows and laying them in to improve it. We have got along today without much damage which is somewhat favorable for the road is awful. At this place the ground around is represented as being swampy and dangerous for cattle. It is reported that there is no place to camp beyond this till where Elder Pratt's company camped and this is so small they have to huddle the wagons together. The soil continues sandy, except in the low moist places where it looks black and good. There is some pine occasionally in sight on the mountains, but timber here is scarce. We have passed through some small patches today where a few house logs might be cut, but this is truly a wild looking place.

Wednesday, 21st. We started onward at half past six, the morning fine and pleasant. We crossed the creek once more and about a half a mile from where we camped, the road turns to the right leaving the creek and ascending the mountains gradually. Much time was necessarily spent cutting down stumps, heaving out rocks and leveling the road. It is an exceedingly rough place. There are several springs at the foot of the mountain and one a mile from the top which runs above the ground a little distance, then sinks under again. The last half mile of the ascent is very steep and the nearer the top the steeper it grows. There is considerable timber up this gap but mostly destroyed by fire. We saw a prairie pheasant while going up and some wild gooseberries. At eleven o'clock, the teams began to arrive on the dividing ridge and in less than an bout, all were safely up. From this ridge we can see an extensive valley to the west but on every other side high mountains, many of them white with snow. It seems as though a few hours' travel might bring us out from the mountains on good road again. We halted on the ridge a little while and then prepared to descend, many locking both hind wheels, a precaution not at all unnecessary. We found the road down exceedingly steep and rendered dangerous by the many stumps of trees left standing in the road. The brethren cut up many of them which delayed us much. About a mile down is a bridge formed of small trees laid one on another to fill up a deep ravine. It is steep on both sides and here Joseph Rooker turned his wagon over, however, without much damage. A mile and a half from the top is a spring and small stream of very good cold water where we halted to let teams drink. This would make a tolerably good camp ground in case of necessity. After this, the road is not so steep but is very rough and winds between high hills or mountains through willows and brush wood and over soft places, crossing the creek a number of times. At four and a half miles from the top of the ridge, we arrived at a good spring of cold water, plenty of grass and a good place to camp. Our teams have now been in the harness about ten hours without eating and the feeling of many was to stay here, but some wanted to go on and we continued. Turning suddenly to the right a little below this spring we began to ascend another high ridge and while ascending some of the teams began to fail. There are a great many service berries on this ridge growing on what we supposed to be wild apple trees. The berries are good and rich when ripe. The descent from this ridge is not nearly so steep as the other one, yet many locked both hind wheels. After descending, we found another small creek and a very rough road again. At 7:30, we formed our encampment near the creek, having traveled fourteen miles in thirteen hours. There is but little grass here and a poor chance for cattle. Orson Pratt's company are camped a half a mile ahead of us and our camp was formed by Colonel Markham. He says they have had many new cases of sickness but mostly getting better. The cannon is left back on the other side of the mountains. About a mile back from this place there is a small grove of sugar maple and considerable other timber along the creek. There are also beds of nice green rushes in several places.

Thursday, 22nd. This morning is cloudy and99some like for rain. We started on at 8:30 and soon came up with Elder Pratt's company. There were several bad places in the road where the brethren spent considerable time fixing them. As we near the mouth of the canyon, there is a small grove of elder bushes in bloom and considerable oak shrubbery. We named this a canyon because of the very high mountains on each side leaving but a few rods era bottom for the creek to pass through and hardly room for a road. It is evident that the emigrants [the Donners] who passed this way last year must have spent a great deal of time culling a road through the thickly set timber and heavy brush wood. It is reported that they spent sixteen days in making a road through from Weber River which is thirty-five miles but as the men did not work a quarter of their time much less would have sufficed. However, it has taken us over three days after the road is made although a great many hours have been spent in improving it. In this thick brush wood and around here there are many very large rattlesnakes lurking, making it necessary to use caution while passing through. After traveling one and three-quarters miles, we found the road crossing the creek again to the north side and then ascending up a very steep, high hill. It is so very steep as to be almost impossible for heavy wagons to ascend and so narrow that the least accident might precipitate a wagon down a bank three or four hundred feet,-in which case it would certainly be dashed to pieces. Colonel Markham and another man went over the hill and returned up the canyon to see if a road cannot be cut through and avoid this hill. While passing up, a bear started near them hut soon was out of sight amongst the very high grass. Brother Markham says a good road can soon be made down the canyon by digging a little and cutting through the bushes some ten or fifteen rods. A number of men went to work immediately to make the road which will be much better than to attempt crossing the hill and will be sooner done.

Agreeable to President Young's instructions, Elder Pratt acompanied by George A. Smith, John Brown, Joseph Mathews, John Pack, O. P. Rockwell and J. C. Little started on this morning on horses to seek out a suitable place to plant some potatoes, turnips, etc., so as to preserve the seed at least. While the brethren were cutting the road, I followed the old one to the top of the hill and on arriving there was much cheered by a handsome view of the Great Salt Lake lying, as I should judge, from twenty-five to thirty miles to the west of us; and at eleven o'clock I sat down to contemplate and view the surrounding scenery. There is an extensive, beautiful, level looking valley from here to the lake which I should judge from the numerous deep green patches must be fertile and rich. The valley extends to the south probably fifty miles where it is again surrounded by high mountains. To the southwest across the valley at about twenty to twenty-five miles distance is a high mountain, extending from the south end of the valley to about opposite this place where it ceases abruptly leaving a pleasant view of the dark waters of the lake. Standing on the lake and about due west there are two mountains and far in the distance another one which I suppose is on the other side the lake, probably from sixty to eighty miles distance. To the northwest is another mountain at the base of which is a lone ridge of what I should consider to be rock salt from its white and shining appearance. The lake does not show at this distance a very extensive surface, but its dark blue shade resembling the calm sea looks very handsome. The intervening valley appears to be well supplied with streams, creeks and lakes, some of the latter are evidently salt. There is but little limber in sight anywhere, and that is mostly on the banks of creeks and streams of water which is about the only objection which could be raised in my estimation to this being one of the most beautiful valleys and pleasant places for a home for the Saints which could be found. Timber is evidently lacking but we have not expected to find a timbered country. There may be timber on the mountains which the long distance would render impossible to be seen with the naked eye, but the mountains through which we have passed have very little on them. In seine places may be seen a grove of small fir or cedar or pine and in the valleys some cottonwood100and other small timber. There is doubtless timber in all passes and ravines where streams descend from the mountains. There is no prospect for building log houses without spending a vast amount of time and labor, but we can make Spanish brick and dry them in the sun; or we can build lodges as the Pawnee Indians do in their villages. For my own part I am happily disappointed in the appearance of the valley of the Salt Lake, but if the land be as rich as it has the appearance of being, I have no fears but the Saints can live here and do well while we will do right. When I commune with my own heart and ask myself whether I would choose to dwell here in this wild looking country amongst the Saints surrounded by friends, though poor, enjoying the privileges and blessings of the everlasting priesthood, with God for our King and Father; or dwell amongst the gentiles with all their wealth and good things of the earth, to be eternally mobbed, harassed, hunted, our best men murdered and every good man's life continually in danger, the soft whisper echoes loud and reverberates hack in tones of stern determination; give me the quiet wilderness and my family to associate with, surrounded by the Saints and adieu to the gentile world fill God says return and avenge you of your enemies. If I had my family with me, how happy could I be, for I dread nothing so much as the journey back again and when I think of the many dangers from accident which families traveling this road are continually liable to and especially this last mountain road from Weber River, it makes me almost shudder to think of it and I could almost envy those who have got safely through, having their families with them, yet they will doubtless have a hard time of it the coming winter. Brother Crow's family especially have very little bread stuff with them, they say enough to last them two months and they are dependent on the success of their hunter for support through the winter. This valley appears to be fortified by mountains, except on the hanks of the lake, on many of which there is still snow lying in large quantities. It is certain that good limestone abounds in these ridges and it is supposed coal can be found with little labor. From this hill I passed down the creek which we named the Last Creek about a mile and there saw a bed of bull rushes of the largest kind I ever saw, some of them being fifteen feet high and an inch and a half in diameter at the bottom. The grass on this creek grows from six to twelve feet high and appears very rank. There are some ducks around and sand hill cranes. Many signs of deer, antelope, and bears, but not many have been seen here. There have been fresh buffalo signs seen a few days' travel back, but those animals evidently do not stay in this region unless some come to winter. The ground seems literally alive with the very large black crickets crawling around up grass and bushes. They look loathsome but are said to be excellent for fattening hogs which would feed on them voraciously. The bears evidently live mostly on them at this season of the year. After spending about four hours' labor the brethren succeeded in cutting a pretty good road along the creek and the wagons proceeded on` taking near a southwest course. We found the last descent even but very rapid all the way. At half past five, we formed our encampment on a creek supposed to be Brown's Creek, having traveled seven and a quarter miles today. We are now five and a quarter miles from the mouth of this. canyon making the whole distance of rough mountain road from the Weber River to the mouth of the canyon on this side a little less than thirty-five miles and decidedly the worst piece of road on the whole journey. At this place, the land is black and looks rich, sandy enough to make it good to work. The grass grows high and thick on the ground and is well mixed with nice green rushes. Feed here for our teams is very plentiful and good and the water is also good. There are many rattlesnakes of a large size in this valley and it is supposed they have dens in the mountains. The land looks dry and lacks rain, but the numerous creeks and springs must necessarily tend to moisten it much. The grass looks rich and good. A while after we camped, Elder Pratt and Company returned and reported that they had been about fifteen miles north from here and this region is as suitable a place to put in our seeds as they have seen. Approaching nearer the lake, the land is mostly sunken and many101small lakes in it. A few miles north of this, is a good spot to break up and plant potatoes, sow our seeds, etc. There is a little timber on the creek. From twelve to fifteen miles north at the foot of the mountain they saw many hot sulphur springs issuing from the rocks. as many as fifty in number. One of them, the largest, falls out of the rocks and then forms a pool apparently ten feet deep and a rock is in the center. The water of this is so hot a person cannot bear his hand in it but a very few seconds. It is strong of salt and sulphur and the bottom appears green as though it was covered with verdigris. A council was held at the Doctor's wagon and it was decided to move early tomorrow to the place designated: also, to send two men back to the President and company to report our progress, etc., then to commence forthwith and plow and plant about ten acres with potatoes this week if possible and thus continue till the seed is secured. John Pack and Joseph Mathews were selected to return to President Young's company. The evening was fine and pleasant and the night feels reach warmer than in the ravines of the mountains.

Friday, 23rd. This morning Elders Pack and Mathews started to meet the President and at the same time the camp moved on to the final location. We traveled two miles and then formed our encampment on the banks of the creek in an oblong circle. The grass here appears even richer and thicker On the ground than where we left this morning. The soil looks indeed rich, black and a little sandy. The grass is about four feet high and very thick on the ground and well mixed with rushes. If we stay here three weeks and our teams have any rest they will be in good order to return. As soon as the camp was formed a meeting was called and the brethren addressed by Elder Richards, mostly on the necessity and propriety of working faithfully and diligently to get potatoes, turnips, etc., in the ground. Elder Pratt reported their mission yesterday and after some remarks the meeting was dismissed. At the opening, the brethren united in prayer and asked the Lord to send rain on the land, etc. The brethren immediately rigged three plows and went to plowing a little northeast of the camp; another party went with spades, etc., to make a dam on one of the creeks so as to throw the water at pleasure on the field, designing to irrigate the land in case rain should not conic sufficiently. This land is beautifully situated for irrigation, many nice streams descending from the mountains which can be turned in every direction so as to water any portion of the lands at pleasure. During the afternoon, heavy clouds began to collect in the southwest anti at five o'clock we had a light shower with thunder. We had rains for about two hours. The brethren flare plowed up considerable land and broken several off their plows, but there have been three plows going nearly all day. At night, the camp was called together and addressed by Elder Richards on a subject which seemed little welcome to many from the way it was handled. It was a sermon of--from end to end. Some felt a little insulted but it all passed off well and jokingly.

Saturday, 24th. The plowing is renewed and many are gone to planting potatoes. There is one drag going. Others are still at work on the dams. John Pack and Joseph Mathews returned at dark last night and reported the President and company a few miles up Last Creek. They have gone back this morning to fix two bridges at file mouth of the canyon. The day is fine and hot with a nice breeze. At a quarter to twelve, President Young and Kimball arrived and the wagons also began to arrive at the same time. The President seems much better and the sick generally are getting better. Most of the brethren express themselves well pleased with the place, but some complain because there is no timber. There appears to be a unanimous agreement in regard to the richness of the soil and there are good prospects of sustaining and fattening stock with little trouble. The only objection is a lack of timber and rain. The latter God will send in its season if the Saints are faithful and I think yesterday was a proof that He listens to and answers the prayers of the Saints. We can easily irrigate the land at all events which will be an unfailing and certain source of water, for the springs are numerous and the water appears good. About 5:00 p.m. we were favored with another nice shower102accompanied by thunder and some wind. It continued raining till nearly dark; the balance of the evening fine. Elder Kimball says that it is contemplated to send out an exploring party to start on Monday and proceed north to the Bear River and Cache valleys. They design taking several wagons with them and Presidents Young and Kimball accompany the expedition. Another company is to start at the same time and go west to the lake, then south to the Utah lake and return down this valley.

Sunday, 25th. Morning fine and pleasant. At ten o'clock a meeting was held in the camp and the brethren addressed successively by Elders G. A. Smith, H. C. Kimball and E. T. Benson these mostly expressing their feeling of gratification for the prospects of this country, each being highly satisfied with the soil, etc. Elder Kimball referred especially to the manifold blessings we have been favored with during the journey. Not a man, woman, or child has died on the journey, not even a horse, mule, ox, cow or chicken has died during the whole journey. Many exhortations were given to the brethren to be faithful, obey the council of those in authority and we shall be blessed and prosperous. At 1:00 p.m. by request of Elder Kimball, the following persons viz.: Howard Egan, Hans C. Hanson, Jackson Redding, Carlos Murray, Thomas Cloward, George Billings, Philo Johnson, Charles Harper, Edson Whipple, Win. A. King, Hosea Cusing, Robert Byard, Orson K. Whitney and Horace Whitney, assembled themselves in a willow grove adjacent to the camp wit ere Elder Kimball addressed them in substance as follows: [^6]

"Most of you here present have become adopted into my family, except a very few calling them by name and Horace, who has become connected with my family by marriage, but I do not care for that, you are all the same to me, and your interest is my interest for whales mine is yours and what's yours is your own. If I have the privilege of building a house, I want you to help me and I will help you. Horace will want to build a house for some of his father's family if they should come up and there is plenty of timber in the hills. When my family comes up, we may conclude to settle somewhere else. If so, there will be plenty to buy us out if we shall have made any improvements. I want you all to be prudent and take care of your horses, cattle and everything entrusted to your care. It would be a good plan and probably will be done for those who stay here, to go back on the Sweet Water and kill buffalo, etc., for winter consumption. We shall go tomorrow if Brigham is well enough, in search of a better location-if indeed, such can be found if not, we shall remain here. There should be an enclosure made for the purpose of keeping the horses and cattle in nights for there are plenty of Indians in the vicinity. I should advise you to keep the Sabbath day holy whether others do or not. I want you to put all the seed into the ground that you think will come to maturity. I am satisfied that buckwheat will do as well here as any other seed we can grow. I want also some peach stones and apple seeds to be planted forthwith. Brother Byard and Hans I would like to have immediately engage in making garments of buck skins. Brother Cloward in making shoes and Brother Johnson in making hats as soon as practicable. If you wish to go hunting, fishing, or to see the country, select a week day and not the Lord's day for that purpose. Do not let us get giddy and light minded as the Nephites did of old, but strive to work righteousness in the beginning, inasmuch as we have reached the promised land.

At 2:00 p.m. the brethren again assembled within the camp and were successively addressed by Elders Woodruff, Orson Pratt and W. Richards sustaining the ideas advanced by the other brethren this morning. Some remarks followed from Lorenzo Young, John Pack and others and the meeting was dismissed. It is contemplated to send some wagons back to lighten the loads and assist the next company over these rough roads. It is now certain that there is considerable timber in the ravines and valleys103between the mountains, several large bodies having been seen by the brethren since our arrival. There is a mountain lying northeast from here on which is considerably large timber. It is supposed to be about ten miles distance. The northern expedition is given up for the present on account of President Young's health. A company intend to go tomorrow to the lake and survey that region. If they go, they will probably be gone a day or two.

Monday, 26th. Morning cloudy and pleasant. The brethren commenced plowing early, others are gone to planting, etc., and the brethren appear to feel well. Some of the sick have been to bathe in one of the hot springs and pronounce the effects wonderfully beneficial. Others are going this morning to try the same experiment. Another company are gone to make a road to the timber through a ravine a little north of this. About ten o'clock, President Young sent me a horse with instructions to join him and some others going on a short exploring expedition. I immediately started anti found the company consisted of President Young, Elders Kimball, Woodruff, G. A. Smith, Benson, Richards and Carrington. We took a course northward passing by the land where the brethren are plowing and planting. The land indeed looks rich and light. About three-quarters of a mile north of the camp, we arrived on a beautiful table land, level and nicely sloping to the west. Here we halted to view it and the more we viewed, the better we were satisfied that it is as handsome a place for a city as can be imagined. At the east part there is a considerable creek of clear cold water descending from the mountains and just above this place it branches into two forks, one running northwest the other southwest and the two nicely surrounding this place, and so well arranged that should a city be built here the water can be turned into every street at pleasure. We passed on and began to ascend the mountains, the President signifying a wish to ascend a high peak to the north of us. After some hard toil and time we succeeded in gaining the summit, leaving our horses about two-thirds the way up. President Young felt pretty well fatigued when he got up. Some of the brethren feel like naming this Ensign Peak. From this place, we had a good view of the Salt Lake and could see that the waters extend for a great many miles to the north of us. There appears to be land, although white with salt, all the way to the mountain on the northwest which we had previously supposed was surrounded by water. We can see a pretty large stream winding from the south to the north through the valley but keeping not many miles distant from these mountains towards the lake. After satisfying ourselves we began to descend, President Young and Lorenzo, who joined us a while before we went up, going down on the east side where they were joined by Elders Woodruff, Benson, and Richards with the horses. Elders Kimball, Smith, Carrington and myself descended on the northwest corner and found the descent very lengthy and difficult. These hills are mostly rocky of a kind of soft stone in some places, in others a harder kind of flint stone. On arriving on the level again, we wound our way southward to nicer the other brethren and after passing a little way saw one of the sulphur springs where a pretty large stream of sulphur water boils out of the rock at the foot of the mountain and thence branches out into several smaller streams for some distance till these enter a small lake. This water is about as warm as dish water and very salty. There is much filthy kind of substance collected on it and the smell arising from it is truly nauseating and sickly, though generally supposed to be in no way unhealthy. Elder Kimball left us here on seeing Elder Woodruff's carriage and the other brethren returning back towards the camp. In the meantime, Elders Smith, Carrington and myself went lower down towards the lake in search of some fresh water to quench our thirst. We found a nice clear stream of cold water but a little way from the sulphur spring and having drunk of it, we concluded to go on and see the river which we had noticed from the mountain. We look nearly a west course and soon struck the old road made by emigrants last year. We found the land exceedingly rich all along, good grass and abundance of rushes. We found many wet places but no signs of swamps, nor danger of miring. After104traveling about two miles, we arrived at rite river having followed the road to the ford. This river is about five rods wide on an average, three and a half feet deep at the ford but in other places much deeper. The current is slow and the water of a dark lead color. The banks are about five feet high and the soil to the water level of a rich, black alluvial. There is no timber on the banks here and not many willow bushes. We went over the river and found the soil equally good on the other side. While here we observed Elder Woodruff's carriage and the brethren again proceeding northward. We started back to meet them, it being the intention to go to the large, hot sulphur spring. We could but remark all along, the richness of the soil and the abundance of high, good looking grass. On arriving at the foot of the mountain beside another sulphur spring, we saw the carriage come on to the first spring but apparently judging it unsafe to cross, they wheeled around and returned back to camp. Elders Smith. Carrington and myself then concluded to go on and view the big spring which we found to be about two miles farther. Before arriving at it, there is a large shoat salt lake and on the banks are numerous sulphur springs varying in the appearance of the surface and losing themselves in the lake. There were many plovers on and around this lake. We arrived at the big spring about four o'clock and making our horses fast, we went down to where it boils out of the rock. This spring is also situated at the foot of the mountains and at the base of a largo rock, perpendicular on the west side and gradually losing itself on the east in the mountain. The spring, as I flare said, is at the base of this rock. There is a circular hole about four feet wide and a yard high from the top to the surface of the water from whence the water boils out in a considerable stream. The water itself in the spring seems to be about two feet deep. There is a rock at the mouth of the spring where a person can stand and see inside. Standing on this rock with your face near the mouth of the spring a strong warm sulphurous air is fell to come in gusts out of the rock and it is so hot that it requires only a few minutes to start the perspiration. On putting my hand in the spring, I was startled with the heat and found I could not bear to hold my hand in five seconds. It is as hot as the hottest dish water ever used for dishes. Immediately on emerging from the rock, the water forms a lake about three rods in diameter and evidently pretty deep. The water is exceedingly clear and nice to look at but very salty indeed. We could see the water boil up in many parts of the lake. The water escapes at the north side of the lake at the base of the rock and there forms a stream about four feet wide and eighteen inches deep. We concluded we would go down the stream six or eight rods to wash our feet, naturally expecting the water to be cooler, but on taking off our boots and socks we found it impossible to hold our feet in it a moment and could barely wash by dashing the water on with our hands and suddenly dipping them in and out. It is supposed this would boil an egg in about ten minutes. At five o'clock we returned back to camp and supposed that the spring is about four miles distance. We arrived in camp at six o'clock. The brethren have planted about three acres of potatoes, some peas, beans, and are now planting four or five acres of corn. Elder Kimball stated that on returning with the carriage to the creek near the camp to get some water, he discovered that he had lost his spy glass. He retraced his steps on foot to the top of the peak and back without finding it, and on arriving at the bottom he saw Elders Richards and Benson bathing in one of the warm sulphur springs. Although wet with perspiration he took off his clothes and plunged in and found the effects very pleasant and beneficial. After bathing they started back for camp and but a few rods distance found the glass near the road. Some of the brethren have commenced making a garden about two miles to the southeast and indeed their operations and industry are truly pleasing and noble. The more I view the country, the better I am satisfied that the Saints can live here and raise abundant crops. Elder Kimball has kindly offered me a horse to ride and view the country as much and when l have a mind to while we stay here. This morning Joseph Mathews and John Brown started west to go to the mountain. They returned this evening and105report that they have been at the foot of the mountain and judge it to be about sixteen miles distance. They say the wild sage is very plentiful on the other side the valley. showing that the land is not so rich there as here. They found a horse, near the mountain anti have brought it to camp, supposed to have strayed from emigrants who have previously passed this way. Towards sundown heavy clouds were noticed in the south and southwest. We expected a shower, but it passed off to the east.

Mary Goble Pay [^7] Death Strikes the Handcart Company

I, Mary Goble, was born in Brighton, Sussex. England 2 June 1843. My father William Goble son of William and Harriet Johnson Goble. My mother was the daughter of John and Sarah Penfold.

My childhood days were spent the same as most children. When I was in my twelfth year, my parents joined the Latter-day Saints. On November 5th I was baptized. The following May we started for Utah. We left our home May 19, 1856. We canoe to London the first day, the next day came to Liverpool and West on board the ship, Horizon, that evening.

It was a sailing vessel and there were nearly nine hundred souls on board. We sailed on the 25th. The pilot ship came tugged us out into the open sea.

I well remember how we watched old England fade from sight. We sang "Farewell Our Native Land, Farewell.

"While we were in the river the crew mutinied but they were put ashore and another crew came on board. They were a good set of men.

When we were a few days out, a large shark followed the big vessel. One of the saints died and he was buried at sea. We never saw the shark any more.

After we got over our seasickness we had a nice time. We would play games, and sing songs of Zion. We held meetings and the time passed happily.

When we were sailing through the banks of Newfoundland, we were in a dense fog for several days. The sailors were kept busy night and day ringing bells and blowing fog horns. One day I was on deck with my father, when I saw a mountain of ice in the sea close to the ship. I said, "Look, father, look." He went pale as a ghost and said, "Oh, my girl." At that moment the fog parted, the sun shone bright till the ship was out of danger, when the fog closed on us again.

We were on the sea six weeks, when we landed at Boston. We took the train from Iowa City where we had to get an outfit for the plains. It was the end of July. On the first of August we started to travel with our ox teams unbroke and did not know a thing about driving oxen. My father had bought two yoke of oxen and one yoke of cows, a wagon and tent. He had a wife and six children. Their names were: Mary, Edwin, Caroline, Harriet, James and Fanny.

My sister Fanny broke out with the measles on the ship and when we were in Iowa Campgrounds, there came up a thunder storm that blew down our shelter, made with hand carts and some quilts. The storm came and we sat there in the rain, thunder find lightening. My sister got wet and died the 19 July 1856. She would have been 2 years old on the 23. The day we started on our journey, we visited her grave. We felt very bad to leave our little sister there.

We traveled through the States until we came to Council Bluffs. Then we started on our journey of one thousand miles over the plains. It was about the last of September. We traveled106from 15 to 25 miles a day. We used to stop one day in the week to wash. On Sunday we would hold our meetings and rest. Every morning and night we were called to prayers by the bugle.

The Indians were on the war path and very hostile. Our Captain John Hunt had us make a dark camp. That was to stop and get our supper then travel a few miles and not light any fires but camp and go to bed. The men had to travel all day and guard every other night.

One night cattle were in the corral, which was made with wagons. When one of the guards saw something crawling along the ground. All in a moment the cattle started. It wits a noise like thunder. The guard shot off his gun. The animals jumped up and ran. It was an Indian with a buffalo robe on. Mother and we children were sitting in the tent. Father was on guard. We were surely frightened but Father came running in and told us not to be afraid for everything was till right.

We traveled on till we got to the Platt River. That was the last walk I ever had with my mother. We caught up with Handcart companies that day. We watched them cross the river. There were great lumps of ice floating down the river. It was bitter cold. The next morning there were fourteen dead in camp through the cold. We went back to camp and went to prayers. We sang the song "Come, Come, Ye Saints, No Toil Nor Labor Fear." I wondered what made my mother cry. That night my mother took sick and the next morning my little sister was born. It was the 23rd of September. We named her Edith and she lived six weeks and died for want of nourishment.

We had been without water for several days, just drinking snow water. The captain said there was a spring of fresh water just a few miles away. It was snowing hard, but my mother begged me to go and get her a drink. Another lady went with me. We were about half way to the spring when we found an old man who had fallen in the snow. He was frozen so stiff, we could not lift him, so the lady told me where to go and she would go back to camp for help for we knew he would soon be frozen if we left him. When she had gone I began to think of the Indians and looking and looking in all directions. I became confused and forgot the way I should go. I waded around in the snow up to my knees and I became lost. Later when I did not return to camp the men started out after me. It was 11:00 p.m. o'clock before they found me. My feet and legs were frozen. They carried me to camp and rubbed me with snow. They put my feet in a bucket of water. The pain was so terrible. The frost came out of my legs and feet but did not come out of my toes.

We traveled in the snow from the last crossing of the Platt River. We had orders not to pass the handcart companies. We had to keep close to them to help them if we could. We began to get short of food and our cattle gave out. We could only travel a few miles a day. When we started out of camp in the morning the brethren would shovel the snow to make a track for our cattle. They were weak for the want of food as the buffaloes were in large herds by the road and ate all the grass.

When we arrived at Devil's Gate it was bitter cold. We left lots of our things there. There were two or three log houses there. We left our wagons and joined teams with a man named James Barman. He had a sister Mary who froze to death. We stayed there two or three days. While there an ox fell on the ice and the brethren killed it and the beef was given out to the camp. My brother James ate a hearty supper was as well as he ever was when he went to bed. In the morning he was dead.

My feet were frozen also my brother Edwin and my sister Caroline had their feet frozen. It was nothing but snow. We could not drive the pegs in the ground for our tents. Father would clean a place for our tents and put snow around to keep it down. We were short of flour but father was a good shot. They called him the hunter of the camp. So that helped us out. We could not get enough flour for bread as we got only a quarter of a pound per head a day, so we would make it like thin gruel. We called it "skilly.

"There were four companies on the plains. We did not know what would become of us. One night a man came to our camp and told us there would be plenty of flour in the morning for Bro. Young had sent men and teams to help us.107There was rejoicing that night. We sang songs, some danced and some cried. His name was Ephriam Hanks. We thought he was a living Santa Claus.

We traveled faster now that we had horse teams. My mother had never got well, she lingered until the 11 of December, the day we arrived in Salt Lake City 1856. She died between the Little and Big Mountain. She was buried in the Salt Lake City Cemetery. She was 43 years old. She and her baby lost their lives gathering to Zion in such a late season of the year. My sister was buried at the last crossing of the Sweet Water.

We arrived in Salt Lake City nine o'clock at night the 11th of December 1856. Three out of four that were living were frozen. My mother was dead in the wagon.

Bishop Hardy had us taken to a home in his ward and the brethren and the sisters brought us plenty of food. We had to be careful and not eat too much as it might kill us we were so hungry.

Early next morning Bro. Brigham Young and a doctor came. The doctor's name was Williams. When Bro. Young came in he shook hands with us all. When he saw our condition-our feet frozen and our mother dead-tears rolled down his cheeks.

The doctor amputated my toes using a saw and a butcher knife. Brigham Young promised me I would not have to have any more of my feet cut off. The sisters were dressing mother for the last time. Oh how did we stand it? That afternoon she was buried.

When we had been in Salt Lake a week, one afternoon a knock came at the door. It was Uncle John Wood. When he met Father he said, "I know it all Bill." Both of them cried. I was glad to see my father cry. Uncle said for him to pack up and we would start right away. That night we got to Centerville. There Aunt Fanny was waiting for us at Brother Garns. We stayed there that night. The next morning we went to Farmington and stayed there until the following April. My father married again.

Instead of my feet getting better they got worse until the following July I went to Dr. Wiseman's to live with them to pay for him to doctor my feet. But it was not use he said he could do no more for me unless I could consent to have them cut off at the ankle. I told him what Brigham Young had promised me. He said all right sit there and rot and I will do nothing more until you come to your senses.

One day I sat there crying. My feet were hurting me so-when a little old woman knocked at the door. She said she had felt some one needed her there for a number of days. When she saw me crying she came and asked what was the matter. I showed her my feet and told her the promise Bro. Young had given me. She said, "Yes, and with the help of the Lord we will save them yet." She made a poultice and put on my feet and every day after the doctor had gone she would come and change the poultice. At the end of three months my feet were well.

One day Doctor Wiseman said, "Well, Mary, I must say you have grit. I suppose your feet have rotted to the knees by this time." I said, "Oh, no, my feet are well." He said, "I know better, it could never be." So I took off my stockings and showed him my feet. He said that it was a miracle and wanted me to tell him what I had been doing. I told him to never mind that they were now healed.I have never had to have any more taken from them. The promise of Brigham Young has been fulfilled and the pieces of toe bone have worked out.

I had sat in my chair so long that the cords of my legs had become stiff and I could not straighten them. When I went home to my father and he saw how my legs were we both cried. He rubbed the cords of nay legs with oil and tried every way to straighten them, but it was of no use. One day he said, "Mary, I have thought of a plan to help you. I will nail a shelf on the wall and while I am away to work you try to reach it." I tried all day and for several days. At last I could reach it and how pleased we were. Then he put the shelf a little higher and in about three months my legs were straight and then I had to learn to walk again.

In the spring it was the time the people all moved south. My father and family moved to Nephi. I stayed at Spanish Fork until the spring of 1859, when I came to Nephi. I went to live108with Aunt Carter. On the 26th of June I was married to Richard Pay.

My husband I first saw at Liverpool. He and his wife Sarah sailed in the ship Horizon. We traveled together. At Iowa camp ground their little girl was born July 11, 1856. The mother took the mountain fever. The baby died October 4, 1856 at Chimney Rock. Bro. Pay could not get anyone to dig the grave, so he started digging it himself, when<_P> my father came and helped him.

When my little sister died at Sweet Water, Bro. Pay helped my father when she was buried by the roadside. I felt like I couldn't leave her, for I had seen so many graves opened by the wolves. The rest of the company had got quite away when my father came back for me. I told him I could not leave her to be eaten by the wolves it seems too terrible. But he talked to me and we hurried on.Bro. Pay's wife died at Bridger, Wyoming, so he was left alone. He arrived in Salt Lake City the 13th of Dec. He came down to American Fork and stayed there all winter. In the spring he started with all he owned tied up in a handkerchief and walked to Nephi. He lived to Jacob Bigler's, who was the bishop and worked for him for two years. Then we were married by Jacob G. Biglet at Nephi.

When I was married it was very bard times. My husband bought a one room adobe house. For windows we had a sack. Glass we could not get, so we greased some paper and put over the sack. That did alright until one day it rained and that spoiled our "glass." We then put up factory. We had a bed stead, three chairs, a table, a box for flour. Our bed tick we filled with straw. We had two sheets, two pillow slips, and one quilt. I used to take them off the bed and wash them and put them on again. For dishes we had three tin plates, three cups, a pan or two to cook in and a spider to bake our bread. After a while we bought a bake kettle and a brass kettle.

We used to grow squash, let them freeze and then boil them and make molasses of the juice. Some we would make preserves out of by cutting up carrots and parsnips the size of dice and boil it in the juice.We would save all the bits of fat and bones for our soap. To make the lye we would burn the hard wood for ashes, then put them in the leach. The leach was made by putting three or four boards, slanting at the bottom, then put in some straw. Then put on the ashes. When we had enough, we would pour boiling water on, then the lye would run slowly out. This we would boil and then make our soap.

My husband made adobes for eight sheep. I would take the wool, wash it, spin and dye it with weeds and leaves. I learned to spin and knit so I could knit our stockings, mitts and ties. My husband made our shoes. We had a cow, pig and chickens and raised wheat and vegetables.

The people all lived inside of a large mud wall with a north and south gate. At night our cattle and sheep were brought home and we were all locked inside the fort for safety from the Indians. Guards were at both gates. They were to see that no one came in or out of the gates that we did not know. They were locked at eight o'clock every night. If you did not get in then you were locked out.

We were a happy band of brothers and sisters. We felt safe locked inside the fort walls. In the winter time we would have lots of house parties. After a while we built our farms just outside the big walls. Then the Black Hawk War broke out and we were afraid for our children to be out of our sight, afraid the Indians would get them. We were afraid for them to play or cry, the noise might bring the red men. Poor little tots they would sit by the fire and say, "Why can't we have some fun, mama."

My husband took his turn on guard and when the Black Hawk War broke out he was a minute man called out any moment night or day. He had to furnish his own gun and ammunition and had to keep rations on hand. We used crackers and cheese. These were always ready so that he could go any moment. He belonged to Company B. Benjamin Ricks was his captain. Many a time he was called out with 40 rounds of ammunition to march after the red men. I got to know the rap of Brother Peter Sutton. He would say, "Brother Pay, I want you to march as quick as possible." He would109kiss his wife and babies and be gone. We did not know if we would ever see each other again. All we could do was pray. He always said that no Indian would ever kill him.

President Brigham Young advised all that could to learn the Indian language so we could talk to them and to be kind to them and feed them and they would respect us.

There was a small tribe of Indians called Pagwats that stayed around Nephi. Their chief's name was Pawania. He and his squaw were very friendly to the white people. Many a time has she brought letters for us and we would send them by her. She would help me wash and pick wool and she taught me their language. Many a time she would tell me she had seen my husband and little son and they were well. She was very honest and would often bring back things that her papoose had taken.

One day she went to my husband's camp to get something to eat. He did not have anything to give her so she went to her wickiup and cooked a meal of deer meat and beans and made a cake of ground sun flower seeds, then called him to eat with them. Of course he had to go, but he suddenly lost his appetite. They hunted a rusty spoon for him, but they ate with their fingers.

She would always tell me when the Indians were getting mad and on the war path. The Ute Indians would get mad very often.

I remember one day when I was dressing my baby and two of the boys were playing on the floor, when the door opened and two Indians came in. One was the meanest looking Indian I ever saw. They started to talk. He said, "Let's kill them, see there are four scalps." The old chief said, "No, you cannot kill them for she and her husband are my friends." He got mad and said, "I'd like to cut their throats." Then I answered him. I tell you he was frightened Indian. For he didn't know I knew what he had said. He stood ramming his gun. I told him to go. The old chief laughed and made fun of him because he did not know I understood him. I loaded the old chief down with some things to eat because he had saved my life and my children.

It was afterwards proven that the Indian was one that had helped kill a family of six in Thistle Canyon. He and five others had a trial and were shot.

Black Hawk was a fine looking chief. Black Hawk looked different from the other chiefs. He was tall and had long black hair. His nose was long, and he had a black small mustache. lie looked like he had Jewish blood in him. He could talk English quite good. He had nice looking squaws. It was fun to see them try to use their plates and knives and forks like white people.

He and his squaws would come in the fall to get us to hire them to husk corn. He would come with them, but he would not work. He would make the bargain for us to pay them so much corn and the best dinner we could get them. Which was not very rich I assure you.

One day when the war was about over, my husband and one of the boys were in Salt Creek Canyon with their sheep. They saw six Indians on horseback coming to their camp. One was Black Hawk, with five of his warriors. My husband thought his time had come, but the chief told him, he and his braves were good, that they were very hungry and wanted a sheep. He told them they could get one. They went into the herd, shot one of the best and ate every bit of it, but the skin. That night they stayed by the camp fire.

Black Hawk said, "You need not be afraid of us anymore. I am sick of blood. Look at me, the great chief. Brigham Young told me if I shed the Mormon's blood I should wither and die. I am going up to see the Big Chief Brigham once more and then I am going to the place where I was born and die. He did not live more than two or three weeks after. He was a living skeleton wasting to nothing. He knew it was because he had killed the white man.

It was the summer of 1860 our men were out in the fields busy getting up their hay. Nearly all the men were away from home. One day we heard an awful noise, my neighbors came running to my house. We knew it was the Indians on the war path. We went to the main street and there we saw a sight. It made us all sick. I guess there were fifty Indians riding on horses, four abreast with four scalps on their110poles and their faces were painted horribly. When they saw us they sung their war songs. They rode through the city. One Indian paced up and down the forest wall by the side of our house. He had the clothes of a stage driver that they had killed in Little Salt Creek. He had a white shirt on all stained with blood. He said, "White man's blood." We did not know who the scalps were. They might be our husbands'. Bishop Bigler sent three of our young men to the meadow to see if our brothers were safe and for them to come as quick as possible.

When the brethren in the field saw the young men coining they got together and waited. They wondered what was wrong, but the men told them of the Indians at the fort and that we were nearly frightened to death. We were sure glad to see our brethren safe. Bishop Bigler said for us to go to our homes and not to interfere with the red men but to protect our family.

We kept watch all that day. The next morning they were gone. The soldiers were after them. They kept up their noise all night. On one of the mountains they had signal fires to tell if anyone was after them.

One day when our trees were starting to bear Little John and his squaws came to our house for sonic peaches. My husband was away from home. There was a tree of peaches that they wanted. I told them they could not have them for I wanted them for myself. He told his squaws to go get them. I was afraid to stop them. He spoke in his language, but I knew what he said. I told him if they went I would bring them out. He laughed and told them to go on. They went and he sat down under the tree. His squaws and his boys were picking the fruit. I gathered up a stock and when they saw me coming they got out of the tree tumbling over one another, old Little John and all. He was very mad. He said, the white man had taken the land and water away from the Indians and that all that was there belonged to them.

He did not come again to our house until spring. Then he came in laughing and wanted to shake hands asking us if we were friendly. My husband told him he didn't know. Then he wanted to shake hands with me. He said, "Brave squaw not afraid." We shook hands with him and he went away laughing. And he behaved himself after that.

There was another Indian named Bob. He was mean and the women were afraid of him. He had a squaw who was sick. He came and asked us for some medicine for her. We gave him some. He would come painted horribly. I would say to him, "What is the matter, Bob?" He said, "I am mad, but I will not hurt you nor your husband, nor your papoose, you good to me, to my squaw."

I could relate many more incidents of our dealings with the Indians but we followed Pres. Young's advise to be good to them, feed them and not fight them. An Indian never forgets a kindness and he never forgets a wrong. They are truthful. If they say they will do a thing, they will do it. I remember my husband asked one of them if he had seen his oxen. He told him if he would get them for him he would pay him. The next morning it rained hard but he was there with the oxen. Although it was storming hard he had kept his word. He said he had told him he would bring them so he did.

My husband was driving cattle one day and some of them ran in the brush. He went after them and he saw a man's vest, part of a leg and an arm. The vest had a watch in the pocket. He came to camp and notified Cap. Hunt and Gilbert Spencer. They got on their horses and went with him to the place. It looked like a man had sat down to rest and gone to sleep and had been killed and eaten by wolves. His name was Bro. Stone. He must have been making for our camp, as he had a sister and her daughter living there, that he used to stay with very often. My husband gave the watch to his sister, Janet. She later moved to Spanish Fork. Her daughter's name was Anna. She married Bishop Wells of Spanish Fork.

Once when the boys were coming in to spend the 24th of July, we heard there were eight Indians in Dog Valley that were very hostile. I was very much frightened for I knew that my two boys, Richard and George, and their friend Tom Carter would surely meet them if they came that way. All we could do was to pray for the Lord to protect them. It111came nine o'clock at night and they hadn't reached home. We were very much worried, when we heard the boys singing. I asked them if they had seen ally Indians in Dog Valley. Richard said they did not come that way for a voice seemed to say to take the road through Spring Canyon. I knew that was an answer to our prayers. The Lord had protected them.

One might wonder what my husband used to fix his shoes with. He had to work to make everything himself. There was a tannery, where he would buy the leather paying for it by trading wheat, corn or potatoes. For the pegs, he would get maple and saw it in different sizes, butting them with his knife. For the wax he would boil tar and put grease in it. For the shoe thread, some of the sisters would spin the cotton and grease it with the wax. For soles we used skins. We took salaterous from the top of the ground, cleaned it and used it (soda) for cooking.

To make whitewash we would get a rock of plaster paris, bury it in hot ashes, make a fire and burn it until it crumbled. Our salt we would get out of a cave. We had to boil it to get it clean. We used to make our starch out of potatoes. To grate the potatoes we would use a piece of tin with holes punched in it. We made enough in the spring to last a year.

For fruit we gathered ground cherries, sarvice berries, choke cherries, and wild currants. When the men went to work, they would take a sack to get their pay. It would be corn, potatoes, grain, flour, squash, or anything we could get.

My husband was a teacher in the first Sunday School in Nephi. I think it was in the year 1862.Thirteen children were born to us: ten sons and three daughters. Two died in infancy and one little son two years old. The rest lived to manhood and womanhood.

We lived in Nephi twenty-two years, then moved to Leamington. One January 4th, 1892, our eldest son died with pneumonia. He was 21 years and 3 months.

My husband and I were called to sing in the choir. He was a teacher in the ward and clerk and President of the Seventies. I was called as a second counselor in the Relief Society to work with Sister Anna T. Walker, She moved away and l worked with another sister until the fall of 1893. I was called as President of the Primary at Leamington. I labored in Relief Society ten years and in Primary twelve years.

My husband died April 18, 1893, at Leamington and was buried in Nephi. When I moved to Nephi, I was called to act as a teacher in the Second Ward. I was left with nine children, two were married. It looked pretty dark with nothing coming in. I had to depend on my boys and being strangers in Nephi they did not gel much work, so I started to nurse the sick. In this I had good success.

The first of Sept 1894, my son George died of typhoid fever. he left a wife and five children. When he died my son William was very sick. On Nov. 12, 1895, my daughter Sarah Eliza died. She was nearly fifteen years old.

It is now Oct. 1896, fifty years ago we left our homes over the sea for Utah. Quite a few of us that are left have been in Salt Lake City to celebrate our Jubilee. We met in the 14th ward assembly hall. We held three meetings. President Joseph F. Smith presided and the Relief Society furnished us a banquet. We had a very good time. I stayed with Annie Pay Kimball. We met the captain of our company. We were happy to see one another and talk of the times that are gone.

My sister Carrie and her husband went up to the city with me. Her husband came in Captain Ellsworth Handcart Company. We went to conference two days and then went to the cemetery to find my mother's grave. It was in Lot 2, plot C. It was the first time I had seen it; for when she was buried our feet were so we could not go to the funeral and later we moved South.

No one knows how I felt as we stood there by her grave. There was Alma, his wife, myself, and Ethel, one of George's daughters. There were three generations and our mother was a martyr of the truth. I thought of her words, "Polly, I want to go to Zion while my children are small, so they can be raised in the Gospel of Christ. For I know this is the true Church."

Now there are 31 grandchildren, 26 great112grandchildren living, and 15 are dead. There are three of us livings-my brother, sister, and I.

I later went to Farmington and visited with my cousin Ellen Pierce. I saw a number of my cousins. I came back to the city and went to the temple and saw my son Alma married. I worked in the temple two days.

I think my mother had her wish. My brother and three of my sons have filled missions and her grandsons and daughter are workers in the Church. They are all members of the Church.

I now have six sons and one daughter living, four sons are married and I have eleven grandchildren and I am proud of them all.

I am the mother of thirteen children, 10 sons and three daughters. My brother Edwin is the father of fifteen sons and daughters. My sister Carrie is the mother of nine seven sons and two daughters.

In Sept. 1902 we had a Jubilee to celebrate the fifty years of settling Nephi. I was in the parade as a Gleaner, the first day. The next day as a braider. We rode in Bro. Nephi Jackson's wagon. There was Aunt Bird, my sister Carrie Bowers, Eliza Bowers, Cynthia Downs and myself. I hope in fifty years that I will have a representative in the parade.

Oct. 1908, I have been to our Handcart Reunion and met quite a few old friends. We went to conference in Salt Lake and my brother and I went to see my mother's grave. It has been renumbered. It is now plot F. Lot 8 and 12.Oct. 24, 1909. I went to Sunday School and was asked to relate a few incidents of our journey across the plains. I told them we had the first snow storm the 22nd of Sept. in 1856. There were fifteen who died through the cold and exposure while crossing the Platte River. Sister McPherson sat by me and she said her mother was the fifteenth to die. They were all laid side by side and a little dirt thrown over them.

November, I have been to a reunion. I met Bro. Langly Bailey and had a good time talking over incidents of our trip across the plains. It made me feel bad it brought it all up again. It is wise for our children to see what their parents passed through for the Gospel, yes, I think it is.

Mary Goble Pay

Priddy Meeks [^8] Historical Chips

Now I will inform the reader that I have promiscuously picked up several chips and recorded them in this book and will continue to do so all through this book as they occur to lily mind (having no data to base my thoughts upon), and I shall call them chips although of different kinds. Some historical chips, some medical chips and some religious chips.

Now the first winter that we were in the valley we had most glorious night meetings. The spirit. of the Lord was much enjoyed. Preaching, praying, singing and speaking in tongues and the interpretation of tongues and prophesying was abundantly enjoyed among us. After enjoying one of these good meetings I laid myself down and fell into something of a trance or vision and lost all knowledge of time and sense.

I thought the people were all busily engaged with their daily vocations in the valley, and there was a city in the sky right over the valley with a porch to it facing the west, and a ladder leaning against the porch and the foot of the ladder on the ground in the center of the valley. It was intuitively made known to me that the time had come for me and my wife to ascend the ladder up to the city.

I spoke to my wife saying, "Come Sally, it is113our time now to go up the ladder." She willingly responded and we started up the ladder. I got on the first round and took her by the hand or arm and helped her up even with me and she stood there until I got on the second round and then I helped her up by my side on the second round. and that was the order until we got up to the top of the ladder. And when on the last round the edge of the porch was even with my breast.

I looked in by the fireplace and saw several men sitting by the fireplace all dressed alike in plain mixed jeans. Their countenances looked very pleasant and familiar. One of them got up and came out to me smiling and said: "I know you can't come in; it is my place to come and take you over the edge of the place." And then I turned around and helped my wife up, for that was the order in getting into the city.

I thought we now could look down and see the thoughts and intents of the hearts of those down on the ground. I saw two hogs in shape, although they were "Mormons." One was a large sandy colored hog with large lopped ears which I thought represented or was Amasa Lyman, although I never would receive it in that light until I was obliged to. I had so much confidence in him. The other one was a small round-bodied, well made hog, more lively and quick motioned than the others, and not so sandy colored, yet I knew they were "Mormons." But who the little one represented I had no knowledge.

I knew their thoughts and the intents of their hearts, and that was to get into the place of the First Presidency, whom I thought I saw lying on a blanket apparently asleep on the ground; I saw only two. Those two hogs went and tried to root them off their blankets so they could get in their places. They would start them with their snouts to roll out but before they could get them out their snouts would slip up and they would roll back again. The blankets being a little basining in the center the hogs would then make much of them and rub them first one side and then the other, like a cat by the way of reconciliation for fear they would be disturbed at their conduct.

I could see their thoughts and the intents of their hearts which was nothing but deception. They tried it several times but failed every time till they gave it up and started off. They appeared to be disappointed and disheartened. In a little while they came to a small tree. I saw their minds change: I thought they had claws like a cat and they reared up against the tree arid tried the strength of their nails, thinking they could get them off their blankets with their claws if they could not with their snouts so they turned back and tried it. Oh how they would rub their sides against them, first one side and then another, with the most powerful pretensions of friendship that was possible to use, but could not succeed.

They finally gave it up and started off never to return. At that instant they began to get poor. The large one was the poorest hog I ever saw. His back was round like a rainbow and his ears lopped down almost to the ground. He was the ugliest hog I ever saw. In that condition they went off. And the first thing I knew I was at home. But the person that was represented by the little hog, I never did see anyone that suited the figure as well as William Godbe, but I don't know as he is the one.

Evil Spirits-I will now give some items of my experience in Nauvoo. It was so desperately sickly. I run myself down and took sick myself. I took medicine that broke up my disease but I was so weak and feeble that the spirits of affliction or evil spirits or disembodied spirits or the devil if you please, got possession of me and come near killing me. They would torment me nights so that I could not rest, let alone sleep; of a morning I was so tired I was almost dead. They would make me work in a horse mill. They would make me go around and around so heavily I could hardly step one foot before the other. Sometimes they would put a pack on my back so heavy I could scarcely stand up under it, and they would make me carry it.I do not know how long I was troubled this way but I was nearly dead and out of heart. They troubled me only of nights. I dreaded the nights believing if they troubled me tonight as they did last night I could not live until morning, being so weak and feeble I had to lie down. Being quite late in the evening I do not know114but it was best for me to go to bed for the night. So I had a trundle bed pulled out about the middle of the floor where I could be cool, it being hot weather. I lay down with a heavy heart, something seemed to say (though I heard nothing), "Put the Doctrine and Covenants or the Book of Mormon under your head, and do not consent to them and they can have no power over you."Oh joy unspeakable. I did so and covered up my head and shut my eyes musing in my mind, thinking what will be next, and I saw the three devils coming that always come together to pester me. I thought they had knowledge that there was something up, past common, as they proceeded very slow, like as they were doubtful of a disappointment, all three side by side hold of each other's hands. The middle one was a large man, dark complexion, black eyes and hair and snaggle teeth, big nose and high cheek bones and an old black wool bat lopped down all around, nearly, and an old cloth coat nearly worn out, black but very much faded and hung slovenly over his shoulders like it might fall off. He was extremely ugly; he looked very vicious, he looked like a devil. The other two were smaller and better dressed and appeared bright and affable like men of education; one of them appeared to be a spokesman, one of them looked considerable like Orson Hyde, the other looked like James Simpson. They approached me with a great deal of caution for fear they would not get my consent. I laid still to hear what they would say, full of determination. They appeared to be about three feet of me when they stopped.The spokesman began to make bows to me and wave his hand in the most friendly and enticing manner that was possible and said, "Here is Colonel (such a one) giving him a name (but I cannot remember it), wishing to have an interview with you, if you please," with fascinating and enticing words and gestures to make it look like an impossibility to refuse; but I did wait until he was done speaking. I drew back my fist and aimed to strike him right in the belly and said, "Clear yourselves, you devils, I do not want anything to do with you." And I have never been troubled with them in that way since, but I have had considerable to do with them in working against their power over other people, but they have never captured me and made a slave of me; but many times come in my presence and trouble me like a drunken man would, which does not seem pleasant to my mind; but the best way to keep them off is to get the word of God in your head and heart instead of under it, and keep the commandments, which is far better than to depend on putting it under your head.It was likely it was the same three devils or evil spirits that troubled William Meeks while he lived in Nauvoo. They would trouble him in the day time. They came to trouble him one morning about ten o'clock. He saw them coming and said to his wife, "Send for Uncle, for those devils are coming." She said, "Uncle is far from home (doctoring) this time a day." "Send for John Henderson (who lives close by)." One of the devils said, "What good can he do, he chews tobacco (they told me themselves)." I do not remember whether they sent for me at that time, but they did frequently send for me and they would leave the house before I got there. So you can see that those who do not keep the Word of Wisdom do not have the same power over evil spirits as those who keep it. We therefore see the necessity of keeping the Word of Wisdom.

Witchcraft<_P> [^9] -After I settled in Parowan some time, I went to the city. I inquired for some boy who needed a home, as I needed one, but did not make a raise of one. Sometime after I got home President Daniel H. Wells sent a boy to me by the name of Wm. Titt, some twelve or fourteen years of age. He was born a natural seer, but no knowledge of the fact was had until after he came to live with me, that I ever115knew of. Seer stones. or peepstones, as they are more commonly called, was very plenty about Parowan, I rather being a gifted person in knowing a peepstone when seeing one altho I had never found one yet that I could see in.A seer's stone appears to me to be the connecting link between the visible and invisible worlds. I am not prepared to say to what extent discoveries may be made in the invisible world through these means, but I am prepared to say that truthful discoveries, (I am fully convinced), have been made by those means on certain conditions. It is not safe to depend on peepstone in any case where evil spirits have the power to put false appearances before them while looking in a peepstone. If evil influences will not interfere, the verdict will be as trite as preaching. That is my experience in the matter; also the Patriarch, Hiram Smith, the brother of the Prophet Joseph Smith, held the same idea, but stated that our faith was not strong enough to overcome the evil influences that might interfere, but seemed to think that time would come. I have seen peepstones as well polished as a fiddle with a nice hole through one end that belonged to the ancients. I asked Brother Smith the use for that hole; he said the same as a watch chain to keep from losing it. He said in time of war the Nephites had the advantage of their enemies by looking in the seerstone which would reveal whatever they wished to know. (I believe a peepstone is of the same piece with the Urim and Thummim, if we understood it.)Now this Wm. Titt was the best seer in peep-stones I ever was acquainted with. He was a good boy but was full of youthful peculiarities like other youngsters. No particular bad habits for a boy having a stepmother that he could not live with, and I believe that Satan and his gang saw the danger his kingdom would be in through Win. Titt and the peepstone that they did their best to destroy him; and they told him if it had not been for that old Meeks they would have destroyed him, but told Win. Titt that they could do nothing with old Meeks. (Wm. Titt told me what they said about me.)Now for those foul spirits and witches; what is the difference between them? Foul spirits are disembodied witches living in the flesh. Do they have power over human beings? They certainly do, every pain, ache or misery we endure is attended by a spirit of affliction and that spirit is intelligence; hence the propriety of laying on hands and rebuking it in the name of Jesus, which would be supreme foolishness if it were not intelligent. But those kind Of spirits frequently retorts on them that tried to cast them out, by saying audibly through the one that is possessed; "And what good can you do; you chew tobacco:" and this very expression opens a field for influences which we should profit by, if we dou't stand in out own light. If chewing tobacco weakened his power over that spirit why not every infringement on the Word of Wisdom, or every other evil committed against the principles of the gospel have the same effect?It is certainly fair reasoning. Those kind of spirits work mostly on the mental functions instead of the physical functions but affect the physical system unto death sometimes by tormenting the spirit of the person. I have myself been victimized by those spirits tormenting my spirit; and today I believe I was in a few hours of being killed by them, had I not received instructions by a Heavenly messenger just in time to save my life. I had just lay down for the last time as I thought (and think so yet) had it not been for the instructions I just received of that messenger. He told me to put the Doctrine and Covenants or the Book of Mormon under my head, and not consent to them and they could have no power over you. They have never had power to afflict me in that way since. Altho they came almost immediately on my receiving the instructions, but they went away faster than they came.Now a witch is a female and a wizard a male, a live human. But all of a piece with the disembodied foul spirits only in different conditions. I don't like to say much about witches as there is perhaps no subject that will agitate the public mind to the same degree of enthusiasm as that will, no doubt. But much innocent suffering has been inflicted upon persons who knew nothing of the art. But such do and will exist on the earth as long as Satan is not bound.As far back as 1814 in the state of Indiana I116lived close neighbor to a woman who was said to be a witch; and lived neighbor to her for several years. In my acquaintance with her she was charged several times with witchery and it appeared that the people thought that I was gifted in working against witchery, whether the knowledge I had was innate or acquired I am hardly prepared to say. But the business seemed to come handy. I was engaged away from home. When I returned they said that Anna Meeks was bewitched by that woman. Anna was my brother's wife and we all lived in the same building. Anna was strangely worked upon without a doubt. She said that she could see the witch in the house and tried to show her to us, but we could see nothing of her. Anna said that the witch was trying to choke her to death with putting pins in her mouth. We could see no pins but the blood was seen oozing out of the holes where the pins would stick in the roof of her mouth.She was desperately tormented in different ways. She would sometimes swoon away like asleep on her back with her hands extended each way. We would put a piece of silver easy in her hand and she would flounce like it was fire, but when we put lead in her hand the same way she would not notice it at all. Several other things pertaining to this circumstance might be related, but I don't like to talk about it. But we got. the enchantment broke at the expense of several weeks confinement in the bed of the witch, but she did not die and Anna got well also.Several years later I had a brother who loved to hunt racoons who had a dog that would track them up while the frost was melting in the day time where the coons had gone in the night. One morning he called up Drummer to go hunting. Drummer loved the business as well as his master, but before starting, the dog took a fill he fell down. drew himself up and tumbled all over and rolled up his eyes and could not go. As soon as it was too late the dog was well as ever. My brother Charles told me the circumstances. I said to him the dog is bewitched and the next time he does you cut off his ear and throw it in the fire; and don't you let a thing go out of your house that day to anybody.So he did the next time the dog had a fit, and when the dog's ear was burning, here comes the witch on a gallop on a stud horse to the gate and says to Charles, "My husband is very sick and I want to get a little honey to make some medicine for him." Charles without thought gave her the honey and never thought once what he was doing until the woman was a good ways off going on the gallop. But it cured the dog and the woman was said to be at a quilting next day with a blister on her seat as large as the palm of the hand, and she had to sit on a pillow. But she said that it was caused by her ride after the honey.Now it appears the witches work their craft through or in the blood of the one possessed, and by putting their blood in the fire it punishes the witch; and by putting their water into a vial or bottle and putting it where it will evaporate by the heat of the fire it is said that as long as the process is going on the witch can't make water; and I think it is a very good practice for mothers to hold out their children to make water in the fire when convenient; and a word to the wise is sufficient; and I don't feel like trusting public sentiment with much more of my experience in combating the evil influence of evil spirits with the human family because of the enthusiasm they are likely to run into on such subjects, but hope they act wisely on what I have said.Now in 1848 the [Salt Lake] valley from a human standpoint presented nothing better than extreme suffering if not starvation. The Saints were scattered hither and thither. Some went back to the States and some to California while the mass of the people were eating whatever they could get. Some eating hides off of cattle some eating blood, some eating wolf, hawk and crow. Some eating flesh of cattle that had been dead sometime. And while all this was going on it looked like there was a splendid chance for going naked.

A New Wife.-Several years after I moved to Parowan I went back to the city; I took my daughter, Peggy Jane, a young woman, with me, and when I started from home my wife said, "Don't you come back without another117wife." That put me to studying for she never talked that way before; so the more I studied about it the more I was determined to try and get another wife. So when I arrived at Brother John Dalton's who had charge of the Church Farm four miles south of the city. I left my team there so as to have no encumbrance at the city. We went to Brother Free's in the city. an old acquaintance of ours. I told them there that I intended to get a hand-cart girl to go home with me. They appeared very anxious that I should get one. Sister Free told me she knew of one who had no relations there and it would suit her the best kind. There was a woman then present said she knew her in England and said she was twenty-four years old and as good a woman as ever was. Now I was very muchelated at the prospect. I would not have sold my chance for a considerable amount. I never felt more sure of anything in my life that I did not have hold of.I found out where she stayed and away I went as full of imagination as the milkmaid we read of in the spelling book. I found the place and stopped outside the gate and spoke to a young woman on the porch and asked her, "Are you Hannah Virgil?" "No, sir," she said; said I, "Does she stop here? " "Yes, sir, but she is not at home." I said, "Are you a hand-cart girl?" "Yes, sir," she said. "Well, I am looking for a hand-cart girl to go home with me; maybe it will suit you to go with me." She said, "I am engaged, or I would." That moment she said, "Yonder comes Hannah Virgil now." And when she walked up and spoke to me and I saw her countenance, there was a monitory impulse struck me with such force it seemed as powerful on my feelings as the command of a superior officer when he would with a stern voice say "No."Here now the fat was all in the fire; my feelings I cannot well describe, if I were to try. I left quickly, badly whipped without saying a word to the girl on the subject. I went straightway to President John Young where I was in high repute for letting him have the ox on the plains, he having taken Sarah McCleave to wife, oldest sister of Mary Jane, two years previous to Mary Jane's arrival in the hand carts. She says to me, "Brother Meeks go out to the Church Farm and get your team and harness it to Mr. Young's carriage, he himself not being at home, and Aunt Mary and I will go with you to see Mary Jane: it may be that she will go with you."I had told them that I was going to start home in the morning for I did not think it worth while to try any longer. I was ashamed to tell them anything about Hannah Virgil, I felt so mean. However I went to the Church Farm and got my team and harnessed it to the carriage. "How far is it to where Mary Jane lives?" I asked. I knew that the Warm Springs was only a mile and a half from Brother Young's. I thought we could soon get back. When we reached the Warm Springs, I says, "Where does Mary Jane live now?" "Oh, it is down by the Hot Springs, six miles farther."If I had known that in time, I never should have started. it was now late in the evening and I intended starting home in the morning; but as I had started I must stick with them, but felt disappointed. When we arrived at Hot Springs the sun was just going down. "Now, where is the house?" said I. She pointed away down under the fading sun two miles farther to a little log cabin where she said her sister lived. I felt vexed but could riot turn back now. We drove up close to the house and found Mary Jane on her "all-fours" scouring the floor. When the dog barked she looked up and saw and knew Brother Young's carriage, Sister Young, her sister, Sarah, with a strange man dressed precisely, as she saw all this in a vision shown to her about three nights before when she knelt down in the dark when all were in bed and asked the Lord what she ought to do, because she was teased so much about marrying. In the vision she was told that was the man she must go home with. So when she saw me in the carriage she knew that was the man for her. We went into the house of Brother Levi Gifford, where she lived. I was well acquainted with the whole family and good family of people, too.Sarah did not sit down but took Mary Jane out of doors and told her I had come for her, and sent a runner to tell me to come out there. I started and met Aunt Mary Young coming118post haste after me. She spoke very animatedly saying: "Mary Jane says she will go with you," and we had not spoken to each other yet, neither had we seen each other's faces. The trial I had when I met Hannah Virgil was nothing to what this was. They told her I had come for her and she said she would go.Now, if that monitory impulse strikes me with the same power saying "No," what will I do. Can I stand it, or will I have to wilt and wither under this, the hardest trial I had ever met with in my life? (O Lord help.) That instant it was manifest to me to just see her countenance and I would know what I ought to do. But that did not assure me that I would be inspired to take her, and to refuse, it would bring an everlasting stigma that would last through life and I thought very justly, too.I went out to where they were, the sun being down. The red clouds in the West were all that gave light. I thought if I Could see her countenance by the light of the red clouds I would know what to do; and when I was introduced and shook hands with her I was right in the light. I stepped one side to let the light shine in her face. Peace sprung up in my troubled soul with a hearty relish for the words, "Yes, take her." It put me in mind of the peel when he said "No tongue can express the sweet comfort and peace era soul in its earliest love."I then told Mary Jane it was just right and we all went back in the house. And when Brother Gifford learned that sloe was going home with me he was out of humor and talked very strongly against me by way of insinuations and said, "Mary Jane if you knew Brother Meeks as well as I do you would not be so willing to go with him; I know Meeks," he said. "Well," said Sister Gifford, "Old man, you don't know any harm of him, do you?" "No, I don't," he said. The fact was he wanted Mary Jane himself and both his boys wanted her. The three were so disappointed that they were as cross to her as a wet hen. One of them said "If you are going with that man I want that ring of mine you have." She pulled it off and gave it to him, saying, "I don't want your ring." So we put out into the carriage, dark as it was, and went up to President Young's and in the morning she was sealed to me, it being the 12th day of November, 1856; and the next day we started home .... And if there was ever a match consummated by the providences of God this was one; and she has borne me ten children, and if anything they were above the average of smartness, all well formed and intelligent. I have often said if I had picked the Territory I could not have suited myself as well as in Mary Jane. So I give God the glory while I receive the blessings and an exaltation through the lineage of her posterity; so you can see how the Lord had his eye on Mary Jane from the beginning of this narrative; at any rate clear down until now. She has four grandchildren and a likelihood of having many more, and a nicer and smarter woman no man need to want.

Joseph Smith Black [^10] Cohabitation: The Day of the U.S. Marshal

I returned to Deseret and found all well. During my absence I found there had not much been clone towards the meeting house. We soon called a force and commenced laying brick.

The foundation had been put in about three years before at the cost of about $1,000. The walls underground were four feet thick. The bricklaying was commenced by Cynthia Black and Fanny Scott carrying and scattering the mortar, and I taking two bricks and uniting them together in the mortar and prayed to God that the house might be built acceptable to him and the Saints be enabled to meet therein in the spirit of truth and righteousness. On this occasion119quite a number of the brethern and sisters were present and thus the building of the walls of our meeting house was commenced on the southwest corner and the work was prosecuted vigorously with short interruption until we reached to the square. I had occasion to visit the R. R. company and the lime run short and the work stopped, but on my return I immediately telegraphed north for 100 sacks of lime which was sent down on the night train and the next morning the work was resumed. Brother S. W. Western, my counselor, did all he could to keep the work going. About this lime we established a church school and we had attendence of from 40 to 50 students, but as an impression had gained ground that we were running against the stake academy, it was deemed best to discontinue for the present. By this time our ward had increased in membership to something over 800.Soon after the passing of the Edmunds Law, in the spring of 1882, the marshalls commenced their raids in different parts of the Territory, which caused excitement and annoyance almost continuously. The raids on the different settlements were conducted thus: They would designate a certain number of the brethern that they desired to capture and three or four of them would conic into town doting the night and lie in wait at the house of some traitor. The people reposing in peaceful slumber, not conscious of any danger being near, and perchance the husband and father being weary of<_P> camping out would have repaired home for a good nights rest and to enjoy the society of their loved ones, when all was quiet during the small hours in the morning a loud rap would be heard at the door. The family would spring from their beds and in sudden tones would whisper the word, "Marshalls." Perchance a louder and harsher knock would follow and some one of the family would ask, "Who is there?" and they would say, "Marshalls. Open the door, or we will bunt it down," and if the Father happened to be in the house he would meet them with a light at the door and admit them, and with cocked revolvers they would demand his surrender. Thus by demons in human shape he would be dragged away to some pretended court. In case the husband was not at home. the wife, with almost frantic fear, would admit them to the house and sometimes by threats and abusive language. she would be compelled to show them through the house, while the children would nestle close together in their beds, being almost overcome with fright and anxiety for the safety of their Father and protector. In many instances the women displayed a degree of heroism that would be commendable in any age of the world. Generally on such occasions the word of alarm would soon spread and lights would glitter in all parts of the town and perchance if the raid had been successful the news would soon be conveyed from house to house of the capture of sonic of the most respectful citizens. On such excitement would generally run high, and many would be the expressions of indignation and were it not for wise council of more matured minds many of these raids would have ended in a scene of blood, as it was bard to see fathers, relatives and friends taken away in such a manner.

Another mode they had in capturing those they were hunting was for a stranger to ride into town, looking like a miner or stock man, and they would call at the house and make inquiry about something, and would then serve their papers on those that happened to be there that they wanted for witnesses. In all the numerous cases of that kind I have never known of any resistance of any lawful person. For four years they had been seeking to arrest me, anti offered rewards to different persons if they would assist to trap me, but I am pleased to say traitors were not very plentiful. Conscious of having committed no crime, except as made so by law, it was very humiliating to be continuously hiding from the officers and spotters. Besides it caused me to neglect my business and thereby suffer loss.On one occasion the Marshalls Clauson, Norrell and Mount surrounded my largest house in the night and after a thorough search, being unsuccessful, they subpoenaed some of my family and also some of the family of some of the other citizens. I was a short distance from the house and could plainly see them carrying the lights from one room to the other. In the120morning a messenger brought word to me that the Marshalls were going to capture a brother that lived down the river. His son was plowing nearby and I went and informed him of the fact. He decided to go home at once and I said I would ride with him as far as six miles below to my ranch and that I wait at the corner of the street at my daughter's home until he came along and while I was waiting there my daughter went in the house out of breath and said, "Oh! Pa? the Marshalls are coming up the lane." This was at my daughter, Nancy's, and she urged me to get out of the way. I went into a secret place and the Marshalls came on and surrounded the house. They searched everywhere. Two had given up the search, but Norrell continued, although urged by the others to quit and come on. Several occasions they came within 3 or 4 feet of me, while Norrell, on his way to their carts, having given up the search, came right onto me. He said, "G. D. you come out of there," and used other abusive and profane language. I said, "Mister, you have captured me fairly and now I want you to treat me like a gentleman and use no such language in my presence." The others shouted, "That is the bishop." "Oh," he said, "I beg your pardon. I thought it was Allred. We were not looking for you." We went to the carts and I rode to my house with Clawson, with whom I had formerly been acquainted. The scene was enacted in the presence of quite a number of people, among them were some of the members of my family, who were almost overcome with grief. The marshall told me that they had been told by an individual that a man had been seen in that place, hence their raid, and by the excited manner of my daughter, they were satisfied that some one was there. At the house we talked mailers over anti I agreed to be before the commissioner at Provo the next week. This occurred on Monday.In all the excitement of the raids many amusing scenes occurred and we ran many narrow risks of being captured. On one occasion a marshall was making search for myself and others and boasting of what he could do. I passed him right on the sidewalk and when he learned of the fact, he was very much chagrined. On another occasion I met two in the road and was so close to them that retreat was immpossible. I passed on and as I did so I passed my hand into my vest bosom and said, "Good evening, gentlemen." They returned the salute pleasantly. After passing a short distance, they said, "By God! That is the bishop." They afterwards said they would have captured me, but I had the drop on them. I had my hand on my revolver. In the commencement of the raiding I felt very indignant and was fully determined to shoot any man that would break into my house in the night, but after Marshall Dyer came into office, a more human course was pursued and I had laid my pistols by and at this time I was warned. Another amusing instance transpired when I was at Manti attending the dedication of the temple. A marshall learned of my whereabouts and had planned my capture. I was then stopping at Barton's; a friend informed me of their intention and advised me to go somewhere else and sleep. He took me to Mr. Bench who was an old acquaintance of mine. I informed him that I wanted a bed. He said he was sorry that he could not accomadate me as every bed was occupied, as also all the sleeping places on the floors, says he, "Across the road lives a Presbyterian school teacher. She has a spare bed. She is alone," and if I was willing he was satisfied that he could get permission for me to stay there. I said that is good enough and accompanied him into the house. He introduced me as Mr. Brown. She said that I could stay, and invited me to take a chair in a nicely furnished parlor. The house consisted of two bed rooms, a sitting room and a kitchen. The lady was about 25 years old, of light complexion, beautiful figure and an agreeable manner. We soon entered into conversation. She gave me an outline of her faith, their church organization and government, and part of her history. I in turn told her of my religious faith and mildly corrected her in some of her erronous ideas. Our conversation became quite interesting and after an hour or two I excused myself, thinking it might become tiresome and would retire to bed. She assured me that she was not weary in the least, so the conversation resumed and when I looked at my watch again121it was nearly one o'clock. I bid her good night and retired. I arose early in the morning as I had promised to go out to take breakfast with a friend. She was in the kitchen. I thanked her for the bed and asked her how much l was indebted to her. She answered, "Nothing. You are not going away. I am preparing breakfast for you." I thanked her very kindly as I had promised. She invited me while I was in Manti to make her house my home. As the marshalls had searched the train for me at Nephi at my coming over, I decided to return by horse and buggy, accompanied by my brother. I arrived all safe after having enjoyed my visit and the dedicatory services very much.

It was asserted by many that they had seen and heard heavenly manifestations in the temple, which I am prepared to believe as I heard some very beautiful singing myself at a distance apparently .... The Sabbath before leaving [for prison], I addressed the Saints for a short time and bid them adieu, for how long I did not know. After the services many were the kind embraces which I received from the sisters, many a warm clasp of the hand from many of the brethren, exhorting me to be of good cheer, the sentence would only be short. The day before the young ladies made a beautiful dinner in the Scotts Grove. Some of the brethern were there and also some of the brethern from the city, Brigham Hampton and C. W. Wilkins. After dinner the sisters sang my favorite hymn.

Oh awake ye defenders of Zion, De foes are at the doors of your home Let each heart be the heart of a lion Unyielding and proud as he roams Remember the wrongs of Missouri Forget not the fate of Nauvoo When the God-hating foe are before you Stand firm and be faithful and true.

The president of the Y. L. M. I. A. in behalf of the sisters presented me with an autograph album with many loving expressions. I offered a few remarks and blessed them in the name of the Lord and I felt much affected by their manifest kindness, causing tears to flow. On the evening previous to my departure many of my family and a number of the brethern and the sisters assembled at my home and partook of the sumptuous supper. About 70 sat down to supper. After supper the table was cleared and the time was occupied by songs, recitations, and music. In the course of the evening I made remarks to my faintly and those present exhorting them to be faithful and steadfast in keeping the commandments of God. Read a biographical sketch of Father's and prayed to God that they might be right and defend the rights of the Saints. I went to prison, conscious of being guilty of no crime and rather than break the covenants which I had made before God with them and forsake my family and those I loved so dearly, I would rather bid them the last farewell and spend the rest of my life in prison. The company was much affected, and I spoke words of comfort and cheer to them. Brother Jesse W. Fox of Salt Lake and Brother William and Brother Hales spoke words of comfort and encouragement. I had seated with me at supper my four wives, my mother, Mother Stokes, one of my mothers-in-law, all the rest are dead. My daughter, Courteniah, read the following address:

Deseret, Oct. 9th, 1889.

Most Beloved Father:

The time is at hand when we shall part for a short time. We shall miss the familiar sound of your footsteps on the threshold and the web come smile that greets us as we meet you.

We shall think of you in the hours of your loneliness and every evening as we retire we shall pray to God to protect our darling Father until your return to the homes of your beloved ones.

May he who clothes the lilies And watches the sparrows fall Guide and protect you, dear Father And bring you safe through all

Your loving daughters, Courteniah Black Louisa Black Emma A. Black Phoebe D. Black 122

The above named daughters are all mine by three different wives.

The following which had been composed by one of my wives was also read.

October 8th, 1889.

True, my darling, life is hard And it's ways are dark and dim But God knows the path yon tread I can leave you safe with him.

Tears are but the hearts pure dewdrops Soft distilled through virtues springs Sorrows are the clouds that nightdrops Ere the day her joy shall bring

Crowns are won by faithful valor On the trying fields of strife Virtue come from patient labor In the busy school of life

Hours are darkest near the morning Shadows are deepest at dawning Every mound is but a token Of a brighter and better day

From one that loves you, Cynthia Black.

It was now near twelve o'clock at night and the brethern and sisters prepared to accompany me to the depot a mile distant. We arrived about 12: 30 at which time the train was due. In a few minutes the train arrived anti after bidding them an affectionate farewell I took a sleeper, accompanied by my son, Warren, and arrived at Provo at 7:30 A.M. in proceeding to the depot I rode with my oldest son, Joseph. His team being on the lead of a long train of wagons and carriages reminding me of a funeral procession. I appeared before the court at 10 A.M. but owing to a press of business my sentence was put off until 2 P.M ....At 2 P.M. I appeared before the court for sentence. This was Oct. 10, 1889. The court asked me about my age. I answered 52 past. Court "When did you marry your plural wife?" I answered, "1860." He said, "Mr. Black. Have you anything to say to the court?" I answered, "Nothing." Court-"You will be sentenced to 75 days in the penitentiary and costs." The costs amounted to $94.50.I was then put in charge of a ballif who conducted me up to an upper room where a few of the brethern who had been sentenced had proceeded me, The number continued to increase until there were 12 in the room. A man by the name of J. F. Gibbs had accompanied me from Deseret and was to have been sentenced the same afternoon. I kept watch to see him coming but after a while was informed that he had unconditionally agreed to obey the law, and abandoned one of his families.

About 3:30 P.M. we were conducted down the streets of Provo to the depot by two lynx-eyed deputy marshalls, who kept a strict watch to prevent us from escaping as though we had no interest in this country. Mr. B. Backman, who appeared to be a man with some heart, also accompanied us.

Our party consisted of Bp. J. S. Black of Deseret, Elder Jesse B. Martin of Scipio, and Elder William McKeller of Leamington, all of Millard County. Hans Jesperson of Goshen, J. L. Jolley and L. Dunham of Moroni, C. Newman of Moroni, H. Mower of Fairview, N. Van Leeman of Aurora, George Curtis of Payson, John Beck and James Anderson of Spanish Fork made up the rest of the party.

On our way to the city H. H. Parson, the U.S. marshall, came into the car and sat down by me as we had previously been acquainted. He said he was sorry to see the trouble in the Territory as he had lived in the Territory for years and had many warm friends. He hoped that something would be devised to stop this trouble and he also said that he expected to perform the duties of his office in a humane and honorable manner, and desired his deputies to do likewise. I told him that he was now making history that will never die. He answered that he was conscious of the fact and expected to do as he wanted to be done by under similar circumstances. President Cannon of Salt Lake Stake and President Shurtlief of Weber Stake were also on the train and came into the car where we were and gave us words of encouragement.123Pres. Cannon had served a term of imprisonment of six months for a similar offense as ours. We arrived at the depot of Salt Lake at 6:30 P.M. It was beginning to get dark. I met Sister Yates on the platform who had been to the penitentiary to see her husband, Bp. Yates. She greeted us kindly and bid us be of good cheer. Two wagons awaited our arrival into which we seated ourselves with our bedding and satchels, being very crowded and uncomfortable. We proceeded upon South Temple St., thence down Main on East Temple St. and while riding along viewing the brilliant electric lights and the handsome display in the store windows and viewing the busy throng on the sidewalk where I had so often walked myself on business a free man, I could not help reflect on my present situation, condemned as a criminal and tinder guard on the way to the penitentiary, and that, too, by a government that I had always been taught to love and respect. While in the days of peril at the time of the Civil War, I had given three years of my salary as a county official for the cause of that government. I had previously been deprived of my franchise and now my liberty and franchise would be restored to me if I would just say one word-that I would forsake my family. The sacrifice was too great. I could not do it. We are sorry to be put in this position as we do not want to show defiance to the laws of our country. Congress made it a crime and made a law to punish it, hence we have been caught in the trap set for us.

We arrived at the pen about 8 o'clock.124125

Hosea Stout (1810-89) was born in the backwoods of Kentucky, received a fair education for the time and place, and taught school at twenty-two in Putnam County, Illinois. In 1834 be met Joseph Smith, and in 1838 he was baptized a member of the Church by Charles C. Rich. He followed the Saints to Missouri, then to Nauvoo, where he was appointed clerk of the high council, the policy-making body of the Church. He was called to live the doctrine of polygamy. After the assassination of Joseph and Hyrum, Stout (as chief of police and officer in the Nauvoo Legion) was assigned the responsibility for the safety of the leaders and the general welfare of the members. In his excellent diary one can trace the exodus of the saints and 'after his settling in Utah' the private and public affairs of a devout Mormon man who served as a member of the territorial legislature. The diary, edited by Juanita Brooks and published in 1964 by the University of Utah Press and the Utah State Historical Society, is invaluable.

Lobelia is an herb that was widely used as an emetic and purgative. Dr. Priddy Meeks administered it for many ills and spoke of it as "that blessed Lobelia," but its reactions were so violent that most doctors soon discontinued its use.

Brigham Young left the beginnings of a settlement at Garden Grove under the direction of Samuel Bent, David Fullmer, and Aaron Johnson, while he moved ahead to establish another stopping place.

Solomon and Levi Hancock, brothers. had been in the Mormon Church almost from the beginning. Solomon worked on the Kirtland Temple, came west with Zion's Camp, and then was selected to return to Kirtland that he might receive his endowments there. At the time of the Missouri troubles, the Hancock brothers were able to secrete and keep sixteen guns, which were later brought to Nauvoo. At Far West the Hancock brothers were considered men of judgment and opposed to violence. The brothers wrote original songs and verses, played the flute and violin, and worked in lumber and shaped wood with their turning lathes. At Nauvoo they lived near the home of Joseph Smith, and he visited them so often that people generally recognized that they had the full confidence of the prophet. That Solomon Hancock, now an older man, should accompany the United States recruiting officer and speak in favor of enlistment into the army was evidence that he had great influence among the people.

William Clayton (1814-79) was a native of Penwortham, Lancashire, England. He was baptized a member of the Church in 1837 and soon became a member of the mission presidency, devoting his time to missionary work in Manchester. He emigrated to America in 1840, locating in Nauvoo. He became a secretary to Joseph Smith and was elected treasurer of the City of Nauvoo. He left Nauvoo in 1846 and became one of the original pioneers of 1847, serving as clerk of the camp. Clayton's famous hymn, "Come, Come, Ye Saints," cheered the saints. His journal of the westward trek, excerpted here, has become central to a study of Mormon history.

The whole reported by I Horace Whitney.

Mary Goble Pay (1843-1913) was born in Brighton, Sussex, England. She was baptized in England in 1855, and emigrated with both parents to Utah in 1856. She and her family encountered serious hardship as members of the handcart companies of that year. The mother and two children died en route, and Mary's toes were amputated. She later married and lived most of her life in Nephi. Her autobiography, reprinted here in full, contains rich detail about the Indian-pioneer relationships in Central Utah.

Priddy Meeks (1795-1886), pioneer and "healer" for the Church, was living in Illinois when he and his family "received the Gospel." He moved his wife and children to Nauvoo, and then, as part of the great exodus, to Salt Lake Valley in 1847. In 1851 he volunteered to move to Iron County to strengthen the failing community of Parowan. Ten years later he joined the saints at Orderville, where he lived for over twenty-five years until his death. His journal provides rich insight into the spirit of pioneer life. This selection, from The Utah Historical Quarterly, volume ten, was originally published with the permission of Dr. Meeks' daughter, Mrs. Mary Ellen Hoyt.

This journal is one of the very few documents available to American history which faithfully reflects the American folklore of the early 19th century. Ideas on witchcraft and devil-possession, engagingly chronicled by Dr. Meeks, were widespread among the American folk of his time, and are by no means dead today.

Joseph Smith Black (1836-1910)was born at Lisburn, Antrim County, Ireland. He came to America in 1840 anti was baptized a member of the Church in 1844. An enterprising pioneer of Millard County, Utah, he founded the community of Deseret and, as Bishop, guided the spiritual as well as the temporal welfare of the community. He was a farmer, a merchant, a contractor, a miller, and an irrigation engineer for half a county. As this excerpt begins. Joseph Black has just returned home after a Long absence as a construction contractor for the railroad in northern Utah.

---
Notas:
[^1] An irreverent, but it seems to me. downright honest critic of Christianity argues in effect. "If a child is born to me healthy and bright-eyed, you tell me, God loves you. If a child is born without a spine, or hopelessly paralyzed. you tell me, God still loves you. Frankly, that kind of love I can do without. If God causes or permits events that my worst mortal enemy would not permit, then both the idea of 'God' and 'love' are absurd." That these persons were trying to torture you, perhaps take your life.
[^2] One day my family sat watching the big screen production of the "Greatest Story Ever Told." You see a sinister Herod send his soldiers to Bethelehem. Then come the screams of mothers, glimpses of blood-smirched swords pulled from children's bodies. Then you see Mary and Joseph who have received divine warning, walking peacefully with their Babe toward the safety of Egypt. As this scene closed, the hand of my little girl came into mine and she whispered, confused and frightened, "Daddy, didn't Heavenly Father care about those other children?" That all this was against your will.
[^3] Third is the universal outcry of our own souls in tribulation. "Why?" and "Why me?" We speak much of worthiness and blessedness and of keeping the laws that result in both. But there is, in this cry, the sense of what some call "frustrated entitlement." We have, in measure (not perfectly but close enough) kept the law; and we aspire through dark and dawn to do better. We feel a certain inner worthiness, a sense of "deserving better." But no better comes. Only worse. And still worse. Others we think of as less worthy seem to prosper. We do not demand ease. But we sense injustice and we crave, alas, a little mercy. And how long can we hold on to this slipping rope, and pray in faith? Let alone in love? That the highest service he would render you would be to pull them off.
