Neal A. Lambert, Richard E. Cracroft, Believing People: Literature of the Latter-day Saints ( 1979)

4 THE ESSAY

O, why indulge the gifted pen To float through fiction's fairy field- To chant the deeds o f fabled men, And weave the garland phantoms yield?

Truth has gay arbors crown'd with love, Broad fields where pleasure gambols free, And deeps where shrouded spirits move. And heights of folded mystery.

Eliza R. Snow126127

INTRODUCTION

Surprisingly, the essay has not been as vital a literary force in Mormondom as might be expected.

Poetry was a literary activity which had full approval of the Saints, and drama was fostered by no less a patron than Brigham Young himself. Fiction had no such fortune, for it supposedly distorted truth. As one anonymous writer wrote in the Contributor in 1850, fiction subjects one's "purity of mind to a fearful trial" and destroys one's "power of concentration of mind." Although the climate for fiction began to change in the decade of the 1880s. Latter-day Saints at least those who shaped and published opinion placed a premium upon non-fictional "truth," which was, after all, the raison d'etre of Mormonism.

Given these circumstances, one might expect the proliferation of the essay. But while the late nineteenth century and twentieth century Church magazines published and continue to publish a number of essays, most of them read much like editorials and have clearly didactic aims, avoiding any expression of personal attitudes and feelings. Most essays, like the sermon, were written, then as now, as defenses of the faith. And defending the faith was, after all, the primary mission of the oft-embattled Church. The personal essay, with all of its reflection and scrutiny on life, seemed to have little role in Mormon literature, although the personal reminiscence of the pioneer and the General Authority were-and still are-important. As the Church struggled for its corporate life, its members saw more value in writing of those things which fostered group identity than they did in examining those individual characteristics which make each Saint different: from his brother.

Similarly, the twentieth century has not seen the proliferation of important Mormon essays. P. A. Christensen, a beloved professor of English at Brigham Young University, published two volumes of essays: All in a Teacher's Day (l948) and Of a Number of Things (1962); and the Commissioner of Education of the Church, Neal A. Maxwell, has also published several volumes of essays in recent years. But the central repository for the publication of serious essays continues to be the non-Church related journal, Dialogue: A Journal of Mormon Thought (founded in 1966), which has published a number of sensitive essays by Latter-day Saints who are interested in seeing their faith in the context of the larger world.

In this section we include a potpourri of six essays, arranged thematically. The first two, by Orson F. Whitney, apostle and author, and William Mulder, a professor of English at the University of Utah, deal with some of the potentialities and the problems of Mormon literature, an area due for additional serious consideration. The essays by the late P. A. Christensen, Hugh Nibley, Truman Madsen, and Robert K. Thomas, all associated with Brigham Young University, are all very different and stimulating approaches to things Mormon. The final essay, by Edward Geary, reflects a recent trend in Mormon essays toward nostalgia, as writers reared in Mormon traditions128of the Wasatch Front ponder the meaning of the confrontation of the comfortable old frontier Church with the sleek modern and purposeful space-age Church.

The power of Mormonism lies in the fact that its members, thanks to the organizational genius of the Church, continue to be involved in the day-to-day operations of the Church. The pragmatic and businesslike nature of many of these activities fosters a practical and verbal form of communication rather than the considered and thoughtful expression usually found in the personal essay. However, as the Church finds itself increasingly at odds with the moral values of an encroaching world, the personal essay will undoubtedly assume a larger role as a vehicle for the expression of the values of a people as manifest in the individual life of a sensitive writer. 129

Orson F. Whitney [^1] Home Literature

"Seek ye out of the best books words of wisdom; seek learning, even by study and also by faith." [D&C 88:118.]

The words I have quoted are the words of the Prophet Joseph Smith; or rather, they are the words of the Almighty through him to this people. A people who are popularly supposed to be enemies of education, despisers of learning, haters of books and schools, and of everything, in fact, that is pure, ennobling and refined. A greater mistake was never made, a crueler wrong was never committed, a more heinous moral crime was never perpetrated than when the "Mormon" people, [the people of] the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, were thus made odious in the eyes of mankind.

For, if it be a crime to filch from an individual his good name, that "immediate jewel of the soul," compared with which, as the poet tells us, to steal one's purse is to "steal trash," what must it be to rob a whole community of reputation? A community, too, with such a mission as ours; the spiritual enlightenment of a world, the salvation of the human race, the education, for this life and the life which is to come, of all who can be persuaded to enter the garden of God and partake, freely, of the precious fruits of the Tree of Knowledge, which, in the truest sense, is also the Tree of Life. To rob such a people of their good name, thus limiting their usefulness, and hindering them from fulfilling their great mission, which is to draw all men unto Christ by means of knowledge, wisdom and learning revealed from heaven and recorded in the best of books, is indeed a crime, not only against the immediate victims of the slander, but a crime against God and humanity.

But it is not my present purpose to pursue the subject to which this train of thought would naturally lead. It suffices me to know, and to testify, that this people are the friends, not the foes, of education; that they are seekers after wisdom, lovers of light and truth, universal Truth, which, like the waters of earth, or the sunbeams of heaven, has but one Source, let its earthly origin be what it may.

"Truth is truth, wher'er 'tis found.

On Christian or on heathen ground."

and worthy of our love and admiration. whether far or near, high or low. whether blazing as a star in the blue vault of heaven, or springing like a floweret from the soil.

"Seek ye out of the best books words of wisdom; seek learning even by study, and also by faith."

Why did the Lord so instruct Iris Prophet? Why did the Prophet so teach his people? It was because God had designed, and his Prophet had foreseen, a great and glorious future for that people. Chosen himself in weakness, so far as this world's wisdom was concerned, as a foundation stone of the mighty structure which is destined to tower heavenward, reflecting from its walls and glittering spires the splendors of eternity, he knew there must come a time, unless God, who cannot lie, had sworn falsely, when Zion, no longer the foot, but as the head, the glorious front of the world's civilization, would arise and shine "the joy of the whole earth"-the seat of learning, the source of wisdom, and the centre of political power, when, side by side with pure Religion, would flourish Art and Science, her fair daughters; when music, poetry, painting, sculpture. oratory and the drama, rays of light from the same central sun, no longer refracted and discolored130by the many-hued prisms of man's sensuality, would throw their white radiance full and direct upon the mirror-like glory of her towers; when the science of earth and the wisdom of heaven would walk hand in hand interpreting each other; when philosophy would drink from wells of living truth, no longer draining the deadly hemlock of error, to poison the pure air with the illusions of sophistry; when love and union would prevail; when war would sit at the feet of peace and learn wisdom for a thousand years; when Zion's sons and Zion's daughters, as famed for intelligence and culture as for purity, truth and beauty, "polished after the similitude of a palace," would entertain kings and nobles, yea, sit upon thrones themselves, or go forth, like shafts of light from the bow of the Almighty, as messengers and ambassadors to the nations.

Joseph saw all this; he knew it was inevitable; that such things were but the natural flowers and fruits of the work which God had planted. The roots of the tree might not show it so well their mission is to lie hidden in the earth despised and trampled on of men-but the branches in a day to come would prove it. Joseph knew, as every philosopher must know, that purity is the natural parent of beauty; that truth is the wellspring of power, and righteousness the sun of supremacy. He knew that his people must progress, that their destiny demanded it; that culture is the duty of man, as intelligence is the glory of God. Rough and rugged himself, as the granite boulders of yonder hills, typical of the firm, unyielding basis of God's work, he knew, and his brethren around him knew, that on the rough, strong stones of which they were symbolical-the massive foundations of the past-the great Architect would rear the superstructure of the future; that the youth of Israel, their offspring, would be inspired to build upon the foundations of the fathers, and yet would differ from their fathers and mothers, as the foundations of a building must differ from the walls and spires.

What shall I say, my young brethren and sisters, what can I say to awaken in your hearts, if perchance it sleeps, the desire to realize this glorious anticipation? Alas! what can my poor pen indite, what can my feeble tongue utter to rouse within you this determination? I can only call upon God, in humility, to make my words as sparks of fire, to fall upon the tinder of your hearts and kindle them into flame. That from this hour your souls may be lit up with the light of your glorious destiny, that you may live and labor for God and his kingdom, not simply for yourselves and the perishable things of earth.

What else shall make us worthy of such a future? What are we here for? Why did we come? Was it to waste our time in folly and dissipation, to laugh away our lives, pursuing the phantom of pleasure as an idle boy might chase a butterfly from flower to flower? Was it to bow down to mammon, to worship a golden calf, or to stain our souls and blur the brightness of our minds with the vices of the ungodly? Was this what our fathers and mothers foresaw? Was it for this they sacrificed and suffered, to bring us into existence, teach us the truths of heaven, and place us on the threshold of the mightiest mission ever given to men in the flesh?

The answer falls like a thunderbolt from heaven: "I give not unto you to live after the manner of the world." It echoes down the corridors of years: "If ye are Abraham's children, ye will do the works of Abraham." It speaks from earth, from air, from the roaring waters; it sounds from the depths of the oracular soul:

"YE ARE AN EXAMPLE To THE WORLD; FOLLOW NOT AFTER THEM!"

But what has all this to do with literature? you ask. More, perhaps, than is at first apparent. It is by means of literature that much of this great work will have to be accomplished; a literature of power and purity, worthy of such a work. And a pure and powerful literature can only proceed from a pure and powerful people. Grapes are not gathered of thorns, nor figs of thistles.

I am not here, my friends, to tickle your ears with tinkling phrases, to deliver a learned lecture on Greek and Roman mythology; to quote Hebrew and Latin, and stun you with sound, and bewilder you with a pedantic display of131erudition. No! Experience has taught me that it is the heart, not simply the head, we must appeal to, if we wish to stir the soul. The intellect may shine, but it is the bosom that burns, and warms into life every movement that is born to bless humanity. I, therefore, speak to your hearts, and I would rather say three words by the power of the Holy Ghost than lecture here for three hours on the fables of Greece and Rome.Wake up! ye sons and daughters of God! Trim your lamps and go forth to meet your distiny [sic]. A world awaits you; rich and poor, high and low, learned and unlearned. All must be preached to; all must be sought after; all must be left without excuse. And whither we cannot go, we must send; where we cannot speak we must write; and in order to win men with our writings we must know how and what to write. If the learned will only listen to the learned, God will send them learned men, to meet them on their own ground, and show them that "Mormonism," the Gospel of Christ, is not only the gospel of truth, but the gospel of intelligence and culture. The Lord is not above doing this. He is merciful to all men, not willing that any should perish, or have it to say they were unfairly dealt with. For over fifty years the gospel has been preached to the poor and lowly. It will yet go to the high and mighty, even to kings and nobles, and penetrate and climb to places hitherto deemed inaccessible.

Our literature will help to take it there; for this, like all else with which we have to do, must be made subservient to the building up of Zion.

But remember this, ye writers and orators of the future! It is for God's glory, not man's. Let not vanity and pride possess you. Without humility there is no power. You must be in earnest. You must feel what you write, if you wish it to be felt by others. If the words you speak are not as red-hot embers from the flaming forge of a sincere and earnest soul, they will never set on fire the souls of your hearers. The days of buncombe and bombast are over. Over? They never had a beginning. Nothing really is that is not founded on fact.

"Seek ye out of the best books words of wisdom; seek learning, even by study and also by faith."

The advantages of learning over ignorance are so self-evident as to need no dissertation. Knowledge is power, in this world or in any other. The Prophet Joseph is authority for the saying that "a man is saved no faster than he gets knowledge"; that "it is impossible for a man to be saved in ignorance"; "for," says he, "if he does not get knowledge, he will be brought into captivity by some evil power in the oilier world, as evil spirits will have more knowledge and consequently more power than many men who are on the earth." The Prophet also says that whatever principles of intelligence we attain to in this life, they will rise with us in the resurrection; and if one soul by its diligence and faithfulness acquires more knowledge than another, it will have just so much advantage in the world to come.

How little, then, they know of "Mormonism," who say and think it is opposed to education. "With all thy getting, get understanding" is no less a part of the "Mormon" creed than it is one of the pearls of the wisdom of Solomon.

"Seek learning, even by study and also by faith?'"

The formation of a home literature is directly in the line and spirit of this injunction. Literature means learning, and it is from the "best books" we are told to seek it. This does not merely mean the Bible, the Book of Mormon, the book of Doctrine and Covenants, Church works and religious writings-though these indeed are "the best books," and will ever be included in and lie at the very basis of our literature. But it also means history, poetry, philosophy, art and science, languages, governmentall truth in fact, wherever found, either local or general, and relating to times past, present or to come.

Yes, the Prophet even meant revelation, inspiration, immediate and direct; for does he not say, "seek learning by study and also by faith"? Faith points to futurity, to things that will be; study pertains more to the past, to things that have been. History is temporal; prophecy is132spiritual. The past is great, but the future will be greater. The dead letter may be precious, but the living oracle is beyond all price.

It is from the warp and woof of all learning, so far as we are able to master it and make it ours, that the fabric of our literature must be woven. We must read, and think, and feel, and pray, and then bring forth our thoughts, and polish and preserve them. This will make literature.

Above all things, we must be original. The Holy Ghost is the genius of "Mormon" literature. Not Jupiter, nor Mars, Minerva, nor Mercury. No fabled gods and goddesses; no Mount Olympus; no "sisters nine," no "blue-eyed maid of heaven"; no invoking of mythical muses that "did never yet one mortal song inspire." No pouring of new wine into old bottles. No patterning after the dead forms of antiquity. Our literature must live and breathe for itself. Our mission is diverse from all others; our literature must also be. The odes of Anacreon, the satires of Horace and Juvenal, the epics of Homer, Virgil, Dante and Milton; the sublime tragedies of Shakspeare [sic]; these are all excellent, all well enough in their way; but we must not attempt to copy them. They cannot be reproduced. We may read, we may gather sweets from all these flowers, but we must build our own hive and honeycomb after God's supreme design.

We will yet have Miltons and Shakespeares of our own. God's ammunition is not exhausted. His brightest spirits are held in reserve for the latter times. In God's name and by his help we will build up a literature whose top shall touch heaven, though its foundations may now be low in earth. Let the smile of derision wreathe the face of scorn; let the frown of hatred darken the brow of bigotry. Small things are the seeds of great things, and, like the acorn that brings forth the oak, or the snowflake that forms the avalanche, God's kingdom will grow, and on wings of light and power soar to the summit of its destiny.

Let us onward, then, and upward, keeping the goal in view; living not in the dead past, nor for the dying present. The future is our field. Eternity is before us.

"New occasions teach new duties, Time makes ancient good uncouth; They must upward still and onward, Who would keep abreast of Truth. Lo! before us gleam her camp-fires, We, ourselves, must pilgrims be; Launch our Mayflower, and steer boldly Through the desperate winter sea, Nor attempt the future's portal With the past's blood-rusted key."

I do not mean to depreciate, or speak slightingly of the literature of the past; such of it, at least, as is worthy of the name. Far be it from me to utter one word that might reasonably be so construed. I wish I had power to tell you what I think literature has done for the human race; what men of letters have accomplished in all ages, from Moses to Herodotus, from Herodotus to Shakespeare, from Shakespeare to Goethe and Carlyle; men who have poured the rich treasures of inspired thought and intelligent research into the lap of humanity, giving birth to civilization and filling earth with fame and glory. I would also speak of the press, that modern giant, that great engine of power, scattering far and wide the embers of intelligence, kindling on ten thousand times ten thousand hearth-stones the fires of thought and noble aspiration; the newspaper, the daily history of the world, champion of truth and defender of the oppressed. How mighty its mission, how far-reaching its influence, how invincible its power! Oh, that it should ever be prostituted, dragged in the mire, degraded to ignoble ends! But alas! it often is so. Therefore, choose between the false and true, between the unreal and the genuine. "Seek ye out of the best books"-the best newspapers-"words of wisdom." Write for the papers, write for the magazines-especially our home publications-subscribe [to] them and read them. Make books yourselves that shall not only be a credit to you and to the land and people that produced you, but likewise a boon and benefaction to mankind.

It is impossible to compute in figures, or express in words, the blessings that books and book-makers have been to humanity. Let me133quote from one whose masterly attempt is perhaps half-way successful. Says Carlyle:

"In books lies the soul of the whole past time; the articulate, audible voice of the past, when the body and material substance of it has altogether vanished like a dream. Mighty fleets and armies, harbors and arsenals, vast cities, high-domed, many-engined-they are precious, great: but what do they become? Agamemnon, the many Agamemnons, Pericleses and their Greece; all is gone now to some ruined fragments, dumb, mournful wrecks and blocks: but the books of Greece! Their Greece, to every thinker, still very literally lives."

"With the art of writing, of which printing is a simple, an inevitable and comparatively insignificant corollary, the true reign of miracles for mankind commenced."

"The writer of a book, is not he a preacher, preaching not to this parish or that, on this day or that, but to all men, in all times and places?"

"He with his copy-rights and copy-wrongs, in his squalid garret, in his rusty coat; ruling (for this is what he does) from his grave, after death, whole nations or genarations [sic] who would, or would not, give him bread while living,-is a rather curious spectacle! Few shapes of heroism can be more unexpected."

"Men of letters are a perpetual priesthood, from age to age, teaching all men that a God is still present in their life .... In the true literary man there is thus ever, acknowledged or not by the world, a sacredness; he is the light of the world; the world's priest; guiding it like a sacred pillar of fire, in its dark pilgrimage through the waste of time."

Let us now, for a moment, in the light of this noble interpretation, contemplate the work of a book, a book with which we are all more or less familiar.

Nearly four hundred years have passed away since Columbus discovered America. He found here, what? Forests and Indians, and tropical fruits; little else. But they who came after him found more. Peeping from the crust of the earth, north and south, east and west, were the relics of a civilization that had put to shame the glory of Egypt in her palmiest days. Nations had risen and fallen on this fair land, before whose fame and power the strength of Rome, the wealth of Asia, would have paled as stars before the sun. Whence came they? What were their names? Why had they fallen? None knew. The sad sea waves and the sighing winds answered not, but continued to chant in mournful numbers their solemn requiem for the dead. The natives could not tell, except in tales and traditions as vague and shadowy as the legends of the Druids, or the runic fables of the Norsemen. Who, then would answer? One day a little boy went into the woods and prayed. God answered him trod gave him more than be asked. A book came forth by the power of God; a buried record, hidden in a hill. It told the story of the past, it prophesied of the future, and from that hour, Joseph Smith, the despised Mormon Prophet, became the real discoverer of America.

My brothers and sisters-fellow laborers in the vineyard of our Lord-let me hope if I have said anything, it is something that will stimulate and encourage you to press, onward in the work of God. Follow not after the world. Avoid the snares of Satan. Be true to yourselves and loyal to your mission. Ye are the "hope of Israel." The heavens are watching you, and the earth is waiting for you."

Awake, awake! Put on thy strength, O Zion! Put on thy beautiful garments"-the garments of wisdom and learning, that it may no longer be said of thee, with even a semblance of truth, or a shadow of reason, that thou art not what we say thou art, and all that the Lord thy God has said thou shalt be. Arise, shine, for thy light will come, and the Glory of the cord will rise upon thee! "And the Gentiles shall come to thy light, and kings to the brightness of thy rising." The star of truth has risen; the Sun of Righteousness will come; the night of error is past, and above the eastern hilltops, even now, are breaking the golden splendors of the dawn. 134

William Mulder [^2] Mormonism and Literature

Mormonism began with a book, and the Latter-day Saints, like the English reformers in the time of King James with their brand new translation of the Bible, became pre-eminently the people of a book. Whether it be regarded as an authentic ancient record or as a highly contemporary document, the Book of Mormon is nevertheless a fact and a force. Mark Twain may have called it chloroform in print, but from the beginning it has fed the imagination and, aside from being an original contribution to American literature, it has been the source of countless other contributions, at all levels: from amateur Book of Mormon pageants produced by local congregations to such sophisticated products as Leroy J. Robertson's Book of Mormon Oratorio and Cyrus Dallin's heroic figure of Moroni atop the Salt Lake Temple. The Book of Mormon has added words to the language, dotted the map from New York to Utah with unique place names, and given believers a gallery of heroes rivaling the Old Testament. Not least, it has added to native literature a distinct literary type, the Nephite legend, by now an approved subject for Ph.D. dissertations. The use of the book for theological purposes seems often synthetic; it goes unread in countless Mormon homes; but its story, its symbolism, have persisted now for over a century to become the unconscious, uncritical inheritance of several generations, and no writer treating the Mormon theme can overlook it.

It is not without significance that Mormonism, beginning with a book, had to make its appeal to a literate following. The proselyte had to be able to read. The Saints, be it remembered, equipped their ideal community not only with a temple and a bishop's storehouse, but with a printing press, and they appointed not only elders and bishops and teachers as their ministering officers, but an official printer to the Church. Even Winter Quarters had a press where was struck off what is believed to be the first printing west of the Mississippi, an epistle from the Twelve to the scattered Saints. And a people uprooted, on the move across Iowa and the great plains, carried Webster's blue-backed speller with them and heard their youngsters diligently recite their lessons in the dust of rolling wagons. Once established in Salt Lake Valley, they made an urgent request for a federal appropriation of $5,000 for a territorial library; and within short years they were promoting lyceums, a Polysophical Society, a Deseret Dramatic Association, a Universal Scientific Society, a Library Association, and an Academy of Art.

It is not without significance that Joseph Smith himself, whether viewed as the divinely inspired translator or as a transcendental genius, was the product of a literate background, both in terms of an average New England schooling with its available village culture and of his own family, particularly the maternal side: his grandfather Solomon Mack had published in chapbook form a highly readable spiritual autobiography. It is not surprising that around the Prophet's millennial standard gathered school teachers and college graduates, men as gifted as Oliver Cowdery and Willard Richards, the Pratt brothers-Parley and Orson, Orson Spencer, John Taylor, William Phelps, Lorenzo Snow, and Iris talented sister Eliza, persuasive orators and fluent writers who founded and edited capable periodicals like the Millennial Star in England, the Messenger and Advocate in Kirtand, the Evening and Morning Star in Independence, the Mormon in New York, the Seer in Washington, the Luminary in St. Louis, the Nauvoo Neighbor and the Times and Seasons in Nauvoo, and the Frontier Guardian in Kanesville-some of them brilliant, all of them fearless and eloquent. Their tradition, militant and aspiring, persisted in the columns of the early Deseret News and in the pages of the Contributor 135 and the Young Woman's Journal, to give way at last to genteel moralizing, a tone and manner characteristic of today, with persecution subsided and the dream collapsed.

Clearly, Mormonism had literate beginnings which developed early into a distinctive literature, a rich legacy forgotten in the mediocrity of present-day Mormon expression. That legacy, to be sure, must be sought in more than belles lettres; it must be sought and recognized in the beginnings of literature, the raw materials out of which pure letters rise: in an oral tradition of salty anecdote and imaginative legend, in colorful and vigorous sermons that make the Journal of Discourses such fascinating reading, in personal diaries and letters which reveal the soul-searching triumphs and defeats of the convert, immigrant, and settler, in hymns breathing aspiration and desire-together, intensely moving expressions of a faith fed by millennial dreams and nourished by irrigation. These, a subliterature if you will, come closer to exhibiting the genius of Mormonism as a force and movement than the more formal literary types thrice removed from their original inspiration. It is in these themes and modes, these beginnings of literature, we should attempt to find what is, or has been, characteristic of Mormon literature and what may hold promise for the future.

Aside from the Book of Mormon itself, Mormonism has not yet produced what may be called a religious classic, at once as original and representative, for example, as Dante's Divine Comedy of medieval Catholicism or Foxe's Book of Martyrs of the Protestant Reformation. Mormonism has no Little FIowers of St. Francis, no Imitation of Christ by Thomas a Kempis, no Milton's Paradise Lost, no Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress, no Augustine's Confessions. Mormonism is still very young. But there are approximations. Wilford Woodruff's journal may approach John Woolman, the Quaker saint. Mormon personal journals, incidentally, are a primary literary type: William Clayton, Hosea Stout, Charles L. Walker, George A. Smith, John D. Lee, and a host of unknowns; their native simplicity and strength and human warmth make rewritings of them by later, more consciously literary editors seem thin and derivative, prosaic paraphrasings of what in the original is really rich narrative. Too often these days unimaginative hacks are converting literature and life into dogma.

The private journal was the Mormon's confessional. His conversion and all the works that followed after, he saw as part of God's appointment. History was an unfolding of God's will in which, humbly rejoicing, he played a part, and be recorded God's wonder-working providences with the soul-searching of the Puritan diarists. He saw the hand of the Lord in everything. His journal was a kind of spiritual bookkeeping, a tidy accounting against the day of judgment. Often pious and didactic, it was frequently thrilling narrative and vivid characlerization. Despite the introspection, the dominant impression of Mormon journals is that the wounds of grief and doubt healed quickly: the flesh was healthy, there faith triumphant. It is as if the strong-faced portraits that used to hang on parlor walls should speak. The originals come to life; the portraiture is warmly human.

If, as Stephen Vincent Benét tells us in Western Star, history is falsified by generalizations and we can understand it only when we become aware of the "daily living and dying beneath the sun," then in this unpretentious subliterature of Mormon journals we come close to understanding history. In them we find something of the daily living and dying of men and women both weak and valiant. Their story is not epic except as life and many clays together give it sweep-it is the sweep of daily existence, the great movement that is the result of countless little movements, each life a tiny capillary, a vein, an artery contributing to the strong heartbeat of their collective existence. And it is as a collective expression that Mormon literature makes its greatest impact rather than in any single work so far by any single artist.

In Mormon homes today, the journal tradition has degenerated into the sentimental "Book of Remembrance," family genealogies, and personal keepsakes that too often turn out to be museums of dead mementos rather than treasures of living experience; yet in its way the "Book of Remembrance"-widely kept by136Church members-is a type and, along with missionary experiences and the oral witness to the faith borne at monthly "testimony meetings," should be respected as a literary source. These are part of a rare oral tradition, as is the rich vein of Mormon storytelling, a floating literature waiting to be collected and immortalized in print, a motherlode of humor and folk wisdom ready to be mined. It is a temptation to dwell on this tradition-and on Mormon hymns as a literary type, and on the sermons, and on some of the great tracts in defense of the faith and the Saints; it is a temptation to take a look at Mormon biographical writing, Mormon historical writing, Mormon scholarly writing to see in how many ways the culture has been articulate. The mere recital may suggest how vital the beginnings of literature can be when in form and content they reflect what is significant in the Mormon experience itself. How vital and characteristic does this experience remain when it is transformed by a particular artistic vision, the vision, for example, of the novelist?

Novels continue to be written about the Mormon experience, far better ones today than the old lurid treatments like A Study in Scarlet, Female Life Among the Mormons, or Danites of the Sierras. Today's titles suggest appreciation, aspiration, poetic sympathy: Children of God, A Little Lower Than the Angels, The Peaceable Kingdom, The Harvest Waits, The Giant Joshua, to name a few. Most readers are still expectant, looking for the great Mormon novel, an expectancy which puts an added burden on the writer of the Mormon story, for he is plagued by an epic. Bernard DeVoto says his Mormon novel is by far the best book he is never going to write: God, the best storyteller, made a better story out of Joseph and the Mormon wandering than fiction will ever equal.

Certainly Mormon fiction faces special difficulties, one of them of belief, the other of technique. Says Don D. Walker, "To write with integrity for readers who understand that integrity, writers need a tradition, a system of moral values in which they can make meaningful judgments-they need a frame of belief. Writers within the Church accept the frame and are not troubled by any searching for convictions: they bring firmness, optimism, but also oversimplification, naiveté, sometimes hypocrisy. Writers outside the Church see the frame, the predominant tradition, as merely historical and find it useless for their own terms of response. (There is a certain condescension in ex-Utahns-they believe they can be creatively free only after they escape the country.) The in-group writers treat the pioneers, for example, uncritically as a race of giants; the out-group, as deluded, at best pathetic, men. Both pictures are false. Neither folk worship nor debunking, but human understanding, human values, are what both writers and readers must bring to the Mormon story." Maurine Whipple has observed that the people she wrote about were human beings by birth and saints only by adoption. Amid the deceiving simplicities of the pioneer story, with its genuinely complex elements of polygamy and the united order, the writer is challenged to create both understandable people and understandable Mormons. What is needed, perhaps, is a smaller canvas, a surer perspective, stories that provide not so much the movement of history as the feeling of living experience, the experience of living things, of very particular situations. Too many writers about polygamy, for example, have never got beyond a preliminary social orientation, or, getting further, have found little more than the old truth that women are jealous creatures.

The burden of creating a Mormon literature in the future rests as heavily on the reader as on the writer. If a look at the Church counter in local bookstores fills us with dismay and we accuse Mormon writers of having thrown away their pens in favor of pastepot and scissors, we may well inquire whether a supine readership is after all not to blame. One of the major threats to Mormon literary growth is what may be called the uneducated literacy of the Church membership, a greater danger perhaps than downright illiteracy because adult minds, capable of growth, have been arrested, in the official literature, at the level of the Sunday School lesson and never treated to the stimulation of the mature writing the whole Mormon tradition should have ripened by our time. Mormonism is perfectly capable of its own137Christian Century and Commentary. Scores of Church members are writing with distinction in their special fields, but the official literature does not recognize them because of another major threat to Mormon literary growth: the attempt to endow certain writings, however mediocre in style and spirit, with an authority extraneous to the work itself. The official preface is fatal to Mormon literary production because it invests unworthy works with false prestige while on the other hand better work not so recognized goes unread. Literature should establish its own authority. The best of Joseph Smith's revelations, linguistically speaking, have the authority of good literature; they are literature converted into authority when they speak truth unforgettably. Not "Was it inspired?" but "Is it inspiring?" is the better touchstone of authenticity.

Professor P. A. Christensen of Brigham Young University in that characteristic collection of his essays, All in a Teacher's Day, notes how "Through the easy acquisition of proverbs and verbal epitomes, even superficial people may seem to possess and carry with them the wisdom of the ages," and bow "The very ease with which they establish themselves in memory is not conducive to the study and meditation necessary to grasp the wisdom implicit in them." When Latter-day Saints move beyond the lip service they are at present content to pay such slogans as "The glory of God is intelligence" and "We believe in eternal progress," Mormon literature will move toward the promise of its highly articulate beginnings, for Mormon readers will demand of Mormon writers authentic voices, whether in fiction, in history, in biography, or in missionary tract-the authority of good writing, of truths made memorable.

Parley A. Christensen [^3] Mormonism: An Eternal Quest

We Latter-day Saints, like other groups of people, have our slogans and catchwords, expressions that tersely and effectively state or suggest central thoughts in our philosophy of life. "The glory of God is intelligence," "We believe in eternal progress," "Mormonism embraces all truth,".-such collocations of words are as familiar to us as Ave Marias and Pater Nosters are to those who use the rosary.

But pithy and felicitous summaries of the basic ideas and ideals of a people are not benefits without alloy. The very ease with which they establish themselves in memory is not conducive to the study and meditation necessary to grasp the wisdom implicit in them. Through the easy acquisition of proverbs and verbal epitomes, even superficial people may seem to possess and carry with them the wisdom of the ages. They draw near to the truth with their lips though their minds may be far from it. There is accordingly danger that the first and underlying meaning of great utterances may be lost, though the original forms of expression endure. So it is that there is an ever recurring need that slogans and catchwords be revitalized.

It should, therefore, not be regarded as impertinence for one to ask occasionally what we Latter-day Saints actually mean when we assert that Mormonism embraces all truth, or, indeed, what we mean by Mormonism itself. Much confusion in all human thinking grows out of a tendency to ascribe entity to what exists only as aspects of consciousness. For example, most of us talk about language, as if it were an object suspended in space, a thing which we can reach for, take, use, and return to some ethereal hook or container. Similarly we seem to think of religion as an entity, an ideal entity, existing outside our minds and independent, therefore, of what we are and of what we think and feel. The dictum that Mormonism embraces all truth accordingly suggests to many of us a vague religious being subsisting in a conscious void138and composed in some way of all the truths of the universe, truths which we accept piecemeal as we discover them or as they are revealed to US.

Whatever may be the value to purely speculative thinking of such a transcendental conception, it seems to me that practical thinking necessitates the conclusion that neither our language nor our religion exists in the absence of our minds. They are not creatures born of and reposing in a mental vacuum. Rather they are born of consciousness and they endure only in consciousness or as concomitants of it. Our language is merely the well-known sounds and actions by which we seek to communicate our thoughts and feelings to one another. At any moment in time it is simply the sum total of the language behavior of all of us. So it is with our religion. Mormonism, as a present fact, has no immediacy for us except as present thoughts, feelings, assurances, convictions, and aspirations in our consciousness. Mormonism, in other words, is the present religious equipment of our Mormon minds; it is the sum total of what we Mormons are experiencing in a joint and progressive attempt to find the spiritual meanings of the universe.

In a serviceable sense, then, Mormonism and Mormons are one. If so, the claim that Mormonism embraces all truth cannot mean that we Latter-day Saints embrace all truth in the sense that we are in possession of all truth. It cannot mean that with us the acquisition of all truth is a fact accomplished. Any such arrogation of knowledge and wisdom would be intolerably presumptuous. Nor can it mean, I think, merely that we accept or give mental assent to all truth as it comes to us through study or through revelation. Certainly there would be little credit for us in such a thought. Only the mentally ill reject the ascertained truths of the universe: only the ethically perverted identify themselves with error rather than with truth. Some virtues are universally assumed in civilized society. It is not necessary, therefore, for Latter-day Saints, or any other people, to announce to the world that they prefer right to wrong, goodness to wickedness, beauty to ugliness. truth to error. Anything else is unthinkable.

What, then, does the claim that Mormonism embraces all truth really mean? I find implicit in it both a description of a sublime though unattainable ideal and a summons to an inspiring though endless quest. In other words, I find in it a meaning as paradoxical as life itself. As life each day requires goals that induce effort and give direction to it, so life demands also that the accomplishments of each day shall leave something to be done tomorrow; for life tomorrow and tomorrow, if it is to be significant, will demand continuing ideals and uninterrupted strivings to realize them.

In our dreaming of eternity we Latter-day Saints may find a place in the realm of elusive ultimates for the notion of a perfect knowledge of all truth, and we may sometimes allow ourselves to dream of such a perfection of knowledge as the salvation for which we strive. Men, we say, are saved only as fast as they gain knowledge. But we seriously believe that it is in the striving for such a goal and not in the realization of it that we satisfy our deepest needs. With Schelling we say: If God should come to us with all truth in one hand and the striving for truth in the other and if He should say to us, "Choose," we would answer, "Lord, give us the striving. Pure truth is for thee alone." Ours is to be an eternity of purposeful progress, not an eternity of purposes achieved.

But to accept a transcendent ideal and to enlist oneself in a glorious quest are relatively easy accomplishments. To keep the ideal in mind and to carry on the quest are not so easy. It is easy for all of us to believe in the achievement of ultimate truths through eternal progress, but it is difficult for us to keep our minds open to progressive ideas and attitudes. It is easy to ask for an eternity in which to progress, but it is difficult to detect when our own progress ceases, It is easy to accept limitless time in which to learn, but it is difficult not to spend our days in futile reiterations of the little we already know. Inertia of mind and spirit is a disease that creeps upon its victims slowly and imperceptibly, and few of us are immune to it. Great ideals and great quests are meaningful only for ever-alert and open-minded workers, and for workers of dedicated and unwearying139minds and spirits.

It was with a consciousness of all of these things that Joseph Smith, in the formative days of the Church, explicitly and implicitly urged the need of the open, active, inquiring mind. He knew how readily religion ceases to be a courageous and inspiriting quest for truth and beauty, and deteriorates into a benumbing ecclesiasticism, a sterile formalism, and a stifling literalism-three treacherous rocks upon which all religious barks are liable to founder. So, through revelation, he exhorted his followers to teach one another, to seek wisdom in good books, to acquire learning by earnest study. And when he gave to the world a brief summary of Mormon professions of faith he declared that, if there is anything virtuous, or lovely, or of good report, or praiseworthy, his followers seek after such things. They seek after such things. He did not say that they already possess all that is virtuous or lovely or of good report or praiseworthy, but only that they are in quest of such things.

And certainly Joseph Smith did not intend to limit the quest as to time, place, or persons. In his vivid consciousness of a gospel message for the world he was not unmindful of the message of humanity to his people. He recognized that humanity is old in the earth. He knew that in all ages and among all people God has been working silently, ceaselessly, and impartially to glorify himself through the glorification of his children. He knew, therefore, that at all times and in all lands inquiring and inspired men have caught glimpses of the truly virtuous, lovely, and praiseworthy. He, therefore, enlisted his people in a search after these things. He sent them to books, time's garner of the best fruits of the mind and spirit, that through them the philosophers, the scientists, the poets, the prophets, and seers of all ages might impart their visions of the true and the beautiful to his people to enrich and reinforce his own inspired teachings.

For Joseph Smith apparently had filth in men, in their capacity to find truth through their own unaided efforts. He apparently saw that such a faith in men is the best evidence of a worthy faith in God. He saw that the excellence of the creature is the measure of the excellence of the creator, and, therefore, that to belittle man is to belittle the God who made him. Joseph Smith, I believe, would have had little sympathy with that species of piety which makes a man a pitiful marionette in the leading strings of God, and which habitually disparages the findings of his mind and the promptings of his spirit. I like to think that it is of the essence of genuine piety and religious gratitude to believe that the glory of God is the intelligence with which he has endowed his children.

It seems to me, therefore, that Mormonism progressively embraces all truth only as we Latter-day Saints progressively find truth, and that we find truth only as we seek for it through revelation and through the diligent use of our own divine powers of mind and spirit. Mormonism is an eternal quest, our eternal quest for truth.

Robert K. Thomas [^4] A Literary Critic Looks at the Book of Mormon

All who read the touching lament of Jeremiah must be struck by the loneliness that is inherent in the calling of a prophet. Yet one can well imagine that he who walks with God may need no other companion. The prophet must know that most will reject him, but what protection does he have against his followers-those whose zeal to defend him is only matched by the questionable nature of their plea? Joseph Smith has fared reasonably well at thehands of his enemies, but many who revere him have almost succeeded where his enemies have failed. They speak so glibly of the Prophet Joseph as an instrument in God's hand that they have turned him into a symbol. In viewing him devotedly they try to make everything they hear about him fit. Uncritically accepting rumor with fact, conjecture with reality, they put together a pastiche which has superficial consistency but which may well be profoundly misleading. Perhaps the most embarrassing aspect of such a view is its inherent suggestion that Joseph Smith must be defended, and defended on the world's terms.

Many of the theories which have attempted to account for one or another of the Prophet's statements or actions reflect more faith in esoteric logic than they do in faith itself. In no area of Church scholarship has this been more evident than in the attempts which have been made to account for the manner in which the Book of Mormon was translated. While anti-Church writers-almost to a man-comment on this, no arguments have been more vehement than those which raged in our own Improvement Era during the first decade of this century. Advocates of the so-called automatic theory-that is, the Urim and Thummim were the actual translators with Joseph just a transcriber-contested with proponents of the manual theory, which took its name from the MIA manual in which it first appeared. In this theory Joseph is viewed as the responsible translator' with the Urim and Thummim as accessories, Suffice it to say no more was actually accomplished in this exchange than we might expect in the light of the Book of Mormon assertion that contention is never an appropriate avenue toward truth.

The extent to which a translator is responsible for the diction and syntax he uses is always open to debate. The special circumstances trader which the Book of Mormon was brought forth complicate assessing Joseph Smith's responsibility for the language and style of this work beyond useful conjecture. To say this, however, is not to say that literary criticism of the Book of Mormon is pointless. As B. H. Roberts early asserted, the Book of Mormon is not immune from any kind of examination: "The fact should be recognized by the Latter-day Saints that the Book of Mormon of necessity must submit to every test, to literary criticism as well as every other class criticism, for our age is, above all things, critical, and especially critical of sacred literature. We may not hope that the Book of Mormon will escape closest scrutiny. Neither, indeed, is it advisable that it should escape." No word count, no matter how carefully collated to show the difference between Joseph's normal style and that used in the Book of Mormon, is going to be significant if what the book says is not significant. No citations concerning Joseph's lack of education can make the book more miraculous than it already is if it can live up to its claims.

As an early anti-Church writer bluntly puts it, "The question is not where Smith mined it, but is it gold?" Whatever Joseph Smith's precise relationship to the expression of the Book of Mormon is, his name is going to be linked to this book inextricably. No consideration of Joseph Smith as a writer can ignore the evidence of the Book of Mormon, especially the revelations of the so-called Smaller Plates of Nephi, which are free from the additional complication of major abridgment.

For over a century critics within and without the Church have reiterated the Prophet Joseph Smith's lack of literary skill. These general assertions are usually supported by specific citations which show errors in grammar or punctuation. Occasionally such unusual locutions as "the more part" are decried, or such words as "hefted" are used to indicate the influence of typical New England forms. In terms of responsible literary criticism, this is mere carping. No work is fairly judged in listing the current preferences in grammatical form. The easy pronouncements of 19th century prescriptive grammars are essentially dead today, and so is the flowery rhetoric which is more given to facade than function. The subjectivity of literary evaluation must always be recognized, but the personal need not be whimsical. If we can bring ourselves to look freshly at a work such as the Book of Mormon, we may be surprised to find more than defensive prejudgment within141the Church and inattentive generalizations out of the Church have provided for us.

Until quite recently, the few attempts to look at the Book of Mormon literarily within the Church have stressed its expressive similarities to the King James version of the Bible.<_P> [^5] The Bible has epistles, psalms, and lamentations. So does the Book of Mormon. The Bible displays historical narrative and prophetic discourse. So does the Book of Mormon. This substitution of a quantitative gauge for a qualitative one only suggests desperation and inevitably gives rise to a nagging suspicion that the Book of Mormon is inferior to the Bible literarily; but if we show how similar they are, if we point out that they both have the same features, maybe no one will notice bow much prettier one sister is than the other.

What the Book of Mormon has not yet received is critical evaluation, a true consideration of this work on the basis of criteria which it sets for itself. These are explicitly given on its title page and may fairly be summed up as follows:

Essentially, the Book of Mormon claims to be Hebraic history. This claim, it should be noted, does provide a point of contact with the Bible, but the relationship is one of matter rather than manner. Now, lest this summation seem too modest, it must be remembered that the phrase "Hebraic history" is a loaded one. To begin with, ancient Israel would have found our current theories of history incredibly naive. Our attempts to assemble objective evidence always carry the possibility of an overlooked fact which can destroy the most logical formulation. The Hebraic theory of history is devastatingly simple and exclusive: History is God's dealings with his chosen people-no more, no less. For example, no attempt is made to satisfy our scientific curiosity concerning the process of creation in Genesis 1. Biblical geography is cited with notorious nonchalance, and we search in vain for a truly precise chronology throughout the entire Old Testament. To Hebraic historians, records are never ends in themselves. History enables those who hear its people-oriented account to see themselves as part of a holy race. The hokmah of the proverbs, that intensely practical wisdom that has been distilled from experience, is the hallmark of a people whose rule is law and whose rallying cry is obedience. With profound psychological insight, ancient Israel knew that no fallible human identifies easily with perfection. That is at least one reason wily we are permitted to see Abraham frightened and Jacob indecisive. We can identify with such qualities, and we do, but the Hebrew historian had more in mind than a balanced presentation.Since we bare identified ourselves with men in their weakness, we ought to grow with them its they gain strength. Note how often we see men like Joseph and Jacob grow to confident maturity as they respond to the hand of God on their shoulder. Such background is necessary if we would appreciate the claims of the Book of Mormon. Details may vary, but the Hebraic pattern or manner should remain constant.

Consider, for example Nephi's account of himself in I Nephi. He is obviously a fine boy, but he shares the immaturity of young Joseph, young David. He is not particularly tactful with his brothers, and one contribution of his account is that he lets us see it in typically Hebraic fashion. In chapter two of I Nephi he states his problem very ingenuously: "I Nephi, being exceeding young, nevertheless being large in stature." His youth is still evident when he accompanies his brothers to get the plates and finally takes over the leadership of the little expedition. Coming upon Laban drunken, he appears to be less overwhelmed by the evident opportunity to get the plates than he is by that beautiful sword, and when the Spirit tells him he must kill Laban, he is shocked. The Spirit has to urge him once more, at which point he begins a halfhearted, high school rationalization which is climaxed by the lame assertion that, after all, Laban has stolen their property. Only after the Spirit commands him the third time does he begin to see the relationship of the142precepts he has so dutifully memorized to the realities of this moment. He has started to grow up. Fulfilling the commandment and donning the clothes of Laban-remember that "large in stature"-he tries to make his voice deep like Laban's and, picking up Zoram, heads for the treasury.

In his growing excitement, as he actually touches the sacred records, he undergoes an all-too-human lapse. He tells Zoram that he will carry the records to his "elder brethren who were without the walls." With what terror young Nephi must have heard himself say this in his anxiety. Laban had no brothers outside of the walls. With what a pounding heart he must have bade the servant follow him. What a breath of relief there is in the following verse: "And he, supposing that I spake of the brethren of the church, and that I was truly that Laban whom I had slain, wherefore he did follow me."

As they contact Nephi's brothers, Zoram is suddenly aware of the whole deception and turns to flee. Whereupon Nephi seizes him and in so doing describes himself in the following significant phrase: "And now I, Nephi, being a man." He has matured overnight. The sobering awareness of what serving the Lord may entail has been a refining fire. Note particularly from this time on Iris understanding attempts to help his brothers. No longer is he merely exhorting them to righteousness. He tries everything to help them. Also note how tactfully anti lovingly he takes over for his father when Lehi finally breaks under the continuing strain of providing food for his family in the wilderness. The story of Jacob's wrestle with the angel is not so dramatically related. How skillfully we see Nephi develop. This is Hebraic history of a high order. Biblical analogues to this story are all inferior to it in focus and in illuminating detail.

One exquisitely appropriate story does not, of course. justify the book. But his becomes an experimentum crucis. that critical example which it must be accounted for. Other examples are not wanting. Consider, also, the story of Abinadi, the mildly reluctant prophet. He is careful to make it clear that his preaching is strictly at the Lord's behest, and he goes into hiding when King Noah issues orders to have him killed. When he returns, two years later-for he is a dutiful man and he knows he should go back-he reappears in disguise. But what are his opening words? "Thus has the Lord commanded me, saying-Abinadi .... "What use is a false mustache when he has just identified himself? You could worry a little about Abinadi at this point. The priests evidently are contemptuous of him and prepare to catch him in his words so they can execute him. But something happens to Abinadi when he realizes he is going to have to die for what he believes. No one is going to listen to him; they are going to kill him. And suddenly he too grows up. Any reluctance which seemed to hedge Iris efforts to begin with is burned away. It is a tremendous story. Another favorite of mine is the account of Korihor, the fellow traveler, the Communist. Read Alma 30 again with its skillful propounding of dialectical materialism. How hard it is to control a man who does not carry any dynamite himself but who advocates blowing up the city hall. Is that an overt action? Then, as now, the people were puzzled and frustrated.

I suggest that these are but a few of many stories that are arresting in themselves, but also clearly in the Hebraic tradition. Their only defect is a shared one. Since they occur in those parts of the book which have been abridged, they lack the spontaneity of 1 Nephi.

Incidental but very interesting evidence concerning the possible age of the language from which Joseph Smith is translating occurs when we come across a word like "ziff" in Mosiah 11:3. Together with "neas and sheum" of Mosiah 9:9 and "cureloms and cumoms" of Ether 9:19, we have some very convincing examples of what are technically known as hapax legomena. Linguistically, such terms are a part of almost all ancient records. Indeed they become a check on their age. Hapax legomena are terms which cannot be translated, only transliterated-that is, put into the sounds of a language. Epics such as Beowolf, an ancient Anglo-Saxon epic poem, display them often, as does the Bible in a term like selah. No one knows what selah means. As a child I thought it must mean "Amen," because it came at the end of things. Now our best guess is that it is a143musical notation because it is only retired in Biblical lyrics.

Similarly the examples cited from the Book of Mormon are still unknown. Since the significance of hapax legomena in establishing the authenticity of ancient records is a relatively recent development, actually given most of its impetus by Germanic higher criticism of the last part of the 19th century, their occurrence in the Book of Mormon is persuasive internal evidence of its claims.

But perhaps the most remarkable demonstration of literary sensitivity in the entire Book of Mormon can be enjoyed in the seven pages which comprise the books of Enos, Jarom. and Omni. Though these books at first glance seem too short to be very significant, they are actually a four de force without parallel in Hebraic scripture, illustrating that style is the man.

The headlong impetuosity of Enos is suggested by his rather imprecise, fragmentary opening sentence. As an English teacher this always makes me shiver a little as I react it. "Behold, it came to pass that I, Enos, knowing my father that he was a just man - for he taught me in his language, and also in the Nurture and admonition of the Lord and blessed be the name of my God for it."

The vitality of this man fairly crackles on the page. Note especially his use of verbs and verb forms; "wrestled, sunk, hungered, kneeled, cried. raised, poured out, struggling, swept." Enos simply cannot wait for logic to catch up with him. His words roll forth in an irresistible flood. In describing the Lamanites he pours attitudes on top of environment, adds physical description, then skills, shifts to diet and back to attitudes again. His sentences all have a spoken quality, and their lengths seem determined only by a need for breath. Listen as you read the following description of his own people: "And there was nothing save it was exceeding harshness, preaching and prophesying of wars, and contentions, and destructions, and continually reminding them of death, and the duration of eternity, and the judgments and the power of God, and all these things stirring them up continually to keep them in the fear of the Lord." Just one magnificent sentence-about a deep breath long!

This man wrings meaning from every moment. His concluding words are beautifully in character: "And I rejoice in the day when my mortal shall put on immortality and shall stand before him; then shall I see his face with pleasure." It has been suggested that in all Western literature there is a singular lack of friendship toward God. Reverence, awe, wonder, transport, even ecstasy we know: but all these have overtures of the supernal. Enos, in the company of the English poet George Herbert, might well make an affectionate call on the Lord.

From Enos to his son Jarom is the shortest of genealogical steps but a gigantic shift in style. Except for the expected, conventional beginning, note the difference: "Now behold, I, Jarom. write a few words according to the commandment of my father, Enos, that our genealogy may be kept." You are suddenly aware that nothing in the whole Book of Enos came to bear on a problem with such crispness. The succeeding verses develop the reasons for the length of his account arid the special problems of his day in coherent, beautifully modulated sentences. His diction too is precise. In discussing his people he lets us see their total strength in saying that "They profaned not, neither did they blaspheme." This is not merely synonymous parallelism, that standard device of Hebraic poetry; this is an incremental repetition in which additional meanings are added within a parallel framework.

Too many readers of the Book of Mormon have failed to appreciate its quality by setting their own limited understanding as the gauge of excellence. Profane (literally "before the temple") suggests general irreverence, most commonly heard in light-minded reference to holy things. As serious as this is, it does not connote the deliberate defiance which is suggested by blasphemy. Thoughtless people may profane; the intentionally wicked blaspheme.

Note how carefully the general denunciations of Enos are focused in Jarom. In verse 20 Enos describes the Lamanites as being of "such evil nature they became wild and ferocious, a bloodthirsty people, full of idolatry and filthiness.144" Jarom's accusation is precise: "They loved murder .... "Perhaps more clearly than we have understood before we here see the hopelessness of the Lamanite attitude, with its calculated wickedness.

The remainder of Jarom's account is similarly discriminating. In verse 11 he comments that it was possible to teach the law of Moses but the people had to be persuaded to look forward to the Messiah. Once more this is just the right distinction. The law of Moses was not only a fact of holy writ, it was a fact of experience. It could be rationally apprehended. The concept of a Messiah on the other hand was in the realm of things yet to come; it required emotional reinforcement, which is just the connotation sounded by "persuaded."

From calm, exacting Jarom we come to Omni. At once we are struck by a focus on the first person. There are seven "I"s in two verses. Omni is a soldier, dutifully carrying out the command of his father but not a bit averse to identifying himself as a wicked man. We soon see what really interests him. He not only lets us know of his valor in battle but describes his times solely in terms of war and peace. "We had many seasons of peace, and we had many seasons of serious war and bloodshed."

That reference to "serious war" gives him away. it suggests the concern of a man for whom war is neither inconsequential nor detestable. It is simply a vocation. Omni is forthright, not very reflective, and his sentences march briskly but to no great end.

Amaron, Omni's son, is more like his grandfather, Jarom. He is careful, organized, and in a few verses manages to turn our attention from personalities to issues. Yet Amaron lacks Jarom's linguistic sensitivity. His sentences, unlike Omni's, are neatly balanced, but it is a mechanical neatness. Here is a style which tries to synthesize the no-nonsense approach of his father with the carefully controlled cadence of his grandfather.

If Amaron is not quite successful, what shall we say of Chemish? Poor, dear Chemish! Possibly he did not expect to have to take his turn at the records, since they usually went from father to son, but overwhelmed by the responsibility that is suddenly his, he can only belabor the obvious: "They all write in the same book, and they all write with their own hands." You can just see the half-hopeful, half-relieved smile with which he turns the records over to his son.

I know of no more revealing verse in all scripture. How clearly Chemish is given to us. Not in what is said about him, but in what he says about himself through his style. Just one verse, but in it the whole history of inadequacy. The ghosts of my own failures clamor for recognition from my subconscious whenever l hear the name Chemish. I am related to him by all the blundered opportunity, the embarrassed incompetence that has threaded itself through my own life.

It is a relief to pass on to Abinadom. But in reading his account I seem to detect a bit of insecurity. I suspect he has looked back to see what others have written. There are echoes of Omni and Jarom, but nothing else. At this point we have had four men write in a total of eleven verses. This is all we know of them, yet l feel I might recognize them on the street.

The final nineteen, rather long verses are the breezy contribution of Amaleki. He just loves to write. He mixes exhortation and history in about equal amounts and stops only when he has used up all the space that remained on the plates.

Joseph Smith's translation of the small plates concludes here. Not only have we encountered typically Hebraic figures, but they have been presented with undeniable skill. Styles which should have been distinctive have been consistently so. Yet there is an overall tone which bespeaks a single translator.

We have only to check the markedly different versions of the Bible in English to recognize how much a translator can provide in achieving that integration of nuance and emphasis that turns words into life. It is a temptation which space really will not allow to comment on the many small but significant changes which the Book of Mormon details in the celebrated words of Isaiah. Critics here have ignored the discriminating differences. Equally worthy of comment are the beautiful extensions145given the Savior's words in 3 Nephi. One in particular I find so full of insight that in it alone l begin to recognize some of the plain and precious truths which unending translations have taken from the Bible.

In the Sermon on the Mount in Matthew 5:6-7. there is an injunction to avoid becoming angry with your brother without a cause, lest you be brought to the judgment. Now I have never been angry in my life without a cause. Someone or something has always made me angry. The Book of Mormon allows me no such rationalization: "But I say unto you. whosoever is angry with his brother shall be in danger of his judgment."

How profoundly this extends the Biblical idea. In leaving out "without a cause" I am blocked from shifting the responsibility for my own lack of control, and in substituting "his judgment" for "the judgment," I see my anger against my brother starting a train of judgment and counter judgment which leads inevitably to the more serious consequences elaborated upon in the rest of this verse.

Can anyone seriously question the inspired nature of translations such as the one just cited? Yet to say that Joseph Smith was inspired is not really to say enough. In some sense all good writing is inspired. The traditional invoking of the Muse is only a formalized recognition of a basic need to draw on some power which can breathe life into the feelings and ideas to which we would give expression. The inspiration that attends the translation of sacred records, however, must be a very special kind, in the nature of a gift and partaking of the power of God.

In one of the few comments which we have from the Lord concerning sacred translation, he suggests the person who is entrusted with his gift must study out in his mind the material under consideration and then ask him whether or not it is correct. If it is, the Lord will cause the translator's bosom to burn with the knowledge that what he is writing has divine sanction. How the Prophet Joseph's bosom must have burned as he was translating the Book of Mormon! We shall never learn to appreciate this book fully until we too prepare a temple for the flame.

Hugh Nibley [^6] Educating the Saints-A Brigham Young Mosaic

The Brigham Young Paradox:-A big black leather chair stood in Brigham Young's office by the Lion House; it faced the window on the opposite wall and the President's desk in the middle of the room. First-time visitors to the office were invited to sit on that chair, facing the strong light of day and the calm blue eyes of Brother Brigham, who sat there at his desk, his back to the window, quietly waiting for his guest to say something. After all, the man had come to see him, and it was only right to let him state his business; President Young, according to Grandfather,<_P> [^7] would never say a word for the first three minutes. And at the end of those first three minutes he always knew exactly the sort of man he was dealing with, and the nature-greedy, benign, or sinister-of his business. "And he never (here Grandpa smote the arm of his chair) had to change his mind!"-his psychoanalytical techniques, black leather couch and all, were deadly accurate, and always put him on top of the situation. BrighamYoung used to say that no man, if allowed to speak, could possibly avoid revealing his true character. "For out of the abundance of the heart the tongue speaketh."

It is important to know this if we would understand Brigham Young himself. No man ever spoke his mind more frankly on all subjects; all his days he strove to communicate his inmost feelings, unburdening himself without the aid of notes or preparation in a vigorous and forthright prose that was the purest anti-rhetoric. It has been common practice to dismiss any saying of his of which one disapproves (and he makes no effort to please) by observing that he said so much on so many things that he was bound to contradict himself, and therefore need not be taken too seriously all the time. No view could be more ill-advised, for there never was a man more undeviatingly consistent and rational in thought and utterance. But we must let him speak for himself to see that, and that is what his critics stubbornly refuse to do, allowing him only an occasional phrase or two quoted out of context to clinch their case. The few quotations that follow are, it is true, only a tantalizingly small fraction of the prophet's inspired and resounding utterances on the subject of education, but at least there will be enough of them to establish a definite thesis. Granted that Brigham would admonish the Saints to wear overcoats one day, so to speak, and the next day turn around and advise shirt-sleeves, the element of scandal and confusion vanishes if we only get the main idea, which is, that it is not the rule-book or the Administration but the weather that prescribes the proper dress for the day. All the other apparent contradictions in Brother Brigham's teachings likewise vanish when we grasp the main idea behind them.

What, for example, could sound more worldly and self-centered than a remark such as, "I labor for my own dear self, I have self continually before me; the object of my pursuit is to benefit my individual person ..."? That is, until we read the whole statement, which continues, "... Men may think, and some of them do, that we have a right to work for ourselves; but I say we have no time to do that in the narrow, selfish sense generally entertained when speaking about working for self." (Journal of Discourses, 14: 101:69.)<_P> What can he possibly mean? He explains: the only way properly to serve one's self is "to labor in the kingdom of God"; any other course "is folly in the extreme." (Journal of Discourses, 14:101:69.) "Do you want riches pertaining to this world? Yes, we acknowledge we do!"-that again seems brutally frank until we read on: "I merely use the term 'riches' to lead the mind along, until we obtain eternal riches in the celestial kingdom of God," which is a very different thing. (Journal of Discourses, 15:37:72.) We seem to hear the credo of the ambitious executive when we read, "We are organized for the express purpose of controlling the elements, of organizing and disorganizing, of ruling over kingdoms, principalities, and powers." But the next sentence completely reverses our verdict: "And yet our affections are often too highly placed upon the paltry, perishable objects. We love houses, gold, silver, and various kinds of property, and all who unduly prize any object there is beneath the celestial world are idolators." (Journal of Discourses, 3:357:56.) So it is all along: we may grant that Brigham Young talks like a solid, hard-headed Yankee materialist, but only as long as we understand that the only matter that interests him is the enduring substance of eternity. There is no real paradox when he says: "Then let us seek to extend the present life to the uttermost... and thus prepare for a better life." (Journal of Discourses, 11:132:65.) He is thinking of this life only in terms of the next.

But very few people have been able to see that: "There are those in this congregation who are so short-sighted, and so destitute of eternal wisdom and knowledge, that they believe that brother Brigham is after property-after the things of this world." (Journal of Discourses, 8:125:60.) Well, what else could they think of any man who rolled over all opposition, amassed substance and147power, and commanded the absolute obedience that Brigham Young did? To do that in terms of our world, a man must needs be a combination of Tamerlaine, Caesar Borgia. and Boss Tweed, and as such even the Latter-day Saints have pictured Brigham Young. How can you explain to the average American that there was once a shrewd Yankee farmer and builder with a passion for thrift ("I never suffered a peachpit to be thrown away, nor ate an apple without saving the seeds to plant" [Journal of Discourses, 10:335:64], who practiced and preached as the watchword of his economy the slogan, "Never count the cost"? How could you make him believe that the same dynamic character, whose astounding accomplishments have made his name a synonym for work, used to admonish his people: "Work less, wear less, eat less, and we shall be a great deal wiser, healthier, and wealthier people"? (Journal of Discourses, 12:122:27.) How could you ask him to take seriously the multi-millionaire who declares, "I have never walked across the street to make a trade. I do not care anything much about such things"? (Journal of Discourses, 12:218f:68). Or the devoted family man who advised missionaries to follow his example and put all thought of family from their minds: "I am not bound to wife or child, to house or farm, or anything else on the face of the earth but the Gospel of the Son of God"? (Journal of Discourses, 14:19:70.) Here is the great leader who is utterly contemptuous of his "image": "I care not one groat whether they believe all that I say or not, or whether they love me or not; I have no concern about that...." (Journal of Discourses, 10:302:64.) Here is the mall who worked himself almost to death to get the Nauvoo Temple built Oil time, and then rejoiced to see it in flames: "I was thankfull to see the Temple in Nauvoo on fire....When I saw the flames, I said, 'Good, Father, if you want it to be burned up....'" (Journal of Discourses, 8:203:60.)There is no paradox in all this. Brigham Young was able to master the things of the world because he would not let them master him: he took the measure of a world that could never understand him. It is not a case of physical versus "spiritual" values, but of eternal things, physical or not, versus things we know to be passing and therefore unworthy of our ultimate dedication. "What is the earth in its present condition? Nothing but a place in which we may learn the first lesson towards exaltation, and that is obedience to the Gospel of the Son of God." (Journal of Discourses, 14:232:71.) That makes education the purpose of our life-a special kind of education. "...The world are seeking after the paltry, perishable things of time and sense... they are their glory-their pretended comfort-their God. and their daily study and pursuit." (Journal of Discourses, 6:40:57.) But not for us! "Seek. first the kingdom of God ... and let the gold and silver, the houses, the lands, the horses, the chariots, the crowns, the thrones, and the dominions of this world be dead to you .... " (Journal of Discourses, l:266:53.) "The Latter-day Saints have been driven from their homes, and their goods have been spoiled; but they esteem this as nothing. What do we care for houses and lands and possessions? The whole earth is before us and all the fulness thereof." (Journal of Discourses, 11:16:64.)That sounds like another paradox: we do not mind the loss of earthly things as long as we get possession of the whole earth! Yes, but in the proper way: "While the inhabitants of the earth are bestowing all their ability, both mental and physical, upon perishable objects, those who profess to be Latter-day Saints, who have the privilege of receiving and understanding the principles of the holy Gospel, are in duty bound to study and find out, and put in practice in their lives, those principles that are calculated to endure, and that tend to a continual increase in the world to come." (Journal of Discourses, 2:91:53.) "As I said yesterday to a Bishop who was mending a breach in the canal, and expressed a wish to continue his labor on the following Sabbath, as his wheat was burning up, 'Let it burn, when the time comes that is set apart for worship, go up and worship the Lord.'" (Journal of Discourses, 3:331:56.) "... Let the kitchens take care of themselves, and let the barns, the flocks and herds take care of themselves, and if they are destroyed while you are praying, be able freely to say, 'Go, they are the Lord's.'..." (Journal of Discourses, 3:53:55.) The treasures of the earth are merely to provide us with room and board while we are here at school; being "made for the comfort of the creature, not for his adoration. They are made to sustain and preserve the body while148procuring the knowledge and wisdom that pertain to God and his kingdom, in order that we may preserve ourselves, and live forever in his presence." (Journal of Discourses, 8:134f:60.)The astonishing thing is that Brigham Young, as his behavior demonstrated on innumerable occasions, really believed what be preached; which goes far [in] explaining his brilliant success in surmounting the most terrifying obstacles. "The Gospel of life and salvation reveals to each individual who receives it that this world is only a place of temporary duration, existence, trials, [and so forth]. Its present fashion and uses are but for a few days, while we were created to exist eternally." (Journal of Discourses, 5:53: 57.) That is the basic idea which resolves the paradoxes of Brigham Young's philosophy. No one grants more readily than this supremely practical man of affairs that "the things of this world add to our national comfort, and are necessary to sustain mortal life," and that "we need these comforts to sustain our earthly existence"; but none is more emphatic in insisting that "those things have nothing to do with the spirit, feeling, consolation, light, glory, peace, and joy that pertains to heaven and heavenly things, which are the food of the everliving spirit within us. This I know by experience. I know that the things of this world, from beginning to end, from the possession of mountains of gold down to a crust of johnnycake, make little or no difference in the happiness of an individual." (Journal of Discourses, 7:135:59.) So we live two lives at once, taking care to keep our values straight: "I have a being and a life here; and this life is very valuable; it is a most excellent life! I have a future! I am living for another existence that is far above this sinful world." (Journal of Discourses, 13:220:70.)

The Expanding Mind: -Brigham Young was the Prophet Joseph's most faithful disciple; their teachings are one as the minds of the saints and prophets have always been one. Before he met Joseph Smith, Brigham recalls, "the secret feeling of my heart was that I would be willing to crawl around the earth on my hands and knees, to see such a man as Peter, Jeremiah, Moses, or any man that could tell me anything about God and heaven." (Journal of Discourses, 8:228:60.) And then "when I saw Joseph Smith, he took heaven, figuratively speaking, and brought it down to earth; and he took the earth, brought it up, and opened up, in plainness and simplicity, the things of God; and that is the beauty of his mission." (Journal of Discourses, 5:332:57.) It was a mind-stretching religion: "Thy mind, O man!" said the Prophet, "if thou wilt lead a soul to salvation, must stretch as high as the utmost heavens, and search into and contemplate the darkest abyss, and the broad expanse of eternity." (Joseph Fielding Smith, ed., Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1942., p. 137.)<_P> The promise he gave to those who took the Gospel and the cause of Judah to heart was that "your minds will expand wider arid wider, until you can circumscribe the earth and the heavens ... and contemplate the mighty acts of Jehovah in all their variety and glory." (Joseph Fielding Smith, ed., Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1942., p. 163.) What attests to him the divinity of the Bible is that it is "so much beyond the narrow-mindedness of men, that every man is constrained to exclaim: 'It came from God!'" (Joseph Fielding Smith, ed., Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1942., p. 11.) The Holy Ghost, the ultimate teacher, "has no other effect than pure intelligence. It is more powerful in expanding the mind, enlightening the understanding, and storing the intellect with present knowledge .... It is... the pure light of intelligence." (Joseph Fielding Smith, ed., Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1942., p. 39.) Mind and heart must expand together, according to the Prophet: "... You must enlarge your souls towards each other .... Let your hearts expand, let them be enlarged towards others." (Joseph Fielding Smith, ed., Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1942., p. 228.) For not only is "the mind or intelligence which man possesses ... coequal with God himself" in time (Joseph Fielding Smith, ed., Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1942. p. 353), but "all the minds and spirits that God ever sent into the world are susceptible of enlargement ... so that they have one glory upon another .... "(Joseph Fielding Smith, ed., Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1942. p. 354.)

This was what Brigham Young learned from his beloved Joseph as he "continued to receive revelation upon revelation, ordinance upon ordinance, truth upon truth...." (Journal of Discourses, 16:42:43) It was all good news: "What are we here for?149To learn to enjoy more, and to increase in knowledge and experience." (Journal of Discourses, 14:228:71.) Learning is our proper calling: "We shall never cease to learn, unless we apostatize .... Can you understand that?" (Journal of Discourses, 3:203:56.) "God has given us mental and physical powers to be improved ..." (Journal of Discourses, 10:231:63), and along with them "our senses, if properly educated, are channels of endless felicity to us...." (Journal of Discourses, 9:244:62.) All systems are "go" for the expanding mind: "Let us not narrow ourselves up; for the world, with all its variety of useful information and its rich hoard of hidden treasure, is before us; and eternity, with all its sparkling intelligence, lofty aspirations, and unspeakable glories, is before us." (Journal of Discourses, 8:9:10.) The news is all good-forever: "And when we have passed into the sphere where Joseph is, there is still another department, and then another, and another, and so on to an eternal progression in exaltation and eternal lives. This is the exaltation I am looking for." (Journal of Discourses, 3:375:56.) "... When we have lived millions of years in the presence of God and angels ... shall we cease learning? No, or eternity ceases." (Journal of Discourses, 6:344:59.) First and last, the gospel is learning unlimited.

We Try Harder:-The Mormons were late-comers in the learning game, and it is not hard to see why: "Most of the people called Latter-day Saints have been taken from the rural and manufacturing districts of this and the old countries, and they belonged to the poorest of the poor." (Journal of Discourses, 14:103:69.) "We have gathered the poorest class of men to be found on the continent of America, and I was one of them; and we have gathered the same class from Europe...." (Journal of Discourses, 14:121:71.) "I never went to school but eleven days in my life." (Journal of Discourses, 13:149:69); "I am a man of few words and unlearned in the learning of this generation." (Journal of Discourses, 9:287:62.) "Brother Heber and I never went to school until we got into 'Mormonism': that was the first of our schooling." (Journal of Discourses, 5:97:57.) Such men, coming of age in the flowering of their native New England, hungered for the things of the mind, the more so since they had been denied them: "... we are all of the laboring and middle class. There are but few in this Church who are not of the laboring class, and they have not had the opportunity to cultivate their minds..." (Journal of Discourses, 6:70f:57); yet they felt strongly "the necessity of the mind being kept active and having the opportunity of indulging in every exercise it can enjoy in order to attain to a full development of its powers." (Journal of Discourses, 13:61:69.) Mormonism gave them their great chance, as it sought, in the words of Joseph Smith, "to inspire every one who is called to be a minister of these glad tidings, to so improve his talent that he may gain other talents." (Joseph Fielding Smith, ed., Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1942. p. 48.)

If they were late starters, the gospel gave the Saints certain advantages which might even enable them to overhaul the more privileged. For one thing, they had motivating zeal: "Take those who are in the enjoyment of all the luxuries of tills life, and their ears are stopped up; they cannot hear; but go to the poor ... and they are looking every way for deliverance ....Their ears are opened and their hearts are touched .... These are they that we gather." (Journal of Discourses, 12: 256: 68.) True, "very few of the learned or of those who are high and lifted up in the estimation of the people receive the Gospel" (Journal of Discourses, 14:75:70); but that is all to the good, since such haughtiness can be paralyzing. God is now working with rough but reliable materials: "The beginning of this dispensation of the fulness of times may well be compared to the commencement of a temple, the material of which it is to be built being still scattered, unshaped and unpolished, in a state of nature." (Journal of Discourses, 12:161:68.) "A spirit and power of research is planted within, yet they remain undeveloped." (Journal of Discourses, 7:1:59.) "When we look at the Latter-day Saints and remember that they have been taken from the coal pits, from the ironworks, from the streets, from the kitchens and from the barns and factories and from hard service in the countries where they formerly lived, we cannot wonder at their ignorance." (Journal of Discourses, 14:38: 70.)

But if their ignorance is not to be wondered at, neither is it to be condoned. Without a moment's delay the newly converted Saints were put to work on a grandiose intellectual project, which was nothing less than the salvaging of world civilization! As Brigham puts it, "the business of the Elders of this Church150(Jesus, their elder brother, being at their head), is to gather up all the truths in the world pertaining to life and salvation, to the Gospel we preach, to mechanisms of every kind, to the sciences, and to philosophy, wherever they may be found in every nation, kindred, tongue and people, and bring it to Zion." (Journal of Discourses, 7:283f:59.) The "Gathering" was to be not only a bringing together of people, but of all the treasures surviving in the earth from every age and culture; "Every accomplishment, every polished grace, every useful attainment in mathematics, music, in all science and art belong to the Saints, and they rapidly collect the intelligence that is bestowed upon the nations, for all this intelligence belongs to Zion. All the knowledge, wisdom, power, and glory that have been bestowed upon the nations of the earth, from the days of Adam till now, must be gathered home to Zion." (Journal of Discourses, 8:279:60.) "What is this work? The improvement of the condition of the human family." (Journal of Discourses, 19:46:77.) But why do the poor struggling Saints have to do it? Because "the Lord has taken the weak things of the world to confound the wise" (Journal of Discourses, 14:38:70), and especially because the rest of the world is no longer up to it.

It was a daring concept, but one fully justified by history, that once "the Lord has bestowed great knowledge and wisdom upon the inhabitants of the earth much truth in the arts and sciences," it is quite possible for such treasures to be lost: "This wisdom will be taken away from the wicked" and once it is gone, "I question," says the far-seeing Brigham Young, "whether it would return again." To this impressive bit of historical insight he adds an exciting suggestion: "My faith and my desire are that there should be a people upon the earth prepared to receive this wisdom. It should not be forfeited as to be taken from the earth." (Journal of Discourses, 8:319:61.) The concept (recalling James Hilton's Lost Horizon) is an ancient one, being the idea, for example, behind the Cabbala. Repeatedly Brother Brigham admonishes the Saints that if they are to carry out such a task they must in time come to equal and even excel the learning of the world. They can do it if they work like demons: "Put forth your ability to learn as fast as you can, and gather all the strength of mind and principle of faith you possibly can, and then distribute your knowledge to the people." (Journal of Discourses, 8:146:60.) If the world seems far ahead of us, remember, "we are not as ignorant as they are" because, like Socrates, we acknowledge our ignorance and know where we stand. (14:38f:70.) If the Saints "have not had an opportunity to cultivate their minds," neither had they "been educated in the devilry and craft of the learned classes of mankind," to hold them back. (Journal of Discourses, 6:70f:57.) Joseph Smith had assured them that "there is a superior intelligence bestowed upon such as obey the Gospel" (Joseph Fielding Smith, ed., Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1942., p. 67), and Brigham promised them, "There is nothing the Saints can ask, or pray for, that will aid them in their progress... that will not be granted unto them, if they will only patiently struggle on." (11:14:65.)

That last point, the patient struggling, was the rub. President Young kept after his people all the time: "After suitable rest and relaxation there is not a day, hour or minute that we should spend in idleness, but every minute of every day of our lives should strive to improve our minds and to increase our faith in the holy gospel." (13:310:70.) A year after the arrival in the valley, Brigham Young copied down in his journal a letter which Parley P. Pratt had written to his brother back East describing the new society: "All is quiet-stillness. No elections, no police reports, no murders, no war nor little war .... No policeman has been on duty to guard us from external or internal dangers .... Here we can cultivate the mind, renew the spirit, invigorate the body, cheer the heart and ennoble the soul of man. Here we can cultivate every science and art calculated to enlarge the mind, accommodate the body, or polish and adorn our race; and here we can receive and extend that pure intelligence which is unmingled with the jargon of mystic Babylon." (Brigham Young Hist., Aug. 23, 1848, p. 57.)<_P> [^8] Wonderful to relate, for the ever practical151Brigham and the struggling pioneers the improvement of the mind always came first. Brigham laid it on the line: "All who do not want to sustain cooperation and fall into the ranks of improvement, and endeavor to improve themselves by every good book" were invited to leave the community. (Journal of Discourses, 13:4:69.) The challenge of nature was not the real issue "the greatest and most important labour we have to perform is to cultivate ourselves." (Journal of Discourses, 10:359:64.)

The Universal Curriculum: What the Church most urgently needed at the start was what might be culled "missionary learning." It makes perfectly good sense to insist that "We should be familiar with the various languages, if we wish to send to the different nations and to the islands of the sea" (Journal of Discourses, 8:40:60), or that all spend "a certain portion of the time... in storing their minds with useful knowledge," by "reading the Bible, Book of<_P> Mormon, and other church works, and histories, scientific works and other useful books." (Journal of Discourses, 18:75:75.) At an early lime Brigham Young suggested the formation of independent study groups among the people: "... Call in your brethren, and read the Bible, the Book of Mormon, the Book of Covenants, and the other revelations of God in them; and talk over the things contained in those books, and deal them out to your brethren and neighbors." (Journal of Discourses, 1:47:52.) More formal schooling hail ever an eye to the mission field: "... In our schools, all our educational pursuits are in the service of God, for all these labors are to establish truth on the earth..." (Journal of Discourses, 13:260:70), specifically, "that our young men when they go out to preach, may not be so ignorant as they have hitherto." (Journal of Discourses, 12:31 or 406:67.) Good missionaries should know things: "I do not wish to be understood as throwing a straw in the way of the Elders' storing their minds with all the arguments they can gather... (or) learning all they can with regard to religions and governments. The more knowledge the Elders have the better." (Journal of Discourses, 8:53:54.) After all, Joseph Smith had said that the mind of one who "would lead a soul unto salvation, must stretch as high as the utmost heavens .... "( Joseph Fielding Smith, ed., Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1942., p. 137.)

But articulate and informed missionaries do not issue forth from a community of ignoramuses Zion itself must be the central hearth and home of a broad and flourishing culture: "There is a great work for the Saints to do. Progress, and improve upon, and make beautiful everything around you. Cultivate the earth and cultivate your minds." (Journal of Discourses, 8:83:60.)"Now if we can take the low and degraded and elevate them in their feelings, language and manners; if we can impart to them the sciences that are in the world, teach them all that books contain, and in addition to all this. teach them the principles that are eternal, and calculated to make them a beautiful community, lovely in their appearance, intelligent in every sense of the word, would you not say that our system is praiseworthy and possesses great merit?" (Journal of Discourses, 13:176:70.)

For Brigham, the proper study of<_P> mankind is everything: "This is the belief and doctrine of the Latter-day Saints: Learn everything that the children of men know .... "( Journal of Discourses, 16:77:73.) It all comes under the heading of our religion, which "circumscribes all art, science, and literature pertaining to heaven, earth, and bell. Is there any good? It belongs to you and me. Is there virtue? It is ours. Is there truth? It is ours. Is there knowledge? It is for us." (Journal of Discourses, 12:257:68.) "Every accomplishment, every grace, every useful attaiment in mathematics, in all science and art belong to the Saints and they should avail themselves as expeditiously as possible of the wealth of knowledge the sciences offer to the diligent and persevering scholar." (Journal of Discourses, 10:224:63.)

A favorite with LDS schoolmen has been Brigham Young's declaration that "Every art and science known and studied by the children of men is comprised within the Gospel." (Journal of Discourses, 12:257:68.) But this does not mean, as is commonly assumed, that anything one chooses to teach is the gospel that would be as silly as arguing that since all things are made of electrons, protons, neutrons, and so forth, whenever anyone opens his mouth to speak he gives a lecture on physics. It means rather that all things may be studied and taught in the light of the gospel: "... If an Elder shall give us a lecture upon astronomy, chemistry, or geology,152our religion embraces it all. It matters trot what the subject be, if it tends to improve the mind, exalt the feelings, and enlarge the capacity." (Journal of Discourses, 1:335:53.) It would be quite impossible to improve the mind, exalt the feelings and enlarge the capacity of any man without making him a better candidate for heaven-"it matters not what the subject be." By the same token, the reading of the scriptures if not undertaken in that spirit does not belong to our religion: "'Shall I sit down and read the Bible, the Book of Mormon, and the Book of Covenants all the time?' says one, Yes, if you please, and when you have done you may be nothing but a sectarian after all. It is your duty to study everything upon the face of the earth, in addition to reading those books." (Journal of Discourses, 2:93f:53.)

"Everything on the face of the earth" is a large order, and Brigham was no fool; he knew perfectly well that "the most learned men that ever lived on the earth have only been able to obtain a small amount of knowledge," (Journal of Discourses, 3:354:56), and that time, patience and method are necessary to bring the Saints around: "As Saints in the last days we have much to learn; there is an eternity of knowledge before us; at most we receive but very little in this stage of our progression." (Journal of Discourses, 3:354:56.) There must be a priority of things to he learned, which is what curriculum is all about: "We wish to have our young boys and girls taught in the different branches of an English education, and in other languages, and in the various sciences, all of which will eventually be taught in this school." (Journal of Discourses, 12:116:67.) "We also wish them to understand the geography, habits, customs, and laws of nations and kingdoms, whether they be barbarian or civilized. This is recommended in the revelations Let them be more informed in every department of true and useful learning than their fathers are .... "( Journal of Discourses, 8:9:60.)

Immediately after arriving in the valley President Young recommended "securing at least a copy of every valuable treatise on education-every book, map, chart, or diagram that may contain interesting, useful, and attractive matter, to gain the attention of children, and cause them to love to learn to read"; this includes "every historical, mathematical, philosophical, geographical, geological, astronomical, scientific, practical, and all other variety of useful and interesting writings." (Millennial Star 10:85:48.) To train "the whole man" was his object from the first: "Let us make mechanics of our boys and educate them in every useful branch of science and in history and laws of kingdoms and nations .... "( Journal of Discourses, 10:270:63.)He was always fascinated with problems of communication, on which he had some interesting theories, including the improvement of English phonology: "I would also like our school teachers to introduce phonography into every school .... This is a delightful study! In these and all other branches of science and education we should know as much as any people in the world." (Journal of Discourses, 12:32:67 or 407:67.)

But curriculum is a game for little minds; the important thing for Brigham is that the Saints use their new-found liberty and revel as he did in the things of the mind. The starving man eats thankfully what he can get and does not quibble for hours over the menu and etiquette. The decisive factor is a passion for the things of the mind: "We believe ... that every man and woman should have the opportunity of developing themselves [sic] mentally as well as physically. In the present condition of the world this privilege is only accorded to a few." (Deseret News, May 23, 1877.) Learning is a privilege to be eagerly exploited: "If we can have the privilege we will enrich our minds with knowledge, filling these mortal tenements with the rich treasures of heavenly wisdom." (Millennial Star 24:630:62.) The proper priority of study is not as important as study itself: "If it would do any good, I would advise you to read books that are worth reading," but "I would rather that persons read novels than read nothing" (Journal of Discourses, 9:173:63)-reading nothing being the normal outcome of waiting on the Curriculum Committee.

Use Your Brains!-As the strong man loveth to run a race, so Brigham loved to exercise his brains, and constantly appealed to the people to do the same: "We are trying to teach this people to use their brains .... "( Journal of Discourses, 11:328:67.) "I pray to the Lord for you; I pray for you to get153wisdom-worldly wisdom." (Journal of Discourses, 10:296:64.) Every problem was to be approached as a mental problem, an exciting game of wits: "Whatever duty yon are called to perform, take your minds with you, and apply them to what is to be done." (Journal of Discourses, 8:137:60.) Proper pioneering takes as much brain as brawn. Intelligence is not only useful, it is a high moral quality, a holy thing, an attribute to God himself: "If men would be great in goodness" Brigham Young wrote in his "History," "they must be intelligent....," [^9] And he records in the same work that Joseph Smith prayed for the leaders of the Church "that God may grant unto them wisdom and intelligence, that his kingdom may roll forth." [^10] And so he appeals to the people: "When you come to meeting, bring your minds with you.... I want your minds here as well as your bodies." (Journal of Discourses, 8:137:60.)

To use one's brains is to think for one's self: "Ladies and gentlemen, I exhort you to think for yourselves, and read your Bibles for yourselves, get the Holy Spirit for yourselves, and pray for yourselves." (Journal of Discourses, 11: 127:65.) The appeal has been repeated by every president of the Church. "The catalogue of a man's discipline," says Brigham the sound psychologist, "he must compile for himself; he cannot be guided by any rule that others may lay down, but is under the necessity of tracing it himself through every avenue of his life. He is obliged to catechize and train himself." (Journal of Discourses, 6:315:52.) Even virtue is not too high a price to pay for individual responsibility: "Every mortal being must stand up as an intelligent, organized capacity, and choose or refuse the good, and thus act for himself .... All must have the opportunity, no matter if all go into the depths of wickedness." (Journal of Discourses, 8:352:61 .) We can never grow as long as we are "other-directed": "Pay no attention to what others do; it is no matter what they do, or how they dress." (Journal of Discourses, 15:162:72.) A favorite saying of Brigham Young's was that "Men are organized to be just as independent as any being in eternity .... "( Journal of Discourses, 3:316:56.) No one was a more passionate advocate of temperance than he, but when in his youth be was asked to sign a temperance pledge he absolutely refused: "I said, 'I do not need to sign the temperance pledge.' I recollect my father urged me. 'No sir,' said I, 'if I sign the temperance pledge l feel that I am bound, and I wish to do just right, without being bound to it: I want my liberty... ! What do you say? Is it correct?" (Journal of Discourses, 14:225:71 .) "... It would be useless for anybody to undertake to drive me to heaven or bell. My independence is sacred to me-it is u portion of that same Diety that rules in the heavens." (Journal of Discourses, 10:191:63.) Again, it was Joseph Smith who led the way: "...All have the privilege of thinking for themselves upon all matters relating to conscience .... We are not disposed, had we the power, to deprive anyone of exercising that free independence of mind which heaven has so graciously bestowed upon the human family as one of its choicest gifts." (Joseph Fielding Smith, ed., Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1942., p. 49.)

President Young tried to make the meetings of the Saints stimulating and adult affairs instead of humdrum routines. For one thing, "It may sometimes be just as good and profitable to stay at home as to come to meeting. I do not believe that those who stay at home are, in many instances, any worse than those who come to meeting, nor that those who come to meeting are particularly better than those who stay home." (10:349:64.) "If any of you feel that there is no life in your meetings... then it becomes your duty to go and instill life into that meeting and do your part to produce an increase of the Spirit and the power of God in the meetings in your locality." (Journal of Discourses, 10:309:64.) And even at Conference: "... If any of you are not instructed to your satisfaction, be so kind as to send up a card to the stand, intimating your desire to speak, and we will give you an opportunity of doing so, to display your wisdom; for we wish to learn wisdom and get understanding." (Journal of Discourses, 12:124:67.)

On the other hand, be rebukes senseless applause and even dampens the patriotic ardor of a 24th of July gathering: "I have noticed that people there applaud and boys whistle154when there was nothing to elicit their approbation; and I would say that it would be very gratifying to my feelings if such useless, noisy, and uncalled for demonstrations were discontinued." (Millennial Star 31:571:69.) Even high spirits and firecrackers are no excuse for turning off one's brains: "I ask... all the boys under a hundred years of age-never to applaud unless they know what they are applauding. It is confusing, bewildering, and making a noise without understanding." (Millennial Star 30:550:68.) Empty-headed laughter pleases him not: "Never give way to vain laughter .... I always blush for those who laugh aloud without meaning." (Journal of Discourses, 9:290:62.) Children at meeting, even to attest to the growth of Zion, do not delight him: "I cannot understand the utility of bringing children into such a congregation...just for the sake of pleasing the mothers...." (Journal of Discourses, 13:343:70.) "If you cannot, for the space of two or three hours, forego the pleasure of gazing upon the faces of your little darlings, just stay at home with them." (Journal of Discourses, 13:344:70.)

Celestial Learning:-No matter where we begin, if we pursue knowledge diligently and honestly our quest will inevitably lead us from the things of earth to the things of heaven. All science is cosmology, says Karl Popper, and, we add, all cosmology is eschatology. For Brigham Young, since all knowledge can be encompassed in one whole, the spectrum of secular study blends imperceptibly with the knowledge of the eternities: "... In our schools fill our educational pursuits are in the service of God, for all these labors are: 1) to establish truth on the earth, and 2) that we may increase in knowledge, wisdom, understanding in the power of faith and in the wisdom of God, 3) that we may become fit subjects to dwell in a higher state of existence and intelligence than we now enjoy." (Journal of Discourses, 13:260:70.) Note well that secular learning is sanctified only if it [is] approached in a certain spirit. Only that knowledge belongs to the gospel which is viewed and taught as such-as all knowledge should be. "...God has created man with a mind capable of instruction," according to Joseph Smith, "and a faculty which may be enlarged in proportion to the heed and diligence given to the light communicated from heaven to the intellect ...." (Joseph Fielding Smith, ed., Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1942., p. 51 .)

There are three factors involved: intelligence, revelation, and hard work, and if the spirit may help in earthly learning, the mind is required to operate in celestial matters. The learning process begun in this life carries on into the next: "...And when we pass through the veil, we expect still to continue to learn and increase our fund of information." (Journal of Discourses, 6:286:52.) The Saints must first learn "everything that the children of men know," and then go on and "improve upon this until we are prepared and permitted to enter the society of the blessed-the holy angels." (Journal of Discourses, 16:77:73.) This is done by pursuing a steady course that leads from the earthly to the heavenly without a break: "We should not only learn the principles of education known to mankind, but we should reach out further than this, learning to live so that our minds will gather in information from the heavens and the earth until we can incorporate in our faith and understanding all knowledge." (Journal of Discourses, 12:172:68.) "...Teach the children; give them the learning of the world and the things of God; elevate their minds, that they may not only understand the earth we walk on, but the air we breathe, the water we drink, and all the elements pertaining to the earth; and then search other worlds, and become acquainted with the planetary systems." Not stopping there, they are to go on to discover "the dwellings of the angels and heavenly beings, that they may ultimately be prepared for a higher state of being, and finally be associated with them." (Journal of Discourses, 14:210:71.) "It is the privilege of man to search out the wisdom of God pertaining to the earth and the heavens." (Journal of Discourses, 9:242:62.) "... Learn the wisdom of the world and the wisdom of God, and put them together and you will be able to benefit yourselves." (Journal of Discourses, 12:313:68,) "We try to so live as to gain more information, more light, more command over ourselves...until we can comprehend the great principles of existence and eternal progression." (Journal of Discourses, 9:254: 62.)

Such a concept has, of course, no conflict with science. The motto of the Royal Society,155Nullus in verba "we take no man's word for anything" -is even more strongly expressed in the first editorial to appear in the Times and Seasons-written by Brigham Young: "Remember, Brethren, that no man's opinion is worth a straw." Brigham is a man who wants to know: "The object of this existence is to learn ....How gladly would we understand every principle pertaining to science and art, and become thoroughly acquainted with every intricate operation of nature, and with all the chemical changes that are constantly going on around us! How delightful it would be, and what a boundless field of truth and power is open for us to explore! We are only just approaching the shores of the vast ocean of information that pertains to this physical world, to say nothing of that which pertains to the heavens." (Journal of Discourses, 9:167:62.) "Send the old children to school and the young ones also; there is nothing I would like better than to learn chemistry, botany, geology, and mineralogy...." (Journal of Discourses, 16: 170:73.) "In these respects we differ from the Christian world, for our religion will not clash with or contradict the facts of science in any particular. You may take geology, for instance, and it is a true science; not that I would say for a moment that all the conclusions and deductions of its professors are true [opinions are not facts!], but its leading principles are ...."( Journal of Discourses, 14:116:71.)

The basic common-sense of science appeals to Brigham Young as being sound and true. He took the shocking position that God works on scientific principles: "If I had the skill... to construct a machine" to pass through "the atmosphere as they do now on the terra firma on the railway, would there be any harm in acknowledging God in this?" (Journal of Discourses, 12:260:68.) When "the elements shall melt with Fervent heat, the Lord Almighty will send forth his angels, who are well instructed in chemistry, and they will separate the elements and make new combinations thereof." (Journal of Discourses, 15:127:72.) That was an outrageous statement both from a religious and a scientific viewpoint a hundred years ago. He also propounded a doctrine which has only recently been brought to the fore by such scientists as Giorgio Santillana: "The people of this day think they know more than all who have preceded them-that this is the wisest generation that ever lived on the earth .... But there is no question that many things of great worth known anciently have been lost .... " (Journal of Discourses, 13:305F:70.)

The Facts of Life-Brigham Young's sanguine discourses on education were meant to stir his people up and shame them out of their intellectual lethargy. No one knew better than be the weaknesses of human nature ("Mankind are weak and feeble, poor and needy; how destitute they are of true knowledge, how little they have when they have any at all!" [Journal of Discourses, 3:343:56]); the hebetude of minds used to having others think for them ("... The great masses of the people neither think nor act For themselves .... I see too much of this gross ignorance among this chosen people of God" [Journal of Discourses, 9:295:62]); the hesitancy of the uprooted, tending either "to hide ourselves up from the world" or "to pattern after the people they had left-both wrong (Millennial Star 29:756f:67); the smugness of the Chosen People, who "imagine that they must begin and unlearn the whole of their former education" (Journal of Discourses, 3:204:56), and who expect God to give them everything on a platter: "Have I any good reason to say to my Father in heaven, 'Fight my battles,' when He has given me the sword to wield, the arm and the brain that I can fight for myself?" (Journal of Discourses, 12:240f:68.) The Saints were much too easily satisfied with themselves: "How vain and trifling have been our spirits, our conferences, our councils, our meetings, our private as well as public conversations," wrote the Prophet Joseph from Liberty Jail," -too low, too mean, too vulgar, too condescending for the dignified characters of the called and chosen of God."<_P> [^11] "Condescending" means settling for inferior goods to avoid effort and tension. Brigham hated that: "That diffidence or timidity we must dispense with. When it becomes our duty156to talk, we ought to be willing to talk .... Interchanging our ideas and exhibiting that which we believe and understand affords an opportunity for detecting and correcting errors" the expanding mind must be openly and frankly critical, come hell or High Council (Journal of Discourses, 6:95:57); without that we get "too much of a sameness in this community" (13:153:69)-"I am not a stereotyped Latter-day Saint, and do not believe in the doctrine .... Are we going to stand still? Away with stereotyped 'Mormons'"! (Journal of Discourses, 8:185:60.)

But the foibles of human nature were but some of the timbers and cobblestones of the real barricade which the adversary has contrived to place in the way of learning. The Saints, gathered "from the poorest of the poor," had good reason to know that the imperious question put to all who presume to set foot on this world where Belial rules is not "Have you any knowledge?" (as in the ancient mysteries), but "Have you any money?" That is Satan's Golden Question. If the answer is "yes," well and good ("... for money answereth all things"), but if it is "no" you might as well be dead. That is the way things are set up here upon the earth; "...man has become so perverted as to debar his fellows as much as possible from these blessings, and constrain them by physical force or circumstances to contribute the proceeds of their labor to sustain the favored few." (Millennial Star 17:673:55.) It is no wonder that the Saints who had momentarily broken free from the system were obsessed with an overpowering drive to seek the only security this earth has to offer-wealth. And this passion, as Brigham Young tells them in a mounting crescendo of warning and appeal through the years, is the one absolute obstacle to their ever acquiring the knowledge they must seek.

Brigham discovered the basic conflict at an early age; he tells how at the age of nineteen he "sought for riches, but in vain; there was always something that kept telling me that happiness originated in higher pursuits." (Brigham Young Hist., p. xiv.) At the very beginning of the Church Joseph Smith noted that "God had often sealed up the heavens because of covetousness in the Church." (Joseph Fielding Smith, ed., Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1942., p. 9.) In 1855 Brigham Young pointed out the way in which love of knowledge and love of wealth, like antipathetical sets of glands, render each other ineffective: "It is possible for a man who loves the world to overcome that love, and get knowledge and understanding until he sees things as they really are, then he will not love the world but will see it as it is .... " (Journal of Discourses, 3:119:55.) In 1859: "I desire to see everybody on the track of improvement .... But when you so love your property... as though all your affections were placed upon the changing, fading things of earth, it is impossible to increase in knowledge of the truth." (Journal of Discourses, 7:337:59.) In 1860: "There are hundreds in this community who are more eager to become rich in the perishable things of this world than to adorn their minds... with a knowledge of things as they were, as they are, and as they are to come." (Journal of Discourses, 8:9:60.) In 1862: "No man who possesses the wealth of wisdom would worship the wealth of mammon." (Journal of Discourses, 10:3:62.) In 1863: If we go on "lusting after the grovelling [sic] things of this life which perish with the handling," we shall surely "remain fixed with a very limited amount of knowledge, and like a door upon its hinges, move to and fro from one year to another without any visible advancement or improvement .... Man is made in the image of God, but what do we know of him or of ourselves when we suffer ourselves to love and worship the god of tiffs world-riches?" (Journal of Discourses, 10:266f:63.) In 1866: "When you see the Latter-day Saints greedy, and covetous of the things of this world, do you think their minds are in a fit condition to be written upon by the pen of revelation?" (Journal of Discourses, 11:241:66.) In 1870: "We frequently hear our merchants say that they cannot do business and then go into the pulpit to preach." (Journal of Discourses, 13:308:70.) In 1872: "The man or woman who places the wealth of this world and the things of time in the scale against the things of God and the wisdom of eternity, has no eyes to see, no ears to hear, no heart to understand." (Journal of Discourses, 15:18:72.) In 1874:" ... The covetous, those who are striving continually to build themselves up in the things of this life, will be poor indeed; they will be poor in spirit and poor in heavenly things." (Journal of Discourses, 17:159:74.) 157

The Contracted Mind:-Over against the expanding mind, the Prophets placed the contracted mind: "... You must not be contracted, but you must be liberal in your feelings," Joseph Smith told the people (Joseph Fielding Smith, ed., Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1942., p. 228.) "How contracted the mind and shortsighted we must be," Brigham reflects, "to permit the perishable things of this world to swerve us in the least from our fidelity to truth." (Journal of Discourses, 11:283:67.) "Let us not narrow ourselves up; for the world, with all its variety of useful information and its rich hoard of hidden treasures, is before us." (Journal of Discourses, 8:9:60.) He illustrates this by the practice of constantly quoting a very limited number of scriptures to the exclusion of others equally important, and comments: "This same lack of comprehensiveness of mind is also very noticeable tit times with some men who happen to accumulate property, and it leads them to forsake the Spirit of the Gospel. Does it not prove that there is a contractedness of mind in those who do so, which should not be?" (Journal of Discourses, 11:283:67.) Business by its very nature is narrowing: "Take, for instance, the financial circles, the commerce of the world, those business men, where they have their opponents they... with all the secrecy of the grave, I might say, will seek to carry out their schemes unknown to their opponents, in order that they may win. Like the man at the table with the cards in his hands, unseen by any but himself, he will take advantage as far as he can. So says the politician. So say the world of Christendom, so say the world of the heathens, and it is party upon party, sect after sect, division upon division, and we are all for ourselves." (Journal of Discourses, 15:124:72.) "In our trading and trafficking we wish to confine the knowledge of our business in as small a limit as possible, that others may not know what we are doing .... We all wish to know something that our neighbors do not know. With scientific men you will often find the same trait of character; I know more than they know; I treasure this up to myself, and I am looked upon as a superior being, and that delights me." (Journal of Discourses, 17:52:74.)

Against this, "You see the noble man seeking the benefit of all around him, trying to bring, we will say, his servants, if you please, his tenants, to his knowledge, to like blessings that he enjoys, to dispense his wisdom and talents among them and make them equal to himself." (Journal of Discourses, 15:19:72.) "Keep your riches!" cries Brigham to the well-heeled Saints, "and with them I promise you leanness of soul, darkness of mind, narrow and contracted hearts, and the bowels of your compassion will be shut up...." (Journal of Discourses, 12:127:67.) Even so, Joseph Smith had warned against "those contracted feelings that influence the children of men" who judge each other "according to the narrow, contracted feelings of men" while "the Great Parent of the universe looks upon the whole of the human family with a fatherly care and paternal regard." (Joseph Fielding Smith, ed., Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1942., p. 218.)

For Brigham Young the contracted mind reached its bathos in the world of fashion: "But to see a people who say, 'We are the teachers of life and salvation,' and yet are anxious to follow the nasty, pernicious fashions of the day, I say it is too insipid to talk or think about. It is beneath the character of the Latter-day Saints that they should have no more independence of mind or feeling than to follow after the grovelling [sic] customs and fashions of the poor, miserable, wicked world." (Journal of Discourses, 13:4:69.) "To me the desire to follow the ever-varying fashions of the world manifests a great weakness of mind in either gentleman or lady." (Journal of Discourses, 14:16:70.) Again, it is the things of the world versus the things of the mind: "Mothers ... we will appoint you to a mission to teach your children their duty; and instead of ruffles and fine dresses to adorn the body, teach them that which will adorn their minds." (Journal of Discourses, 14:220f:71.) So the Prophet Joseph had told the sisters at the founding of the Relief Society, "This Society shall rejoice, and knowledge and intelligence shall flow down from this time forth," but only if they "don't envy the finery and fleeting show of sinners, for they are in a miserable situation." (Joseph Fielding Smith, ed., Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1942., p. 229.) Status symbols belong to the same category: "A good name! Bless me! what is a name? It may shine like the noonday sun ... today, and tomorrow be eclipsed in midnight darkness, to rise no more! The glory of the world passes away, but the glory that the Saints are after is that which158is to come in the eternal world." (Journal of Discourses, 14:77:70.) "In all nations, or at least in all civilized nations, there are distinctions among the people created by rank, titles, and property. How does God look upon these distinctions?" (Journal of Discourses, 14: 83:71 .)

The Impossible Marriage:-Misreading the case of the ancient patriarchs, whose wealth came and went and always hung by a thread, many of the Saints dreamed fondly of a happy wedding between the good things of this earth and the blessings of the next, and sought after the death of Brigham Young to bridge the unbridgeable gulf between Babylon and Zion. We cannot go into this here, but it should be clear by now that the search for knowledge, in Brigham's book, by its very nature must be pure and disinterested: "Will education feed and clothe you, keep you warm on a cold day, or enable you to build a house? Not at all. Should we cry clown education on this account? No. What is it for? The improvement of the mind: to instruct us in all the arts and sciences, in the history of the world, in the laws of how to be useful while we live." (Journal of Discourses, 14:83:71 .) It is the things of the mind that are really useful. "Truth, wisdom, power, glory, light and intelligence exist upon their own qualities; they do not, neither can they, exist on any other principle. Truth is congenial with itself, and light cleaves unto light .... It is the same with knowledge, and virtue, and all eternal attributes: they follow after each other. Truth cleaves unto truth because it is truth; and it is to be adored, because it is an attribute of God, for its excellence, for itself." (Journal of Discourses, 1:117:53.) There can be no ulterior motive in the study of heavenly things; "Knowledge is Power" is the slogan of a rascally world: "...What do you love truth for? Is it because you can discover a beauty in it, because it is congenial to you; or because you think it will make you a ruler, or a Lord? If you think that you will attain to power upon such a motive, you are much mistaken. It is a trick of the unseen power, that is abroad amongst the inhabitants of the earth, that leads them astray, binds their minds, and subverts their understanding." (Journal of Discourses, 1:117: 53.)

Here Brigham Young goes all the way: "Suppose that our Father in heaven, our elder brother, the risen Redeemer, the Savior of the world, or any of the Gods of eternity should act upon this principle, to love truth, knowledge, and wisdom, because they are all powerful...they would cease to be Gods; the extension of their kingdom would cease, and their Godhead come to an end." (Journal of Discourses, 1:117:53.) The Saints do what they do purely because the principles which God has revealed... are pure, holy and exalting in their nature." (Journal of Discourses, 16:70:73.) How can there be compromise with the world? "Shame on men and women, professing to be Saints, who worship and love the perishing things of earth." (Journal of Discourses, 7:271: 59.) "It is disgusting to me to see a person love this world in its present organization .... "(Millennial Star 12:275:50.) "Go to the child, and what does its joy consist in? Toys...and so it is with our youth, our young boys and girls; they are thinking too much of this world; and the middle-aged are striving and struggling to obtain the good things of this life, and their hearts are too much upon them. So it is with the aged. Is not this the condition of the Latter-day Saints? It is." (Journal of Discourses, 18:237:74.)

Staying After School:-The Latter-day Saints have always had a way of missing the bus: "Take the history of this Church from the commencement, and we have proven that we cannot receive all the Lord has for us." (Journal of Discourses, 11:103:65.) The trouble is that "these tabernacles are dull, subject to sin and temptation, and to stray from the kingdom of God and the ordinances of his house, to lust after riches, the pride of life, and the vanities of the world." (Journal of Discourses, 18:238:74.) "We may look upon ourselves with shamefacedness because of the smallness of our attainments in the midst of so many great advantages." (Journal of Discourses, 12:192:68.) "... In things pertaining to this life, the lack of knowledge manifested by us as a people is disgraceful." (Journal of Discourses, 11: 105:65.) "I have seen months and months in this city, when I could have wept like a whipped child to see the awful stupidity of the people...." (Journal of Discourses, 2:280:55.) "I feel like taking men and women by the hair of their heads, figuratively speaking, and slinging them miles and miles, and like crying, stop, before you ruin yourselves!" (Journal of Discourses, 3:225:56.) 159

In a now-classic study, R. Kaesemann showed that God's peculiar way of dealing with the Chosen People, ever stiff-necked and slow to learn, was to send them wandering in the wilderness. The Last Dispensation has proven no exception in this regard: "Some may ask why did we not tarry at the centre stake of Zion when the Lord planted our feet there? We had eyes, but we did not see; we had cars, but we did not hear: we had hearts that were devoid of what the Lord required of his people: consequently, we could not abide what the Lord revealed unto us. We had to go from there to gain an experience. Can you understand this?" (Journal of Discourses, 11:102:65.) "Could our brethren stay in Jackson County, Missouri? No, no. Why? They had not learned 'a' concerning Zion; and we have been traveling now forty-two years, and have we learned our a, b, c? ... I will say, scarcely." (Journal of Discourses, 15:4:72.) "I never attributed the driving of the Saints from Jackson County to anything but that it was necessary to chasten them and prepare them to build up Zion." (Journal of Discourses, 13:148:69.) "Are we fit for Zion?...Could we stay in Independence? No, we could not .... What is the matter with all you Latter-day Saints? Can the world see? No. Can the Saints see? No, or few of them can; and we can say that the light of the Spirit upon the hearts and understanding of some Latter-day Saints is like the peeping of the stars through the broken shingles of the roof over our heads." (Journal of Discourses, 15:3:72.)

The prophecies have not been revoked, but their fulfillment can be delayed, indefinitely, if need be, until all necessary conditions are fulfilled. The Saints "will take the kingdom, and possess it for ever and ever; but in the capacity they are now, in the condition that they now present themselves before God, before the world and before each other? Never, never!" (Journal of Discourses, 15:2:72.) "We are not yet prepared to go and establish the Centre Stake of Zion. The Lord tried this in the first place .... He gave revelation after revelation; but the people could not abide them. They do not know what to do with the revelations, commandments and blessings of God." (Journal of Discourses, 11:324f:67.) So though "this people will surely go back to Jackson County, they will none the less be hem back until they are ready-which may be a very long time." (Journal of Discourses, 3:279:56.)

"And so we have got to continue to labor, fight, toil, counsel, exercise faith, ask God over and over, and have been praying to the Lord for thirty-odd years for that which we might have received in one year." (11:300:67.) But there was nothing for it but to keep on plugging: "We are so organized that we need preaching to all the time. This is because of our weakness, and we shall have to bear with one another until we become stronger and wiser." (Journal of Discourses, 8:181:60.) We may give up and lose the blessings, but the prophecies and promises will all be fulfilled, and "if we do not wake up and cease to long after the things of this earth, we will find that we as individuals will go down to hell, although the Lord will preserve a people unto himself." (Journal of Discourses, 18:304:77.) "We may fail, if we are not faithful; but God will not fail in accomplishing his work, whether we abide it or not." (Journal of Discourses, 8:183:60.) "If we are not faithful, others will take our place; for this is the Church and people that will possess the kingdom for ever and ever. Shall we do this in our present condition as a people? No; for we must be pure and holy." (Journal of Discourses, 8:144:60.) "... If my brethren and sisters do not walk up to the principles of the holy Gospel...they will be removed out of their places, and others will be called to occupy them." (Journal of Discourses, 16:26:73.) It had already happened many times: "Of the great many who have been baptized into this Church, but few have been able to abide the word of the Lord; they have fallen out on the right and on the left ... and a few have gathered together." (Journal of Discourses, 11:324:67.) Joseph Smith stated the problem: "I have tried for a number of years to get the minds of the Saints prepared to receive the things of God," but they "will fly to pieces like glass as soon as anything comes that is contrary to their traditions: they still cannot stand the fire at all." (Joseph Fielding Smith, ed., Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1942., p. 331 .)

The Moral: -We have felt no necessity in this brief and sketchy survey for pointing out to the reader how Brigham Young's educational concepts stand out in brilliant contrast against the background of everything that is practiced and preached in our higher schools today. But the160moral of our story must not be overlooked: Brigham was right after all. As administrative problems have accumulated in a growing Church, the authorities have tended to delegate the business of learning to others, and those others have been only too glad to settle for the outward show, the easy and flattering forms, trappings and ceremonies of education. Worse still, they have chosen business-oriented, career-minded, degree-seeking programs in preference to the strenuous, critical, liberal, mind-stretching exercises that Brigham Young recommended. We have chosen the services of the hired image-maker in preference to unsparing self-criticism, and the first question the student is taught to ask today is John Dewey's golden question: "What is there in it for me?"

As a result, whenever we move out of our tiny, busy orbits of administration and display, we find ourselves in a terrifying intellectual vacuum. Terrifying, of course, only because we might be found out. But that is just the trouble: having defaulted drastically in terms of President Young's instructions, we now stand as a brainless giant, a pushover for any smart kid or cultist or faddist or crank who even pretends to have read a few books. That puts them beyond our depth and so we (I include myself) stand helplessly and foolishly by, dangling our bonner and plume while hundreds of students and missionaries, of members and enemies of the Church alike, presume to challenge and reject the teachings of Joseph Smith on evidence so flimsy that no half-educated person would give it a second thought. How can you hope to make these people see that the documents and discoveries they hail with such reverence and delight for the most part went out of date in the 1930s: that Huxley, Breasted, Wellhausen, and Frazer do not represent present-day scientific thought; that one book does not settle anything? No one has ever told them of the new discoveries which every month call for revision of established scientific and scholarly beliefs. No one has ever told them what it means to lay a proper foundation essential to any serious discussion of the things they treat so glibly and triumphantly. No one has ever told them of the millions of unread documents that already repose in our libraries, holding the answers to countless questions that must be asked before they can justify their instant conclusions. An awesome outpouring of newly discovered documents of direct bearing on the history and teachings of the Church is even now in full spate, amazing and confounding Jewish and Christian scholars, but bursting with good news for the Latter-day Saints who ignore them completely.

It is perfectly natural for the young who discover the world of scholarship for the first time to strike in their sophomoric zeal an intellectual pose, rail in high terms against the Church that has kept them in darkness all these years, and catalogue the defects and miscalculations of the Prophets in the light of their own scholarly elevation. That is perfectly natural, and if we had heeded Brigham Young, the urge to study and criticize would be running in fruitful channels. Whether we like it or not, we are going to have to return to Brigham Young's ideals of education; we may fight it all the way, but in the end God will keep us after school until we learn our lesson: "Behold, you have not understood; you have supposed that I would give it unto you, when you took no thought save it was to ask me. But, behold, I say unto you, that you must study it out in your own mind; then you must ask me if it be right .... "(D&C 9:7f.) 161

Truman G. Madsen [^12] Human Anguish and Divine Love

This topic is not a question or problem, not an academic toy. It is the human predicament, as we can show with three illustrations:

All this supposes that God both can and should prevent such misfortunes; that, indeed, a good and loving God would.

Let us look at the "can" before we look at the "should."

In a seminar at Harvard we were devoted to the analysis of St. Augustine's writings. And if you've read any of Augustine's confessions, you're aware that his early life, to say the least, was a traumatic and guilty one (more so, incidentally. than Joseph Smith's). In his doctrine of creation Augustine begins with a premise that God is all-powerful. To him that means all things, all else beside God, including space, time and the souls of men, were created by God from nothing. The puzzle arises as to why a being of unlimited power should have chosen to create such a universe as this: of pain, torment, and (on some views) endless damnation. Specifically, evil and the devil were among the realities God chose to create. Why, being good, could he-would he-do such a thing? This eventually led Augustine to the topic of freedom. How was it that God could make us from nothing and yet condemn us or reward us for actions? Why hold us responsible when he alone is responsible? "For," said one student in the class, "a God who is totally the cause of what is, is indirectly the cause of everything one does." At this point I raised my hand and said with a measure of restraint, "Isn't it at least conceivable that man is not totally the creation of God?" There was a roar of disapproval and162students began to hammer at me from both sides. When things quieted down, the professor said, "Well, the idea cannot be ruled out arbitrarily." But the idea is ruled out by the major wings of Christianity. Otherwise on their view God would not be absolute.

Actually, as soon as it is recognized, as in modern revelation it is, that there is more than one eternal will in the universe -indeed, an infinity of such wills or autonomous intelligences -we have cut the thread that supposes God can "do anything." In all-important ways even he, the greatest of all, can only do with us what we will permit him to do. Our center selves can agree or disagree, assent or resent, cooperate or oppose, To say, as the scriptures do, that God has all power and that he is almighty and that with him all things are possible is to say that he has all the power and might it is possible to have in this universe of multiple selves.

And as soon as it is recognized, as in modern revelation it is, that there are eternal inanimate things which are subject to laws, to "bounds and conditions" which God did not create but himself has mastered, we have cut another thread of illusory omnipotence, For on the extreme view of his power, whatever purpose lie may have had in creating everything from nothing, those same results could have come if he had created nothing from everything. To say "that is impossible" is to say with the Mormon that God cannot "do just anything." He can do only what our wills and eternal laws will permit. In short, he did not make us from nothing and what he makes of us depends on us and the ultimate nature of a coeternal universe.

Thus. we make it too simple when we say in an hour of slinging misfortune, "Couldn't God have prevented this?" The related issue is, ought he to? The "bounds and conditions" mean that if he prevents this he cannot achieve that.

For example, growth, expansion, development. You and I can only grow with stress and distress. There is no muscle without strain, no character without the fiery trials of action and conflict. "There must needs be opposition" not only implies an eternal resistance in the nature of things. It implies that man needs opposition in order to become what he has it in him to become.

So much on the "can."

Now on the "should."

Our outcry supposes that if we really were in charge, these things would never happen. But is that completely the case? Did we come into the world "without our own permission"? On the contrary.

We chose knowingly to enter our present state or sphere of existence. That's a fascinating idea. You may have heard a teenager who says shiftily, "I did not ask to be born," to which it can be truly replied, "Oh, yes, you did." There's another answer you can indulge for comic relief. When your child says, "I didn't ask to be born," you can say, "If you had, the answer would have been no."

We did knowingly elect, and not only choose and elect, but prepare for this world with its real risks, its real opportunities, and its real promises. And those who say they are in their second childhood are unwittingly speaking the truth.

The question thrown upward, "Why did you get me into this?" needs translation: "Why did I get me into this?"

Imagine, for a moment, what it might be like to have a close intimate friend who is sworn to stand by you and protect you, and maybe even die for you. Suppose he is a native era foreign country and has never heard of modern surgery.

If he were ushered into a room where you were undergoing an appendectomy, saw the doctors and nurses cutting away and the evidences of blood and pain, he would likely jump to three conclusions:

But, you see, he would not only be mistaken; his assumptions would, in fact, be the163exact opposite of the truth. These highly trained persons are intent on helping you. Truly, they could spare you the pain of the operation. But only at the cost of your life. It is at your request; and your willingness, even anxiety to "go through with it," however you might shrink, led you to sign a statement justifying any medical action they deemed proper while you were still incapable of further instructions (you might even have cautioned them, "Don't pay any attention to lily groans. Do what you have to do.") And third, the worst thing he would do would be to prevent or even to interrupt their carrying out their task.

Life is an obstacle course. And sometimes it is a spook alley. But the before was a time of visioning the after. And some of our prayers are like the gamblers', "Give me the money I made you promise not to give me if I asked for it." What does a true friend do in such a case? God will honor our first request, to let us go through it; and be will provide you with (let him) the way to make it bearable. More, to make it productive.

The Punitive Theory

Now, let me mention the theory about evil that we all theoretically reject. In practice it often still clings to us. We deny it of others, suspect it of ourselves. It's the so-called "punitive" theory of evil, to the effect that whenever someone suffers, it is because he deserves to. All misfortune is the product of sin. We "have it coming."

To be autobiographical for a moment, I recall an early clean-cut instance of temptation and submission. As a small fry, by jimmying my bank with a screwdriver, I recovered my small fortune of 17 cents, went to the store, and bought fig newtons. (You know, Angustine worries about the fact that he once stole pears. He spends a whole chapter on the question, what motivated him to steal? "Why did I do it?" My problem was figs.) Riding home on my tricycle-I must have been five or six-a hose or something in the sidewalk upset my bike, I tipped over, and badly stuffed my knee. What was my first thought? Yes, you know very well. So with all of us. And I submit that though you are now mature and no longer believe that all mishaps and suffering are retribution, still the thought lingers. "What have I done to deserve this?" Sometimes that is an appropriate question, and there is an answer. But I want to talk about the instances where the answer is not that you have in fact deserved it, but something else.

Now, since I've mentioned a classical theory, let me mention three others, which, as I believe, are misleading, even or especially when they contain a kernel of genuine insight.

Is Evil "All in Your Mind"?

One theory Which arises and is motivated by supreme reverence for the perfection of God is what is called the illusory theory; that all we call "evil" is but the phantom of our minds. It is not real. God, this view reasons, is perfect. Therefore, his creation is perfect. But there is nothing be did not create. Therefore, everything is perfect. This is the nerve of Christian Science, and characteristic of certain kinds of absolute idealism and certain strains of Buddhism. All concrete suffering is addressed with "It's all in your mind. You are a victim of error. If you saw aright, you would know that this world is perfect."

One reason this will not hold up is that in a perfectly good universe even the illusion of evil would not be present. We are imperfect in seeing it otherwise. Admit that imperfection and then why not others? Some of you, I think, in moments of puppy-love, may have heard impatient people say, "But you're not really in love. You just think you're in love." And you may have walked away saying to yourself, "Maybe so. But to me it could not have more impact if it were real." Haven't you ever wanted to say in response to, "It is all in your mind." "I would rather have it almost anywhere else?" Some mental illness is more resistant to treatment than physical.

Now there may be certain things we call evil that are not and vice versa. If there were time, a whole paper could be delivered on this. But that theory is not adequate. 164

Is It "The Point of View"?

A second theory is the perspective theory, especially evident in Leibniz and satirized by the Voltaire of Candide, a book that is painfully funny. What does Leibniz say? He says as Browning does at the end of his poem, "If God is in his heaven, all's right with the world." Under the aspect of eternity, the view of God, the "evil" is acceptable because this is the "best of all possible worlds." Evil is "compossible" with good to achieve a greater good. To which Bertrand Russell replies, "How do we know that good is not in the world to achieve a greater evil?" This theory differs from the illusory theory because it implies that if you get out of perspective, evil is really there. There is common sense support for this. If the Venus de Milo was here on the stand, and you walked up to it and put your nose right against the base, you would see something, but it would hardly be beautiful. On the other hand, if you recede too far in the distance, you only see a gray cylinder on the horizon. Again, beauty is lost. But from the proper perspective, the Venus de Milo is beautiful, even without her arms.

By the same token, a man with a magnifying glass can look at the nose of his girl. But he shouldn't, unless he wants to see a volcanic field. There is a very famous theory in esthetics by Bullough which talks about psychic distance. He uses a clever analogy. Suppose you suddenly see a fire on the dark horizon. You drive closer. The clouds hang over it in a majestic way and the eerie colors of the flames play on people's faces and on the firemen with their hoses and ladders. This calls for a camera. It's magnificent. But if you happen to be the owner of the uninsured house, all of that beauty is lost on you. Perspective does make a difference.

The problem is: We don't have God's perspective. And Leibniz offers us few suggestions on how we can come closer to it.

The Privative Theory

Another view is the official theory of the Roman Catholic Church. It's called the privative theory. Essentially, it's an attempt to exonerate God from creating evil. It says that evil is not a positive reality, but is the absence of good. Now that is a bit puzzling until you realize that the absence is not in vacuo, it is an absence in something. If, therefore, I call you evil, what I really mean on this theory is that you lack or are deprived of certain kinds of goodness. The devil is a privative being. He just isn't any good.

How satisfactory is that? I'm afraid not very, if what one wants is either comfort or conquest. For if anyone had said to me, as I lay in the hospital on one occasion, that I was not really experiencing pain but only the absence of pleasure, I would have wanted to throw him out as a mockingbird.

Evil does have positive effects, positive force in the world, like it or not. Hate begets hate, just as love begets love.

Privative evil (for example-ignorance) is only one kind of real evil.

The Instrumental Theory

This then leads up to a view which, I think, is at the center of the restored gospel. It is sometimes technically called an instrumental theory. It does not say pain is the result of transgression nor deny its reality, nor resort to perspective or privation. Evil, suffering, and stress are seen as eternal. They will not be destroyed, but can be utilized. They can be instruments to something good. Indeed, the highest work of suffering is a work of perfection-Godliness.

The Lord's Way

But let us bring this insight down to loam soil.

In the original of the letter (it belongs with Psalms-a masterpiece of religious writing) Joseph Smith wrote from Liberty Jail are several moving insights which precede the deeper one. For one thing, the Prophet is told that "thine adversity and thine afflictions shall be but a small moment." (D&C 12l:7.)That "small moment" turned out to be five more years of incredible struggle. But comparatively, it was a small moment. And that, I submit to you, is a real force in facing suffering. To believe, better, to know that this lonely or crushed or deprived or painwracked condition165won't last forever; that it will somehow, somewhere be over, is a balm of comfort. Without it, certain kinds of suffering would indeed be unbearable.

Then lie says, "Thou art not yet as Job." (D&C 121:9, 10.) Here we have the "It could be worse" appeal. Always it could be. Says a Persian legend, "I complained that I had no shoes until I saw a man who had no feet." Then a little bit of chiding comes through in the Lord's reminder and promise that unlike Job, "Thy friends do stand by thee and they shall bail thee again with warm hearts and friendly hands." Some friends are the wrong kind and add to oar burden. They come in anti say, "All right, Job. Let's have it! What have you done wrong?" "Job's comforters," they're called. No comfort. Job didn't have the memory of awful transgressions. The roof fell in on a loving, righteous man. That has been redramatized in McLeish's modern play, "JB." A literary critic has said, "The thing that amazed me was to see JB, after it's all over, say, 'All right, let's start again,' not knowing but what the whole roof would fall in again." That is the tingle and threat of Job's life. And of ours. But those of us with faithful friends are always better off than he.

Nietzsche, you may know, is often classified as an anti-Christ. But Nietzsche saw some things more clearly than his religious friends. For several years he had a continual toothache. He talks about "eternal recurrence." And his attitude was heroic. He arose each morning, set his jaw, and said, "Once more." He had the courage to go on. He would not be weak, would not yield to it, and was "grateful for small mercies." That is Jobian trust.

Then there is an "if" clause in this answer. "If," what? "If thou endure it well." The original, I'm impressed to say, adds, "If thou art faithful and endure it well." Faithful. Faithfull. That makes a great difference. "If thou art called to pass through tribulation." (D&C 122:5.)

I know many people who comfort themselves with what technically is "Deism".-the absentee landlord conception of the Lord; that he "wound up" the universe and then turned his back on us, and consequences fall without intervention.

If that outlook Helps anyone, I would be the last to seek to overturn it. It does seem to me that the message of this letter qualifies it. For the Lord says. "their bounds are set, they cannot pass." (v. o.) Who were bound? His enemies, his betrayers, his "false brethren," all men. They could only go so far. Some will say such a promise is not made to us. But it is.

Indeed, promises have been given (yes, many are conditional) that require the Lord to be very close. One day on an airplane we hit some terribly rough air. The wings were swaying, it seemed, like seagulls. Even the stewardess became alarmed and that only distressed the passengers more. I was reading, feeling very calm. When I asked myself why, it was because of a promise given me in a blessing that, in effect, while in the path of duty I would travel safely, "whether on land, sea or air." Musing about that, it seemed to me apparent that either the Lord had adequate foreknowledge that no airplane (which must include this airplane) would crash with me aboard. Or, lacking that foreknowledge, he yet had such power that in the event such a disaster were imminent he would somehow intervene and prevent it.

Take either or both of those alternatives and apply them to the thousands (millions?) of inspired promises made to the Lord's covenant-people (even scriptural generalizations such as "If you will... then I will"). It means his power and knowledge in our lives are much more intimate and ever-present than we tend to dream. He may, indeed, be closest when we suppose him to be farthest away.

The Glorification of Experience

The most vital and, in some ways, miraculous insight of all (and the most trying, perhaps to our faith and love) is this: that after describing the whole catalog of anguish which, then or later, the Prophet faced, including betrayal and having his son trust from him by the sword, and having "all the elements combine to hedge up the way" (ever felt like that; when everything goes wrong?) and seeing the heavens "gather blackness;" and having "the very jawsof hell gape open the mouth," the Lord reveals the pearl of great price:

Know thou, my son, that all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good. The Son of Man hath descended below them all, Art thou greater than he? (D&C 122: 7, 8.)

What good, we ask ourselves, could possibly be served by such affliction?

Brigham Young said of Joseph (and leaving out the fact that, as John Taylor wrote, he has done more, save Jesus only, for the salvation of man than any man who ever lived) that he suffered more in thirty-eight years than many men could in one thousand; that loosing one thousand hounds on Temple Square after one jackrabbit would not be equivalent to the "boiling over" of opposition he faced from his boyhood; but that he was more perfected, more sanctified, more glorified because "every wave of Adversity only wafted him that much closer to Deity."

The Prophet teaches and embodies this marvelously. Hence. it is not enough to endure stoically. Many religions have based themselves primarily on stoicism. Spinoza did. You endure only because you're saying to yourself, "It had to be." Why? "Stark necessity." That can keep you alive in a prison camp or in the loss of vital organs. It has been known to. "It has to be. Face it. It's necessary." That is resignation, a kind of fatalism. But it's not enough. The greater thing is to endure suffering with faith in the Son of Man which enables it to yield its perfect result, which means the fulness of the powers of Godliness.

Now I pause for two immediate objections. It has been said that too easily this view of suffering slips into asceticism; that is, to the notion that the more one suffers the better he is. Soon he is led to take the initiative: to deny himself, to sit on nails, to refuse himself normal appetites. Elements of asceticism are characteristic of both Catholic and Protestant traditions and even more so in Eastern religion; hence the New Yorker magazine cartoons showing emaciated men reclining on stones or nails. Do we take the position that this is desirable? No. Mormonism is not ascetic. It does not commend that you suffer by your own hand. This would require more careful analysis than there is time for, but I want to mention one anecdote: A brother, who shall remain nameless, during the Zion's camp episode, deliberately sought to be bitten by a snake, thus to exercise faith and fulfill the promise of the New Testament that "if they take up any deadly serpent it shall not harm them." He was rebuked by the Prophet. The point that emerged was that if, in the line of one's calling, one is in fact bitten, he can expect relief. But one who deliberately seeks it is entitled to no such promise. And so it is, I submit, in all forms of human affliction. Suffering ought to be the by-product of purposeful service, not a self-obsessed way of life.

A second objection, more difficult, is that if this is the purpose of mortality, this coping with opposition, how is it that so few really do triumph? How is it that so many are themselves overcome? Instead of their souls developing, they shrink; instead of their characters being made into steel, they are made into a tormented shambles; instead of taking on the fluids of Godliness, they take on the acids of degradation. That is a hard, hard question. It is even harder if we point to innocent suffering. In the Primary Children's Hospital, for example, are children, some of them long before the age of accountability, with congenital maladies, no arms, no eyes, and many other afflictions that few can bear to see. This is one of the most difficult realities to reconcile with meaning and purpose, and with God's love.

But irrespective of purpose I want to mention three very real facts that are worth remembering. I find them hidden in the Prophet's letter.

The first point is that there are limits to what we can suffer; there is a cut-out point physically and psychically beyond which we lose full alert consciousness. There are kinds of cancer that attack the bone which could persist to unbearable scales of pain except for the fact167that there are other organs in the body that, eventually, almost like a fuse, break the circuit. I am among those who are grateful that that is so.

Secondly, pain does not compound. When it is over, it is over. That's not true of some other kinds of evil, but it's true of pain. Emily Dickinson, years ago wrote a poem. Here's a case where I don't understand the words and yet understand her. Two lines are indelible. She says, "After great pain, a formal feeling comes. The nerves sit ceremonious like tombs." Then somewhere in the next stanza there is a phrase-"quartz-like contentment." She is describing the glory of relief. Pain once past does not compound. It is simply over.

Then third, as C. S. Lewis reminds us, it is important to remember that no one is suffering all the pain. We can talk about the fact that if I count now, tonight, in this room, each is suffering a certain amount. We'll call that amount X. If you multiply X by the number of people that are in the world, you come up with two billion X. Then add the whole animate creation-the sparrows, and the insects. William James once said, "This universe will never be all good so long as one cockroach suffers the pangs of unrequited love." Now you have multiple billion X. The Prophet said God desires the happiness of all his creatures. And think of all that pain! But notice: no one is suffering multiple billion X. Each is only suffering his own X.

Only if we could see the outcome, even for the most bitter among us, could we estimate bow wise-as well as brave-we were to enter mortality.

The miracle is that the same thing suffering-can have totally opposite effects; depending on how we respond to it.

I know a man who has received 3,200 blood transfusions. He is a hemophiliac, hospitalized with inner bleeding every three weeks. He tells me that each experience is like a "baptismal"... "I come out of the hospital feeling like the blackboard has been wiped clean, anxious that it shall not be filled again." He copes with pain with an expression on his face that would convince a child he was praying. He can inspire a depressed soul, whether in the hospital or out. He has not known a day or a night in fifteen years without pain-and I don't mean low-level aches like stiff muscles. pleasant pains. I mean the hydraulic pain of bone joints being forced apart by his own life-giving blood. Other people I know have suffered far less. Anti they are bitter, cynical. hateful.

How can good and bad fruit come from the same experience? The divine and the devilish? It is the root of our spiritual nourishment that changes everything. That is the scale on which we came to be weighed.

Wrote B. H. Roberts who identified with Joseph Smith as closely as did his blood brothers:

. . . Some of the lowliest walks in life, the paths which lead into the deepest valleys of sorrow and up to the most rugged steeps of adversity, are the ones which. if a man travel in. will best accomplish the object of his existence in this world .... The conditions which place men where they may always walk on the unbroken plain of prosperity and seek for nothing bill their own pleasure are not the best within the gift of God. For in such circumstances tool soon drop into a position analogous to the stagnant pool; while those who have to contend with difficulties, brave dangers, endure disappointments, struggle with sorrows. eat the bread of adversity and drink the water of afflietion, develop a moral and spiritual strength. together with a purity of life and character. unknown to the heirs of ease and wealth and pleasure. With the English bard, therefore. I believe:

Sweet are the uses of adversity!

(B. H. Roberts, Man's Relationship to Deity, pp. 289-90.)

Yes, sweet, but bittersweet. "No chastening seemeth to be joyous, but grievous. Nevertheless, afterward, it yieldeth the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto them Which are exercised thereby." (Hebrews 12:11.)

As a little boy, I watched a favorite uncle bring in willows with cocoons on them. Later, we saw the slight opening in one, and, boylike,168put our ears up against it to hear the seemingly audible groans and strains of the moth. It wanted out. And we wanted to help. We did not ask our wiser uncle. We just found some scissors and with one decisive snip we shed that moth of its confining coat. It lay there and we waited for it to fly. But it never flew. It quivered and finally died.

The modal experience will enable us to fly if we will let it, help it, use it with faith in the Christ who "descended below all." The message of the modern prophets, to a man (and none of them, if you look closely, have been spared any of the vicissitudes), is that there is meaning and purpose in all things we suffer. That "all these things" can be for our good, however empty and barren they now appear. The elements of truth in the classical theories have been caught up in a greater whole. The Lord is not playing games with us. The outcome will far exceed the price; the "chastening" will be visioned as our blessing, the fiber of soul quality will leave no regrets, only infinite and eternal gratitude, and the partnership we forged with him before we entered this refining fire will loom as marvelous to us as does the face of a loving mother in the eyes of a child who has just emerged from his fever-healed, alive, and prepared for life, eternal life, life like God's.

"All your losses will be made up to you in the resurrection if you continue Faithful .... By the vision of the Almighty I have seen it." (Prophet Joseph Smith, 1844.)

Edward Geary [^13] Goodbye to Poplarhaven

Paradise lost, according to Marcel Proust, is the only real paradise. Proust's lost Eden was Illiers-Combray, a village whose medieval church tower and encircling wall gave to his childhood. by their great age, a sense of permanence and continuity. The town of my childhood, Huntington, Utah, is no older than my grandparents and contains nothing that is likely to outlast my grandchildren; yet from it has come whatever sense I have of human continuity. Huntington lies at the west end of a large valley extending from the Wasatch Plateau, that mountain backbone of central Utah, east ward to the canyonlands of the Green and Colorado Rivers, Castle Valley, as the region is called by its inhabitants, is a dry and barren place even by Utah standards. A party of trappers who passed through in 1830 described it as "the most desolate and forlorn dell in the world" and preferred to "forego the acquisition of any benefit in the world" rather than remain there. However, there was water in the creeks that flowed down from the snowbanks of the Wasatch Plateau and made their cottonwood-marked way across the valley, and this seemed sufficient promise that the land could be made habitable. So a call for settlers was issued in Sanpete Stake conference in 1877, and by 1881 several villages had been established, their people one of the last groups to have the sense of destiny that came with such a call. At Huntington they laid out a mile-square townsite with sixty-four ten-acre blocks separated by wide, straight streets and each divided into four lots big enough for a corral and cow pasture, an orchard and a kitchen garden, as well as a house and dooryard. Thus the uncompromising geometry of the plat of the City of Zion was imposed upon the valley floor while it was yet nearly as dry as the newly created earth before the Lord sent up the mist which watered the whole face of the ground. The mist never did rise up in Castle Valley, so the settlers diverted the water of the creek into a town ditch and a field ditch and watered the land themselves. Then they planted trees in the treeless land, trees for fruit, trees for shade, and, to break theconstant winds, row upon row of Lombardy poplars lining the streets east and west, north and south.

The Lombardy poplar grows rapidly to an imposing height, but it is not a long-lived tree; its limbs are brittle and its soft wood subject to decay. This pattern of early growth and early decline held true for the town as well as its trees. In the 1880s the streamflow was steady, and the feed on the high summer range to the west and the desert winter range to the east seemed sufficient. The Rio Grande Railroad was coming west from Denver, its construction crews providing a ready market for the valley's produce. More important, the railroad brought the hope of commercial and industrial development, for there were thick seams of coal among the ledges of the Wasatch Plateau, and who knew what undiscovered mineral wealth in the desert badlands? But the railroad was rerouted to the north through Price Canyon. With this change, Price, which had been a smaller village than Huntington or Castle Dale, became the chief town in the region, and in 1894 Carbon County, with Price as its seat, was split off from Emery County. Access to the railroad made convenient the opening of large mines in the Carbon County coalfields, while the Emery County veins remained undeveloped except for a few small wagon mines for local use. The desert yielded up no great wealth, and even the agricultural base fell short of expectations. The rangeland was soon damaged by overgrazing, leading to erosion of the watersheds and reduced summer streamflow. Moreover, to the problems arising from a shortage of water were added the problems of excessive water in some places. The mancos shale which underlies much of the valley floor holds moisture like a sponge, inhibiting drainage and allowing dissolved alkali salts to rise to the surface. So while some lands were abandoned for lack of water, others were lost through this "swamping" process. As a result of these factors, Huntington reached its highest population in the 1890s, then, less than two decades after its settlement, stopped growing and began a long, gradual decline.

It was into this gradual and gentle decay that I was born, and I grew up in an old town. The people were old because the majority of each new generation left the valley and only a few, like my parents. remained out of nostalgia or hope, to have in their turn children who would grow up to move away. The houses. some of them spacious two-story structures built of an earthy yellow brick from Charles Green's brickyard. were old, too. The barns and sheds, clustered in the center of the large blocks. had the gray patina of aged and weathered spruce. And the trees. those that remained (for few had been planted since the early days), were big and old, the black walnuts starkly massive, the apple trees gnarled and thick. and here and there towered cones of the spruces. The poplars were mostly gone, but enough remained to give the sense of the original rows. From a distance, where you couldn't see how many gaps there were, how many trees broken and dying, the town still looked like a big grove set amid the green hayfields, an oasis, a haven from the surrounding plains of shadscale and pricklypear. Indeed, my private boyhood name for the town, replacing the prosaic Huntington, was Poplarhaven, and I used to imagine myself immortalizing it in fiction someday as Joyce did his Dublin or Faulkner his Jefferson.

A friend of mine, an easterner, once remarked that to enjoy the Utah landscape you must persuade yourself that brown is beautiful. But it is not brown I think of when I think of Huntington, nor the blue-gray that more precisely describes the color of the soil there. I think of the intense green of an alfalfa field in early June before the first cutting, a green made the more vivid by contrasting dry earth above the ditchline. I think of water, running fast and cold from the mountains in the creek, running quietly and slowly between the willow-grown banks of the canals, seeping out of the little desert springs, a miraculous trickle out of the rock, overflowing a mossy watering trough to make a brilliant spot of grass and shrubbery against the reds and ochres of Bull Hollow or Buckhorn Draw. I think of open space, the wonderful sense of room-enough: wide, empty streets, vacant pastures between houses, openness all the way to the horizon, fifty miles distant yet visible in precise detail through the170clear air. I think of the seasons, of winter nights when my freshly combed hair froze stiff while I was walking to a basketball game in the tiny, crowded, and steaming gymnasium; of summer days when I sat unsteadily atop a load of hay (Grandfather always tried to get the whole field into a single load) lurching along a rutted road, leaving dry wisps on the branches of overhanging trees, breathing the hot dry air, air which always turned moist and cool, no matter how hot the day, when the sun went down and the evergreen-scented breezes drifted down the long canyon from the forested slopes. It is not barrenness I remember, but richness, though a casual passer-through might see only barrenness.

There was a rich variety of people too, solid citizens and town eccentrics (categories which often overlapped): Heber Leonard, who had once been the bishop but whom I remember as a bearded old man carrying on endless theological debates with Heber Brockbank, his neighbor across the street (every village used to have its scriptorians and theologians in those days before theology was taken over by the seminary system); old Sister Allen, who used to go around buying the carcases of dead animals for a nickel or a dime in the expectation that she would have a sizeable livestock holding in the hereafter. Then there were the old bachelors, chief among them Bert Westover who reputedly had fought at San Juan Hill with Teddy Roosevelt and who lived, a bent and bowlegged old man, in a one-room cabin across the road from my grandparents. Bert had three great loves: his Bull Durham tobacco, his horses (none of which ever pulled a load, an occasional one of which would occasionally run in local horseraces, but most of which spent their lives grazing along the ditchbanks in unmolested leisure). and his talking. He had got some radical ideas from somewhere and used to carry on at length about the superiority of the Russian system. Except for his own funeral, I don't ever remember seeing him inside the church house. However, he used to declare his intentions of moving away somewhere before the Millennium because his house would be the first place they hit coming over the hill from the cemetery, and they'd eat him out of house and home.

The old people are all gone now, of course, gone and mostly forgotten and the very marks of their existence largely obliterated. Where Heber Leonard's house stood beneath its two tall spruces on Main Street now stands the two-ward chapel built during the 1950s and looking like all the other two-ward chapels built during the 1950s. Across the street, where mulberry trees shaded the wide front porch of Heber Brockbank's house, nothing now shades the parking lot of a concrete block grocery store. Bert Westover's cabin and the sheds and corrals where his horses made their home are all gone too, and the unused ground whitens with alkali year by year. There is nothing there now to attract the attention of the troop coming over the hill on resurrection morning.

The general tenor of life in Huntington was quiet and uneventful, leading us at times to long for an excitement and stimulation that we imagined as existing somewhere beyond the valley (and which we have not yet found), but there were several big occasions each year. One was the annual basketball game with the high school from the other end of the county, on the outcome of which our self-respect seemed importantly to depend. The others were more widely observed holidays which we celebrated in our own peculiar way.

Before dawn each Twenty-fourth of July, town officials set off a charge of blasting powder, and we all awoke to its horrific thunderclap. Then the high school band, or at least those members who could be gathered up in the summertime, made a tour of the town on a hay wagon, playing martial airs somewhat off-key to children sitting in their pajamas on front porches and old women out in their gardens gathering the produce before the sun shone on it. After that there was a two- or three-hour break while chores were done and water tended, then at nine o'clock (or more commonly about twenty minutes past) the parade: the marshall of the day, always costumed as Brigham Young, leading the way on horseback or buckboard, depending on his age and abilities, followed by wagons garnished with171sagebrush, cars and trucks with strips of crepe paper strung on them, the inevitable hayrack full of Primary children with a big sign on it saying "Utah's Best Crop," and bringing up the rear a crowd of boys on horseback and bicycle. The parade made its way northward up Main Street for four blocks then turned around and made its way back down again, making it twice as long and allowing everybody to see both sides of the floats. After the parade we all gathered in the old meetinghouse for the program. Here, in the arched and galleried ball (now only a memory like so many other pioneer meetinghonses), under the direction of "Brigham Young," a program of songs and readings and tapdances unfolded, presented by a succession of Miss Deserets, Miss Utahs, Miss Castle Valleys, Miss Huntingtons, enough symbolic misses to accommodate, with their attendants, nearly all the teen-age girls in town. At the end would come Brigham Young's oration, in which we were exhorted to remember that this was Zion and that we in these valleys of the mountains had a great destiny. The whole program was punctuated not only by applause bet by one old man after another rising to his feet in the audience and crying out, "Three Cheers for Brigham Young and the Pioneers!" or "Three Cheers for the Constitution!" (the Fourth of July and the Twenty-fourth tended to merge into a single event in our town). Then we all joined in-the younger ones of us rather self-consciously not with the staccato cheers they give in the movies, but giving every syllable its full value: "H-i-i-p, h.i-i-p, hooraay! Hip, hip, horray! Hip, hip, horray!"-the leader describing large circles in the air above his head with his hand to mark the time. After the program it was home for dinner then back to the "square," the dusty block across from the meetinghouse, for games and races, hamburgers and hot dogs cooked in makeshift booths by red-faced men, and bottles of soda pop from ice-filled washtubs. At night there would be a dance on the tennis court, dark except for the lights over the band; the air, cleansed of the day's heat and dust by the canyon breeze, filled with the sounds of popular songs from the nineteen-twenties and thirties. It was a big day.

But Memorial Day we called it Decoration Day -was even bigger in its way, for it involved not only those living in the community but also the larger number who had moved away and the still larger contingent of the dead, as we all gathered for the day in the cemetery for a massive reunion and homecoming. People decorated the graves with bridal wreath and bleeding hearts and peonies, if they were blooming early enough, and, in the case of those back home for the day from Provo or Salt Lake, with store-bought wreaths. Then the grownups strolled from lot to lot. renewing acquaintances, while the children ran about stroking the stone lambs on children's graves, gathering wildflowers from the dry hill behind the cemetery, half welcoming, half challenging the kids from out of town who didn't quite belong though their parents did. When I think of community and continuity, of the hearts of the children turning to the fathers, I think of those Memorial Days in Huntington. My city-bred wife is constantly amused at Utah obituary notices, in which someone who has lived in Salt Lake City or Los Angeles for fifty years is fisted as being from Beaver or Ephraim or Wellsville and is taken back there for burial. But for me the roots put down in the harsh soil of Castle Valley have proven impossible to transplant, and though I shall probably never live in Huntington again, I cannot imagine consigning my bones at last to any other spot than that old graveyard.

I am being nostalgic, of course. But what strikes me as I remember back is how little nostalgia there was in Huntington when I was growing up, how little nostalgia and how much expectancy, of a kind scarcely anyone seems to have anymore. For Huntington didn't just happen; it was established by design, and surely the design had not yet been fulfilled. My grandfather, always an enterprising man, remarked to me shortly before his death that all his life the town had seemed just on the verge of some great development, but the development had never come. After the railroad boom there was the gold boom, then the oil boom, the gypsum boom, the uranium boom, but they all, together172with assorted lesser booms, fizzled out.

Now prosperity has at last arrived. The land boom has reached Castle Valley. You can read the pitch in the classified ads of any newspaper as highpowered real estate companies peddle the old farms: "Eighty-acre ranch in Utah valley, close to town with half-mile border on county road." "Utah hideaway-forty acres near hunting and fishing." Farmers are selling their land for more money than they have made from it in a lifetime of hard work, and their place is being taken by new people moving in from the West Coast to seek some dream of their own. But theirs is a different dream, the Hollywood dream of the cowboy on his own spread, not the pioneer dream of building a society. They don't build houses or plant trees but live in mobile homes. And it is not only the new people but the younger generations of the old families who are bringing in a new life style. For example, I can remember only two of my grandfather's contemporaries who habitually wore cowboy boots, while today every second person appears in "western" attire. Community events used to include drama, concerts by a men's glee club, weekly baseball games by the town team (an ill-equipped and not very highly skilled but zestful contingent), and an annual Hereford Days celebration dedicated to improving breeding stock on the farms. Now there are only rodeos.

Industrial development is arriving too, in the form of a power generating plant being built in the mouth of the canyon to exploit the extensive coal deposits. Farmers sold their water rights to attract the plant (they find that Californians will buy land without water as readily as with it), and it was expected not only that several hundred new jobs would be created but also that the county's tax base would be doubled. The jobs have come, and with them dozens of new families to crowd the schools and strain municipal facilities, but in a piece of traditional Castle Valley hard luck a legal technicality has forestalled the tax bonanza. So now the people have joined with the power company in seeking an exemption from air quality laws so that another large unit can be added to the plant. They have been poor in the clear air long enough, they say, and are willing to breathe a little smoke if it means prosperity.

Today the generating plant with its massive smokestack stands on a bluff overlooking the creek, looking very much like a permanent fixture in the landscape. No one seems to care whether the canyon breeze will smell the same once it is in operation. Business is booming at the grocery stores and beer parlors, though prices have risen so high that the older residents now do most of their shopping in Price. The town itself takes on an increasingly temporary look. The poplars are nearly all gone now. No one approaching the town today would guess that they once lined the streets. Not even a scar remains on the earth to show where the old meetinghouse stood, and many of the old brick houses are gone too. The high school is gone, merged into a county high school in Castle Dale. Barns and corrals are being pulled down at an astonishing rate to make room for trailer parks (parks only in the sense of places to park). What few houses have been built in the last several years are mostly prefabs that appear suddenly and are capable of disappearing just as fast. Indeed, one feels that when the last of the old mature trees are gone, the whole town could be moved somewhere else almost overnight, leaving the valley floor as dry and bare as that party of fur trappers found it in 1830.

Not long ago I attended Sunday School in the already deteriorating "new" chapel that stands on the site of Hebe Leonard's old house. The lesson in the gospel doctrine class had something to do with the idea of Zion, and at its conclusion the class president, the daughter of old Bishop Leonard, announced number six as the closing song and took her place at the organ, the only thing salvaged from the old meetinghouse. She didn't have to look at the songbook, and neither did the older singers.

Beautiful Zion for me, Down in the valley reclining ....

The younger members of the groups tried to follow the obviously unfamiliar selection in the book or merely sat silent, but the older ones knew by heart the words that expressed their173conviction that this little town settled by their parents in this remote valley of the mountains was really Zion.

Clasped in the mountain's embrace, Safe from the spoiler forever ....

Robed in the garments of peace, Virtue the crown of thy glory, God shall thy kingdom increase, Angels delight in the story,

Did they think of what was happening around them as despoilation or as the long-awaited increase of the kingdom? Or did they think of it at all? Did the conviction inhabit some part of their minds immune to the pressure of actual events? That the conviction was there was unmistakable in the final ringing declaration of love for the fields of home:

When through the wide world I roam. Naught on the land or the sea

Charms like my own mountain home, Beautiful, beautiful Zion for me.174175

Orson F. Whitney (1855-1931) was born in Salt Lake City, where he served for twenty-eight years as bishop of the Eighteenth Ward. Called to the Council of the Twelve Apostles, where he served until his death, Whitney was educated at the University of Deseret and became chancellor of the University of Utah. He filled three missions for the Church, presiding, during his last one, over the European Mission. A man of letters, he wrote The History of Utah, published biographies of Heber C. Kimball and Lorenzo Snow, an autobiography entitled Through Memory's Halls, and several books of poetry, including his lengthy epic poem, Elias, An Epic of the Ages, which we have excerpted elsewhere in this book. He wrote frequent defenses of literature, including this essay, first published in the July, 1888, issue of the Contributor.

William Mulder (1915- ) is a professor of English at the University of Utah. He has published widely, including his book, with A. Russell Mortensen, Among the Mormons: Historic Accounts by Contemporary Observers (1958). republished in 1973 by Bison Press. This essay first appeared in Western Humanities Review, Vol. 9, Winter, 1954-55.

Parley A. Christensen (1888-1968) lived in Provo, Utah, much of his life, where, as a professor of English, he taught for nearly forty years at Brigham Young University. Widely loved by generations of students for his literary and philosophical insights, Professor Christensen published many articles and two books, All in a Teacher's Day (1948) (from which this selection is taken) and Of a Number of Things (1964).

Robert K. Thomas(1918- ),academic vice-president of Brigham Young University, was an honors scholar at Reed College and director of the Honors Program at BYU. He holds an M.A. from the University of Oregon and the Ph.D. in English from Columbia University. He is well known to Relief Society women for his five volumes of Out of the Best Books, compiled with Dr. Bruce B. Clark for the cultural refinement lessons of the Relief Society. This article is reprinted from To the Glory of God, Deseret Book Co., 1972, Charles D. Tate, Jr., and Truman G. Madsen, editors.

For two representatives of the more recent criticism see John W. Welch, "Chiasmus in The Book or Mormon," BYU Studies 10:1 (Aut. 1969), pp. 69-84; and John A. Tvedtnes, "Hebraisms in the Book of Mormon: A Preliminary Survey," BYU Studies 11:1 (Aut. 1970), pp. 50-60.

Hugh W. Nibley(1910- ) is one of the most prolific and provocative scholars in the Church. He graduated summa cum laude from the University of California at Los Angeles, and completed a University Fellow Ph.D. degree at the University of California at Berkeley. A well-known figure in the library and on the lecture platform, Dr. Nibley has become famous for his research and writing about the Church and its scriptures. His work is characterized by a remarkable linguistic ability, original historical analysis, an absolute devotion to the faith, and a rapierlike wit. Besides pamphlets and numerous articles in Dialogue, BYU Studies and Church magazines, Dr. Nibley is the author of many books including Lehi in the Desert and Since Cumorah. This essay appears in BYU Studies, Autumn, 1970.

Charles W. Nibley. During the winter of 1921, when Charles Nibley was writing his reminiscences at Ocean Park, California, be used to read the manuscript to Hugh Nibley's family in the evenings, telling as he went the much better stories left out of the official biography. This was one of them, and has since been repeatedly confirmed by Preston Nibley, who had it from the same source.

The so-called Brigham Young History is still in manuscript form in the Church Historical Department. Passages are quoted by permission.

Brigham Young History, p. 78, Sept. 22, 1851. The so-called Brigham Young History is still in manuscript form in the Church Historical Department. Passages are quoted by permission.

Brigham Young History, p. 45, June, 1839. The so-called Brigham Young History is still in manuscript form in the Church Historical Department. Passages are quoted by permission.

HC, 3:295-96.

Truman G, Madsen (1926- ), a professor of philosophy and religion at Brigham Young University, is director of the Institute of Mormon Studies and holder of the Richard L. Evans Chair of Christian Understanding. Madsen has published in Church magazines, in Dialogue and BYU Studies, and in professional journals. He is widely known as guest lecturer on contemporary issues in philosophy and religion. He has published four books: How to Stop Forgetting and Start Remembering. Four Essays on Love (from which this essay has been taken), Eternal Man, and Christ and the Inner Life.

Edward Geary (1937- .). born in Huntington, Utah, is now a member of the English faculty of Brigham Young University. A graduate of stanford, he has long been associated with the editorial staff of Dialogue, which he presently serves as associate cditor. His present projects include a volume of fiction, Notes Toward a Family History, and a book of criticism, The Authority of Failure: The Renunciatory Mode in Modern Literature.

---
Notas:
[^1] An irreverent, but it seems to me. downright honest critic of Christianity argues in effect. "If a child is born to me healthy and bright-eyed, you tell me, God loves you. If a child is born without a spine, or hopelessly paralyzed. you tell me, God still loves you. Frankly, that kind of love I can do without. If God causes or permits events that my worst mortal enemy would not permit, then both the idea of 'God' and 'love' are absurd." That these persons were trying to torture you, perhaps take your life.
[^2] One day my family sat watching the big screen production of the "Greatest Story Ever Told." You see a sinister Herod send his soldiers to Bethelehem. Then come the screams of mothers, glimpses of blood-smirched swords pulled from children's bodies. Then you see Mary and Joseph who have received divine warning, walking peacefully with their Babe toward the safety of Egypt. As this scene closed, the hand of my little girl came into mine and she whispered, confused and frightened, "Daddy, didn't Heavenly Father care about those other children?" That all this was against your will.
[^3] Third is the universal outcry of our own souls in tribulation. "Why?" and "Why me?" We speak much of worthiness and blessedness and of keeping the laws that result in both. But there is, in this cry, the sense of what some call "frustrated entitlement." We have, in measure (not perfectly but close enough) kept the law; and we aspire through dark and dawn to do better. We feel a certain inner worthiness, a sense of "deserving better." But no better comes. Only worse. And still worse. Others we think of as less worthy seem to prosper. We do not demand ease. But we sense injustice and we crave, alas, a little mercy. And how long can we hold on to this slipping rope, and pray in faith? Let alone in love? That the highest service he would render you would be to pull them off.
