Neal A. Lambert, Richard E. Cracroft, Believing People: Literature of the Latter-day Saints ( 1979)

5 POETRY

If you'd correctly, write in rhyme, Make equal feet to sound in time, For one small word will mar the chime And spoil the metre. As want of music is a crime, But sound is sweeter.

John Lyon (c. 1860)176177

INTRODUCTION

While the Latter-day Saints were reticent at first about fiction, they were never reticent about poetry, which to them was clearly a vehicle for preaching the gospel. Most of the early leaders of the Church wrote poetry, and Eliza R. Snow Smith, one of Mormonism's most prominent and influential women, was the faith's leading poet. Heavily influenced during the early years by, among others, Wordsworth, Byron, Milton, and Shakespeare and in later years by Tennyson and other Victorian poets, Mormon poets chose to apply such influences to far different and formally incongruous themes-the gathering to Zion, praise of Church leaders (especially Joseph and Hyrum Smith and their martyrdom), the pioneer movement, the Book of Mormon, and particular LDS doctrines. Like most of the popular poetry written in that era, much Mormon poetry, derivative and didactic, is regrettably forgettable. Stiff, cliché-ridden, and sing-song in its verse, much of it offers little to the modern reader. However, Eliza R. Snow, Augusta Joyce Crocheron, Josephine Spencer, and a few others deserve some study and attention for their uneven but often good contributions.

It is, however, as writers of hymns that the Mormon poets showed their mettle. Influenced by their rich and varied backgrounds in other protestant faiths, these early converts were steeped in the hymn stanza and in the images of the Holy Bible. This background, combined with the Millennial fervor of Mormonism, with its sense of persecution and exile in the Rocky Mountains, produced some memorable hymns, and Parley P. Pratt, John L. Townsend, W. W. Phelps, and others have provided modern Mormonism with some lovely lyrics, interesting because of their anachronistic militant stances and their bold and imaginative statements of doctrine. Mormon hymns provide a fascinating study in the attitudes of the Saints. Few, for example, can read Penrose's "Up Awake Ye Defenders of Zion" without hearing martial drums beating a call to arms; for, after all, the Lord's Chosen People were brashly at war with the United States of America -and completely assured of victory! It is this kind of confidence and zeal which make the hymns interesting today, an interest compounded by the fact that a number of them are very good poems.

In the twentieth century, Mormon poets have broken loose from the traditional shackles which bound such writers as Orson F. Whitney. In poetry, as in the short story, twentieth-century writers have seen the power of Mormon history, faith, and symbols as literary subjects and have focused increasingly upon the human meaning of Latter-day Saint history, the personal tragedies inherent in the confrontation of faith with doubt. It is interesting that, as a body, modern Mormon poets seem to yearn for an era when the issues were clearer, the lines between the Mormon world and the non-Mormon world more clearly drawn-for an idyllic era when fewer compromises were demanded by a more spiritual world. Yet as the twentieth century advances, there seem to be more178poets who, maintaining their believing vision in the present, probe the problems of keeping vigorous a Mormon faith in an existential universe which proclaims that God is dead, or, at very least, doesn't want to get involved. Because of these tendencies and because of the willingness of Mormon journals to publish, Mormon poetry is in a vigorous state, and even the proselyting. oriented Church magazines are publishing less didactic and more aesthetic verse. The trend bodes well for Latter-day Saints who desire to examine vigorously the meaning of their faith in dialogue with a wider world, for in the last half of the twentieth century, Mormonism has increasingly shed its Rocky Mountain homespun for the more colorful robes of an international Church. 179

NINETEENTH-CENTURY POETRY

Three Folk Songs

Once I Lived in Cottonwood

Oh, once I lived in Cottonwood and owned a little farm, But I was called to Dixie, which did me much alarm; To raise the cane and cotton, I right away must go; But the reason why they called on me, I'm sure I do not know. I yoked old Jim and Bolly up all for to make a start, To leave my house and garden, it almost broke my heart. We moved along quite slowly and often looked behind, For the sand and rocks of Dixie kept running through my mind. At length we reached the Black Ridge where I broke my wagon down, I could not find a carpenter so far from any town, So with a clumsy cedar pole I fixed an awkward slide; My wagon pulled so heavy then that Betsy could not ride. While Betsy was a'walking, I told her to take care, When all upon a sudden she struck a pricklypear. Then she began to blubber out as loud as she could bawl, "If I was back in Cottonwood, I would not come at all!" When we reached the Sandy, we could not move at all, For poor old Jim and Bolly began to puff and loll. I whipped and swore a little but could not make the route, For myself, the team, and Betsy, were all of us give out. Next we got to Washington, where we stayed a little while To see if April showers would make the verdure smile. But, oh, I was mistaken and so I went away, For the red hills of November looked just the same in May. I feel so weak and hungry now, there's nothing here to cheer Except prophetic sermons which we very often hear. They will hand them out by dozens and prove them by the book- I'd rather have some roasting ears to stay at home and cook. I feel so weak and hungry now, I think I'm nearly dead; 'Tis seven weeks next Sunday since I have tasted bread. Of carrot tops and lucerne greens we have enough to eat- But I'd like to change that diet off for buck-wheat cakes and meat. I brought this old coat with me about two years ago, And how I'll get another one, I'm sure I do not know. May providence protect me against the cold and wet; I think myself and Betsy, these times will not forget. My shirt is dyed with wild dockroot, with greasewood for a set; I fear the colors all will fade when once it does get wet. They said we would raise madder, and indigo so blue, But that turned out a humbug, the story was not true. The hot winds whirl around me and take away my breath; I've had the chills and fever till I'm nearly shook to death. "All earthly tribulations are but a moment here; And, oh, if I prove faithful, a righteous crown I'll wear." My wagons's sold for sorghum seed to make a little bread; And poor old Jim and Bolly long ago are dead. There's only me and Betsy left to hoe the cotton-tree; May Heaven help the Dixieite wherever he may be!

The Handcart Song

Ye saints who dwell on Europe's shore Prepare yourselves for many more, To leave behind your native land, For sure God's judgments are at hand. For you must cross the raging main Before the promised land you gain And with the faithful make a start To cross the plains with your handcart.

The lands that boast of modern light We know are all as dark as night Where poor men toil and want for bread, Where peasant folks are blindly led. These lands that boast of liberty You ne'er again will wish to see When you from Europe make a start To cross the plains with your handcart.

As on the road the carts are pulled 'Twould very much surprise the world To see the old and feeble dame Thus lend a hand to pull the same. And maidens fair will dance and sing, Young men more happy than a king, And children will laugh and play Their strength increasing day by day.

And long before the Valley's gained, We will be met upon the plain With music sweet and friends so dear And fresh supplies our hearts to cheer. And then with music and with song How cheerfully we'll march along And thank the day we made a start To cross the plains in our handcart.

When you get there among the rest, Obedient be and you'll be blessed And in God's chambers be shut in While judgments cleanse the earth from sin, For we do know it will be so, God's servants spoke it long ago, We say it is high time to start To cross the plains with your handcart.

Chorus:

For some must push and some must pull As we go marching up the hill; So merrily on our way we go Until we reach the Valley-o.

A Marriage Proposal

Say, Susan, wilt thou come with me, In sweet community to live- Oh heart and hand and home to thee, A sixteenth part I'll freely give Of all the love that swells my breast, Of all the honor of my name, Of worldly wealth by me possessed, A sixteenth portion thou shalt claim.

Nay, tell me not too many share The blessings that I offer thee; Thou'lt find but fifteen others there, A household happy, gay and free. A mod'rate household, I may say; My neighbor has as many more- And Brother Brigham, o'er the way, Luxuriates in forty-four.

I'll give thee whatso'er thou wilt, So it but be a sixteenth part; 'Twould be the deepest depth of guilt, To slight the rest who share my heart. Then wilt thou not thy fraction yield, To make complete my perfect bliss? Say "yes" and let our joy be sealed, With just the sixteenth of a kiss. 182

William W. Phelps [^1] Gently Raise the Sacred Strain

Gently raise the sacred strain, For the Sabbath's come again That man may rest, And return his thanks to God, For his blessings to the blest. Holy day, devoid of strife; Let us seek eternal life, That great reward, And partake the sacrament In remembrance of our Lord. Sweetly swells the solemn sound While we bring our gifts around Of broken hearts, As a willing sacrifice, Showing what his grace imparts. Happy type of things to come, When the Saints are gathered home To praise the Lord In eternity of bliss, All as one with sweet accord. Holy, holy is the Lord; Precious, precious is his word; Repent and live; Though your sins be crimson red, Oh, repent, and he'll forgive. Softly sing the joyful lay, For the Saints to fast and pray! As God ordains, For his goodness and his love, While the Sabbath day remains.

William W. Phelps [^2] Now Let Us Rejoice

Now let us rejoice in the day of salvation. No longer as strangers on earth need we roam. Good tidings are sounding to us and each nation, And shortly the hour of redemption will come, When all that was promised, the Saints will be given, And none will molest them from morn until ev'n, And earth will appear as the garden of Eden, And Jesus will say to all Israel, "Come home." We'll love one another and never dissemble, But cease to do evil and ever be one. And when the ungodly are fearing and tremble, We'll watch for the day when the Savior will come, When all that was promised, the Saints will be given, And none will molest them from morn until ev'n, And earth will appear as the garden of Eden, And Jesus will say to all Israel, "Come home." In faith we'll rely on the arm of Jehovah To guide through these last days of trouble and gloom; And after the scourges and harvest are over, We'll rise with the just when the Savior doth come. Then all that was promised, the Saints will be given, And they will be crowned with the angels of heav'n, And earth will appear as the garden of Eden,

And Christ and his people will ever be one. 183

William W. Phelps [^3] Hosanna Anthem [^4]

The Spirit of God like a fire is burning! The latter-day glory begins to come forth; The visions and blessings of old are returning, And angels are coming to visit the earth.

The Lord is extending the Saints' understanding, Restoring their judges and all as at first. The knowledge and power of God are expanding, The veil o'er the earth is beginning to burst.

We'll call in our solemn assemblies in spirit, To spread forth the kingdom of heaven abroad, That we through our faith may begin to inherit The visions and blessings and glories of God.

How blessed the clay when the lamb and the lion Shall lie down together without any ire, And Ephraim be crowned with his blessing in Zion, And Jesus descends with his chariot of fire!

Chorus:

We'll sing and we'll Shout with the armies of heaven, Hosanna, hosanna to God and the Lamb! Let glory to them in the highest be given, Henceforth anti forever; Amen and amen!

Praise to the Man

Praise to the man who communed with Jehovah! Jesus annointed that Prophet and Seer. Blessed to open the last dispensation, Kings shall extol him, and nations revere.

Praise to Iris memory, he died as a martyr; Honored and blest be his ever great name! Long shall his blood, which was shed by assassins, Stain Illinois [^5] while the earth lauds his fame.

Great is his glory and endless his priesthood. Ever and ever the keys he will hold. Faithful and true, he will enter his kingdom, Crowned in the midst of the prophets of old.

Sacrifice brings forth the blessings of heaven; Earth must atone for the blood of that man. Wake up the world for the conflict of justice. Millions shall know "brother Joseph" again.

Chorus:

Hail to the Prophet, ascended to heaven! Traitors and tyrants now fight him in vain. Mingling with Gods, he can plan for his brethren; Death cannot conquer the hero again.

From W. W. Phelps [^6] To Joseph Smith, the Prophet [^7] VADE MECUM

Go with me, will you go to the Saints that have died-

To the next better world where the righteous reside?

Where the angels and spirits in harmony be, In the joys of a vast paradise?-Go with me.

Go with me where the truth and the virtues prevail;

Where the union is one, and the years never fail;

Not a heart can conceive, nor a nat'ral eye see

What the Lord has prepar'd for the just.-Go with me. 184

Go with me where there's no destruction or war; Neither tyrants or sland'rers, nor nations ajar; Where the system is perfect, and happiness free, And the life is eternal with God.-Go with me.

Go with me, will you go to the mansions above, Where the bliss, and the knowledge, the light, and the love, And the glory of God do eternally be? Death, the wages of sin, is not there.-Go with me.

Joseph Smith The Vision From Joseph Smith to W. W. Phelps, Esq. [^8]

I will go, I will go, to the home of the Saints, Where the virtue's the value, and life the reward;

But before I return to my former estate, I must fulfill the mission I had from the Lord.

Wherefore, hear O ye heavens, and give ear O ye earth, And rejoice, ye inhabitants, truly again;

For the Lord he is God, and his life never ends, And besides him there ne'er was a Savior of men.

His ways are a wonder, his wisdom is great; The extent of his doings there's none can unveil; His purposes fail not; from age unto age He still is the same, and his years never fail.

His throne is the heavens his life-time is all Of eternity now, and eternity then;

His union is power, and none stays his hand, The Alpha, Omega, for ever. Amen.

For thus saith the Lord, in the spirit of truth, I am merciful, gracious, and good unto those That fear me, and live for the life that's to come: My delight is to honour the Saints with repose,

That serve me in righteousness true to the end; Eternal's their glory and great their reward.

I'll surely reveal all my myst'ries to them- The great hidden myst'ries in my kingdom stor'd; 185

Front the council in Kolob, to time on the earth, And for ages to come unto them I will show

My pleasure and will, what the kingdom will do: Eternity's wonders they truly shall know.

Great things of the future I'll show unto them, Yea, things of the vast generations to rise;

For their wisdom and glory shall be very great, And their pure understanding extend to the skies.

And before them the wisdom of wise men shall cease, And the nice understanding of prudent ones fail!

For the light of my spirit shall light mine elect, And the truth is so mighty 'twill ever prevail.

And the secrets and plans of my will I'll reveal, The sanctifi'd pleasures when earth is renew'd;

What the eye hath not seen, nor the ear hath yet heard, Nor the heart of the natural man ever view'd.

I, Joseph, the prophet, in spirit beheld, And the eyes of the inner man truly did see

Eternity sketch'd in a vision from God, Of what was, and now is, and yet is to be.

Those things which the Father ordained of old, Before the world was or a system had run;

Through Jesus, the Maker and Savior of all- The only begotten (Messiah) his son.

Of whom I bear record, as all prophets have, And the record I bear is the fulness-yea, even

The truth of the gospel of Jesus-the-Christ, With whom I convers'd in the vision of heav'n.

For while in the act of translating his word, Which the Lord in his grace had appointed to me, I came to the gospel recorded by John, Chapter fifth, and the twenty-ninth verse which you'll see.

I marvell'd at these resurrections, indeed, For it came unto me by the spirit direct:

And while I did meditate what it all meant, The Lord touch'd the eyes of my own intellect.

Hosanna, for ever! They open'd anon, And the glory of God shone around where I was;

And there was the Son at the Father's right hand, In a fulness of glory and holy applause. 186

I beheld round the throne holy angels and hosts, And sanctified beings from the worlds that have been, In holiness worshipping God and the Lamb, For ever and ever. Amen and amen.

And now after all of the proofs made of him, By witnesses truly, by whom he was known, This is mine, last of all, that he lives; yea, he lives! And sits at the right hand of God on his throne.

And I heard a great voice bearing record from heav'n, He's the Saviour and only begotten of God;

By him, of him, and through him, the worlds were all made, Even all that career in the heavens so broad.

Whose inhabitants, too, from the first to the last, Are sav'd by the very same Saviour of ours;

And, of course, are begotten God's daughters and sons By the very same truths and the very same powers.

And I saw and bear record of warfare in heaven; For an angel of light, in authority great, Rebell'd against Jesus and sought for his power, But was thrust down to woe from his glorified state.

And the heavens all wept, and the tears dropp'd like dew, That Lucifer, son of the morning, had fell! Yea, is fallen! is fallen and become, oh, alas! The son of perdition, the devil of hell!

And while I was yet in the spirit of truth, The commandment was-"Write ye the vision all out, For Satan, old serpent, the devil's for war, And yet will encompass the Saints round about."

And I saw, too, the suff'ring and misery of those, (Overcome by the devil, in warfare and fight);

In hell-fire and vengeance-the doom of the damn'd; For the Lord said the vision is further, so write:

For thus saith the Lord, now concerning all those, Who know of my power and partake of the same;

And suffer themselves that they be overcome By the power of Satan. despising my name-

Defying my power, and denying the truth: They are they of the world, or of men most forlorn, The sons of perdition, of whom, ah! I say, 'Twere better for them had they never been born. 187

They're the vessels of wrath, and dishonour to God, Doom'd to suffer his wrath in the regions of woe, Through all the long night of eternity's round, With the devil and all of his angels below.

Of whom it is said no forgiveness is found, In this world, alas! nor the world that's to come, For they have deny'd the spirit of God, After having receiv'd it, and mis'ry's their doom.

And denying the only begotten of God, And crucify him to themselves, as they do, And openly put him to shame in their flesh, By the gospel they cannot repentance renew.

They are they who go to the great take of fire, Which burneth with brimstone, yet never consumes, And dwell with the devil. and angels of his, While eternity goes and eternity comes.

They are they who must groan through the great second death, And are not redeemed in the time of the Lord;

While all the rest are, through the triumph of Christ, Made partakers of grace, by the power of his word.

The myst'ry of godliness truly is great; The past, and the present, and what is to be; And this is the gospel-glad tidings to all, Which the voice from the heavens bore record to me:

That he came to the world in the middle of time, To lay down his life for his friends and his foes, And bear away sin as a mission of love, And sanctify earth for a blessed repose.

'Tis decreed that he'll save all the work of his hands, And sanctify them by his own precious blood;

And purify earth for the Sabbath of rest, By the agent of fire as it was by the flood.

The Saviour will save all his Father did give, Even all that he gave in the regions abroad, Save the sons of perdition-they are lost, ever lost! And can never return to the presence of God.

They are they who must reign with the devil in hell, In. eternity now, and eternity then!

Where the worm dieth not, and the fire is not quench'd, And the punishment still is eternal. Amen. 188

And which is the torment apostates receive, But the end or the place where the torment began, Save to them who are made to partake of the same, Was never, nor will be revealed unto man.

Yet God, by a vision, shows a glimpse of their fate, And straightway he closes the scene that was shown;

So the width, or the depth, or the misery thereof, Save to those that partake, is forever unknown.

And while I was pondering, the vision was closed, And the voice said to me, write the vision; for, lo!

'Tis the end of the scene of the sufferings of those Who remain filthy still in their anguish and woe.

And again I bear record of heavenly things, Where virtue's the value above all that is priz'd, Of the truth of the gospel concerning the just, That rise in the first resurrection of Christ.

Who receiv'd, and believ'd, and repented likewise, And then were baptiz'd, as a man always was, Who ask'd and receiv'd a remission of sin, And honoured the kingdom by keeping its laws.

Being buried in water, as Jesus had been, And keeping the whole of his holy commands, They received the gift of the spirit of truth, By the ordinance truly of laying on hands.

For these overcome, by their faith and their works, Being tried in their life-time, as purified gold, And seal'd by the spirit of promise to life, By men called of God, as was Aaron of old.

They are they, of the church of the first-born of God, And unto whose hands be committeth all things;

For they hold the keys of the kingdom of heav'n, And reign with the Saviour, as priests and as kings.

They're priests of the order of Melchizedek, Like Jesus (from whom is this highest reward), Receiving a fulness of glory and light; As written-they're Gods even sons of the Lord.

So all things are theirs; yea, of life or of death; Yea, whether things now, or to come, all are theirs, And they are the Saviour's, and he is the Lord's, Having overcome all, as eternity's heirs. 189

'Tis wisdom that man never glory in man, But give God the glory for all that he hath;

For the righteous will walk in the presence of God, While the wicked are trod underfoot in his wrath,

Yea, the righteous shall dwell in the presence of God, And of Jesus, forever, from earth's second birth-

For when he comes down in the splendour of heav'n, All those he'll bring with him to reign on the earth.

These are they that arise in their bodies of flesh, When the trump of the first resurrection shall sound;

These are they that come up to Mount Zion, in life, Where the blessings and gifts of the spirit abound.

These are they that have come to the heavenly place; To the numberless courses of angels above:

To the city of God, e'en the holiest of all, And the home of the blessed, the fountain of love;

To the church of old Enoch, and of the first-born: And gen'ral assembly of ancient renown'd, Whose names are all kept in the archives of heav'n, As chosen and faithful, and tit to be crown'd.

These are they that are perfect through Jesus' own blood, Whose bodies celestial are mention'd by Paul, Where the sun is the typical glory thereof, And God, and his Christ, are the true judge of all.

Again, I beheld the terrestrial world, In the order and glory of Jesus go on;

'Twas not as the church of the first-born of God, But shone in its place, as the moon to the sun,

Behold, these are they that have died without law; The heathen of ages that never had hope, And those of the region and shadow of death, The spirits in prison, that light has brought up.

To spirits in prison the Saviour once preach'd, And taught them the gospel, with powers afresh;

And then were the living baptiz'd for their dead, That they might be judg'd as if men in the flesh.

These are they that are hon'rable men of the earth; Who were blinded and dup'd by the cunning of men; They receiv'd not the truth of the Saviour at first; But did, when they heard it in prison again. 190

Not valiant for truth, they obtain'd not the crown, But are of that glory that's typ'd by the moon:

They are they, that come into the presence of Christ, But not to the fulness of God on his throne.

Again, I beheld the telestial, as third, The lesser, or starry world, next in its place, For the leaven must leaven three measures of meal, And every knee bow that is subject to grace.

These are they that receiv'd not the gospel of Christ, Or evidence, either, that he ever was;

As the stars are all diff'rent in glory and light, So differs the glory of these by the laws.

These are they that deny not the spirit of God, But are thrust down to hell, with the devil, for sins, As hypocrites, liars, whoremongers and thieves, And stay 'till the last resurrection begins.

'Till the Lamb shall have finish'd the work he begun; Shall have trodden the winepress in fury alone.

And overcome all by the pow'r of his might: He conquers to conquer, and saves all his own.

These are they that receive not a fulness of light, From Christ, in eternity's world, where they are, The terrestial sends them the Comforter, though, And minist'ring angels, to happify there.

And so the telestial is minister'd to, By ministers from the terrestrial one, As terrestrial is, from the celestial throne; And the great, greater, greatest, seem's stars, moon, and sun.

And thus I beheld, in the vision of heav'n, The telestial glory, dominion and bliss, Surpassing the great understanding of men.- Unknown, save reveal'd. in a world vain as this.

And lo! I beheld the terrestrial, too, Which excels the telestial in glory and light.

In splendour and knowledge, and wisdom and joy. In blessings and graces, dominion and might.

I beheld the celestial, in glory sublime; Which is the most excellent kingdom that is, Where God, e'en the Father, in harmony reigns; Almighty, supreme, and eternal in bliss. 191

Where the church of the first-born in union reside, And they see as they're seen, and they know as they're known Being equal in power, dominion and might, With a fulness of glory and grace round his throne.

The glory celestial is one like the sun; The glory terrestrial is one like the moon;

The glory telestial is one like the stars, And all harmonize like the parts of a tune.

As the stars are all different in lustre and size, So the telestial region is mingled in bliss;

From the least unto greatest, and greatest to least, The reward is exactly as promised in this.

These are they that came out for Apollos and Paul; For Cephas and Jesus, in all kinds of hope; For Enoch and Moses, and Peter and John; For Luther and Calvin, and even the Pope.

For they never received the gospel of Christ Nor the prophetic spirit that came from the Lord;

Nor the covenant neither, which Jacob once had; They went their own way, and they have their reward.

By the order of God, last of all, these are they, That will not be gather'd with saints here below, To be caught up to Jesus, and meet in the cloud: In darkness they worshipp'd; to darkness they go.

These are they that are sinful, the wicked at large, That glutted their passion by meanness or worth;

All liars, adulterers, sorcerers, and proud, And suffer as promis'd, God's wrath on the earth.

These are they that must suffer the vengeance of hell, 'Till Christ shall have trodden all enemies down, And perfected his work, in the fulness of time, And is crowned on his throne with his glorious crown.

The vast multitude of the telestial world - As the stars of the skies, or the sands of the sea;

The voice of Jehovah echo'd far and wide, Every tongue shall confess and they all bow the knee.

Ev'ry man shall be judg'd by the works of his life, And receive a reward in the mansions prepar'd;

For his judgments are just, and his works never end, As his prophets and servants have always declar'd. 192

But the great things of God, which he show'd unto me, Unlawful to utter, I dare not declare;

They surpass all the wisdom and greatness of men, And only are seen, as has Paul where they are.

I will go, I will go, while the secret of life, Is blooming in heaven, and blasting in hell;

is leaving on earth, and a-budding in space: I will go, I will go, with you, brother, farewell.

John Lyon [^9] The Apostate: A Fragment

I knew him, ere the roots of bitterness Had grown to putrid cancer in his soul.

Then Revelation's light gleamed o'er his mind In strange fantastic dreams of future bliss; He saw the dawn, and tiffs was quite enough For speculation's visionary claim.

Precocious, in a day from childhood to A man, he grew a giant of his kind; Until his head was in the clouds, and there He saw the myst'ries of the aerial world!

All knowledge, ere it was revealed, he knew. The knotty points in Scripture he could solve, By presto touch of talismanic wand, And, Patriarch-like, had the discerning gift To know the ancient seeds of Israel's race.

The spirits of all men he could discern, And oft, through speculation's vain conceit, He did interpret, to indignation, And raise the fouler passions of a few; While sonic admired, in sycophantic phrase, That made the humbler of the Saints to blush.

The Gathering was his constant theme; for he Had dreamed of golden gates, and pearly walls, And palaces, and ghostly saints at case Reclining 'neath the palm-tree's shade at noon.

And so he left, to seek his fairy kind Uncounselled, in his own imaginings.

But ah! he thought not of the fiery path Where persecution, poverty, and death, Await the just, ere they can sing the song Of ransom'd ones, by suffering perfect made.

Thus, full of novelty's romance, he found The city of the Saints, and with it all The stern realities of life. His hope, Like morning mist, evaporated quite, And with it, all his dreams of phantom bliss Which nightly pictur'd out Elysian fields, Woods, lawns, and bowers, and wizard, winding streams, By crystal founts, and cool refreshing groves!

Amazed beyond description to rehearse, He tried to reconcile his blasted hopes, Where he beheld the toil-worn sons of God Rolling the stone of Joseph, pond'rous grown: Still disaffection's deadly, 'venomed sting Withered his schemes, till every sense became Corrupt, and dead. He neither saw, nor felt, Nor heard, nor savour'd of the things of God.

Then falsehood came, and with it came distrust: Truth error seemed, and lies appeared as truth! And holy men were swindling vagabonds! The Temple, once revered, stood folly's shrine! His jaundiced eye suspiciously reversed The objects he perceived, or thought he saw.

The name, that erst gave pleasure's pure delight, Rang in his ears a strange delusive sound.

Like smould'ring embers still his hatred burned In his foul mind, till every passion burst Their prison'd fire, and blazed one sulph'rous flame Of malice, hotter than the Stygian lake!

And so be fell from his gigantic height, 193 As we have seen a falling meteor fall From out the starry vault, which never had.

'Mong constellations. a fixed residence, Save the combustive fluid of scattered gas, That, kindled by the windy current. flashed.

And falling, seemed a blazing orb of heaven!

Forgotten, nearly twenty moons he'd left Nauvoo! when 1o! in Scotland I beheld This strange, outlandish looking man at church Among the Saints. I wondered much, I watched Him when the congregation sang in praise The songs of Zion! but his lips moved not, And when they knelt, he stood a statue mute Amidst the prostrate throng of worshippers.

His bas'lisk eye in rolling anguish told The gnawings of the bitter worm within. I met him after service, and he strove To imitate the Saints' fond welcome greet, But when his hand touched mine,-Lord save me, how I shook! Touched with his influence of despair; It ran like lightning o'er my mortal frame, Benumbing till the energies of life.

The Prophet, Saints, and all their labours were His theme of execration and contempt.

Anon he railed of horrid, murd'rous deeds, Of av'rice, cruelty, and heartless fraud, Pollution. and a thousand evil ways Unheard of, save in his degen'rate heart.

Apostles! fiends in human shape. he viewed; The Priesthood! dupes. or duped. In madness thus He raved. and counted o'er his money lost;- The turning period of his selfish soul- And like old Shylock, grinned in bitter spite To have his "pound of flesh?' We parted thus. 'Twas past all patience, longer to endure.

John Lyon [^10] Family Prayer

'Tis sometimes hard to be devout at prayer.

For devils then will lead our minds astray By sortie injected thought, or outward snare, And turn the current of our thoughts away From holy things, in spite of all our care, So artful are they, watching night and day To work our ruin, by some hidden guise, Which, when found out, we heartily despise.

This story's of a countryman's devotion, While praying with his wife and two small sons, Who of a dog and cat had little notion, Were winking by the fireside without noise, When all at once, by some infernal motion, Snap growled at Puss, and gave her such a hoise, When she hissed, spitting, jumped from the attack And fastened claw-deep on the farmer's back.

The boys laughed loud to see at pray'r such fun, While father groaned, and swore an oath or two; The cat kept scratching where she'd safety won Above the reach of Snap, who growled, and grew More furious barking as at Puss he run, Till all the family were in a stew, Nor could continue longer their devotion With such unholy feelings and commotion.

"O Lord!" he cried, in accents quite emphatic- Rather more serious than his praying mood- But which he'd often done, stung with rheumatic; His wife, as every loving woman should, Roared out, "Confound that dog!" in tones erratic, "And that singed cat, that's always in a feud;" And rising from her knees in holy ire Caught Snap and threw him plump into the fire.

The husband, sorry for his poor burnt dog, Threw Puss in fury at his angry wife; And she, to be revenged, commenced to flog Her little boys, for laughing at the strife- "Who were," she said, "like father, the old rogue, Who never did the square thing in his life." So on they went, a town's talk and their sport, Until they parted at the probate court.

Such is a picture I have seen of late, Suggesting quarrels of a family kind, 194 That led to greater, and a sadder fate, To say and do things in our passion blind Which, when with other, meaner, acts combined, Led on by folly, in an angry state, To sober thought, and helplessly do fail To calmly act, as we would read this tale.

Joel H. Johnson [^11] High on the Mountain Top

High on the mountain top A banner is unfurled;

Ye nations, now look up; It waves to all the world;

In Deseret's sweet, peaceful land - On Zion's mount behold it stand!

For God remembers still His promise made of old

That be on Zion's hill Truth's standard would unfold!

Her light should there attract the gaze Of all the world in latter days.

His house shall there be reared His glory to display;

And people shall be heard In distant lands to say,

We'll now go up and serve the Lord, Obey his truth and learn his word.

For there we shall be taught The law that will go forth,

With truth and wisdom fraught, To govern all the earth;

Forever there his ways we'll tread, And save ourselves with all our dead.

Then hail to Deseret! A refuge for the good,

And safety for the great, If they but understood

That God with plagues will shake the world Till all its thrones shall down be hurled.

In Deseret doth truth Rear up its royal head;

Though nations may oppose, Still wider it shall spread;

Yes, truth and justice, love and grace, In Deseret find ample place.

Eliza R. Snow [^12] How Great the Wisdom and the Love

How great the wisdom and the love That filled the courts on high

And sent the Savior from above To suffer, bleed, and die!

His precious blood he freely spilt; His life he freely gave,

A sinless sacrifice for guilt, A dying world to save. 195

By strict obedience Jesus won The prize with glory rife:

"Thy will, O God, not mine be done," Adorned his mortal life.

He marked the path and led the way, And every point defines

To light and life and endless day Where God's full presence shines.

How great, how glorious, how complete, Redemption's grand design,

Where justice, love, and mercy meet In harmony divine!

In memory of the broken flesh We eat the broken bread:

And witness with the cup, afresh, Our faith in Christ, our Head.

Eliza R. Snow [^13] Invocation, or the Eternal Father and Mother [^14]

O my Father, thou that dwellest In the high and glorious place, When shall I regain thy presence, And again behold thy face? In thy holy habitation, Did my spirit once reside? In my first primeval childhood, Was I nurtured near thy side?

For a wise and glorious purpose Thou hast placed me here on earth, And withheld the recollection Of my former friends and birth. Yet ofttimes a secret something Whispered, "You're a stranger here." And I felt that I had wandered From a more exalted sphere.

I had learned to call thee Father, Through thy Spirit from on high: But until the key of knowledge Was restored, I knew not why. In the heavens are parents single? No; the thought makes reason stare! Truth is reason, truth eternal Tells me I've a mother there.

When I leave this frail existence, When I lay this mortal by, Father, Mother, may I meet you In your royal courts on high? Then, at length, when I've completed All you sent me forth to do, With your mutual approbation Let me come and dwell with you.

Eliza R. Snow [^15] Be Not Discouraged [^16]

Though deepening trials throng your way, Press on, press on, ye Saints of God!

Ere long the resurrection day Will spread its light and truth abroad.

Though outward ills await us here, The time at longest is not long

Ere Jesus Christ will reappear, Surrounded by a glorious throng.

Lift up your hearts in praise to God; Let your rejoicings never cease;

Though tribulations rage abroad, Christ says, "In me ye shall have peace."

What though our rights have been assailed? What though by foes we've been despoiled?

Jehovah's promise has not failed; Jehovah's purpose is not foiled.

His work is moving on apace, Anti great events are rolling forth;

The kingdom of the latter days, The "little stone," must fill the earth.

Though Satan rage, 'tis all in vain; The words the ancient Prophet spoke, Sure as the throne of God remain; Nor man nor devils can revoke. 196

All glory to his holy name Who sends his faithful servants forth

To prove the nations, to proclaim Salvation's tidings through the earth.

Eliza R. Snow [^17] My First View of a Western Prairie

The loveliness of Nature always did Delight me.

In the days of childhood, when My young light heart, in all the buoyancy Of its own bright imagination's spell, Beat in accordant consonance to all For which it cherish'd an affinity, The summer glory of the landscape rous'd Within my breast a princely feeling. Time's Obliterating strokes cannot erase The impulse, with my being interwove; And oftentimes, in the fond ecstacy Of youth's effervescence, I've gaz'd Upon the richly variegated fields, Which most emphatically spoke the praise Of Nature, and the Cultivator's skill.

But when I heard the western trav'ller paint The splendid beauties of the far-off West; Where Nature's pastures, rich and amply broad, Waving in full abundance, seem to mock The agriculturists of eastern soil; I grew incredulous that Nature's dress Should be so rich, and so domestic, and So beautiful, without the touch of Art; And thought the picture fancifully wrought.

Yet, in the process of revolving scenes, I left the place of childhood and of youth; And as I journey'd t'ward the setting sun, As if awaking from a nightly dream, Into a scenery grand and strangely new, I almost thought myself transported back Upon the retrograding wheel of time, To days and scenes when Greece presided o'er The destinies of earth; and when she shone Like her ador'd Apollo; without one Tall rival in the field of Literature; And fancied then myself as standing on That towering mount of truly classic fame

That overlooks the rich, the fertile, and The far-extended vales of Crissa: or That in some wild poetic spell, of deep Unconscious recklessness, I'd stray'd afar Upon the flowing plains of Marathon.

But soon reflection's potent wand dispell'd The false illusion, and I realiz'd That I was not inhaling foreign air, Or moving in a scene emblazon'd with The classic legends of antiquity.

O, no: the scenery around was not Enchantment. 'Twas the bright original Of those fair images and ideal forms, Which fancy's pencil is so prompt to sketch. Instead of treading on Ionian fields, I stood upon Columbian soil, and in The rich and fertile state of Illinois.

Amaz'd, I view'd until my optic nerve Grew dull and giddy with the frenzy of The innocent delight; and I exclaim'd, With Sheba's queen, "One half had not been told."

But then my thought-can I describe my thoughts?

No: for description's liveliest powers grow lame, Whenever put upon the chase of things Of non-existence; and my thoughts had all, Like liquid matter, melted down, and had Become, as with a secret touch, absorb'd In the one all-engrossing feeling of Deep admiration, vivid and intense. And my imagination too, for once Acknowledg'd its own imbecility, And cower'd down as if to hide away; For all its powers had been too cold and dull, Too tame and too domestic far, to draw A parallel with the bold grandeur, and The native beauty, of the "Western World!<_P>" 197

Eliza R. Snow [^18] Mental Gas

Charles to his teacher-Sir. you say

That nature's laws admit decay- That changes never cease;

And yet you say, no void or space;

'Tis only change of shape or place No loss, and no increase.

That space or vacuum, sir, explain-

When solid sense forsakes the brain, Pray what supplies its place?

O. sir, I think I see it now-

When substance fails, you will allow Air occupies the space.

Not so, my child, that rule must fail;

For. by my philosophic scale, The substitute for sense

Is lighter far than common air;

And with the most Consummate care, No chemic skill can dense.

But when misfortune turns the screw,

'Tis oft compress'd from outward view- By outward force confin'd:

But with expansive power 'twill rise,

Destroy the man, increase his size, And swell his optics blind.

Of various hues, yet still the same;

Though mental gas its chemic name, Some Poets call it pride:

Th' important aid this gas imparts

Among the various human arts Can never be denied.

This gas, entire, may be obtain'd

From skulls whence sense is mostly drain'd, Or never had supplies:

But were the noblest heads disclos'd,

From acts and motives decompos'd, This mental gas would rise.

Tire parson's lecture, lawyer's plea,

Devoted sums of charity, The sage with book profound;

The Muse's pen, the churchman's creed,

The mill-boy on his pacing steed, Are more or less compound.

Parley P. Pratt [^19] Come, O Thou King of Kings

Come, O thou King of kings! We've waited long for thee, With healing in thy wings To set thy people free; Come, thou desire of nations, come; Let Israel now be gathered home.

Come. make an end to sin And cleanse the earth by fire, And righteousness bring in, That Saints may tune the lyre With songs of joy, a happier strain, To welcome in thy peaceful reign.

Hosannas now shall sound From all the ransomed throng, And glory echo round A new triumphal song; The wide expanse of heaven fill With anthems sweet from Zion's hill.

Hail! Prince of life and peace! Thrice welcome to thy throne! While all the chosen race Their Lord and Savior own. The heathen nations bow the knee, And ev'ry tongue sounds praise to thee. 198

Parley P. Pratt [^20] The Morning Breaks; the Shadows Flee

The morning breaks; the shadows flee; Lo, Zion's standard is unfurled! The dawning of a brighter day, The dawning of a brighter day Majestic rises on the world.

The clouds of error disappear Before the rays of truth divine; The glory bursting from afar, The glory bursting from afar Wide o'er the nations soon will shine.

The Gentile fulness now comes in, And Israel's blessings are at hand. Lo, Judah's remnant, cleansed from sin, Lo, Judah's remnant, cleansed from sin Shall in their promised Canaan stand.

Jehovah speaks! let earth give ear, And Gentile nations turn and live. His mighty arm is making bare, His mighty arm is making bare His covenant people to receive.

Angels from heaven and truth from earth Have met, and both have record borne; Thus Zion's light is bursting forth, Thus Zion's light is bursting forth To bring her ransomed children home.

Parley P. Pratt [^21] An Angel from on High

An angel from on high The long, long silence broke, Descending from the sky, These gracious words he spoke: " Lo, in Cumorah's Ionely hill A sacred record lies concealed; Lo, in Cumorah's lonely hill, A sacred record lies concealed."

Sealed by Moroni's hand, It has for ages lain To wait the Lord's command, From dust to speak again. It shall again to light come forth To usher in Christ's reign on earth; It shall again to light come forth To usher in Christ's reign on earth.

It speaks of Joseph's seed And makes the remnant known Of nations long since dead, Who once had dwelt alone.

The fulness of the gospel, too, Its pages will reveal to view; The fulness of the gospel, too, Its pages will reveal to view.

The time is now fulfilled, The long expected day; Let earth obedience yield And darkness flee away; Remove the seals; be wide unfurled Its light and glory to the world; Remove the seals; be wide unfurled Its light and glory to the world.

Lo, Israel filled with joy Shall now be gathered home; Their wealth and means employ To build Jerusalem, While Zion shall arise and shine And fill the earth with truth divine, While Zion shall arise and shine And fill the earth with truth divine.

Parley P. Pratt [^22] Evening Prayer [^23]

As the dew from heaven distilling Gently on the grass descends

And revives it, thus fulfilling What thy providence intends, 199

Let thy doctrine, Lord. so gracious. Thus descending from above, Blest by thee, prove efficacious To fulfill thy work of love.

Lord, behold this congregation; Precious pro raises fulfill:

From thy holy habitation Let the dews of life distill,

Let our cry come up before thee; Thy sweet Spirit shed around, So the people shall adore thee And confess the joyful sound.

Cyrus H. Wheelock [^24] Ye Elders of Israel

Ye elders of Israel, come join now with me And seek out the righteous. where'er they may be: In desert, on mountain. on land, or on sea, And bring them to Zion, the pure and the free.

The harvest is great, and the laborers are few; But if we're united, we all things can do; We'll gather the wheat from the midst of the tares And bring them from bondage, from sorrows and snares.

We'll go to the poor, like our Captain of old, And visit the weary, the hungry, and cold; We'll cheer up their hearts with the news that he bore And point them to Zion and life evermore.

Chorus:

O Babylon, O Babylon, we bid thee farewell; We're going to the mountains of Ephraim to dwell.

William Clayton Come, Come Ye Saints [^25]

Come, come, ye Saints, no toil nor labor fear; But with joy wend your way. Though hard to yell this journey may appear, Grace shall be as your day. 'Tis better far for us to strive Our useless cares from us to drive; Do this and joy your hearts will swell- All is well! all is well!

Why should we mourn or think our lot is hard? 'Tis not so; all is right. Why should we think to earn a great reward, If we now shun the fight?

Gird up your loins; fresh courage take; Our God will never us forsake; And soon we'll have this tale to tell All is well! all is well!

We'll find the place which God for us prepared, Far away in the West, Where none shall come to hurt or make afraid; There the Saints will be blessed. We'll make the air with music ring, Shout praises to our God and King; Above the rest these words we'll tell- All is well! all is well! 200

And should we die before our journey's through, Happy day! all is well! We then are free from toil and sorrow, too; With the just we shall dwell!

But if our lives are spared again To see the Saints their rest obtain, O how we'll make this chorus swell- All is well! all is well!

John Jaques [^26] Oh Say, What Is Truth?

Oh say, what is truth? 'Tis the fairest gem That the riches of worlds can produce, And priceless the value of truth will be when The proud monarch's costliest diadem Is counted but dross and refuse.

Yes, say, what is truth? 'Tis the brightest prize To which mortals or Gods can aspire; Go search in the depths where it glittering lies Or ascend in pursuit to the loftiest skies. 'Tis an aim for the noblest desire.

The sceptre may fall from the despot's grasp When with winds of stern justice he copes, But the pillar of truth will endure to the last, And its firm-rooted bulwarks outstand the rude blast, And the wreck of the fell tyrant's hopes.

Then say, what is truth? 'Tis the last and the first, For the limits of time it steps o'er. Though the heavens depart and the earth's fountains burst, Truth, the sum of existence, will weather the worst, Eternal, unchanged, evermore.

Charles W. Penrose [^27] Up, Awake, Ye Defenders of Zion

Up, awake, ye defenders of Zion! The foe's at the door of your homes; Let each heart be the heart of a lion, Unyielding and proud as he roams. Remember the wrongs in Missouri; Forget not the fate of Nauvoo. When the God-hating foe is before you, Stand firm and be faithful and true, Stand firm and be faithful and true, Stand firm and be faithful and true; When the God-hating foe is before you, Stand firm and be faithful and true.

By the mountains our Zion's surrounded; Her warriors are noble and brave; And their faith on Jehovah is founded, Whose power is mighty to save. Opposed by a proud boasting nation, 201 Their numbers, compared, may be few; But their union is known through creation, And they've always been faithful and true. And they've always been faithful and true, And they've always been faithful and true, But their union is known through creation, And they've always been faithful and true.

Shall we bear with oppression forever? Shall we tamely submit to the foe, While the ties of our kindred they sever And the blood of our prophets shall flow? No! the thought sets the heart wildly beating; Our vows at each pulse we renew: Ne'er to rest till our foes are retreating, And to be ever faithful and true, And to be ever faithful and true, And to be ever faithful and true; Ne'er to rest till our foes are retreating, And to be ever faithful and true.

Though assisted by legions infernal, The plundering wretches advance, With a host from the regions eternal, We'll scatter their troops at a glance. Soon "the Kingdom" will be independent; In wonder the nations will view The despised ones in glory resplendent; Then let us be faithful and true, Then let us be faithful and true, Then let us be faithful and true! The despised ones in glory resplendent; Then let us be faithful and true!

Richard Smyth [^28] Israel, Israel, God Is Calling

Israel, Israel, God is calling, Calling thee from lands of woe: Babylon the great is falling. God shall all her towers o'erthrow. Come to Zion, come to Zion Ere his floods of anger flow. Come to Zion, come to Zion Ere his floods of anger flow.

Israel, Israel, God is speaking; Hear your great Deliverer's voice! Now a glorious morn is breaking For the people of his choice. Come to Zion, come to Zion, And within her walls rejoice. Come to Zion, come to Zion, And within her walls rejoice.

Israel, angels are descending From celestial worlds on high, And to man their power extending, That the Saints may homeward fly. Come to Zion, come to Zion, For your coming Lord is nigh. Come to Zion, come to Zion, For your coming Lord is nigh.

Israel! Israel! canst thou linger Still in error's gloomy ways? Mark how judgment's pointing finger Justifies no vain delays. Come to Zion, come to Zion! Zion's walls shall ring with praise. Come to Zion, come to Zion! Zion's walls shall ring with praise. 202

Ina Coolbrith [^29] Millennium

The night falls, heavy with the coming storm! Far out, the ocean frets against the bar, And the cloud-legions, gathering force and form Shut, with closed ranks, all gleam of moon or star.

Tempestuous darkness! and unto the dawn, Long hours. Ah! with the passing will there be The gold and crimson by the sun-rays drawn, Or tempest still, and moaning of the sea?

The world is heavy with the coming storm! No nation wars with nation, race with race, But where the love-pulse should beat quick and warm, Lo! brother against brother, face to face. Abel unto the god of blood gives blood, Who heeds not the fair fruitage of the land, And wrong and rage, of viper-nests the brood, Arm Cain with flaming heart and flaming brand.

Where is the peace that should with thee abide O Earth? Art still beneath the primal ban, Availing naught the Holy Crucified? No faith in God because no faith in man! Thy helpless idols help thee not-Awake! Arise, and let thy weary burden fall! Captive, the fetters of the ages break, And, thrall to Mammon, be no longer thrall.

O Spirit of the Holy One, from where On high Thou dwellest, lend Thy loving will To quell these battle-giants of the air, And to the warring waters speak, "Be still." Or if from darkness, only, springs the light, And but from struggle blessed peace is born, Loose till the awful thunders of Thy might- And hail, the night! that heralds the glad morn.

Augusta Joyce Crocheron [^30] Thoughts Within

As some poor laborer's sightless babe Wakes from its pallet on the floor In fear, to find itself alone, And gropes the open door to find; Reaching anon the empty air To clutch; seeking something to grasp To aid it in its search; and then, Wearying in its efforts vain, It lifts its plaintive, grieving wail; Then pauses, listening softly for Its mother's answering voice; so I Kneel down before Thine unseen throne- So I call to Thee in my prayer Earnest and deep, yet humble too; And listen with that inner ear Far in the soul's remotest depth. Not for Thy voice to sweep to earth Answering to my human cry, As angels in the old times did, When men were truly, purely Thine; But for an influence, sweet and still, To lead my groping soul aright.

As though I, clinging to some hand, Across a torrent spanned but by A slender tree's decaying trunk, 203 Looking not to the shore beyond, Nor turning, though the pine tree shriek And wave her arms, and writhe in the grasp Of the dark storm-fiend, strong in his wrath- Nor on the current swift beneath, Lest I should, swooning, fall and sink: But only where my steps should be. So will I, clinging, follow Thee Across life's deep, unmindful of The strife below,

Augusta Joyce Crocheron [^31] Parting

What brought it back to me? I thought that it had fled;

Again I sit with thee And watch the twilight red.

Far out upon the deep The full moon's light is thrown.

This night thou must not sleep; Stay near me, O, my own!

How hard for me to know That this must be the last;

That duty's wave must flow O'er all the sacred past.

Dear heart, what walls that rise Can bar out memory's view,

Or hush the poor heart's sighs You'll know are breathed for you?

So fair the moon will rise To other eyes than ours,

That weep while bitter sighs Stay not the winged hours.

Upon the radiant sight, Front out the thronged halls,

Like requiem to-night, The entrancing music falls.

At last the daylight makes, With rising shafts of gold,

Each heart in parting breaks, And duty's wage is told.

Augusta Joyce Crocheron [^32] Estranged

And hast thou shut and locked thy heart Against me? Nay, not so.

Whom once I loved, I ever love; I cannot let thee go.

Thou, who hast dwelt within my love, Winning thy place so well-

Ah! must we say good by to hearts? I cannot say farewell.

Thou, who alone didst watch my bed Of sorrow, pain, and fear;

While wintry night raged, dark and wild, And death seemed all too near.

Can I forget those dream-like days, When, resting in thy care,

I traced the wanderings of thy song Upon the charmed air?

E'en if some idle words let fall (As leaves float on the wind),

Long wandering, to thy gentle heart Its way at last did find,

Ah! who could weigh it 'gainst the past, With all its memories dear'?

Not thou, or I, who know, so well, Life's holy mission here.

Ah! who would take the perfect rose, Love on its heart had worn,

And, counting not its loveliness, Treasure alone the thorn?

I could not sing in heaven, if there A loved face turned away,

Unreconciled; 'twould chill my joy, E'en in that perfect day. 204

Joseph L. Townsend [^33] To Nephi, Seer of Olden Time

To Nephi, seer of olden time, A vision came from God, Wherein the holy word sublime, Was shown an iron rod.

While on our journey here below, Beneath temptation's power, Through mists of darkness we must go, In peril every hour.

And when temptation's power is nigh, Our pathway clouded o'er, Upon the rod we can rely, And heaven's aid implore.

And, hand o'er hand, the rod along, Through each succeeding day, With earnest prayer and hopeful song, We'll still pursue our way.

Afar we see the golden rest To which the rod will guide, Where, with the angels bright and blest, Forever we'll abide.

Chorus:

Hold to the rod, the iron rod; 'Tis strong, and bright, and true; The iron rod is the word of God, 'Twill safely guide us through.

Joseph L. Townsend [^34] Hope of Israel [^35]

Hope of Israel, Zion's army, Children of the promised day, See, the Chieftain signals onward, And the battle's in array!

See the foe in countless numbers, Marshaled in the ranks of sin; Hope of Israel, on to battle, Now the vict'ry we must win!

Strike for Zion, down with error; Flash the sword above the foe; Every stroke disarms a foeman, Every step we conq'ring go.

Soon the battle will be over; Every foe of truth be down; Onward, onward, youth of Zion, Thy reward the victor's crown.

Chorus:

Hope of Israel, rise in might With the sword of truth and right; Sound the warcry, "Watch and pray!" Vanquish every foe today. 205

Orson F. Whitney [^36] The Wintry Day, Descending to Its Close

The wintry day, descending to its close, Invites all wearied nature to repose, And shades of night are falling dense and fast Like sable curtains closing o'er the past. Pale through the gloom the newly fallen snow Wraps in a shroud the silent earth below As though 'twere mercy's band had spread the pall, A symbol of forgiveness unto all.

I cannot go to rest but linger still In meditation at my window sill, While, like the twinkling stars in heaven's dome, Come one by one sweet memories of home. And wouldst thou ask me where my fancy roves To reproduce the happy scenes it loves? Where hope and memory together dwell And paint the pictured beauties that I tell?

Away beyond the prairies of the West Where exiled Saints in solitude were blest; Where industry the seal of wealth has set Amid the peaceful vales of Deseret, Unheeding still the fiercest blasts that blow, With tops entrusted by eternal snow, The towering peaks that shield the tender sod, Stand, types of freedom reared by nature's God.

Tire wilderness, that naught before would yield, Is now become a fertile, fruitful field. Where roamed at will the savage Indian band, The templed cities of the Saints now stand. And sweet religion in its purity Invites all men to its security. This is my home, the spot I love so well, Whose worth and beauty pen nor tongue can tell.

Orson F. Whitney [^37] Ararat

Again I gazed. It was a scene sublime, Yet awful in its naked majesty. A buried world, by water freed from sin, Rose grandly from the waves, and gladly reared, O'er all, as at the first, a virgin crest Of innocence and beauty; barren all Of living soul, or life inanimate, Yet rife with promise and fertility.

On Ararat's bleak top the buoyant ark, The blessed ark of refuge, now finds rest, With all its precious heritage of souls, And germs of future growth-bequeathed from time That was, to time that was to be- a bridge Of life, the past and future linking, wide The gulf of waters o'er.

An eager throng Streams from it s portals: Noah, aged sire And Adam of the new-born world; his sons, Illustrious triad, peoplers of the waste, And parents to the nations; each with spouse, Queen mothers of a race regenerate; And all the myriad forms of motley life, For earth's replenishment reserved in store; As winding rills, rejoicing on their way, Adown the mount their devious paths pursue. 206

Orson F. Whitney [^38] From "Elect of Elohim" in Elias, an Epic of the Ages

In solemn council sat the Gods; From Kolob's height supreme, Celestial light blazed forth afar O'er countless kokaubeam;

And faintest tinge, the fiery fringe Of that resplendent day, 'Lumined the dark abysmal realm Where earth in chaos lay.

Silence self-spelled; the hour was one When thought doth most avail; Of worlds unborn the destiny Hung trembling in the scale. Silence o'er all, and there arose, Those kings and priests among, A Power sublime, than whom appeared None nobler 'mid the throng.

A stature mingling strength with grace, Of meek though Godlike mien, The love-revealing countenance Lustrous as lightning sheen; Whiter his hair than ocean spray, Or frost of alpine hill.

He spake; attention grew more grave, The stillness e'en more still.

"Father!"-the voice like music fell, Clear as the murmuring flow Of mountain streamlet trickling down From heights of virgin snow. "Father," it said, "since one must die," Thy children to redeem, Whilst earth, as yet unformed and void, With pulsing life shall teem;

"And thou, great Michael, foremost fall, That mortal man may be, And chosen Saviour yet must send, Lo, here am l-send me! I ask, I seek no recompense, Save that which then were mine; Mine be the willing sacrifice, The endless glory, Thine!

"Give me to lead to this lorn world, When wandered from the fold, Twelve legions of the noble ones That now thy face behold; Tried souls, 'mid untried spirits found; That captained these may be, And crowned the dispensations all With powers of Deity.

"A love that hath redeemed all worlds, All worlds must still redeem; But mercy cannot justice rob- Or where were Elohim?

Freedom-man's faith, man's work, God's grace- Must span the great gulf o'er;

Life, death, the guerdon or the doom, Rejoice we or deplore."

Silence once more. Then sudden rose Aloft a towering form, Proudly erect as lowering peak 'Lumed by the gathering storm! A presence bright and beautiful, With eye of flashing fire, A lip whose haughty curl bespoke A sense of inward ire.

"Give me to go!" thus boldly cried, With scarce concealed disdain; "And hence shall none, from heaven to earth, That shall not rise again. My saving plan exception scorns; Man's agency unknown; As recompense, I claim the right To sit on yonder throne!"

Ceased Lucifer. The breathless hush Resumed and denser grew. All eyes were turned; the general gaze On one common magnet drew. A moment there was solemn pause; Then, like the thunder-burst, Rolled forth from lips omnipotent- From Him both last and first:

"Immanuel! thou my Messenger, 207 Till time's probation end. And one shall go thy face before, While twelve thy steps attend.

And many more, on that far shore. The pathway shall prepare, That I, the First, the last may come, And earth my glory share.

"Go forth, thou chosen of the Gods, Whose strength shall in thee dwell! Go down betime and rescue earth. Dethroning death and hell On thee alone man's fate depends, The fate of beings all. Thou shalt not fail, though thou art free- Free, but too great, to fall.

"By three in heaven, by three on earth,- By blood that sanctifies, By water of obedience, Spirit that justifies; By every word of mine and thine, Through toil anti travail sore, Man, God-redeemed, with God shall be, As God forevermore."

'T was done. From congregation vast Tumultuous murmurs rose; Waves of conflicting sound, as when Two meeting seas oppose. 'T was finished. But the heavens wept; And still their annals tell How one was choice of Elohim, O'er one who fighting fell.

A stranger star that came from far, To fling its silver ray, Where, cradled in a lowly cave, A lowlier infant lay; And led by soft sidereal light, The Orient sages bring Rare gifts of gold and frankincense, To greet the homeless King.

Oh wondrous grace! Will Gods go down Thus low that men may rise? Imprisoned here the mighty one Who reigned in yonder skies? Hark to that chime!-a tongue sublime, That tells the hour of noon. A dying world is welcoming Life-light of sun and moon.

"Peace! peace!"-thy voice, eternity! "Peace!" echoes time's false tone. "Peace! peace!" Is discord then no more? Are earth and heaven as one? Peace, peace, where sparkling hosts proclaim A monarch manger-born: There ruler of unnumbered realms. Here throneless and forlorn.

He wandered through the faithless world, A prince in shepherd guise: He called his scat feted flock, but few The voice did recognize; For minds upborne by hollow pride, Or dimmed by sordid lust, Ne'er look for kings in begger's garb, For diamonds in the dust.

Wept He above a city doomed, Het temple, walls, and towers, O'er palaces where recreant priests Usurped unhallowed powers. "I am the way, the life, the light!" Alas! 't was heeded not; Ignored nay, mocked God's messenger, And spurned the truth He taught.

O bane of damning unbelief! Till now when e'er so rife? Thou stumbling stone, thou barrier 'thwart The gates of endless life! O love of self, and Mammon's lust! Twin portals to despair, Where bigotry, the blinded bat, Flaps through the midnight air.

Through these, gloom-wrapt Gethsemane! Thy glens of guilty shade Grieved o'er the sinless Son of God, By gold-bought kiss betrayed; Beheld Him unresisting dragged, Forsaken, friendless, lone, To halls where dark-browed hatred sat On judgment's lofty throne. 208

As sheep before His shearers, dumb, Those patient lips were mute; The clamorous charge of taunting tongues He deigned not to dispute. They smote with cruel palm a face Which felt yet bore the sting; Then crowned with thorns His quivering brow, And mocking, hailed him "King!"

Transfixt He hung,- O crime of crimes!- The God whom worlds adore. "Father, forgive them!" Drained the dregs; Immanuel was no more! No more where thunders shook the earth, Where lightnings, 'thwart the gloom, Saw that unconquered spirit spurn The shackles of the tomb.

Far-flashing on its wings of light, A falchion from its sheath, It cleft the realms of darkness and Dissolved the bands of death; Hell's dungeons burst, wide open swung The everlasting bars, Whereby the ransomed soul shall win Those heights beyond the stars.

Josephine Spencer [^39] The Long Steel Road [^40]

The long, steel road, like a silver thread Crosses the stretch of the desert bed; Through sage-sewn miles of burning sand It spreads a sinuous, shining band, And through its magic-time and space Fade out in spells of whirlwind pace.

Across its path the lizards creep, Roused from a long and listless sleep To see in the shining track a sword That threatens death to the useless horde Of desert creatures that have held The land in liege through time unspelled.

Where snake and lizard breed and thrive, Where scorpions in sand-dunes hive, The steel road weaves a wizard charm To still their taunts of death, or harm; And where they fattened-herds shall low, And emerald grasses wave and blow.

Along its way, fair spots, unknown To human eye, through ages lone- Unfold their beauties, borne anear By the steel highway-charioteer Of Destiny-to give the world Treasures so long from vision furled.

Its tread wipes out the desert miles; Bold peak to sloping sea-shore smiles; Light craft that ply an inland sea Signal old ocean's argosy, And orange groves to Oquirrh fields Trumpets the tie the steel road wields.

From Wasatch wall to harbor gate- Its girdle, like a band of fate, Links in an endless amity Two cities, pledged by Destiny To be twin comrades in a toil, That yet shall win the desert's soil From age on age of sere repose To bud, and blossom as the rose! 209

TWENTIETH-CENTURY POETRY

S. Dilworth Young [^41] The Brothers, June 24, 1844

Where are you riding, Joseph Smith? The horse walks slowly Past the city, Past the temple on the hill: I ride toward Carthage town, To keep a rendezvous, A date with destiny. And if I meet it well, My people will not call Me coward ever more. And like a lamb I go- The slaughter waits. A meek and humble man, I've lived my life as God directed me. For eighteen years I've kept his word Deep in my heart Until it was A part of me, Inseparable part. I ride with Hyrum by my side. He will not leave. We've lived our lives, Flesh of the same flesh, Born of the same womb. He has been unfaltering; His love, no one can Measure of its depth. I would that he would Stay and let me Face this Gethsemane Alone, stay and guide The church on its next Pilgrimage, for it has Trials to face. Its place Is in the West. I've seen the Vision of it all; The tall Mountains, snow-capped, Gleaming in the sun, The valleys lush, The Saints grown strong, Impregnable as long as They will keep God's law. These are the best people On the earth. Each hearth the center of the virtue Of the pure in heart. Their part is to obey The Lord.

But Hyrum rides with me. His loyalty transcends, Exalts, the common blood We share. There is his heart, A gentle heart. It beats With great compassion For the weak. Remember Orson Hyde. Hyrum pled his cause, Reminded me of what It means to be forgiven After true repentance. And there are others too, Too many to remember now. He truly lives the law of God: I the Lord will forgive whom I will forgive, But of you it is required to forgive all men.<_P> [^42] He is not sure, not yet, Of what we face, as I am sure, And that is best. Why don't I send him back? Command in God's own name? He might obey me and find rest, Safe rest, 211 Among the saints. But no, we're bound Together now with bands Like steel: The bands of love, The bands of blood. The bands of waking and of Sleeping, The bands of sorrow and of Weeping. The bands of happiness and joy. lie stays with me, though he Is free To go, And he will be with me Eternally.

Vesta Pierce Crawford [^43] The Fable of the Rose

This place has never blossomed as the rose, With cups of color as grails upon the land. Here the yields of thorn and cactus stand, And brush and bracken give reluctantly Their tints of faded green as shadow on the rocks: And fields once planted to the yellow grain Have turned to their ancestral genesis With summer's burning of the sprouted blade. Let the winds count the years we have known The forest of thistle and the sea of stone. Petitions repeated our asking for rain, With facts lifted to indifferent sky.

We have importuned in blessed words Allot phrases of the prophets and the seers. Yet harvested a quest denied And reaped a stubble in the arid years.

Stili we are cloud watchers we believe in rain; We have pardoned the land forgiven Isaiah For words we changed in time and place. Then do not ask us where the promise goes, For we have lived too long within the fable of the rose.

Christie Lund Coles [^44] Modern Christmas

In space, the lonely missile spins its way Beyond the earth's soft-breathing atmosphere. Beyond the note of song, the wind's wild play, The Cumulus, the rain's recurrent tear; Throughout file sky of orbits hung by one Who saw Ills handiwork and called it good, There moves this metal deed which man has done.

I tremble in the name of Brotherhood. For I remember how, another night, A new star pierced the heavens from above, Not in the name of power or of might, But in the name of His eternal love. May satellite and star be reconciled And bring us nearer to the waiting child. 212

Veneta L, Nielsen [^45] My Father Tamed Wild Horses

My father who is eighty shot white bears In my small Arctic. Crystal igloos Mounded wastes of boundless snow. He fished In sawtooth oceans for my frigid food, and flame That made blue glaciers tumble milk, Braided gold ears on each cold stalk, Charmed ruby rings from chunks of chalk, Prismed the air to sun-sprayed silk... He gave me dogs, some bones to shape, A knife, a skin, a game. My father from magenta dunes could see Our desert spin, with windrift sand As hot as comets' tails, and he would spell The unfixed whirligig to stop, then stitch Our ragged tent upon a calm; Would gather dates from mirage palm, Genie a well of scorpion balm, Could sing a psalm... His gateways to our camel's eye Unnerved the needles of the rich.

My father made an ark so tough A dove could find it in the sleet. If seas of tempest battered down Mountains and cliffs, a channel ditch Where roily waters had to move Along a stern but seemly groove, Although the restless current prove As angular as bitter love... He gave me for my earliest home A willow basket caulked with pitch.

My father tamed wild horses down A fire of jungle vines. Too temperate For crocodiles, he caged a zoo Of leopards, tigers, zebras. Cobras came. He found me brooks and hidden springs. He taught me lotus and the fringe Of shadow that will shelter things. He brought to me what darkness brings. He gave me bows, and arrow barbs, My ride, his rein, my name.

Arthur Henry King [^46] On this Gray and Silver Day

On this gray and silver day, why regret the blue of May? By this morning's gray and silver, note the bronze on the slow river and the birch-leaf's apricot clearer that the sun is not, better for this calmer light further from the unbounded night than the blue that opens to yet another open view.

Praise a God who, closing in detail, can prevent the sin of self-pathos in the unending prospect of the cosmos bending round the camber all the time vagueness of a cloudless clime never a vista, never a line as an artist might define.

Bless a day that sees our earth familiar and the infinite spaces not etern like finite faces by the chosen Christian hearth refining from infinity definitude's eternity. Give me a canvas, not a space, for an unforgotten face. 213

Arthur Henry King [^47] Hot Weather in Tucson

Glimpsed askance through leaves. the sky looks lapis and ivory:

confronted, blinds and is blinded by file sun's incandescence. Through the thick shadow of a mulberry a white-wing dove may little a cool blue call contimuo; and Christ. white-robed as priest, direct a blue gaze from the print on the wall. But, to face the Father's or Jehovah's embodied essence, must I prepare my own eyes for longer than I know and further than surprise can go? Have I to arrive beyond surprise or wonder, simply to accept Sinai, lightning and thunder, and the intense presence of the Gods' incorporate power and light? Joseph was not surprised: he saw his sight.

In the thin shallow of the tamarisk and mesquite, the cicadas draw a relentless buzz-saw. I dare not plant my hare sole on the sand. I have my free agency; but I can act only on things as they are, freedom being interpretable as willing obedience rather than mere recognition of necessity, like radiance from the ineluctable path of a star. Hence, it may be. Their exceeding light that I cannot yet bear. though it has driven out "Chaos and old night."

Meanwhile, the white-wing dove may call in fluted blue from the mulberry; seen through the leaves, the sky look ivory and lapis-lazuli; and Christ stand in snow and azure on the wall. I am grateful for the diversity by limitation -through the sense, the plain sense of incarnation; and hope for deliverance into a still more gifted body of flesh and bone, yes, like that of the Father and of the Son.

Edward L. Hart [^48] To Utah

I.. Arrival

Nobody wanted this place: Spaniards saw it and turned back; Trappers endured the taste Of salt in the wind for the fur pack Or love of space.

When settlers planned Westward treks it was California They chose and cursed this land For standing in the way with its thorns and Hot sand.

The sun of a late July Burns varnish onto Summit rock. Wagons and teams go by. Escarpments for a moment block The scalding sky.

Teams trail in a line now, Over the downward roll of the hill, Brushed by cedar bough; Then ages of Indian stone worlds spill From an iron plow. 214

II. Laying out the City

A sextant captures a light train Bounced from the moon to a Great Basin Point where Brigham Young's cane Marks the site for the temple mason.

Rays of base lines running through South Temple and Main embrace The cosmos in a grid beginning at a new Meridian of time and space.

III. The Gathering

They came by thousands at a slow clip, All but those buried at Haun's Mill Or Florence or some place that the lip Of man had no name for yet to trip The tongue of the young, who wanted still To find home over the next hill Or lush pastures past each desert strip. They came over the mountains and around The Horn in ships and wagons, or dragged Handcarts over stony and frozen ground, Often opened and shoveled in a mound Upon women and children or the man who lagged In his shafts only on the day he sagged In death on the crosspiece: Zion bound.

IV. Preparing for Fire

Leaving the City

You build a city and leave it, maybe To burn. All morning wagons piled Full have gone by to the south, And now we leave our house with straw Stacked in the doorway, ready for fire. Where we go next, who knows? Sonora, maybe: It's a long way.

Instructing the Torchbearers

Then it's settled; you know the signal. The city burns if only one soldier Steps out of line or raises his hand As a vandal or takes for his own use One spoon or disturbs a stick of kindling. Soldiers will not tie our hands Here and hold us tamely for mobs To rub in the dust again: never! Joseph's body was propped by a pump As a target for soldiers sent to protect him From themselves. Before that happens Here we'll level the city with fire And leave them the ashes of our past.

General Albert Sidney Johnston Marches through Salt Lake City

The naked bayonets of the Fifth Infantry flash in the van of the Union Army in morning sunshine. Baggage Wagons and caissons still rumbling At dusk through deserted streets send Echoes rattling from locked and hollow Houses to the valley walls while Crickets shrill in cadence from the hills.

V. Expansion

Any of a hundred places: name it And go there and try to claim it From Indians and insects, rodents and drouth Try, for instance, going south To Pipe Spring, in the northern strip Of Arizona above the ripped Rock at Grand Canyon and stay For years, two hundred miles away From a boy who'd ask your boy to play.

VI. Temple

Cradled in world-weighted darkness The core cooled slowly, the granite grew Into flecks of mica and pods of quartz Around flowering feldspar and hornblende. Weathering winds and rains cut off Soft cover, and light glinted From orthoclastic patterns as quarrying Frost pried free a block at last To stand capstone at the temple crest. 215

Edward L. Hart [^49] The Gentle Way (To President David O. McKay)

He left to other men the path To wealth, that turns to clay;

He left to others hate and wrath, And sought the gentle way.

Though life was filled with joy and pain, With struggle and delay,

He never challenged God's design, But chose the gentle way.

Temptations offered subtle cures For ills, and time to pay;

He stripped the mask of ugly lures, And kept the gentle way.

He earned the sweetest word known- peace, Striving day by day

To live to the last breath's release In love, the gentle way.

Marden J. Clark [^50] Lines on a Line

"Where the big dipper touches the Sacramento in quiet communion."

The line came full-blown in the dim-dawn morning, No source that I Call trace, not even awareness Of Sacramento as river. But it nags at me, like a wife whose nagging Carries celestial authority.

I like the image: the focal point of Heaven Stretching toward earth for solemn sacrament To drink and be filled. Or to offer, it works both ways.

I'm not so sure of rhythm or sound. They too seem To work, but not by any regularity. Alliteration, but hard k's that ought to hurt The sense of worship. They don't. Nothing does. Not even The inexact physics. The line stands Defining neither place nor lime But mood but experience. Anti I am dumb to know its source.

Why must it tease and drive me so? It makes me guess at deeper reaches, a darker spawning place, It whispers of possibilities I calmer seem to tap, A river sunk 'neath the gravely bed Of conscious mind. The stones obstruct Bet h sight and feel. The only water drips salty From my forehead waved to ripples By concentrated thought. But nothing comes. And the nagging voice can only ask;

One line for me Why not an Odyssey? 216

Lael W. Hill [^51] The Pagans

Gethsemane's packed in mothballs, in the attic where strangers, one dusty year, may discover it under the cobwebs. We've washed our hands, and bit by bit the colors in dawn come true, as before they haven't:

The cock has already made triple threat of morning (in the city you can't keep a rooster, but some do) and we wait, all of us-caught as Peter with his ears down, denying his Lord-expecting the keys to heaven.

Fools in the rite, we are come to a Witches' Sabbath- wearing curled goose-feathers, riding a silly hare, dancing our own graves greener than cellophane grass in a twisted wood. Go away, then-nobody's here-

Golgotha is marked on the map with a stab of thumbs and a pair of Jacks-hardly worth the mention- where Christ on our doublecross hangs in barbed ascension: with vinegar, serve the holy bread. Day comes,

The games of chance rattle with bones' rolling- bones or a stone, that is. What a sight for an Angel: the lot of us trying to put on or off that robe with egg on our faces, and ham on the Easter table.

May Swenson [^52] The Centaur

The summer that I was ten- Can it be there was only one summer that I was ten? It must

have been a long one then- each dlay I'd go out to choose a fresh horse from my stable

which was a willow grove down by the old Canal. I'd go on my two bare feet.

But when, with my brother's jackknife, I had cut me a long limber horse with a good thick knob for a head,

and peeled him slick and clean except a few leaves for the tail, and cinched my brother's belt

around his head for a rein, I'd straddle and canter him fast up the grass bank to the path, 217

trot along in the lovely dust that talcumed over his hoofs. hiding my toes, and turning

his feet to swift half-moons. The willow knob with the strap jouncing between my thighs

was the pommel and yet the poll of my nickering pony's head. My head and my neck were mine,

yet they were shaped like a horse. My hair flopped to the side like the mane of a horse in the wind.

My forelock swung in my eyes, my neck arched and I snorted. I shied anti skittered and reared,

stopped and raised my knees, pawed at the ground and quivered. My teeth bared as we wheeled

and swished through the dust again. I was the horse and the rider, and the leather I slapped to his rump

spanked my own behind Doubled, my two hoofs beat a gallop along the bank,

the wind twanged in my mane, my mouth squared to the bit. And yet I sat on my steed

quiet, negligent riding, my toes standing the stirrups, my thighs hugging his ribs.

At a walk we drew up<_P> to the porch. I tethered him to a paling. Dismounting, I smoothed my skirt

and entered the dusky hall. My feet on the clean linolcum left ghostly toes in the hall.

Where hare you been? said my mot her. Been riding. I said from the sink, and filled me a glass of water.

What's that in your pocker? she said. Just my knife. It weighted my pocket and stretched my dress awry.

Go tie back your hair. said my mother, and Why is your mouth all green? Rob Roy, he pulled some clover as we crossed the field, I told her.

May Swenson [^53] Any Object

any Object before the Eye can fill the space can occupy the supple frame of eternity

my Hand before me such tangents reaches into Much root and twig extremes can touch

any Hour can be the all expanding like a cunning Ball to a Vast from very small

skull and loin the twin-shaped Cup store the glittering grainery up for all the sandy stars to sup

any Single becomes the More multiples sprout from alpha's core from Vase of legend vessels of lore

to this pupil dark and wild where lives the portrait of a Child let me then be reconciled

germ of the first Intent to be I am and must be seen to see then every New descends from me

---
Notas:
[^1] An irreverent, but it seems to me. downright honest critic of Christianity argues in effect. "If a child is born to me healthy and bright-eyed, you tell me, God loves you. If a child is born without a spine, or hopelessly paralyzed. you tell me, God still loves you. Frankly, that kind of love I can do without. If God causes or permits events that my worst mortal enemy would not permit, then both the idea of 'God' and 'love' are absurd." That these persons were trying to torture you, perhaps take your life.
[^2] One day my family sat watching the big screen production of the "Greatest Story Ever Told." You see a sinister Herod send his soldiers to Bethelehem. Then come the screams of mothers, glimpses of blood-smirched swords pulled from children's bodies. Then you see Mary and Joseph who have received divine warning, walking peacefully with their Babe toward the safety of Egypt. As this scene closed, the hand of my little girl came into mine and she whispered, confused and frightened, "Daddy, didn't Heavenly Father care about those other children?" That all this was against your will.
[^3] Third is the universal outcry of our own souls in tribulation. "Why?" and "Why me?" We speak much of worthiness and blessedness and of keeping the laws that result in both. But there is, in this cry, the sense of what some call "frustrated entitlement." We have, in measure (not perfectly but close enough) kept the law; and we aspire through dark and dawn to do better. We feel a certain inner worthiness, a sense of "deserving better." But no better comes. Only worse. And still worse. Others we think of as less worthy seem to prosper. We do not demand ease. But we sense injustice and we crave, alas, a little mercy. And how long can we hold on to this slipping rope, and pray in faith? Let alone in love? That the highest service he would render you would be to pull them off.
