uncoiling into Motion i start a massive panoply the anamolecular atoms fly 218

and spread through ether like a foam appropriating all the Dome of absoluteness for my home

Clinton F. Larson [^54] A Letter from Israel Whiton, 1851

A crest of wind runs and rustles through the pinions Below the butte, and it is evening; the moss-green shade Glimmers with lancets and gems of the afternoon sun; The fields beyond glow yellow-gold; and the overcast Of azure dims pale and like powder in the air Fails away into the recesses of light and time. I sit before a candle that tips its flame From the door, and I write...

Dear Mother: I received a letter from you the 8 of May. I was very glad to hear from you but I had to wet The letter with tears. You are a good Mother to me. Their was a letter came from Father too.

I crease them at the edge of the desk, splinters Shifting the pages awry...

I and Eliza have not forgot what you told us Before we started our journey, If we was faithful In the Gospel of the Priesthood, we should be instrumental In the hands of God, of turning the hearts of the Children To the Fathers. My health has been good every day Since I left home; I am tough and herty, enjoying Good health and this I am thankful for as usal.

There in New Haven, the bank of pillows and the skin Like the river sand beyond the sheeting water That subtly rises and fails, drawing grains In the tumult of recession, and the eyes sudden To see me near, from sleep, and my going away Beyond the doors that she sees closing.

Eliza kept all my clothes in good order, She was a good woman to take care of things. I do not know what I should have done to travel Without her; we had a team of our own, one yoke Of oxen and 2 yoke of cows.

Over the plains from Laramie, west, the bow of mountains Far to the south, and I write as if there, receding Into the blue and golden undulations of distance, Away from home and farther still to the great Divide Of the land, and down the reaches of the far slope, The canyons appearing between the walls and towers Of rock and the high vales of the wind and the wisps Of cirri against the high flanges of stone...

We took in Sister Snow and her little boy To carry through to the rally for 75 dollars, When we got about 300 miles she died With the Cholery. Her husband was to the gold 219 Minds and was a coming to meet her to the rally In the fall, but I heard from him: he has been sick In the Sutters' gold minds and has not come yet. By having Sister Snows things in my wagon I had to by another yoke of oxen when I got To Fort Carny where I got my cattle, because She was foot sore and could not go, for 55 dollars.

The oxen before me, I watch the rhythm of the wagons Tipping and heaving, and the finite dust Settles in our wake, paling the sage on either Side, and after. I am the measure of that journey, Never to return, and here where the soundless sky Drifts from the still clouds, and where it goes I see the quiet periods of stars and the sleek Heaven of that other certainty...

It was very bad for Eliza to have sickness And death in her wagon on such a journey. We see thousands and thousands of bufalows Moving in great beards; we kill some and had All the meat we wanted and it was as good As titled beef. We kill some antaloope, an animal As big as sheep; they was as good as mutton. Manly Barrows kill a good many rabits because He had a shot gun; I shot some sage hens With Mauly's gun. We see some raddle snake; A young man got bite by one, but got well, Very early one morning there was one run under Our wagon and they kill it. We see Indians In droves without number; one rode up to my wagon And give my Eliza some blake Cherrys And she gave him two crackers. They all ride Horses and have long slim poles fastened To there horses to carry there game.

From the plain I see the declivity to the stream Then as we brake the wagon with poles, to the water's edge, Then easily into the cold, the oxen threshing for footing On the stony bed: I steady the wagon, reaching From my horse to the buckboard, but over it goes

Like a vane against the current and the rills Of cold, and Eliza sinks there before I catch her, Her skirts the mantles of darkness, laden with water.

And she gazes wildly at me when I right her And help her to the bank. She shivers as I right The wagon from my saddle, and in the evening I touch the question in her, of the exposure and cold Of September, and the wind. She shivers again, trying Against the cold ...

We got to the Vally about the middle of October. I work one yoke of my cattle, the old brindle some. A cold storm come and one died. We have Some brown sugar that we brought from St. Louis. Wheat is worth 3 dollars a bushel, beef 10 dollars A hundred and maybe potatoes I dollar a bushel. There is grist mills and saw mills in the Valley a plenty. The wheat on the ground bids fair for a good crop; They raise from 40 to 60 bushels to acre; After harvest they plow in the old stuble And next summer get a great crop of wheat Without sowing trod this they can follow up Year after year.

Eliza, you lie there, under the window, the last sunlight Over your hands, and I cannot see where you Must see, the pinons flickering like lashes Over your eyes, the fire of embers waiting in the ash White powdering over them ... You lie there, Tucked in the quilt you made for us in New Haven, 220 Still as the evening before the crest of wind...

My Hunter finds teem and seeds and tools and land And I have one half of the crop and give him The other half in the shock. I have 18 acres of wheat On the ground, Mother, it looks fine up to my knees. We have good meetings every Sunday. Eliza s... The Vally is 100 miles long and about 20 wide With the river running through the middle, called The River Jordan and the Mountains all around The Vally higher than the clouds.

But Eliza is still as I write, and I must only Listen. I, Israel Whiton of the Salt Lake Valley, Write this letter to you, Mother, from the canyons And the butte above my land; it is a leaf From the spring before we came, as both you and Eliza Know, unanswerable except in the signs that come, That I cannot seek. So I give it to the wind From the tips of pinons or the butte, and it lifts Away, and I try to see it as it diminishes Away, then vanishing though I know it is there, As you know better than I, Mother... And it will rise Beyond the golden seal and touch the white hand In the cirri pluming the Oquirrh crest west Over the sunset, and it is as if I take a veil Full in my hand as I write, as if to let it yield To the days consecrated to the journey west That holds me aloof from all I have ever known, The East and the cities of my common being, As I am here, in Zion, wondering about you Who cannot respond except in the barest hints Of being that lift over me and show me the way To yield and rise into the Kingdom, the sky And the land like the white silver spirit That we know but is fathomless before us And indefinite as the planes of God rising Into the sun...

With love,

Your son Israel

Clinton F. Larson [^55] Advent

The gentle God is our guest; His staff will prompt us to the door.

The table is set in the oak-paneled room: Goblets are rinsed and set out, The warm vapor vanishing around them: The silver, withdrawn from felt-lined red mahogany,

Is counted and burnished to mercurial white And set on immaculate linen, Sleek with crystal and rococo ware.

The table is set for the Guest Near the imminent door. The servants stalk Each gray indiscretion to be rent On the merciless rack of their decor.

The table is set for the gentle God: The roasted fowl entice the savoring tongue: The marmalade and sweetmeats brim The centerpiece, a horn; The fruit is full, plucked in prime, Oranges, apples, pears Like noon-shade autumn leaves. The supper will please the gentle God Who surely comes, Who comes like the breath on a veil.

But out of the East the breath is fire! Who comes with temblor, sound of hurricane? Who rages on the portico? Who claps his vengeful steel on stone? Who comes to dine?

The servants cower like quail in the anterooms. Who blasphemes in the shuddering halls? Who rends the imminent door? Our guest is a gentle God, a Lamb. 221

Clinton F. Larson [^56] The Witness

Now. as I walk home, the ghosts appear in the relief Of shadows in the imperative light, and they coast In my vision, disappearing as I look away into darkness. I thought the nearness of my oilier world upon me, But in the measure of my recognition He touched my arm, And I turned to His eyes, full of the sense of immediacy, And He found my question, examining my witness As He might beside the waters of Canaan. This is not The road where I once appeared, He said. Emmaus

Is the fall of another time, the surety of willows In the hushed will of the crypts and sands of Asia. I am the sign of Samarkand and the Colorado From the rim of the canyon: I touch your arm And guide you as you listen to my quietness, The remote voice of fire arriving in the gesture Of giving. Listen!

And I shall, as if forever, When lie speaks from the veils of evanescence And over the tiers of God as they range in the brief Of creation, in the clarity of the cordillera. And in his robe lie turned, rustling into darkness, Beholding me and my questions, His voice my visit Of light.

Clinton F. Larson [^57] Granddaughter

Next to tears for the supposed naughtiness Of tipping oatmeal from her pastel bowl And spilling milk under our haughtiness, She displays the repentance of her soul

Over there. Her gaze is tenuous with sorrow As she looks at the world, hoping for the best, Arms folded to gather herself for the harrow Of scolding. "Amen," she says in a tentative test

Of our love, grace over, but willing to pray. I saw that the lip of her tray had tipped her bowl, She not knowing why her oatmeal in disarray Was so, but feeling the sackcloth of her role.

And there stand I as well with her as anywhere, Marvelling how to keep some order at hand, Displaying my hope glossily to keep fair Days of charity flowing like hourglass sand. 222

Max Golightly [^58] Widow Spring

First thaw after winter. The sky bright, blinding, unnatural, steaming everything outside the cabin. I go out to the yard where the cats, underfoot shadows, arch their backs, bask on the sunside wall of the shed.

(My man is dead! Sleeping under the sod of the cabin floor, needing the brightness no more ! Who would have thought the winter could make such a hasty

grave,

Careful!

Youmustnotrave !)

I fetch his moulding books out to where the ground is showing. To planks and rocks open to the sun I bring them all, the Keats, Coleridge, Burns, Jonson (My man preferred him to Moliere), the Progress, Bible, scripture and gospel, Shakespeare in bindings too ancient to repair. I turn the pages in their own light to salvage what the heart needs to grow through, feel his brown hands touching them, each one for his love of the words, for his yearning and the burn of desire to be more than he was.

Joseph, I am caught between your pages; browsing the damp words ruin has not claimed, I feel the pulse of your vision beating in this warm world, in the summers of your elation, the winters o f your fear, the brilliant certainty, the shock of your weakness, the seasons of your hurt, nebulous hungers unrequited, the promise of your wonder, The Lamanites, stony in their camps, speechlessly hearing from your own lips, the story of the grove. Damp moss history, I pluck at your stemless flower, thinking the same thoughts he must have thought 223 while he fought corruption of the truth He had written down in a finger of blood: I have known through the blizzard, the same spasms he knew where he fell from the window to their hate below at None o'clock in a desperate hour. Weightless and wondering, between Ether and Moroni, I read feverishly, impersonal, listening for sounds to bind this world to that, the plough in the field, the seagull screech, horses in a distance too thick to know.

(O, Joseph!

This is a barren world, another time you had not prophesied! My man, four months dead, covered over in the blue of winter, his breast and mine, frozen, ice where I had hoped to nurse a babe or two! Show me the roses Brigham promised! Any simple indication! Let that hawk, shadowing this page, disapper from the sky. a vindication! Hush! No need for crying; it falls on the deaf ear!)

Here! On the last of Moroni, in my man's writing: "Faith and hope.-one with the other!" He must have meant it for me, or for himself. When? Does it matter?Here underlined: Verse Twenty. "if there must be faith, there must also be hope". (Then follows: "Charity"!) Tears, brackish in my eyes; I close the book and run. Slipping and sliding I go, panting and sighing, whimpering away the dark months, shuddering through the crisp, nauseous in the air, running from myself, my unbelieving; breathless and a mile away, cleaving to the earth, turning about me, spinning without me, locked in a white prayer. (Dear God! Father in Heaven! 224 Touch me as I kneel; in some sweet, unassuming way, let me have his dream! Raise the shades of my windows grown rampant with decay, touch me with clear knowledge, with homely Urim and Thummim! I am a wet woman with bruised knees; I cannot endure more.

Show me ! What must I know if life comes in a splendid way?)

First thaw day. Winter is gone. The words are dry, and with the sun, my heart dries, too. I wonder... could I shoot that hawk and make a stew? I will! O, Place in the tops of the mountains, finding a love for you, I capitulate, turning my shadow on the barest circumference of ground that by and by becomes my own !

R. Paul Cracroft [^59] The Martyrdom

A circus atmosphere Pervaded Carthage, troops its roustabouts, Its main tent built around a rustic jail. Where once a single shot had stirred alarm, Repeated volleys signalled only that Abandon, corked and bottled far too long, Sought throats and hearts against the head and deed. Just as the swelter of the dying June Sought out the vengeance-bent with sticky hands, So too Depression oozed through cracks and slid Over window sills, polluting every breath Of those who felt the shrinking cell constrict. Dismayed by shouts and jeers which spoke of death, Uncheered by wine or song or prayer, the raft Of prisoners bobbed slowly on its moors Of gloom. Uneven on the ground made fresh By summer rain the day before, came steps Of men with painted faces-some with soot Like Negroes splashed with eyes of pink and blue, Some ringed and diamond-flecked like prairie chiefs Disfigured all to hide or shift the blame. By squads of three or four they ran, head down, Then pressed themselves against the orange walls. Their uniforms were motley, inside out Or never uniforms at all. Where first Their running feet made all the silent noise, Assembly din increased until their ranks And guns made silence cowardly.

"Come on !" Their cry was answered by the guards, who fired Into the air, resisted with a laugh- And stood aside. "The paneled door is theirs. Go past the cell!" The jailer's call was lost As surge of painted flesh moved up the stairs. "Make way! The men up front need room to fire. You men below, surround the house and pen The bastards in!"

When Joseph heard the rush, He snatched the pistol from his coat and jumped Again beside the flimsy door. All four Leaned hard against the yielding wood to keep The painted dogs at bay. "It's locked. Stand back!" The yell was punctuated by a shot Which ripped the useless keyhole out and burned John Taylor's leg. As pistol snouts were thrust Inside the door, the Prophet's friends upset Their hurried aim with walking sticks and cried Aloud for God to see their plight.

"The gun! I'll get the other gun!" yelled Hyrum. As He backed away, a bullet caught him flush Against his nose and stretched him out full length. "I am a dead man!" Hyrum gasped, the blood Which gurgled from his throat attesting all His lifeless lips could no more say.

"They've killed My poor, dear Hyrum? Joseph cried. But time Grew short for grief. He straightened up and walked In tight-lipped fury toward the door. Six times He squeezed the trigger on the Colt. Just three caught fire and summoned forth a hotter blast Of lead, as smell of blood reached through the doc A scream rang out. A mobster's arm was smashed By Joseph's bullet. "Sure it hurts! It burrs Like bell!" he bellowed. "But I got revenge. I shot old Hyrum right between the eyes!" The Prophet's other shots hit home as well, Less tellingly.

"Do what you can. I'll try to draw their fire!" the Prophet yelled. He sprang Across the room, the deadly criss-cross blasts Already buckling Taylor near the bed. Before he reached the open window, two Hard-slamming slugs smashed into Joseph's back. They spun him to the sill where outside shot Crashed home into his breast.

"O Lord, my God!" He screamed and tumbled out the window, dead Or dying, by the time be hit the ground. A Carthage Grey, his painted face cracked wide With sooty grin, dragged Joseph's sagging corpse Against the well-curb, where he propped him up. "You four men there!" his Colonel barked. "That's Joe. Take careful aim and tell your kids you helped To finish off the Mormon fraud." They fired And Joseph Smith jerked once, then moved no more. 226

Emma Lou Thayne [^60] Pruning the Sage

The sage has crept through all the tangle of the privet. It nudges dry against the aspen and the dogwood, parching in the shadowed sun, clutching spaces. Dutifully I cut the deadwood from the sapless gnarls that snap against their loss, and the first clean cut brings mountains to my hands, a pungent tantalizing terror.

I'm climbing stony hours above the stream where only wild, sharp sage can grow. The rocky path grates to crags that must be climbed.

Who dares to grab the elbowed sage and swing across the granite face to skinny footholds laddering the sky? Who will finger for a ledge where rattlesnakes lie green on gray? Who'll risk the snakes because the sage gives arms to climb?

Swift, confident I prune. Dead branches fall away to open spaces redolent of rattlesnakes but wide enough to bare four violets in bloom.

Emma Lou Thayne [^61] Heretic

Indulge my searching my unsteady voice: You share the blame; it's You who gave me choice.

Emma Lou Thayne [^62] First Loss

My grandma shared her bed with me, Till she died when I was twelve. We slept with breaths that matched. (I went to sleep every night restraining Deliberately one extra breath in five To let her slower time teach mine to wait.)

She never knew I waited, but talked To me of Mendon where Indians ferreted Her isolated young-wife home for cheese and honey, And of Santa Barbara and eerie tides that 227 Drew her now for gentle months away from snow And sometimes of Evangeline lost in the forest primeval.

Grandma's batter-beating, white-gloved, laughing Daytime self slept somewhere else. and she visited Melifluous beyond my ardent reach, always off Before me. I followed into rhythms I knew Were good, her chamois softness weighing me By morning toward a cozy common center.

She died there. widen I was twelve. I was sleeping. alien. down the hall In a harder bed. isolated from the delicate Destruction that took its year to take her, That night my mother barely touched my hair And in stiff, safe mechanics twirled the customary

Corners of my pillow one by one. "Grandma's gone." She said. Crepuscular against the only light Alive behind her in lilt hall. she somehow left. My covers fell like lonely lead on only me. I lay as if in children's banks of while where After new Snow we plopped to stretch and carve

Our shapes like paper dolls along a fold, Now, lying on my back, I ran my longest arms From hip to head, slow arcs on icy sheets, And whispered childhood's chant to the breathless room: "Angel, Angel, snowy Angel. "Spread your wings and fly."

Emma Lou Thayne [^63] Sunday School Picture

1Our Ward housed the biggest Sunday School the Church has ever let exist. and one Sunday morning a thousand of us hipped into the breathless benches and undulated into the foyer. anteroom, recreation hall, and up onto the indignant stage a thousand Mormon heads away from the pulpit.

In the picture that President Heber J. Grant had them take that auspicious day (three shots overlapping) I came out twice, being on the edge of two of them. and Mother always said that would guarantee me two chances at perfection, but I being seven at the time figured so? and went on becoming two people instead.

2One of me would chin my fretted flimsiness the forty-three times my brothers said I should be able to on the banister in the empty entry of the Ward, and blithely loosen the screen from inside the classroom while my Primary teacher was rasping at Donnie Rohlfing,

so my brothers and I and certain franchised friends could scrunch in later and titter nonsense from the palsied pulpit and play The Happy Farmer with our pleated fingers on the cool black pedals of the organ, and with rapid eyes see what other kinds of bathrooms looked like, and run tautly for our window if Mr. Tomlinson came clinking in, and then try not to sit by Richard when l needed to be nice in church

because he was the brother that I got the giggles with like witch we sang You-hoo unto Jesus and had to leave all the time hunching up the searing aisle acting like we had the nosebleed, and Richard who was five in First Grade when I was four in Kindergarten smiled the teacher into promoting me into his class (no one seemed to mind as long as I could read the flash cards)

so I could be on first and catch the siren balls he practiced on me in our shivering front room where no one ever threw anything except when Father thought the quickest way to get me dressed for church was to juggle my patented leather paraphernalia at me saying Think fast! 228

so I'd snatch them on before they dropped to prove I could, and then race across the mud-hard fields to beat the organ's going silent whispering its Sunday sentence.

The other me sedately bathed my Di Dee Doll til her left eye washed away, and played house with Corinne at least seventeen hours a week in the tolerant trailer her father built, and hated it when Marilyn Mason (it must have been because of her wet palms that stuck to things) beat me once a day all summer at jacks,

and lady-like read Polly Anna, certain of a tunnel (probably under our hollyhocks) and wrote a poem drying my tortuous ringlets by the radiator in the bathroom about spilling batter on the blue kitchen floor that pale Miss Crawford announced I must have copied somewhere,

and that me sat in buttoned velvet memorizing the swollen arch of the ward chapel that cupped the painting of the Sacred Grove where green bumped into blue like my 500 piece puzzle with 200 desperate pieces of sky,

and hoped that the deacons were noticing that I could read the words to I Know That My Redeemer Lives, which I wondered why we sang all four verses to even though I was sure I guess I did know, and recited a two-and-a-half minute ordeal that my mother knew I knew on Why I Want To Be Baptized,

which I didn't because of the hospital and Richard who was in there and couldn't be baptized with me, and pushed one fidget finger at a time into the tempting screw holes in the boring bench in front, and dangled and waved absently with the other eight-and-unders in the choir seats at our determinedly non-noticing mothers,

and that me made handkerchief dolls with my eyes closed during the prayer and searched the sacrament for the bread without a crust and held the rim of the kiss-size cup against my lip and swallowed slow to let it trickle down and feel like what they said it should, and tried to think of Jesus all white like in the Grove, not with his beard crumpled on his collar bone, dead.

Sometimes I look at that thousand-peopled picture when I'm sorting things and marvel a lot, and even otherwise, I find myself saying, Highland Park Ward, my roller skates still rattle down your dented driveway, and my absent waiting is sometimes done against the brown banisters below the Garden of Gethsemane in your raised entry,

and mostly, your organ churns under its outside loft across the filled fields where our short-cuts are long buried in old foundations,

and like the green-grained oak of your chapel doors, it closes with gentle right my separateness and gathers my wandering double selves together. 229

John Sterling Harris [^64] The Assassination of Emma Gray

Old Jerome. as the local story goes, Was a keeper of many pigs. But he kept them kindly With love and tender regard Of the kind men often feel For horses and dogs and even women.

Now anyone who has tried to love a pig Knows such men are rare.

Jerome's pigs were. pampered pigs Who got the richest swill in town; Their pens were cleaner than his house, And he fed them barley from his hand Not for love of future bacon and ham But just for rite love of pigs.

His Berkshires followed him about like dogs, And he thought it no insult to his neighbors To give their names to Iris hogs: Each pig had a name and knew it And came when it was called- Amos Bowen. Charlie Pollard, Jamie Hall.

But even Jerome understood That the use of a pig won't buy the feed; Oh, he tried to make them pay, Selling some of the weathers off, But he always sold too few And kept too many at the trough.

Ed Lee, his neighbor, was a practical man Who saw pigs as sausage and chops; To him the waste of good pork flesh Was a sin against the Lord But his helpful suggestions of slaughter Jerome rebuffed, deterred or ignored.

One of Jerome's pigs was Emma Gray A large and ancient Berkshire sow So old and fat she could hardly walk; Jerome had saved her twenty years before From a sow that ate the rest of the litter And he had raised her on a bottle.

The squirming. squealing hairless thing I lad slept in a box by her master's bed Until she could take her place at the trough, And Jerome remembering a schoolboy crush, On a girl, a prominent matron now, I lad named rite piglet Emma Gray.

When the bottle-fed baby grew Into a strong young sow,' Like a father he led her down the lane To Wetzel's Duroc Jersey boar and then Twice a year he assisted at the birth And gave each new-born pig a name.

Now Emma Cray was getting very old; She'd had no brook that spring- Nor the two before if the truth were told- The weaners and the young Poland China boar Crowded her away from the feeding trough, But Jerome fed her by hand as he had before.

Now anyone who has tried to love a pig Knows such men are rare.

Ed Lee had said she must be killed - Said he'd do it for a side of bacon, Speculated on the lard she'd render; He persuaded and he nagged And he juggled fancy numbers Until at last Jerome gave in.

On the appointed day Ed built a fire Under a fifty gallon drum To heat the scalding water; He scoured down the rending kettle, honed The scrapers, rigged the hoist, and as he Stropped the killing knife, nodded to Jerome. 230

Jerome then called Emma Gray Who came and leaned against his leg And rubbed with affection or to ease an itch- With pigs the difference is not great- The effort made her grunt and wheeze While Ed approached with the killing knife.

Wet eyed Jerome looked down at his pig Then told Ed Lee to wait- He had a word or two to say- Putting his hand on the old sow's back He knelt in his overalls there in the mud And bowed his head to pray.

Emma Gray, he said, I thank the lord for thee; Thou hast been a most faithful friend To me and to the other pigs; Thou hast not kept the others from the trough Nor held for thyself the choicest wallowing spots; Nor hast thou been a breaker of fences.

Thy children have been many and fat and Thou hast protected them from the winter's cold And the ravaging foreigners of New Town And fed and nourished well thy brood And taught them to walk in righteousness And wept to see them leave thy side.

But thy days are fulfilled, and now I deliver Thee into the hands of Ed Lee the assassin. Ed looked at the grunting wheezing pig And the old man kneeling by it in the mud; He stabbed the knife into a wooden post- They say he couldn't ever kill another pig.

Now anyone who has tried to love a pig Knows such men are rare.

John Sterling Harris [^65] Hay Derrick

You can see the derrick there In the lower meadow by the marsh Where there's a low stack Of hay against the pale sky.

The father made them unhook the chain That linked the pole to base And lowered the end To rest upon the ground.

But the big pine pole Used to point toward the sun And swing across the summer sky To raise the loads of meadow hay

Thai creaking wagons brought to stack- The Jackson hanging from the block, With four curved tines like blades of scythes Dropping down and sinking in the load,

Then hoisting high with cable taut, Turning slowly in the air And swinging over the stack With the screek of straining blocks-

Then the shout of yo to pull The trip rope and dump the hay, Returning then to the wagon- Eight forkfulls for the load.

So they were that August day, The father pushing the fork into the load, His son carefully building the stack, And a child on the plodding derrick horse

That drew the cable up Then backed to let it down, In easy rhythm of lower And hoist and swing and drop.

Then there came a shift of wind That made the derrick horse start. The child tried to pull the reins, But the horse bolted fast.

The empty fork flew to the block But stopped and then plunged down Where one tine pinned the son to the stack And the broken cable covered him with coils. 231

They left the stack unfinished To bleach in the summer sun. And the autumn winds stirred the hay Like unkempt hair on the head of a boy.

David L. Wright [^66] A Gathering of Saints

They softened into visiting, After the weed fire, Parking their cars and tracks In the wide part of the dirt road, Halfway between the homes the poet lived in, The two decades of his village life: Visiting of matters apart from this emblazoned threat To the township's long, inherited peace, Shaped by less peaceful pioneers who carved A civilization from a valley Jim Bridger Swore to Brigham Young could not be humanly inhabited, Infested with wild beasts, winters in July, and A swollen river.

Now, the blaze controlled, they talk gently Of sons and grandsons making more money in a month Than they in a year; One a biochemist for the USDA, Another, executive for IBM; A business accountant, a military officer, etcetera, But saying nothing of what the poet knows To have been their sacrifices for offsprings Whose fortunes had to be sought apart from the heritage. In worlds of stone and steel- Selling cows, sheep, ancestral lands To send them through universities, Reducing poverty to want; Wise, these old, to see the cast Of the world's change did not lie with villages. Though hurting somewhat that it were not so; Hurting, even yet, for the progeny rarely retums and,

Returning, gives scarce evidence of honoring the heritage, Even the language or the values; and jittery Anxious to return to whatever they chase, "Bright" beyond the above villages now, with computers, Promotions and all, oblivious of What the mountains once meant, And scarcely with memory of or connection To those in Cemetery Hill who never made it through; Yet, they are proud of their go-getters, these old, Unaware of or disbelieving driven nerves Scraping beneath flannel mils and tailfin cars. Educate them-the only way nowadays Help them "get started" (sell another cow) For family cannot cleave unto family anymore And land must be sold for a gentile's money, If that's what it takes to pay tuition. And even now (sell another cow) when somehow The big salary turns to bad luck or recession Or business overturn. Sell the north forty; Get them through, he's got a degree, he'll prevail; Like his letter says expenses are more nowadays. Just think, everything lie eats comes from a grocery store! We don't know, don't understand, Send him a check, And he'll be all right. This they don't talk of, But the poet knows, for he too was educated, and home now By way of sold cows.

Now in the sundown, the weed blaze 232

smouldering dull, Their first emergency since the old fisherman disappeared Last winter and they had to hook up the town's Only team (belonging to him) and fetch him From the river- Only at such crises times do the Saints gather now, Discounting church where they worship mostly silent now, Often sleeping through services, nudged awake By the ghosts of intense ancestors, To sip the sacrament waters, Then settle again to the thrumming pulpit platitudes, Not to be disturbed anymore by loud Maori chants, Nor conscienced by milky intensely blue eyes and shaking mouth; For the conscience of the village has been quieted. Not at ball games do they gather, for there are none, Nor school plays, for the children are bussed Into the city's consolidated schools And the long-suffering Sadie has hushed the only link To their collective memory. The fire, spreading from leaves the incompetent attic boy Had left untended Smokes gently in the slow, delicate declining hour Of Sunday. The sundown disc backlighting the Pescadero Hills And flaming the poplars at the poet's "old place" With yellows of autumn leaves Which cannot sublimate the darker meadows Where the splendid brother flushed cows home From willow bush hideaways, In days when these were mid-aged And the pioneer houses of the village Seemed likely to be repopulated By the blood of youth in the heritage; Not left to rot as now, each log house, Or inhabited and remodeled, Respirited by workers imported by Monsanto to work In the city's phosphate plant;

Workers moving on, most likely, next year, herever the company trumpets them to. (Would the splendid brother be Mr. IBM now?) The poet looks into the darker meadows And a millennium ago, Only slightly hearing the villagers murmur Upon the death of Enoch Henry, one of their number, Yesterday, at 80, 27 days older than the old fisherman (According to the attic boy's mother, who Having traced her blood to Adam, now traces for others) And repeat as if it's incredible That he is now town patriarch, Not knowing, as the poet knows, He has always been the oldest .... (Horace Mahonri Barnum and Bailey Tare) Who, in his 70's, fat, stubby, watery-eyed, peppery, Always Santa Claus at the children's Christmas party, Leans his elbow on his truck window, squints his eyes Into the hint smoke, and tells of his chartered excursion To the World's Fair. Is of the opinion New York Was a damned waste of somebody's money, New Yorkers Worse than stampeding animals, Except animals are more friendly. Stopped in Times Square to tell a wino About the saving graces of Mormonism When a hurried elbow knocked his hat off, And stooping, another bowled him over, The potential convert quickly disappearing By the time he pulled his Santa's rotundity together. Oh they could tell I was a sheepman .... Saw it in their eyes .... Hell, if living there means getting ahead .... I wonder what's the use of .... His voice quits, and the poet finishes the memory, Of his son Rex, city dwelling, making money, Who put a bullet in his head five years ago, 233 Life wouldn't be worth living if It wasn't for the church... Continues, describing the claustrophobia. the speed, The noises, how. trapped, he couldn't escape Because the bus was chartered, And finally, hardly able to breathe and trembling with Outrage and invective, Of collapsing halfway through Nebraska, Making the trip from Wyoming in an ambulance. I'm all right now, he says, back home, Convinced only a fool would ever leave the elixir Air of mountains and the everlasting gospel; : Starting life all over again, He laughs, prying his mouth open. : Looky here, starting to grow teeth again! Takes the false ones out, plops them into The poet's surprised hand, And arranging the angle of his head, Shows reddened gums with white edges of enamel Protruding in three places .... (James Simon Armetus Montgomery Ward Tare) Ex-bishop, taps his cane In the fire's weed ashes, saying : When a president of the United States stands up Without batting an eyelash and says the farmer is better off Than he's ever been, he's nothing but a dang- busted liar... Unable to connect the drop to ninety-nine cents in wheat prices To the farmers' voted insistence upon a free market. Financially indentured to a future that Democrats, somehow, Have cheated him of, he had not and would not sell His grand piano, Bought in war-time prosperous years Despite tone deafness, without exception, in his family. : Not on your life... finest piece of furniture In the valley. Nor had he sold any other of his finest and super fluous Commodities to pay his debts, despite court orders. For unlike his Santa Claus brother. James S.A.M.W. Tate Never reduced his standard of living for his children's sake, And they now remain in the valley or near, Adding yearly to their father's posterity, Thus increasing his and their rewards in heaven (For so it is written).

But it was the bishop's son, the poet knows, Who slew himself in the Pescadero Hills, Before the poet's time.

He walks among them, from group to group, Noting the members missing from their number Uncle Arnold Davis, thrown to his death five years ago When his tractor struck a badger hole, circled And ran over him Pete Hart, retired sheepherder, inveterate Jack-Mormon, Who boasted of hitting a foul ball off Walter Johnson When Walter was a lumberjack and everybody else fanned Found frozen in his house, A week after his death, in the posture of prayer- Uncle Milt Jennings, after three years of insanity And memory-clear juvenility- And dozens of others, And now Enoch Henry who searched for 30 years The walls of his cabin As the old fisherman searched his river for eighty, Of these the poet ponders, While the decimated and feeble remainders of the heritage Mill contentedly among the ashes of a fire That threatened their peace, Their lives now a continuum Of selling cows 234 To progress the world into enrichments Their children assure them exist, Somewhere out there In the space of fast moving planets Where ours will dump its problems- Soon -one day; Long before millennium.

Thomas Asplund [^67] The Heart of My Father

Who knows what an electronic microscope might do to the great gulf fixed between faith and knowledge? I suppose that one day some chemical mechanic under the flickering death of fluorescent tubes will find deep within the coiling chemistry of my island body a germ of that narrow dirt road

which ran through summer's miasma of sweet clover between a beaten windbreak of dusty cottonwoods and an irrigation ditch

where once

my father ran down tripping ruts of clay

in flight and play

to the straight

gray sanctuary of home. I must say it plainly without the rhythm of convention without the rhythm of history because I sense in my patterned cells the tentative cry the first unmeasured measure of a melody

carried by the constant wind which ran down the road with my father and over the paintless clapboards and over the wagon-breaking buffalo wallows in the prairie beyond and over the stamped sod of the dugout where my grandfather kept

in the close dark room of earth

his

wife and children during their first winter as prairie creatures

and near the wind the formless exhortation of Prophets

"Brother, the Church has contracted with the Canadian Government to carry out the construction of an Irrigation Canal just east of Our Cardston settlement. The Lord would like you to assist Us in this Important Endeavour." 235

IMMIGRANTS AND SETTLERS 200 MILLION ACRES OF CHOICE FARM LAND FREE

The Canadian Government will give settlers in Western Canada up to 160 acres of land at no cost. To obtain title settlers must cultivate a minimum acreage, construct a building on the land and establish residence.

APPLY:Department of Citizenship and Immigration, Ottawa, Canada or the Territorial Land Registration Office.

Blessed are the Meek, for they shall inherit the Earth. Blessed are the poor in spirit. Blessed are the poor in beauty. Do you know the geography of a hard search for Beauty?

the mini patch by the ditch

gold and purple flags blooming early at the sheltered side of the house

strawberries

glass marbles with secret swirls and hard clabberand bubbles

a new issue of the Free Press (with coloured comics) trees

a watermelon that ripened before frost

Oh, this sounds like a catalogue of bathos in our jungle of beauty in our riot of restraint in our supermarket of enlightenment where it is impossible to know the difference between sentimentality and hunger.

The hunger of waiting for things to grow

for snow to melt for visitors to come for wind to stop for the promised coming of a father who left to

preach the gospel or to build a canal or to follow the sheep-shearing or to join a threshing crew.

Welcome Beauty, welcome, welcome "Welcome, welcome, Sabbath morning. Now we rest from every care. Welcome, welcome is thy dawning Holy Sabbath. day of prayer."

The stage is set with high dark leather chairs, the saucy chorale of a pump organ and the bishop, hatless white-haloed forehead and leather face, tending

"Bless the leadership of Thy Church from the Prophet and General Authorities at the head thereof, down to the least and last ordained."

my boot is cracking right there by the lace

"We pray for the Missionaries in the field and in distant lands across the sea. Lead them to the doors of the Honest In Heart." 236

brother ramsbotham's milking overalls are sticking out under his Sunday pants

"Help us to go about our various activities this Day in a manner which is pleasing before Thee."

sister harris took the sacrament with her left hand

"And return us to our various places of abode in Safety."

Where have you builded your abode? The foolish man built his house upon the sand. But the wise man built his house upon

160 acres of

unbroken prairie. Rough-sawn spruce. Poplar fence posts. One unfloored room. You work on the irrigation canal six days each week. On Saturday you try to finish early, ride 25 miles and with the horse and hand-plow break the new land which you have selected for its black richness

and for the handful of Mormon neighbours.

Ten acres to qualify the first year whether it grows or not. Work through the long prairie twilight each Saturday night. Rest on the Sabbath morning and take sacrament with your neighbours in the nearby home of Brother and Sister Anderson, before the long ride back.

But one silver windless day in June the ground is singing. Enough land has been broken to qualify and all but one acre is seeded. A small acre open and ready.

But there is no ox, and too much sunshine to find a mire.

Lord, forgive me For my life rests in the abundance of Thy Creations

My joy is in the seed of my loins: I am Thy Hostage, But when the Earth blooms my loved ones can come to dwell with me again

And we can be one; even as the Father and Son are one. So you begin to plant the seeds quickly

letting them fall where

they may. And you work quickly to mitigate the offense until you are hailed to a startled stop by a Mounted Policeman in his hard red coat.

Hello, he says.

hello

I've noticed you working this place the past few weeks. Where are you from ?

i'm working a team on the irrigation canal near Stirling.

A Mormon, eh?

(that involuntary twitch of fear) yes. from Utah then?

yes. Your family still there?

yes. i'm trying to get the place ready for them.

(The Law speaks with a soft English accent, sounding casually direct and official. It looks like General Kitchener.) Did you know it's against the law to work land on Sunday?

(Perhaps you can pretend righteous ignorance but guilt prevents the further sin.) yes. 237

I'm sorry. I'll have to give you a summons. We don't generally worry about a little Sunday work, you understand; but Anderson your neighbour saw you this morning and swore out an official complaint. l don't like it you understand. It will only<_P> be a small fine.

(I was a stranger, and ye took me in; I was sick and ye visited me, in prison and ye came unto me.)

Hope your family enjoys it here, says the Mountie as he wheels his horse away.

In the silent lightless winter morning you can enjoy the small warm spot in your bed, buried beneath the comforting weight of quilts and flannel sheets, knowing that it is not your turn to rise and milk the cow or fill the reservoir in preparation for the coming day. But the hour is coming when all must rise

and struggle to the warming

kitchen and dress stiffly before the dull yellow lamplight is smothered by the dull yellow daylight

the reluctant dawn.

My grandmother sinned weekdays in a stained teacup. And on Sundays she worried about dressing

and feeding and facing neighbours and the Church of the Devil and the Poor Lost Tribes and the Great and Dreadful Day,

but her faith was elsewhere.

Always she listened in the wind for the whisper of God

For by Grace are ye saved through faith

lest anyone should boast

and she searched in the dust for the blessings of God

taking from

shattered clay the fruits of toil

reaping where she had sown and

storing up her treasure. Each harvest was a battle

a bitter war

with the late spring, the wind, the early frost. And each September her kitchen was filled with green tomatoes, wrested from the killer

clear night of first frost to ripen in the safety of her redoubt

But sometimes she fasted. And sometimes she prayed. She knew her enemies.

Her youngest son was a frail and beautiful child when she first travelled to the Canadian wilderness. At the urging of a wealthy aunt, the child was left in the safety of that childless Utah home to avoid the rigors of settlement. He was a fair and quiet boy, whose unspoken needs returned blossom and grace to careful love given. When the aunt suggested that an adoption be arranged so that she could raise the child with security and advantage, my grandmother sensed another enemy and in reflex gathered that which she claimed for her pain to the safety of her affection. But her affection was not sufficient and238 the child died. Thereafter my grandmother watched more carefully for her enemies

and her quick

hands and her quick eyes were always ready.

Her marriage, as I knew it, was chiseled, hard

marked by the

erosion of wind and frost. It was not reconciled or shared

but like

genuine virtue it was unconscious of its success and its toughness. Happiness, as such, was not an issue.

There were too many important

things to worry about. Fair share of irrigation water. Horses in the garden. Potato bugs. Children playing near the well. Stinkweed. The milk cow going dry. Grandma worried. Knotting her hands in her apron she darted to the kitchen window

at each sound

at each silence

when the wind knocked

when the wind whispered

and when there was nothing

more to worry about my grandmother died.

My grandfather, on the other hand, had an accommodation with the land. He treated it kindly, accepting respectfully whatever it chose to give. He could taste its sweetness touching a handful carefully with his tongue-tip and leaving a few stray bits hanging on his moustache. He could divine its secret waters with a willow branch.

Hey, said Raymond Knight (rancher and gentleman of wealthy Utah family), you're supposed to be out at my place digging that well.

Grandpa was leaning on the sunny store front on the main street of the town named for Brother Raymond. He examined the board sidewalk, pulled his moustache, bit his tongue.

i can't dig that well anymore.

But I've already paid you, said Brother Raymond.

(not looking up) i can't dig that well anymore.

You promised that well for this week. I've got stock coming in five days and I need the water, said Brother Raymond.

(still not looking up) i can't dig that well anymore.

Why in the Sam Hill can't you, said Brother Raymond.

(looking at the sun and squinting tightly)

i can't dig that well anymore because it's got four feet of water in the bottom of it.

and thus did my grandfather play with life and its secrets (faith without laughter is dead) The tough armtwist with fate (for laughter suffereth long; is not puffed up; Beareth all things) And in the game my grandfather kept his eye to the sun and secret stream

the dark and dazzling depths the silent sinews of the scarlet-slashed Book of Life.

In the beginning was the Word

and the Word was made flesh 239

and dwelt among us full of grace and truth

the secret stream of words

and the anxious hand that broke the back of the Book of Life

light by light

in the yellow night

my grandfather read The Book

a book

any book.

His scriptures had been worked till they lay limp on the sideboard. But with equal care he would read the backs of fertilizer sacks and Corn-flakes boxes. The Watchtower. Pocket novels. At tomato-picking time he would stop to read the old newspapers that his wife had used to line the boxes. With hand-held glass he gleaned and pried from every journal a richness of names and places... Cordoba, Pretoria, Nanking, Addis Ababa, Blanchard, Graziani, Cambrai, Jutland, Haig, Shensi, Nenve- Chapelle, Coral Sea, Salonika, Smuts, Manchukuo, Anzio.

And on a large coloured map hanging by the telephone he plotted and counselled the armies and generals and their wars and rumours of wars. In those moments with his grown sons or priesthood brethren, when Grandma and the women were elsewhere

and nothing of practical

importance needed to be said

he could blossom with passionate two-

handed gestures to argue the dark ways of history and the glorious ways of God.

But he floated gently

backwardly

through old age to death as

one will who doesn't like to fight. His funeral was the first I had ever attended. It was an afternoon of passionate Words that he would have enjoyed, the Words of Redemption and Salvation and Unseen Worlds and peace that now seemed too real and too practical for his quiet folded hands

the hands that once bounced and cradled me in blessing

If there are any of you with children to be blessed, would you please bring them forward.

a name and a father's blessing

for the blessings of the

father will prevail

If there are no more ordinances to perform I will open this meeting for the Bearing of Testimonies by members of the congregation. Brothers and Sisters, the Time is yours to use as you see fit.

now i am alone in my wilderness of time the vast, dry prairie of time the lonely winter night of time

time the temperer

time the temptor

If thou be the son of the father command faith in this broken bread, and angels will bear you up. 240

is it not written?

yes is it not written in my forehead?

in the Book of Life? is it not written in the chemistry of my blood

the blood which is the life thereof?

the time is mine but where there be time it shall perish for time majestically magically melts like the wind it is always here and never and always beyond and where there be faith it shall

once I huddled with other boys in

the chapel's last bench during a summer fast and testimony meeting. A young sister of the Ward who was plain and backward stood suddenly beside her mother at the piano and sang "If I Could Hie to Kolob" then sat down leaving the congregation in a vast shoe-watching silence. We sat in stunned, forced reverence. No one ever sang a testimony. She sang her testimony. Using the words of another person. Composed. A testimony should not be bound by structure, it should be a unique expression of one's own faith.

My father's prayer before the Sunday feast that day was quiet, deliberate, unusual in its phrasing. After we seated ourselves and broke our fast my father told us of the meetings of his childhood. Meetings of faith. Of saints who bore testimonies in unknown tongues. Of saints who bore testimony by prophecy and the interpretation of tongues. Of times past. And my heart turned to my father.

He spent almost a dozen years in the glorious paradox of service as a Bishop. Once, in a spasm of fear, a long-inactive member of my father's Ward summoned him to her death-bed. Her grieving husband, a member of the small congregation of another struggling sect, had invited the ministration of his own pastor. The Minister and my father came to the quiet house at the same time. As they waited together in the close atmosphere of pain and anxiety, the woman died. That issue being settled, the Minister immediately raised the next item of business- in which church would the funeral be held?

The minister presented a carefully balanced case with fervent civility and structured conviction. There was little doubt that the husband of the deceased was the principal beneficiary of the oblations of the Church-and his wife had not really asserted her religious impulses; indeed, she had frequently attended her husband's church meetings. But he fortified his careful logic with a forthright testimony; We are only a small Church. But the children of God have always been small in number.

I waited for the lightning of my father's reply

for the majesty of His Priesthood for the great white tumbling stone of his faith 241

for the star of the morning the crumbling drums and trumpets the voice of angels

we believe all people are the Children of God, said my Father.

and he yielded to his adversary

The funeral was held in the Church of the Minister. My father attended as a faceless mourner.

And my heart turned to my father and I sensed in the blood that poured through my turning heart

the pain of hunger the pain of time the pain of faith the chemistry of faith

And I prayed for my naked and bloodless soul in the coming of that great and dreadful day.

Harrison Davis [^68] From the Land of Song

From Conway and Caerphilly, From Caerleon and Caerwent, From Llanelly and Llangollen, From the Gower and the Gwent,

From the castled-heights of Harlich, And the glen of Aberfan, From the white-capped craggs of Snowdon, From Caermarthen and Cwmbran,

It's the magic of the voices Whispering through the vales, And deep within this breast of mine They call, "Come back to Wales."

Nolyn Hardy [^69] Today's Dignitary

Fearless, he rises From the leather-cushioned chair And strides to the polished podium With an authoritative air.

He enchants the waiting audience With a politic-ish flair And befriends the haughty microphone With a manumiscient stare.

Then in phrases long and flowing, Like a wind too long a-blowing, Or a friend too long in going, He bestows the closing prayer, 242

Marilyn McMeen Miller [^70] News Express

Somebody down too many orchards from ours To count even by the numbers of lengths We could ride the pony at one time And not come sore Which gives you some idea Of how far away from home News travels Told us how to make our warts disappear.

And whoever it was will not ever know How religiously I followed somebody's words So many times removed And washed my sprouted hands With a bitter shred of Grandpa's night shirt Beneath a flooding moon. The night was very clear And somebody will never know how far I walked Or where-until I say it here- I dug my pit with my spade behind the cellar In the fallen apples piled winters up from the low

Apple branches hung so close they tangled in my hair Exactly as somebody said to do. And chanting at midnight under a clear sky I buried the shredded wart-infected rag In the stirring ground To grow whatever wart trees might spring In some unguarded boy's hands when I was old. But I would never touch wherever the spirit Of my warts stung now. And whoever-somebody's brother-it was who shared this cure Would know what I finally knew Without my saying anything And it would not matter now to him That-just as whoever-it-was promised- When the rag was finally rotted My warts were gone.

That kind of news needs no telling.

R. A. Christmas [^71] At Mountain Meadows: for Juanita Brooks

The mass grave here is set with stones Piled low inside a low rock wall, And marked for travelers by a sign That tells us briefly of the murder Of six score emigrants, whose bones Lay here and there once - on the plain, In the gulley - left to the weather Of almost a century where they fell -

Like so many others, screaming, shot, Robbed and left naked in the dust; A few of the millions underneath, And killed for something, like the rest That we remember and forget In stone and plaque - our modern shrines, A casual pilgrimage of death For tourists in the summertime

Who cannot kneel to sift for those yet Ungathered pieces of the dead That wash out here in summer floods Like parts of broken animals, But choose a few things to take home, A twig, a name, then pass adept 243 As visitors around low walls, Inspecting what they must disown:

Forgetting that such ways will end When these bones, bursting to rebirth, Pick through the meadows for debris

We did not number, and the Earth Burns to a glass in which we see Ourselves as we are seen, wherein We read, as guilt and innocence, The record of our ignorance.

Carol Lynn Pearson [^72]

To the Mormon Now Blessed with Roses instead of Tar and Feathers

Remember Aesop's Tale of the Traveler? Please note: The wind failed To make him Shed his coat. It was the sun That won.

Carol Lynn Pearson [^73] Guilt

I have no vulture sins, God, That overhang my sky, To climb, grey-feathering the air, And swoop carnivorously.

It's just the tiny sins, God, That from memory appear Like tedious, buzzing flies to dart Like static through my prayer,

Carol Lynn Pearson [^74] Ritual

Why ritual? May I not receive Christ without burial By water? If I remember That He bled, If I believe, What need for Sacramental bread?

Only this I know: All cries out For form No impulse Can rest Until somehow It is manifest. Even my spirit, Housed in heaven, Was not content Until it won Embodiment.

Carol Lynn Pearson [^75] To an Atheist

God must have a huge sense of humor So righteously to resist The temptation of turning the tables On your pretending He does not exist.

Charis Southwell [^76] Reformation

Underneath the pressed-marble foundations They have buried the witches, And in the dark library store rooms, they have put away the myth. Now the dark shape drifts up the stairs, Stands on the rostrum, and conjures.

A chain of laughter moves around the cocktail party, Light laughter like the clink of glass and ice And the jingle of bracelet rings. The smoke rises between us in a screen, And everyone is gay except for you, And you are restless and turn away To look for nothing, And could not tell me, if I asked you, "Why?"

Dante rose out of his grave and passed a bar. From the asylum where the air is a camouflage And the intimacy impersonal, he heard Hell's music. The well-dressed lady blushed and said, "Would you mind if I call you Father?" "Not at all, if it helps," he said. The well-dressed lady bowed her head And tried to find a way to tell.

When the storm lifts the litter from the streets And screams around the buildings Tearing at the wires and throwing down the leaves When the earth leaves and breaks itself, And the sea comes up in a great hand to slap the land,

The shadow rides upon the water And contorts his face in lightning For the pain of another power.

II

In my dreams I run until I am out there In the middle of everywhere, Wyoming, Where a hundred thousand voices sing the silence, And clouds as big as giants expand their chests and roar ! Where there is a stillness in between For the quiet things that sing in the smaller amplitudes And play on the fragile strings, Where only flowing water passes never hours And the undulance and coolness of the stream Shares the lovely solitude of dreams. It is a myth the quiet place. I waken from the illusion of the schedule Into the shelter of the willow, The soothing moving of the water, And the warm enclosing arms of sun.

III

Idumea, Idumea, we have forgotten. The blurr of pigeon wings moves into the evening, Following the day into the west, Dipping under the rose edge of the gray bowl And out into the ever-light. The great eye dims as earth turns beneath the aperture And closes away the blue. Plate-glass windows watch the white translucence Change through blue into the crystal black of night And sigh into the security of stars.

Idumea, Idumea, we have forgotten. The shadow hovers down so near We cannot see. We only feel the cold, like fear, Brush past, and wait and play to pass the time That's ticking faster than before, And the dark shape moves from door to door. Who knows when it has passed Or whether we are all dead at last? 245

Charis Southwell [^77] Waking

Seeds move up from the tomb To taste the sky. And I Because one man who died returned

Rejoice. Rejoice with me and come To where scarred souls look high Remembering the light of home.

Clifton Holt Jolley [^78] Heritage

One cannot know the desert Until there alone, Nor more the fever of her minotaur- Cycloptic on the sky- Who waits the maze of sand and stone To render poor Processioned wealth strewn low Beneath his golden, burning eye.

And yet we came By ones and threes And trains of dozens Dominoed across the plain From green to death to green again: A microcosm stretching out Our allegory against life's shame And ultimate retreat.

She would say to me: "Gideon, We have come too long a way To not be seen beside the Salt Lake Ultimately. One summer from Missouri to the gold fields; One winter, by our faith, to raise the claim; Spring to sell, and summer to be home again In Zion. Not the same, but higher There, where everlasting hills and snow Seem somehow transluced into cloud And, up, transcended on the wind, away."

Elizabeth, where are you now To speak away my pain?

* * *

The great Mojave lies between you If you travel south-the mountain passes north. And, fearing for the child's lungs, We knew death a valley We, as others, should surely cross.

But only half-way, where the axle broke And Elizabeth, leaping to the ground, Caught her skirts upon the wheel's brake And fell.

We watched the mules die Until, certain there was little chance, We shot them dead. Or, rather, I did. Elizabeth, tiny fists against her ears, Face disfigured of her want and broken hip, Whose eyes had not known water long enough to tear, Wept dust and could not bear it.

"You go on," she had said. "You go on. Take the one mule, the child. Leave the to the care of God. When the pain is healed I'll follow, But, for God's sake and the child's, You go on... to Zion."

It was simply more than l could bear To leave her Where God should care for her, perhaps, But not, perhaps, deliver her Beyond His Son's deliverance. And the snow hills, and the Salt Lake, and the valley 246

Which had ever been Should surely wait this moment's passing. Summer, winter, spring; Summer here again, perhaps, then fall; But ever surely seasons for our blessing: Summers to be home again. And, if I left her-two gone on In dull subtraction from our dream- Then should our seasons-one divided into three- Ever be the same?

So I murdered them Which were like children when they died: Brown eyes unapparent in their quizzing; Then amazement; then relief, And thirst gone out of them like a black and heavy bird; Then peace.

* * *

The salt flats of the valley. How long since water wandered here? Flat chalk shells (turned thin as dust And sharp) shear up through leather Into flesh With screaming they too Moved upon this floor. But before Peleg, when it was more Than death descended down to form.

"Bless me, Gideon. Bless me That I be the being you have said And not afraid. Bless me That my son shall be the heir That we have dreamed for him to be, Beyond the power of an axle To reach out and murder him. Bless me That I be the will of God And understand Him not As bush fire flaming in the sun But freshwater springs Beside an inland sea. To that end bless me, Gideon. Bless me."

But it did not take, And, although I prayed her well a hundred times And miracles to save us all And more, She withered there, beneath the desert's senseless eye, And, like hills of snow, was gone.

I could not bury her. Could not. Could not so much as close her eyes, Wrap her body, shroud her head, But laid her in shade beneath the wagon's tree And, with insufficient strength to pray, Thought God, Hoped His mercy, Mourned the dead.

And all the day and night and day The child, too weak to cry. Searched wide-eyed over me And, in the evening, softly died.

One cannot know the desert Until there alone Where air, ascending on the heat, Snakes tangible confinement to the world; Turns it wrong-side round (here refreshment where there is none, Here an open passage through solid stone) Until the sun Is welcome savior To the blanching of our bones And my son sacrifice- Fulfillment of what Abram's child was nearly shown.

I shall rest now with his mother That, if found, There shall, perhaps, be men of them To understand: I have cribbed them Who were too soon fodder To the stallions of a pagan, charioted god; That, having searched them Zion And come short, I have consecrated them This last expanse of decimated stone And lent form the face of Gideon, Elizabeth, And their son, Congealed beneath the Golden Light of God To one; That, finally, I could have gone, 247

Could bave touched the Salt Lake and snow hills With more than thought, Could, perhaps, have carried on

Alone, But, as one last, wild, hopeless gesture, Did not.

Dennis Drake [^79] To Jacob Hamblin (1819-1886)

They say I have your eyes And talk about as much, Which is to say our words Are not quite sparse as oceans In Arizona, but almost.

(I understaud. A man who travels alone Has no reason to talk much, And a man with four wives No opportunity.)

If you were here today We could despise crowds together, Their traffic signals, debts, governments ... Or listen to Simon and Garfunkel And complain how religion Leaves so little time to fish.

You might laugh to think a man Would ride a horse for pleasure, But progress brings strange regressions: Our Indians are not free; Cities are extended, not established; And peacemakers have been out of work for years.

Dennis Marden Clark [^80] Statement before the World Expands

If i have seemed lately to turn from you and mail my mind beyond our common rooms as if the calm intelligence your eyes offer to share were not sufficient plea that you should hear confession of all dooms i fear, and share each joy that touches me, and wander in the maze my thoughts devise when they to god for revelation sue, it's not because i don't know that you're here; i'm just remembering one june fifteenth we knelt and crossed an altar with our bands and swore we'd make our love outlast the sun, and now you're eight months pregnant and we pray good temper will help us survive the day.

Dennis Marden Clark [^81] Meadow

Balance is what we mean the name to tell her when she's suckled news into her brain that birth knits her into the nervous system of the ponderous live planet- the mediation of the seen oasis in the dance of heat received with second sight by men becomes a vision of the presence and greasy burden of dominion- in balance coming in the world because we gather and shape to life germ, egg, milk, grass-seed, tree-seed, meat, to live-share and plowshare-with beasts and trees working God's good green fate

a community of the elect, proving ourselves and proving God in the communion of his breath all toads and weeds and fieldmice weigh in peril with our infant will:

the name may remind her, when she can mind the name, that we chose birth as an experiment in restraint which she may join in dance, in song, in concert with this lurching earth.

A Name and a Blessing

The father and his friends, holding the high, holy priesthood and the infant, stand in a circle facing each other, right hands supporting the baby - rising, falling to gentle it left hands on the near neighbor's shoulder, on the stand before the meeting of saints this fast and testimony sunday;

having forsaken food for thought, and sought the company and brooding warmth of the holy ghost (a spirit of promise), considering the creation of bodies (his, his wife's, and God's) he is to name and bless, the father now closes his eyes to shut the world out, bows his head to see the child, begins talking with God into the microphone so that the congregation may share the revelation of fatherhead; in Jesus' name, and with his power he labels the child, then listens, then plunges into blessing if the ghost lures him down, under forms and records to that silence of mind where spirit

speaks freely in the depths of life, of death, and hears, searching experience for knowledge of this child that he may learn to bless it, then asks father God to signify through spirit he has found the source of energy of mind to raise his child in harmony, in love, with the child Jesus, father Christ.

Helen Walker Jones [^82] Cornerstone (Tracting in New Mexico)

With vivid cunning she draws rounded petals of smoke within her mouth, crosses a bony knee and speaks of converting other Lamanites. Eve, too, was a brunette.

And from this tender mouth rings the laughter of a girl, a vessel of the fruitful earth. My body is occupied by sin, she says, laughing. I know because the holy spirit 249 told me. The devil is a molten ball I dreamed of Catherine of Siena as a child. Endless nights, Father. White flowers bursting into flame at my bedside: a sign Pierced through the heart with a sharpened candlestick. I come, penitent. Sundays

laid out before me. fresh sheets drying upon the grass with rocks at their corners. Parted lips are among my eternal burdens. How much do you wish for this naked hallway this remorse?

Linda Sillitoe [^83] Trip Toward Prayer

You can't pray with a clenched brain Or fall asleep with fisted hands; But force one finger open at a time Until thoughts clatter loose and fall Like budded balls of crumpled paper.

Focus on God: O vast, universal wall on which I bounce my bead and words; which catches every other prayer spattered with tears, and returns the rest rebounding on my ears.

A child bored in church, I'd climb on to my daddy's lap saying, "Hold me." Then cleverly feign sleep, furtively turning the lead in his mechanical pencil, flipping his tie clasp.

Hear my sincere prayer when I have phrased an eloquence of motivating words.

What words can you impress on the law? While speeding a shouting baby toward an overdue nap a red light flashes a sickening through my feet. 250

Officer, sir, after you citate me, wordlessly berate me, glaring at the peace sign in the window, remember you are not the only one who hates me; as traffic peers around us, for a moment only, with uniform authority, hold me.

Yet we know one another somewhat; since the time when as a threshold girl I found that if I prayed for what I most loved You'd take it - to make me strong, they said. Weak since that time, I pray for less, and though I know You know I know You know I know You know, I am content with all things given, overwhelmed with love.

Sleep, little one. Lord, don't let this first warmth be the beginning of measles. I hate this creaking chair of so many hours, the vulgar, noisy trains. Go to sleep! I'll blow my morning midterm. Can't you at eleven little months, understand? I press her closer, kiss her kitten hair, and think of mental hospitals where people safe in separate cells can scream and scream their voices into salt. The thought relaxes us both, held asleep in the moving chair.

Giver of all I can give away - no, more than that; for you once granted forgiveness and reward on subsequent days. I have not forgotten.

Soon the drab morning and this stupid, stupid war,

which though it does not touch us most directly, still we wear a similar uniform of human skin which stinks with the blood of our many-sized brothers.

My love, 251

The baby has the measles after all ... a term paper due tomorrow... About your adjustment to military life... Cease this cheerful written chatter. Listen, let me say this - I can's take it anymore I can't take it hold me!

This baby and this man infinitely dear, Bless them all you can.

A single light ray pricks the palm of my brain Informing it with wonder-a word of love With forgotten implications, most simple, most complete. Yes, it was the first word you taught me To say with pre-flesh lips Clearly and with love, Lost in contending Wall, Giver, Forgiver,

Yet I lift it to thee now with new light - that word father, Father.

Hold me.

Ann Doty [^84] Sterling and Jenny

I am awake; The sheets over my skin, There is rain over me on the wood shingles Oh my Father. Last night I was only Sixteen.

Jenny.

Mama. Calling me up on the stairs. I smell bacon; Bacon and rain.

Jenny. Breakfast ready.

Breakfast downstairs, Yellow kitchen, orange juice, My family praying On knees. Father I can't go. This morning everything is changed; I'm not the same.

Jenny are you awake up there?

No, Mama, I'm not awake, I've always been asleep in this Bed I grew up in, under a quilt My grandma made. Here 252

I've always slept, safe under this slanted ceiling painted lavender.

Jenny it's eight o'clock in the morning!

Lavender was how the desert smelled last night, Mama. Because it's spring and those round purple flowers are everywhere on the mesa, growing close to the sand. And I could smell them last night. Mama, and I could smell the rain comin' And so could Sterl and Sterl and me, we left the car and walked to the field, and the wind last night was very warm.

I'm comin' up there, Jan.

Her voice is pleased, my mother's voice. She's coming to wake her daughter and to be alone with her. She'll say "Jen, last night did you have a good time?" I will say yes, and I'll smile like nothing 's changed. I will pretend. Oh my Father. I am alone.

There you are with your face in the pillow, Wake up, Junior Prom Queen.

Oh Mama no. Don't say anything more like that; I want to be outside in the rain. I want to go find Sterl.

I put your roses in water, your crown on the piano, and your brothers are down there makin' fun of everything.

She's so happy. She has a Yellow kitchen, and sons, and the little one in corduroy pants.

Come on Jen, rise and shine! It's rainin' outside- Finally Heavenly Father sent us rain.

Heavenly Father.

Rain smells so good out there, I opened all the windows. Here let's swing this 'un open, an' you can hear it more.

Rain in the cottonwoods. I'll say it out loud. "Rain"

Well. She's awake.

Mornin ' Mama.

Have a good time last night?

Oh yes, Mama.

Well that's good. We thought-your dad thought you sure looked pretty dancin' in that blue dress, And that Sterl, Well I've always looked on Sterling Adams as bein' the best boy in this valley.

Sterl.

Well you get dressed now and come on down. Or just come in your nightgown. I don't care.

Mama? Mama wait.

What, Jen?

Sterling, he is the best boy.

You bet he is. And he's got the best girl too.

No Mama.

Oh yes. Why, everybody was sayin' last night-

No! I mean, Sterling's different. From me or anybody. He reads things, and Writes Writes things down in this Journal he has. He thinks about life Mama, And he's always walkin'. Out there in those 253

Fields. I've seen him.

Seen 'im ?

About a week ago I saw him. Only he didn't know I was there.

Well.

I was ridin' the horse out across the back fields. when all of a sudden there he was, walkin' out in a field. So I got down off the horse and I watched him from under the cottonwoods.

Jen, what's the matter?

And he was just standin' there, Mama, alone in the

middle of that field with the wind warm and blowin' the

hay up against his legs. And the sky was glittery and dusty and yellow-blue, and the thing was- The thing was, Mama, he was lookin' up. Like across the sky. He was so tall in the hayfield, and I could smell the hay.

No! I mean, it's O.K., Mama. It was just so good that's all. Now Here I am feelin' like cryin' Ain't that funny?

No Jenny, it ain't.

He didn't know I was there, Mama. I just sat there under the cottonwoods watchin' him, and I could feel- I could feel that clay that he was very happy, and that day he knew many things. That's good, Jenny, that's good.

Yes, Mama. It was.

Oh!

Hear those boys downstairs. I'm gone one minute and they're

wrestlin' in the livingroom. I'm goin' down. You come on down now, Jen.

O.K. Mama.

I move Grandma's quilt, move Ibis Raggedy Ann Doll, and this pillow with words on it I sewed when I was ten. Greet the day with a song, Make others happy, Serve gladly. I pull my nightgown up over my head and stated by the open window smelling the rain air, and the wet desert, and the hayfields. Father, help Sterl today. It'll be harder for him, Because he has to be outside. Under the sky.

Two Children's Songs

Anonymous Give, Said the Little Stream

Give, said the little stream, Give, oh! give, give, oh! give, Give, said the little stream, As it hurried down the hill; I'm small I know, but wherever I go, The Fields grow greener still.

Give, said the little rain, Give, oh! give, give, oh! give, Give, said the little rain, As it fell upon the flow'rs; I'll raise their drooping heads again, As it fell upon the flow'rs. 254

Give, then for Jesus give; Give, oh! give, give, oh! give, Give, then for Jesus give; There is something all can give. Do as the streams and blossoms do, For God and others live.

CHORUS

Singing, singing all the day, Give away, Oh! give away. Singing, singing all the day, Give, oh! give away.

Naomi W. Randall [^85] I Am a Child of God

I am a child of God, And he has sent me here, Has given me an earthly home With parents kind and dear.

I am a child of God, And so my needs are great; Help me to understand his words Before it grows too late.

I am a child of God, Rich blessings are in store; If I but learn to do his will I'll live with him once more.

Chorus:

Lead me, guide me, walk beside me, Help me find the way. Teach me all that I must do [^86] To live with him someday. 255

William W. Phelps (1792-1872) was born at Hanover, New Jersey. Well educated, Phelps was an aspirant for the office of lieutenant governor of New York at the time he first learned of Mormonism through reading the Book of Mormon and talking with Sidney Rigdon. He visited Kirtland in 1831, was baptized, and became active in editorial work, establishing the Evening and Morning Star. One of the Prophet's scribes, he assisted in preparing the first hymnal. Excommunicated in 1839, he returned to fellowship in 1841 and fulfilled a mission to the eastern states. He was implicated in the difficulty surrounding the destruction of the Nauvoo Expositor and was summoned to be tried for treason with Joseph Smith at Carthage. He accompanied the pioneers to Utah, where he became one of the first regents of the University of Deseret and a representative in the Utah legislature.

William W. Phelps (1792-1872) was born at Hanover, New Jersey. Well educated, Phelps was an aspirant for the office of lieutenant governor of New York at the time he first learned of Mormonism through reading the Book of Mormon and talking with Sidney Rigdon. He visited Kirtland in 1831, was baptized, and became active in editorial work, establishing the Evening and Morning Star. One of the Prophet's scribes, he assisted in preparing the first hymnal. Excommunicated in 1839, he returned to fellowship in 1841 and fulfilled a mission to the eastern states. He was implicated in the difficulty surrounding the destruction of the Nauvoo Expositor and was summoned to be tried for treason with Joseph Smith at Carthage. He accompanied the pioneers to Utah, where he became one of the first regents of the University of Deseret and a representative in the Utah legislature.

William W. Phelps (1792-1872) was born at Hanover, New Jersey. Well educated, Phelps was an aspirant for the office of lieutenant governor of New York at the time he first learned of Mormonism through reading the Book of Mormon and talking with Sidney Rigdon. He visited Kirtland in 1831, was baptized, and became active in editorial work, establishing the Evening and Morning Star. One of the Prophet's scribes, he assisted in preparing the first hymnal. Excommunicated in 1839, he returned to fellowship in 1841 and fulfilled a mission to the eastern states. He was implicated in the difficulty surrounding the destruction of the Nauvoo Expositor and was summoned to be tried for treason with Joseph Smith at Carthage. He accompanied the pioneers to Utah, where he became one of the first regents of the University of Deseret and a representative in the Utah legislature.

Composed for the dedication of the Kirtland Temple, this hymn is now sung at the dedication of all Latter-day Saint temples and is known by the title, "The Spirit of God Like a Fire."

"Plead unto heaven" bus replaced the words "Stain Illinois." This hymn was written by Phelps to the memory of Joseph Smith, who was assassinated at Carthage Jail, Carthage, Illinois, on June 27, 1844.

William W. Phelps (1792-1872) was born at Hanover, New Jersey. Well educated, Phelps was an aspirant for the office of lieutenant governor of New York at the time he first learned of Mormonism through reading the Book of Mormon and talking with Sidney Rigdon. He visited Kirtland in 1831, was baptized, and became active in editorial work, establishing the Evening and Morning Star. One of the Prophet's scribes, he assisted in preparing the first hymnal. Excommunicated in 1839, he returned to fellowship in 1841 and fulfilled a mission to the eastern states. He was implicated in the difficulty surrounding the destruction of the Nauvoo Expositor and was summoned to be tried for treason with Joseph Smith at Carthage. He accompanied the pioneers to Utah, where he became one of the first regents of the University of Deseret and a representative in the Utah legislature.

This poem, and Joseph Smith's response, were first published in the Times and Seasons (Nauvoo, January 1843) and later (August 1843) in the Millennial Star. The subject of Joseph's response, is, of course, closely based on the vision described in the seventy-sixth section of the Doctrine and Covenants.

This is the only poem extant supposed to have been written by the Prophet Joseph Smith. Close textual comparisons, however, lead one to suspect that W. W. Phelps was the author. For a long period Phelps served as a personal scribe for Joseph. This poem was published in Nauvoo in 1843.

John Lyon (1803-89), a Utah pioneer, served as a missionary in England and is the author of two collections of verse, Harp of Zion (1853) and Songs of a Pioneer, published posthumously by his son in 1923. Lyon's poetry, like that of Eliza R Snow, provides interesting literary and historical insights into early Mormonism. The editors have been, as yet, unable to identify the apostate of whom Lyon was writing in this poem.

John Lyon (1803-89), a Utah pioneer, served as a missionary in England and is the author of two collections of verse, Harp of Zion (1853) and Songs of a Pioneer, published posthumously by his son in 1923. Lyon's poetry, like that of Eliza R Snow, provides interesting literary and historical insights into early Mormonism. The editors have been, as yet, unable to identify the apostate of whom Lyon was writing in this poem.

Joel H. Johnson ( 1802-83) was born in Massachusetts. In I 830, while in Ohio, he became acquainted with LDS missionaries and joined the Church. In 1832 he was called on a mission to New York; in 1833 he moved to Kirtland, built u sawmill, and furnished lumber for the temple. Active in organizing branches of the Church in Ohio, in the South, and in Illinois, he helped seek out the site for Nauvoo. He accompanied the Saints to Utah, settled at the mouth of Mill Creek Canyon, then was called to go south with George A. Smith to settle Southern Utah. He became a member of the territorial legislature. His journal contains 736 hymns and songs. A volume, Voices from the Mountains, containing prose and poetry, was published in 1881, and a book of poems, Hymns of Praise, appeared in 1882. He died at Johnson, Utah. The "Gather to Zion" cry of the desert Saints is clearly manifest in this hymn.

Eliza R. Snow (1804-87) was born in Becket. Berkshire County, Massachusetts. She gained early renown in her area as a gifted poet. She was baptized in 1835 and moved to Kirtland, where she taught a school for girls and was, for a time, the governess to the Prophet Joseph Smith's family. She moved with the Saints to Far West, then to Nauvoo, where she taught school and wrote "O My Father," her most beloved poem, notable for its doctrine concerning a "heavenly mother." She Was the first secretary of the Relief Society, organized in 1842, and became one of Joseph Smith's plural wives on June 29, 1842. After the death of her husband she accompanied the pioneers west, where she was married to Brigham Young in 1849, residing in the Lion House until the time of her death. She was president of the Relief Society, the director of the women's work in the Endowment House, and she assisted in organizing the Primary Association. She published two volumes of poems in 1856 and 1876.

Eliza R. Snow (1804-87) was born in Becket. Berkshire County, Massachusetts. She gained early renown in her area as u gifted poet. She was baptized in 1835 and moved to Kirtland, where she taught a school for girls and was, for a time, the governess to the Prophet Joseph Smith's family. She moved with the Saints to Far West, then to Nauvoo, where she taught school and wrote "O My Father," her most beloved poem, notable for its doctrine concerning a "heavenly mother." She Was the first secretary of the Relief Society, organized in 1842, and became one of Joseph Smith's plural wives on June 29, 1842. After the death of her husband she accompanied the pioneers west, where she was married to Brigham Young in 1849, residing in the Lion House until the time of her death. She was president of the Relief Society, the director of the women's work in the Endowment House, and she assisted in organizing the Primary Association. She published two volumes of poems in 1856 and 1876.

Original title. Now titled, "O My Father."

Eliza R. Snow (1804-87) was born in Becket. Berkshire County, Massachusetts. She gained early renown in her area as u gifted poet. She was baptized in 1835 and moved to Kirtland, where she taught a school for girls and was, for a time, the governess to the Prophet Joseph Smith's family. She moved with the Saints to Far West, then to Nauvoo, where she taught school and wrote "O My Father," her most beloved poem, notable for its doctrine concerning a "heavenly mother." She Was the first secretary of the Relief Society, organized in 1842, and became one of Joseph Smith's plural wives on June 29, 1842. After the death of her husband she accompanied the pioneers west, where she was married to Brigham Young in 1849, residing in the Lion House until the time of her death. She was president of the Relief Society, the director of the women's work in the Endowment House, and she assisted in organizing the Primary Association. She published two volumes of poems in 1856 and 1876.

Original title. Now titled, "Though Deepening Trials."

Eliza R. Snow (1804-87) was born in Becket. Berkshire County, Massachusetts. She gained early renown in her area as u gifted poet. She was baptized in 1835 and moved to Kirtland, where she taught a school for girls and was, for a time, the governess to the Prophet Joseph Smith's family. She moved with the Saints to Far West, then to Nauvoo, where she taught school and wrote "O My Father," her most beloved poem, notable for its doctrine concerning a "heavenly mother." She Was the first secretary of the Relief Society, organized in 1842, and became one of Joseph Smith's plural wives on June 29, 1842. After the death of her husband she accompanied the pioneers west, where she was married to Brigham Young in 1849, residing in the Lion House until the time of her death. She was president of the Relief Society, the director of the women's work in the Endowment House, and she assisted in organizing the Primary Association. She published two volumes of poems in 1856 and 1876.

Eliza R. Snow (1804-87) was born in Becket. Berkshire County, Massachusetts. She gained early renown in her area as u gifted poet. She was baptized in 1835 and moved to Kirtland, where she taught a school for girls and was, for a time, the governess to the Prophet Joseph Smith's family. She moved with the Saints to Far West, then to Nauvoo, where she taught school and wrote "O My Father," her most beloved poem, notable for its doctrine concerning a "heavenly mother." She Was the first secretary of the Relief Society, organized in 1842, and became one of Joseph Smith's plural wives on June 29, 1842. After the death of her husband she accompanied the pioneers west, where she was married to Brigham Young in 1849, residing in the Lion House until the time of her death. She was president of the Relief Society, the director of the women's work in the Endowment House, and she assisted in organizing the Primary Association. She published two volumes of poems in 1856 and 1876.

Parley P. Pratt, whose biographical data is cited earlier, was clearly one of the greatest of the early Mormon hymnists. Whether writing hymns of praise, as with "Evening Prayer," or hymns with a strident millennial and restoration fervor, such as "The Morning Breaks," Pratt achieved a formal richness and simple beauty which make his poems perpetual favorites of the Latter day Saints.

Parley P. Pratt, whose biographical data is cited earlier, was clearly one of the greatest of the early Mormon hymnists. Whether writing hymns of praise, as with "Evening Prayer," or hymns with a strident millennial and restoration fervor, such as "The Morning Breaks," Pratt achieved a formal richness and simple beauty which make his poems perpetual favorites of the Latter day Saints.

Parley P. Pratt, whose biographical data is cited earlier, was clearly one of the greatest of the early Mormon hymnists. Whether writing hymns of praise, as with "Evening Prayer," or hymns with a strident millennial and restoration fervor, such as "The Morning Breaks," Pratt achieved a formal richness and simple beauty which make his poems perpetual favorites of the Latter day Saints.

Parley P. Pratt, whose biographical data is cited earlier, was clearly one of the greatest of the early Mormon hymnists. Whether writing hymns of praise, as with "Evening Prayer," or hymns with a strident millennial and restoration fervor, such as "The Morning Breaks," Pratt achieved a formal richness and simple beauty which make his poems perpetual favorites of the Latter day Saints.

Original title. Now titled, "As the Dew from Heaven Distilling.

Cyrus H. Wheelock (1813-94) was born in Henderson, New York. He joined the Church in 1839 and filled a mission in Vermont and other states. A gifted orator, he labored with Governor Thomas Ford in behalf of Joseph Smith and those incarcerated in Carthage Jail. He accompanied the Church to Utah, returning in 1878 as president of the Northern States Mission. He lived in Mount Pleasant, Utah, where he wrote a number of widely used hymns such as this, which reflects clearly the "Gathering" philosophy, now changed, of the Mormons. In this hymn is seen the popular "Come out of Babylon (the world) unto Zion (Utah)" theme.

See William Clayton's famous diary for his brief account of Brigham Young's charge that he write this hymn, closely identified throughout the world with the Latter-day Saint faith.

John Jaques (1803-89), born in Moraket Bosworth, Leicestershire, England, became a Latter-day Saint in 1845. He emigrated with his family to America in 1856 and crossed the plains with the fated Martin Handcart Company. His daughter was among those who died. He returned to England as a missionary (1869-71), and there, at Stratford-upon-Avon, he penned the Mormon hymn, "O Say, What Is Truth." After his return from England he worked for the Deseret News and in the Church Historian's Office.

Charles W. Penrose (1832-1925) was born in London, England. At the age of eighteen he joined the Church and was soon thereafter sent on a seven-year mission through England, during which time he established a number of branches of the Church. After his long labor he was called to preside over the London conference. It was while serving in this position that he began to write. In 1861 he and his family emigrated to Utah. He returned to England on a second mission. On returning to Utah, he moved to Logan and then to Ogden, where he began his newspaper work. He soon became editor of the Deseret News, where he served until his call to the First Presidency of the Church. His hymns are still widely sung in Mormondom. This hymn is wonderfully dated, springing as it does from the 1857 Utah War, in which the Mormons saw themselves audaciously at war with the United States; and, when it was over, felt that they had, with God's will, been granted some kind of victory. The hymn is sung to the tune of "The Red, White, and Blue."

Richard Smyth (1838-1914) was born in Dublin, Ireland. He emigrated to the United States in 1863 and was known in Salt Lake City as "Smyth the Hatter." He returned to Ireland on two missions. In 1890 he establishec a hatter company. His hymn "Israel, Israel, God Is Calling" was a great favorite with the British Saints in the early gathering days. A number of Smyth's poems appeared in the Millennial Star, the voice of the Church it Britain.

Ina Coolbrith (1842-1928) was a niece of Joseph Smith, the daughter of Don Carlos Smith. Brought by covered wagon to California as a child, she lived, after 1865, in the San Francisco Bay region. Disassociated with the Church, she became an important literary figure in California, assisting Bret Harte in editing the Overland Monthly, and associating with the literary circle which included Mark Twain, C. W. Stoddard, and Joaquin Miller. Her simple lyric poems, such as this one, were collected in A Perfect Day (1881), The Singer of the Sea (l894), and Songs from the Golden Gate (1895). She was named by the California legislature as the state's first Poet Laureate.

Augusta Joyce Crocheron (1844-1915) was born in St. George, but she lived most of her life in Salt Lake City, where she was prominent in the leadership of the Relief Society and the YWMIA organizations. A well-known writer of her day, Mrs. Crocheron published a collection of poems, Wild Flowers of Deseret (1881) (from which these three poems were taken), a series of biographical sketches entitled Representative Women of Deseret (1883) and The Children's Book. She contributed poems and sketches to Tullidge's Magazine, the Women's Exponent, the Contributor, and other Church magazines.

Augusta Joyce Crocheron (1844-1915) was born in St. George, but she lived most of her life in Salt Lake City, where she was prominent in the leadership of the Relief Society and the YWMIA organizations. A well-known writer of her day, Mrs. Crocheron published a collection of poems, Wild Flowers of Deseret (1881) (from which these three poems were taken), a series of biographical sketches entitled Representative Women of Deseret (1883) and The Children's Book. She contributed poems and sketches to Tullidge's Magazine, the Women's Exponent, the Contributor, and other Church magazines.

Augusta Joyce Crocheron (1844-1915) was born in St. George, but she lived most of her life in Salt Lake City, where she was prominent in the leadership of the Relief Society and the YWMIA organizations. A well-known writer of her day, Mrs. Crocheron published a collection of poems, Wild Flowers of Deseret (1881) (from which these three poems were taken), a series of biographical sketches entitled Representative Women of Deseret (1883) and The Children's Book. She contributed poems and sketches to Tullidge's Magazine, the Women's Exponent, the Contributor, and other Church magazines.

Joseph L. Townsend (1849-1942), born in Pennsylvania, gained a good education at the University of Missouri and the Agricultural College of Missouri. In 1872, ill health sent him west to Salt Lake City. Six months later he joined the Church. He became principal of Payson High School. A business leader in Payson for a number of years, he also served as a teacher of penmanship at Brigham Young Academy at Provo and later as a manual training teacher in Salt Lake High School. He wrote a great number of hymns still sung by the Latter-day Saints. The iron rod, imaged here is one of Mormondom's important symbols. It is drawn from Lehi's vision in the Book of Mormon.

Joseph L. Townsend (1849-1942), born in Pennsylvania, gained a good education at the University of Missouri and the Agricultural College of Missouri. In 1872, ill health sent him west to Salt Lake City. Six months later he joined the Church. He became principal of Payson High School. A business leader in Payson for a number of years, he also served as a teacher of penmanship at Brigham Young Academy at Provo and later as a manual training teacher in Salt Lake High School. He wrote a great number of hymns still sung by the Latter-day Saints. The iron rod, imaged here is one of Mormondom's important symbols. It is drawn from Lehi's vision in the Book of Mormon.

Seeing themselves as a chosen people in conflict with earthly principalities and satanic powers, the Mormon people used militant images in numbers of their early hymns.

Whitney's biography may be read in the essay section of this book, accompanying his essay, "Home Literature."

Whitney's biography may be read in the essay section of this book, accompanying his essay, "Home Literature."

Whitney's biography may be read in the essay section of this book, accompanying his essay, "Home Literature."

Josephine Spencer (1861-1928), born in Salt Lake City, was the daughter of Daniel and Emily Spencer. An excellent student and avid reader, she helped organize one of Salt Lake City's first literary societies, "Azalia." A gifted poet rind avid short story writer, her contributions to the Church magazines mark her as one of Mormondom's most productive poets and writers. Devoted to literary work, she was for a long time society editor for the Deseret News and represented that paper at the Chicago World's Fair in 1893. She died in Los Angeles, California.

The Salt Lake route.

S. Dilworth Young (1897- ), a native of Salt Lake City, is senior member of the First Council of the Seventy, and one of the General Authorities of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. One of the more prolific authors of the Church, his writings include, besides numerous magazine articles, The Testimony of Mary, An Adventure in Faith, Family Night Reader, More Precious Than Rubies, Young Brigham Young, Here is Brigham .... Here I Stand Looking, and The Long Road, from which this poem is taken.

D&C 64:10

Vesta Pierce Crawford ( 1899- ), of Salt Lake City, was reared in Gunnison, Utah. Mrs. Crawford was a schoolteacher, associate editor of the Relief Society Magazine for twenty-five years, and a free-lance writer. She lilts published poems in many anthologies, and she won first prize for her book Short Grass Woman (from which this poem has been taken), published in 1965 by the Utah State Poetry Society. She has published in many magazines, including LDS Church publications. the Christian Science Monitor, the New York Times, Washington Post, Denver Post, and the Salt Lake Tribune She has been twice president of the Utah State Poetry Society filial has served as an officer and judge in many other poetry societies; and contests. She has published more than six hundred poems, short stories, and articles, some of which have won awards in the Utah State Institute of Fine Arts competition.

Christie Lund Coles (1906- ) was born in Salina, Utah, but has resided many years in Provo, Utah, where she is a housewife and a free-lance writer. Widely published, Mrs. Coles has poems in such periodicals as Dialogue, BYU Studies, Western Humanities Review. Saturday Review, Ladies Home Journal, McCall's, Saturday Evening Post, the New York Times, the New York Herald-Tribune. and the LDS Church magazines. She has published three volumes of verse: Legacy, Some Spring Returning (1958). and Speak to Me (1970). Mrs. Coles writes plays, short stories, and poems which have won numerous contests.

Veneta Leatham Nielsen (1909- ) lives in Logan, where she has taught for a number of years at Utah State University as a professor of English, teaching Great Books and Ideas, Mythology, and world literature and poetry. She has written a handbook, To Find a Poem, a number of critical essays, and three monographs: Under Sound, Tree of Fire (from which this poem is taken), and Insurgent Form.

Arthur Henry King (1910- ), an author and lecturer of international reputation, is a native of England, where he gained renown as a leader in education. He is now a professor of English and assistant director of the Honors Program at Brigham Young University. Besides his poetry he has published books and articles on sixteenth and seventeenth century literature and on English as a foreign language. A recent convert to Mormonism, King tins contributed numerous articles to BYU Studies, Dialogue, and LDS Church magazines.

Arthur Henry King (1910- ), an author and lecturer of international reputation, is a native of England, where he gained renown as a leader in education. He is now a professor of English and assistant director of the Honors Program at Brigham Young University. Besides his poetry he has published books and articles on sixteenth and seventeenth century literature and on English as a foreign language. A recent convert to Mormonism, King tins contributed numerous articles to BYU Studies, Dialogue, and LDS Church magazines.

Edward L. Hart (1916. ), born and reared in Bloomington, Idaho, resides in Provo, Utah, where he has been a professor of English at Brigham Young University for many years. Hart has taught in the universities of Washington, Utah, California (Berkeley); has served as president of Rocky Mountain Modern Language Association, and has won an award in poetry in the Utah State Institute of Fine Arts competition (1963). In addition to being a Rhodes Scholar (at Oxford University) and a conference champion miler (1939), Hart has published Minor Lives (1971), stories, and numerous poems, articles, and book reviews. His work has been widely anthologized.

Edward L. Hart (1916. ), born and reared in Bloomington, Idaho, resides in Provo, Utah, where he has been a professor of English at Brigham Young University for many years. Hart has taught in the universities of Washington, Utah, California (Berkeley); has served as president of Rocky Mountain Modern Language Association, and has won an award in poetry in the Utah State Institute of Fine Arts competition (1963). In addition to being a Rhodes Scholar (at Oxford University) and a conference champion miler (1939), Hart has published Minor Lives (1971), stories, and numerous poems, articles, and book reviews. His work has been widely anthologized.

Marden J. Clark ( 1916- ) is a native of Morgan, Utah, and a professor of English at Brigham Young University. A scholar in modern literature, he has been a Fulbright lecturer in Finland and has published several articles in this country, including Modern and Classic: The Wooing Both Ways (Merrill Monograph Series), and an essay, "Art in the Marketplace," in Dialogue.

Lael Woolsey Hill(1919- ),a housewife and free-lance poet, writer, and artist, lives in Salt Lake City. Mrs. Hill has published a book of poems, A Legacy of Years (1966). She has published her poetry in LDS Church magazines, Utah Woman, A merican Scholar, Chelsea Nine, Ladies Home Journal, Saturday Evening Post, The Humanist, Woman's Journal (England), St. Anthony Messenger, The Christian Science Monitor, New York Times, New York Herald-Tribune, both major Salt Lake City papers, and in Utah Sings. She has been an officer in a number of poetry associations, and has won prizes in numerous contests.

May Swenson (1919. ) has achieved a wider poetic renown than any other poet with a Mormon back-ground. Born in Logan, Miss Swenson was educated at Utah State University and now lives in New York. Widely published in prestigious periodicals and anthologies, she has published several collections, Another Animal (1954), A Cage of Spines (1958), To Mix with Time (1963), Half Sun Half Sleep (1966), and Poems to Solve (1968).

May Swenson (1919. ) has achieved a wider poetic renown than any other poet with a Mormon back-ground. Born in Logan, Miss Swenson was educated at Utah State University and now lives in New York. Widely published in prestigious periodicals and anthologies, she has published several collections, Another Animal (1954), A Cage of Spines (1958), To Mix with Time (1963), Half Sun Half Sleep (1966), and Poems to Solve (1968).

Clinton F. Larson (1919-), from American Fork, Utah, is a long-time professor of English and Poet-in-Residence at Brigham Young University, where he teaches creative writing. Larson, a prolific and award-winning writer, is known to audiences for such plays as Snow White and the Mirror, The Mantle of the Prophet, Mary of Nazareth, and The Prophet. He has published two books of poetry, The Lord of Experience (1967) and Counterpoint (1973), and numerous other poems in periodicals and pamphlets. He is known in many Mormon homes for his text, prepared for Promised Land Publications, Illustrated Stories from the Book of Mormon.

Clinton F. Larson (1919-), from American Fork, Utah, is a long-time professor of English and Poet-in-Residence at Brigham Young University, where he teaches creative writing. Larson, a prolific and award-winning writer, is known to audiences for such plays as Snow White and the Mirror, The Mantle of the Prophet, Mary of Nazareth, and The Prophet. He has published two books of poetry, The Lord of Experience (1967) and Counterpoint (1973), and numerous other poems in periodicals and pamphlets. He is known in many Mormon homes for his text, prepared for Promised Land Publications, Illustrated Stories from the Book of Mormon.

Clinton F. Larson (1919-), from American Fork, Utah, is a long-time professor of English and Poet-in-Residence at Brigham Young University, where he teaches creative writing. Larson, a prolific and award-winning writer, is known to audiences for such plays as Snow White and the Mirror, The Mantle of the Prophet, Mary of Nazareth, and The Prophet. He has published two books of poetry, The Lord of Experience (1967) and Counterpoint (1973), and numerous other poems in periodicals and pamphlets. He is known in many Mormon homes for his text, prepared for Promised Land Publications, Illustrated Stories from the Book of Mormon.

Clinton F. Larson (1919-), from American Fork, Utah, is a long-time professor of English and Poet-in-Residence at Brigham Young University, where he teaches creative writing. Larson, a prolific and award-winning writer, is known to audiences for such plays as Snow White and the Mirror, The Mantle of the Prophet, Mary of Nazareth, and The Prophet. He has published two books of poetry, The Lord of Experience (1967) and Counterpoint (1973), and numerous other poems in periodicals and pamphlets. He is known in many Mormon homes for his text, prepared for Promised Land Publications, Illustrated Stories from the Book of Mormon.

Max Golightly (1924-) is a professor of speech and drama at Brigham Young University. Golightly has degrees from Brigham Young University and Southern Illinois University. He has published poetry in the Prairie Schooner, Coastline, Kaleidograph, The Search, Wye Magazine, Tulsa Poetry Quarterly, South and West, Discourses on Poetry, Human Voice Quarterly, Utah Sings, Prize Poems of the NFSPS, and in many other periodicals and newspapers. He has published articles in BYU Studies, Utah Speech Magazine, and the Utah Music Educator. His poem, "Ibid.," won first prize in the National Publications Award of South and West Publications. Father of five children, Golightly has acted in and directed numerous plays. He has acted in several films, is widely respected as a narrator, and, in 1970, won the Utah State Poetry contest with his volume of poems, A Morning of Taurus.

R. Paul Cracroft (1922- ) has published numerous articles in LDS Church magazines, Editor and Publisher, NAM Journal, and other professional journals. Cracroft lives in Salt Lake City. He is a teacher of journalism and is public relations director at the University of Utah, where he also hosts a long-running television interview show. He has recently completed an epic poem, "A Certain Testimony," about the Book of Mormon and the rise of Mormonism.

Emma Lou Thayne (1924- ) is not only a poet but a wife, mother of five daughters, and a part-time instructor in the Department of English at the University of Utah. She worked (1965-72) on the General Board of the YWMIA. Her articles, short stories, and poems have appeared in local and national publications. She has authored two well-received collections of poetry, Spaces in the Sage ( 1971), from which this and the following poem are taken, and Until Another Day for Butterflies (1973), from which "First Loss" and "Sunday School Picture" are taken.

Emma Lou Thayne (1924- ) is not only a poet but a wife, mother of five daughters, and a part-time instructor in the Department of English at the University of Utah. She worked (1965-72) on the General Board of the YWMIA. Her articles, short stories, and poems have appeared in local and national publications. She has authored two well-received collections of poetry, Spaces in the Sage ( 1971), from which this and the following poem are taken, and Until Another Day for Butterflies (1973), from which "First Loss" and "Sunday School Picture" are taken.

Emma Lou Thayne (1924- ) is not only a poet but a wife, mother of five daughters, and a part-time instructor in the Department of English at the University of Utah. She worked (1965-72) on the General Board of the YWMIA. Her articles, short stories, and poems have appeared in local and national publications. She has authored two well-received collections of poetry, Spaces in the Sage ( 1971), from which this and the following poem are taken, and Until Another Day for Butterflies (1973), from which "First Loss" and "Sunday School Picture" are taken.

Emma Lou Thayne (1924- ) is not only a poet but a wife, mother of five daughters, and a part-time instructor in the Department of English at the University of Utah. She worked (1965-72) on the General Board of the YWMIA. Her articles, short stories, and poems have appeared in local and national publications. She has authored two well-received collections of poetry, Spaces in the Sage ( 1971), from which this and the following poem are taken, and Until Another Day for Butterflies (1973), from which "First Loss" and "Sunday School Picture" are taken.

John Sterling Harris (1929- ) draws his poetry from a varied professional career that includes such prosaic professions as used car salesman and army first sergeant. He is better known, however, as a sensitive teacher of American literature and technical writing at Brigham Young University. His publications include a textbook, Writing for the Social Sciences, and a book of Western poetry, Barbed Wire. Harris has also published a number of articles and poems in BYU Studies, The Carpenter, Dialogue, and in several anthologies.

John Sterling Harris (1929- ) draws his poetry from a varied professional career that includes such prosaic professions as used car salesman and army first sergeant. He is better known, however, as a sensitive teacher of American literature and technical writing at Brigham Young University. His publications include a textbook, Writing for the Social Sciences, and a book of Western poetry, Barbed Wire. Harris has also published a number of articles and poems in BYU Studies, The Carpenter, Dialogue, and in several anthologies.

David L. Wright (1929-67), who lived in Bennington, Idaho, published in Mutiny, Arizona Quarterly, The Humanist, and Inland. His story, "A Summer in the Country," was reprinted in Best Articles & Stories and named to the honor roll in Best American Short Stories 1961. Wright, a high school and elementary teacher, served as a major in the air force in Viet Nam. His play, Still the Mountain Wind, has been performed numerous times. Wright, who died of a heart attack at the age of thirty-eight, left a number of unpublished novels, poems, and plays, many of them about Mormon life in southern Idaho. This poem was published in Dialogue.

Thomas Asplund (1934- ) was born and grew up in Lethbridge, Alberta, Canada, Educated at the University of Alberta, Brigham Young University, Harvard Law Schook, and he University of Toronto, he now teaches law at Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario. His first audience for his poetry is his wife and four children. He has published several poems in Dialogue.

Harrison M. Davis (1935- ) was born in Logan and reared in Ogden, Utah. He teaches humanities at Brigham Young University, runs rivers wherever he can find white-water, writes poetry, and climbs mountains. His publications include two anthologies, A n Introduction to the Humanities and Anatomy of Peace, and a book of poems, Portraits for Peace (1972). This poem springs from his experiences in Wales, where he served as a Mormon missionary.

Nolyn Hardy (1936- ), from San Diego, California, now lives in Salt Lake City, where she is a home-maker-writer. Mrs. Hardy has published poetry and articles and is at work on historical research which she hopes will become the basis of a series of three novels.

Marilyn M. Miller (1938- ) is a professional writer who resides in Provo, Utah. An editor for Brigham Young University Press, manager of her own publishing company, teacher of freshman English, Mrs. Miller has published Rainflowers, a book of love poetry. She has also published in Church magazines and in Dialogue and has won a prize in the Utah State Fine Arts contest for a novel, Rainy. She has won numerous other prizes in Utah contests.

R. A. Christmas (1939- ), who claims many occupations, most recently college professor and sales representative, was reared in Pasadena, California, but now lives in Sierra Madre, California. He has published in The Southern Review, Western Humanities Review, BYU Studies, Dialogue, Stories Southwest, and others. His book of poetry, Getting Drunk in a Clean House, was a finalist in the United States Award competition in 1972. The book is in process of publication.

R. A. Christmas (1939- ), who claims many occupations, most recently college professor and sales representative, was reared in Pasadena, California, but now lives in Sierra Madre, California. He has published in The Southern Review, Western Humanities Review, BYU Studies, Dialogue, Stories Southwest, and others. His book of poetry, Getting Drunk in a Clean House, was a finalist in the United States Award competition in 1972. The book is in process of publication.

Carol Lynn Pearson (1939- ),a homemaker-writer from Provo, Utah, is widely known among Mormon readers as the author of two volumes of poetry, Beginnings (1968) and The Search (1970). She has recently achieved a wide readership for her compilation Daughters of Light (1973). Her play, Pegora the Witch, and her Mormon musical, The Order Is Love, have been widely produced, as have Think Your Way to a Million and Martyr-in-Waiting. A thoroughgoing professional, Mrs. Pearson has published widely in LDS and non-Mormon periodicals and has written several films for the Brigham Young University Motion Picture Studio.

Carol Lynn Pearson (1939- ),a homemaker-writer from Provo, Utah, is widely known among Mormon readers as the author of two volumes of poetry, Beginnings (1968) and The Search (1970). She has recently achieved a wide readership for her compilation Daughters of Light (1973). Her play, Pegora the Witch, and her Mormon musical, The Order Is Love, have been widely produced, as have Think Your Way to a Million and Martyr-in-Waiting. A thoroughgoing professional, Mrs. Pearson has published widely in LDS and non-Mormon periodicals and has written several films for the Brigham Young University Motion Picture Studio.

Carol Lynn Pearson (1939- ),a homemaker-writer from Provo, Utah, is widely known among Mormon readers as the author of two volumes of poetry, Beginnings (1968) and The Search (1970). She has recently achieved a wide readership for her compilation Daughters of Light (1973). Her play, Pegora the Witch, and her Mormon musical, The Order Is Love, have been widely produced, as have Think Your Way to a Million and Martyr-in-Waiting. A thoroughgoing professional, Mrs. Pearson has published widely in LDS and non-Mormon periodicals and has written several films for the Brigham Young University Motion Picture Studio.

Charis Southwell (1941-1970), born in Logan, Utah, became chronically ill in her teens. She battled bravely, serving as a commencement speaker at her high school graduation and graduating cum laude from Brigham Young University, where her poetry won several awards, including the Hart-Larson Award. "Reformation" was also published in BYU Studies. Her husband, William H. Southwell, has published the Collected Poems of Charis Southwell.

Charis Southwell (1941-1970), born in Logan, Utah, became chronically ill in her teens. She battled bravely, serving as a commencement speaker at her high school graduation and graduating cum laude from Brigham Young University, where her poetry won several awards, including the Hart-Larson Award. "Reformation" was also published in BYU Studies. Her husband, William H. Southwell, has published the Collected Poems of Charis Southwell.

Clifton Holt Jolley (1945-) was born in San Luis Obispo, California. An instructor at the LDS Institute of Religion at Cypress Institute, he resides at Buena Park, California. He has published poetry in Dialogue and the Ensign.

Dennis Drake (n.d.) is the author of What You Feel, I Share, published by Bookcraft.

Dennis Marden Clark(1945- )was reared in Provo, Utah, but currently resides in Seattle, Washington. A graduate of Brigham Young University, Clark has published poetry in Dialogue.

Dennis Marden Clark(1945- )was reared in Provo, Utah, but currently resides in Seattle, Washington. A graduate of Brigham Young University, Clark has published poetry in Dialogue.

Helen Walker Jones (1946-) is a native of Raymond, Alberta, Canada, and now lives in Salt Lake City, Utah. She has been a teacher, a medical assistant, and a rock musician. Now a housewife, she has published in college magazines. Not limiting herself to poetry, she has done editorial work and has, more recently, completed a novel.

Linda Buhler Sillitoe (1948- ) lives in Salt Lake City, where she is a homemaker. She is a graduate in English from the University of Utah. She has published a number of poems in Dialogue and in Contempora.

Ann Doty (1948-1971 ) grew up in Logandale, Nevada. While a student at Brigham Young University, Miss Doty was editor of the Wye magazine. A creative writing student with brilliant promise, Miss Doty was killed in an automobile accident just prior to her graduation. The English Department at Brigham Young University has established a creative writing award in her name.

Naomi Ward Randall (n.d.), born in North Ogden, Utah, is the wife of Earl A. Randall and the mother of true daughter. Mrs. Randall has been a member of the General Primary Board of the Church since 1947. She is presently serving as first counselor in the General Primary presidency. She has served on the editorial board of the Children's Friend (now the Friend). Her poem, "I Am A Child of God," has ranked as one of the all-time popular childrens' songs in Mormon history.

Originally this was "know."
