Neal A. Lambert, Richard E. Cracroft, Believing People: Literature of the Latter-day Saints ( 1979)

6 FICTION

I think our own people are producing some of the purest and best literature. It may not be polished with rite smoothness and elegance of rhetorical mastery, but it contains nothing that will injure, and very much that will elevate and refine.

Susa Young Gates256257

INTRODUCTION

Mormon fiction, now progressing nicely, was slow aborning.

In the early years of the Church there was little fiction. Parley P. Pratt, as we show in this section, indulged his rich imagination with the writing of some delightful dialogues which echo frontier speech and vitality. But these atypical dialogues were religious treatises in thin disguise.

Early Mormon periodicals preached of the evils of reading fiction, not an uncommon attitude in America but a short remove from Puritanism and a natural attitude in a people who had given so much to escape the compromising influences of a world whose values they rejected. Yet as the Mormons settled firmly into the West, and as the Church magazines, called "home literature," took hold, the attitude toward fiction shifted to one of qualified acceptance. Home literature, comprised of books and journals and articles written by Latter-day Saints for the edification of their fellow believers, alternated with the increased reprinting of morally acceptable stories by popular non-Mormon writers to awaken the literary appetites of many young Latter-day Saints.

The result was a flood of moralistic stories from the pens of such writers as Augusta Joyce Crocheron, Josephine Spencer, Susa Young Gates, and Nephi Anderson. These stories, long on plot and short on artistry and character development, appeared in virtually every issue of the Contributor, the Woman's Exponent, the Young Woman's Journal, and the Improvement Era. Modern Mormons, more sophisticated in their tastes, reject the stories while continuing to applaud the morality of tales wherein the love of young Mormons, strained by a temporary straying from the faith by one of the pair, is rewarded with happiness when the erring one realizes that he or she had been misled by a wicked world. Other variations included the apostasy and resultant misery of a once-stalwart Saint, or the suitor who finally saw (or, alas, failed to see) the truth of Mormonism and married the girl from the mountains (or rode sadly off, full of bittersweet admiration for a girl who could stick by her faith). These stories, similar to the popular stories being read by all of America during the last half of the nineteenth century, are amusing to the few modern readers who indulge, but they often afford interesting cultural insights into life in the Mormon West, where life under polygamy and words such as "mission," "ward," "stake," "bishop," and "temple work" were part of the idiom which linked the Mormons in a solid front against the inroads of "outsiders."

The first several decades of the twentieth century afforded little excellence in shorter fiction, the heyday of Mormon short story writers passing with Nephi Anderson and Josephine Spencer, who are represented in this section. Church magazines did little to foster anything more than the short, underdeveloped, and strongly didactic tale. In recent years, however, more and more artists have turned with increasing success to their Mormon backgrounds for subject matter. Their explorations of the Mormon world, with an eye to examining universal human experience as it is258filtered through the prism of Mormonism, have yielded some rich discoveries. We present some of these stories here, stories revealing the craftsmanship of authors such as Virginia Sorensen, Eileen G. Kump, Douglas H. Thayer, and Donald R. Marshall, all of whom grew up in Mormon towns and villages and experienced at first hand the confrontation in their lives of the idealism of the Latter-day Saints with the realities of the world beyond the mountains.

The stories by these writers and others demonstrate clearly that while Mormon fiction was slow in developing, it has reached a very virile puberty; and continuing life signs are strong. 259

Parley P. Pratt [^1] A Dialogue between Joseph Smith and the Devil

(Enter Devil with a bundle of hand bills, which he is in the act of pasting up)

WANTED IMMEDIATELY!

All the liars, swindlers, thieves, robbers, incendiaries, murderers, cheats, adulterers, harlots, blackguards, gamblers, bogus makers, idlers, busy bodies, pickpockets, vagabonds, filthy persons, and all other infidels and rebellious, disorderly persons, for a crusade against Joe Smith and the Mormons! Be quick, be quick, I say or our cause will be ruined and our kingdom overthrown by the d - d fool of an imposter and his associates, for even now all earth and bell is [sic] in a stew.

Joseph Smith happens to be passing and hails his majesty:

Smith: Good morning, Mr. Devil. How now, you seem to be much engaged; what news have you got there?

Devil: (Slipping his bills into his pocket with a low bow) Oh! good morning Mr. Smith; hope you are well sir. Why, I-I was just out on a little business in my line. Or, finally, to be candid I was contriving a fair and honorable warfare against yon and your imposition, wherein piety is outraged and religion greatly hindered in its useful course. For, to be bold, sir-and I despise anything underhanded I must tell you to your face that you have made more trouble than all the ministers or people of my whole dominion have for ages past.

Smith: Trouble! What trouble have I caused your majesty? I certainly have endeavored to treat you and all other persons in a friendly manner, even my worst enemies, and I always aim to fulfil the Mormon Creed, and that is, to mind my own business exclusively. Why should this trouble you, Mr. Devil?

Devil: Ah, your own business, indeed! I know not what you may consider your business, it is so very complicated; but I know what you have done and what you are aiming to do. You have disturbed the quiet of Christendom, overthrown churches and societies, you have dared to call into question the truth and usefulness of old and established creeds, which have stood the test of ages, and have even caused tens of thousands to come out in open rebellion, not only against wholesome creeds, established forms and doctrines, well approved and orthodox, but against some of the most pious, learned, exemplary and honorable clergy whom both myself and all the world love, honor and esteem, and this is not all. But you are causing many persons to think who never thought before and you would fain put the whole world a thinking and then where will true religion and piety be? Alas! They will have no place among men, for if men keep such a terrible thinking and reasoning as they begin to do, since you commenced your business, as you call it, they never will continue to uphold the good old way in which they have jogged along in peace for so many ages, and thus, Mr. Smith, you will overthrow my kingdom and leave me not a foot of ground on earth, and this is the very thing you aim at. But I, sir, have the boldness to oppose you by all the lawful means which I have in my power.

Smith: Really, Mr. Devil, your majesty has of late become very pious. I think some of your Christian brethren have greatly misrepresented you. It is generally reported by them that you are opposed to religion. But-

Devil: It is false; there is not a more religious260and pious being in the world than myself, nor a being more liberal minded. I am decidedly in favor of all creeds, systems and forms of Christianity, of whatever name and nature; so long as they leave out that abominable doctrine which caused me so much trouble in former times, and which, after slumbering for ages, you have again revived; I mean the doctrine of direct communication with God, by new revelation. This is hateful, it is impious, it is directly opposed to all the divisions and branches of the Christian church; I never could bear it. And for this very cause, I helped to bring to condign punishment all the prophets and apostles of old, for while they were suffered to live with this gift of revelation, they were always exposing and slandering me, and all other good pious men in exposing our deeds and purposes, which they called wicked, but we considered as the height of zeal and piety; and when we killed them for these crimes of dreaming, prophesying, and vision-seeing they raised the cry of persecution, and so with you miserable, deluded Mormons.

Smith: Then, your most Christian Majesty is in favor of all other religions but this one, are you?

Devil: Certainly, I am fond of praying, singing, church-building, bell ringing, going to meeting, preaching, and withal, I have quite a missionary zeal. I like, also, long faces, long prayers, long robes, and learned sermons; nothing suits me better than to see people who have been for a whole week opposing their neighbor, grinding the face of the poor, walking in pride and folly, and serving me with all their heart. I say nothing suits me better, Mr. Smith, than to see these people go to meeting on Sunday with a long religious face on, and to see them pay a portion of their ill-gotten gains For the support of a priest, while he and his hearers with doleful groans and awful faces, saying: "Lord, we have left undone the things we ought to have done, and done the things we ought not"; and then when service is ended see them turn to their wickedness and pursue it greedily all the week and the next Sabbath repeat the same things. Now, be candid, Mr. Smith, do you not see that these and all others, who have a form and deny the power, are my good Christian children, and that their religion is a help to my cause?

Smith: Certainly, your reasoning is clear and obvious as to these hypocrites, but you would not be pleased with people getting converted either at camp meeting or somewhere else, and then putting their trust in that conversion and in free grace to save them-would you not be opposed to this?

Devil: Why should I have any objections to that kind of religion, Mr. Smith? I care not how much they get converted, nor how much they cry Lord! Lord! nor how much they trust to free grace to save them, so long as they do not do the works that their God has commanded them. I am sure of them, at last, for you know all men are to be judged according to their deeds. What does their good old Bible say? Does it not say, "not every one that saith Lord, Lord, shall enter into my kingdom, but he that doeth the will of My Father which is in heaven." No, no, Mr. Smith, I am not an enemy to religion, and especially to the modern forms of Christianity, so long as they deny the power, they are to help to my cause; see how much discord, division, hatred, envy, strife, lying, contention, blindness, and even error and bloodshed [have] been produced as the effect of these very systems. By these means I gain millions to my dominion while at the same time we enjoy the credit of being pious Christians; but you, Mr. Smith, you are my enemy, my open and avowed enemy; you have dared, in a sacriligious manner, to tear the veil from all these fine systems, and to commence an open attack upon my kingdom, and this even when I had almost all Christendom together with the clergy and gentlemen of the press in my favor. How dare you venture thus to commence a revolution, without reverse and without aid or succor and in the midst of innumerable hosts261of my subjects?

Smith: Why sir, in the first place, I knew that I had the truth on my side, and that your systems and forms of Christianity were so manifestly corrupt that one had only to lift the veil from your folleries on one side and to present plain and reasonable truth on the other, and the eyes of the people could at once distinguish the difference so clearly that except they chose darkness rather than light, they would leave your ranks and come over to truth. For instance, what is easier than to show from the history of the past, that a religion of direct revelation was the only system ever instituted by the Lord, and the only one calculated to benefit mankind? What is easier than to show that this system saved the church from flood, famine, flames, wars, division, bondage, doubt and darkness, many times, and that it is the legitimate way and manner of God's government of his own peculiar people in all ages and dispensations.

Devil: To be candid with you, Mr. Smith, I must own that what you have now said, neither myself nor my most able ministers have been able to gainsay by any argument or fact. But then you must recollect that tradition and custom, together with fashion and popular clamor, have in all ages had more effect than plain fact, and sound reason. Hence, you see we are yet safe so long as we continue to cry from press and pulpit, and in Sunday Schools, that all these things are done away and no longer needed. In this way, though God may speak, they will not hear; angels may minister and they will not believe, visions may reveal, and they will not be enlightened; Prophets may lift their voice, and their warnings pass unheeded; so you see we still have them as safe as we had the people in olden times. God can communicate no message to them which will be examined or heard with any degree of credence or candor. So, for all the good they get from God, all communications being cut off, they might as well be without a God. Thus, you see, I have full influence and control of the multitude by a means far more effectual than argument or reason, and I even teach them that it is a sin to reason, think or investigate, as it would disturb the even tenor of their pious breathings and devout groans and responses. Smith, you must be extremely ignorant of human nature, as well as of the history of the past to presume that reason and truth would have much effect with the multitude. Why, sir, look how effectually we warded off the truth at Ephesus when Paul attempted to address them in the theatre. Strange that with all these examples before you, you should venture to raise the hue and cry which has so oft been defeated and this with no better weapons on your side than reason and truth. Indeed, you touch my Christian spirit of forbearance that you have escaped so far without a grid-iron; but take care for the future, I may not always be so mild.

Smith: But why is your majesty so highly excited against me and my plans of operation, seeing that you consider that you have the multitude perfectly safe; and why so enraged and so fearful of the consequences of my course and the effect of my weapons, while at the same time you profess to despise them as weak and powerless? Alas, it is too true that you have the multitude safe to all appearance at present, and that truth can seldom reach them; why not then be content and leave me to pursue my calling in peace? I can hardly hope to win to the cause of truth any but the few who think, and these have ever been troublesome to your cause.

Devil: True, but then you are in spite of all my efforts, and that of my fellows, daily thinning our ranks by adding to the number of those who think, and such a thinking is kept up that we are often exposed in some of our most prominent places, and are placed in an awkward predicament, and who knows what defeat, disgrace and dishonor may befall the pious cause if you are suffered to continue your rebellious course.

Smith: But, Mr. Devil, why, with all these other advantages on your side do you resort to such mean, weak and silly fabrications as the262"Spaulding Story'"? You profess to be a gentlemen, a Christian and a clergyman, and you ought, for your own sake, and for the sake of your cause, to keep up outward appearances of honor and fairness. And now, Mr. Devil, tell the truth for once; you know perfectly well that your Spaulding story, in which you represent me as an impostor, in connection with Sidney Rigdon, and that we were engaged in palming Solomon Spauldings romance upon the world as the Book of Mormon, is a lie, a base Fabrication, without a shadow of truth and you know that I found the original records of the Nephites and I translated and published the Book of Mormon from them, without ever having heard of the existence of Spaulding, or his romance, or of Sidney Rigdon either. Now, Mr. Devil, this was a mean, disgraceful and underhanded trick in you, and one of which you have reason to be ashamed.

Devil: Well, Mr. Smith, to be candid, I acknowledge that what you say is true, and that it was not the most honorable cause in the world, but it was you who commenced the war, by publishing that terrible book which we readily recognized as a complete expose of all our false and corrupt Christianity not even keeping back that fact that we had continued during the dark ages to rob the scriptures of their plainness, and we feel the utmost alarm and excitement. and without much reflection, in the height of passion, we called a hasty council of the clergy and editors, and other rascals in Painesville, Ohio, and thinking that almost any means was lawful in war, we invented the Spaulding story, and fathered it upon the poor printer. Howe of Painesville, although Dr. Hurlburt (thanks to my aid) was its real author. But Mr, Smith, mark one thing; we had not a face so hard nor a conscience so abandoned as to publish this Spaulding story at the first as a positive fact; we only published it as a conjecture, a mere probability, and this you know we had a right to do; without once thinking of the amount of evil it would eventually accomplish. But, Sir, it was some of my unfortunate clergymen, who more reckless, hardened, and unprincipled than myself, have ventured to add to each edition of this story, till at last, without my aid or consent, they have set it down for a positive fact that Solomon Spaulding, Sidney Rigdon, and yourself, have made up the Book of Mormon out of a romance. Now, Mr. Smith, I am glad of this interview with you, as it gives me the opportunity of clearing up my character. I acknowledge with shame that I was guilty of a mean act in helping to hatch up and publish the Spaulding story as a probability, and that I associated with rascals far beneath my dignity either as a sovereign prince or a religious minister, or even as an old honorable and experienced Devil, and for this I beg your pardon. But really I must deny the charge of having assisted in making the addition which has appeared in the later editions of that story, in which my power probabilities and mean conjectures are set down for positive facts. No! Mr. Smith, I had no hand in a trick so low and mean; I despise it as the work of priests and editors alone, without my aid or suggestion, and I don't believe that even the meanest young devils in our dominion would have stooped to such an act.

Smith: Well I must give your majesty some credit for once at least, if what you say is true, but how can you justify your conduct in dishonoring yourself so far as to stoop to the level of the hireling clergy and their followers, in still making use of this humbug story (which you affect to despise), in order to still blind the eyes of the people in regard to the origin of the Book of Mormon?

Devil: Oh! Mr. Smith, it does take so readily among the pious of all sects that it seems a pity to spoil the fun, and I cannot resist the temptation of carrying out the joke, now it is so well rooted in their minds. And you can't think how we devils shake our sides with laughter when we get up in the gallery in some fine church, put on our long face, and assist in singing and in the devout re263sponses: this done, the Spaulding story is gravely told from the pulpit, while the pious old clergyman wears a face as long as that of Balaam's beast. All is swallowed down for solid truth by the gaping multitude, while we hang our heads behind the screen and laugh and wink at each other in silence, as anything overheard would disturb their worship, and as bad as I am, I never wish to disturb those popular modes of worship, which decency requires us to respect. So, yon see, Mr. Smith, we have our fun to ourselves at your expense; but after all we do not mean any hurt by it, although I must acknowledge, upon the whole, it serves our purpose.

Smith: Well, we will drop this subject, as I want to inquire about some of your other stories which have had an extensive circulation by means of your editors and priests. For instance, there is the story of my attempting to walk on the water and getting drowned, the numerous stories of my attempting to raise the dead, as a mere trick of imposition, and getting detected in it; and the stories of my attempting to appear as an angel, and getting caught and exposed in the same; and, besides this, you have me killed by some means every little while. Now, you old hypocrite, you know that none of these things ever happened, or any circumstance out of which to make them; and that so far from this I deny the principle of man's working miracles, either real or pretended as a proof of his mission and contend that miracles if wrought at all, were wrought for benevolent purposes, and without being designed to convince the unbeliever, why, then, do you resort to such silly stories in your opposition to me, seeing that you have many other advantages? Not that I would complain of such weak opposition, as if it were calculated to hinder my progress, but rather to mention it as something well calculated to injure your own cause, by betraying your weakness, folly and meanness.

Devil: Ha, ha, ha, eh, eh! Oh, Mr. Smith, I just put out these stories for a joke, in order to have my own fun. and without the more distant idea that any being on earth would be so silly as to give any credence to them; but judge my surprise and joy when I found priests, editors, and people so ready to catch at everything against their common enemy, as they call you, that these jocose stories of ours actually look in their credulous craniums for grave truths, and were passed about by them and sought after and swallowed by the multitude as greedily as a young robin swallows a worm when it is dropped into its mouth which is stretched at frill width, while its eyes are closed. So you see Mr. Smith, that without meaning any particular harm to you, I have my fun, and am, besides, so unexpectedly fortunate as to reap great advantage from circumstances where I had neither expected nor calculated. So I hope you will at least bear my folly, nor set down aught in malice where no malice was intended. You know we devils are poor, miserable creatures at best, and were it not for our fun, and our gambling, and our religious experiences, we would have nothing to kill time.

Smith: Well I see plainly you will have to creep out some how or other, rather than hear the disgrace and stigma which your conduct would seem to deserve. But forgetting the past, let me inquire what course you intend to pursue in the future and whether this warfare between you and me will still be prosecuted? And if so, what course do you intend to pursue hereafter? You know my course. I have long since taken the field at the head of a mere handful of brave patriots, who are true as the polar stars, and firm as the Rock of Gibralter. They laugh at and despise your silly stories, and with nothing but a few plain, simple weapons of truth and reason, aided by revelation, we boldly make war upon your whole dominion and will never quit the field, dead or alive, till we win the battle, and deprive you of every foot of ground you possess. This is our purpose, and although your enemy, I am bold and generous enough to declare it. So, you see, I am not, for taking any unwary advantage, not264withstanding all your pious tricks upon me and the public.

Devil: Mr. Smith, I am too much of the gentleman not to admire your generous frankness and your boldness, and too much of a Christian not to appreciate your honesty; but, as you commenced this war, and I only acted at first on the defensive, with the pure motive of defending my kingdom, I think this ought, in some degree at least, to excuse the means I have made use of; and, that yon may have no reason to complain in the future, I will now fully open to you the place of my future campaign. Here (pulling out his bundle of handbills) is what I was doing this morning when by chance we met, and by the reading of which you will see my course. Heretofore I have endeavored to throw contempt upon your course in hopes to smother it and to keep it under, as something beneath the notice of us well informed Christians. For this cause I have generally caused it to be represented that you were a very ignorant, silly man, and that your followers were made up of the unthinking and vulgar, and not worthy of notice. But the fact is, you have made such rapid strides and have poured forth such a torrent of intelligence and gathered such a host of talented and thinking men around you, that I can no longer conceal these facts under a bushel of burning lies, and therefore I now change my purpose and my manner of attack. I shall endeavor to magnify you and your success from this time forward and to make you appear as much larger than the reality as you have heretofore fallen short. If my former course has excited contempt and caused you to be despised and thus kept you out of notice, my future course will be to excite jealousy, fear and alarm, till all the world is ready to arise and crush you as though you were a legion of scapegoats commanded by Bonaparte. This I think will be more successful in putting you down than the ignoble course I have heretofore taken, so prepare for the worst.

Smith: I care as little for your magnifying powers as I have heretofore done for you contempt; in fact, I will endeavor to go ahead to that degree that what you will say in regard to my great influence and power, though intended by you for falsehood, shall prove to be true, and by so doing I shall be prepared to receive those whom you may excite against me, and to give them so warm a reception, that they will never discover your intended falsehood, but will find all your representations of my greatness to be a reality-so do your worst. I defy you.

Devil: Well time will determine whether the earth is to be governed by a prophet and under the sway of truth, or whether myself and my Christian friends will still prevail; but remember, Smith, remember, I beseech you, for your own good, beware what you are doing. I have the priests and editors with a few exceptions, under my control, together with wealth, popularity and honor. Count well the cost before you again plunge into this warfare. Goodbye, Mr. Smith, I must be away to raise my recruits and prepare for a campaign.

Smith: Goodbye to your Majesty. (They both touch hats and turn away)

Devil: (Recollecting himself and suddenly turning back) Oh! say, Mr. Smith, one word more if you please, (in low and confidential tone, with his mouth to his ear) after all, what is the use of parting enemies, the fact is, you go in for the wheat and I for the tares. Both must be harvested; are we not fellow laborers? I can make no use of the wheat, nor you of the tares even if we had them; we each claim our own, I for the burning, you for the barn. Come then, give the poor old Devil his due, and let's be friends.

Smith: Agreed; I neither want yours, nor you mine a man free from prejudice will give the Devil his due. Come, here is the right hand of fellowship, you to the tares, and I to the wheat. (They shake hands cordially)

Devil: Well, Mr. Smith, we have talked a long while, and are agreed at last-you are a noble and generous fellow, and would not bring a265railing accusation against even a poor old Devil, nor cheat him one cent. Come, it is a warm day, and I feel as though it is my treat. Let us go down to Mammy Brewer's cellar and take something to drink.

Smith: Agreed, Mr. Devil, you appear very generous now. (They enter the cellar together)

Devil: Good morning, Mrs. Brewer, I make you acquainted with my good friend, Mr. Smith, the prophet.

Landlady: Why Mr. Devil, is that you? Sit down, you're tired; but you don't say that this is Mr. Smith, your mortal enemy? I am quite surprised; what will you have, gentlemen, for if you can drink together, I think all the world ought to be friends.

Devil: As we are both temperance then and ministers, I think perhaps a glass of spruce beer apiece will be alright; what say you Mr. Smith? Smith: As you please your majesty. (They take the beer)

Devil: (Holding up glass) Come, Mr. Smith, your good health. I propose we offer a toast.

Smith: Well proceed.

Devil: Here's to my good friend, Joe Smith, may all sorts of ill-luck befall him, and may he never be suffered to enter my kingdom, either in time or eternity, for he would almost make me forget that I am a devil, and make a gentleman of me, while he gently overthrows my government at the same time that he wins my friendship.

Smith: Here to his Satanic Majesty; may he be driven from the earth and be forced to put to sea in a stone canoe with an iron paddle, and may the canoe sink, and a shark swallow the canoe and its royal freight and an alligator swallow the shark and may the alligator be bound in the northwest corner of hell, the door be locked, key lost, and a blind man hunting for it.

Josephine Spencer [^2] A Trial of Hearts

Hart Richfield touched the horse lightly with his whip, then leaned back in the buggy-seat and drew a long breath of enjoyment.

It was six o'clock in the morning. The country road over which he drove was rutless and grass-edged; some of it lined with cottonwood trees, their satiny, green leaves winking and twinkling in the noiseless morning breeze. On either side were meadows of lucerne and long stretches of tilled fields, many of them with a lark perched like a sentinel on the fence-poles, alternating their near plaintive cadence with the hint calls of a fellow songster somewhere in the distance. Over in the east the indigo peaks were tinting up with reflections cast by patches of sunrise-reddened cloud, poised like kites in the sky above. The air was dewily cool, as if blown from the surface of some crystal stream, and its breath, and the hush, and all the sweet freshness and fragrance of the morning made Hart's pulses glow with absolute delight.

The sense of new birth of time and the world, which the sight of an early dawn brings even to jaded hearts-was it not three-fold keen with this lusty young fellow hardly out of his teens, strong, hopeful, ambitious, with life's thousand avenues of effort and achievement open before him? And then, too, to be experiencing at this particular time a first touch of that "perennial sorcery of the world"-love; and to be upon this particular morning on his way to an opportunity of seeing, and being, and conversing with its object-was it wonder that the air and landscape and dawn should hold magnified enchantment.

It was a holiday-the Twenty-fourth, and she was to be his partner to a picnic at Hilton's Farm, or Hilton's "Grove," as it had been newly christened since the street cars ran there.266They were to meet the rest of the "crowd" at seven o'clock, and he had just an hour to ride out to the mouth of the canyon where she lived and join the others at the ward schoolhouse, from whence they were to start.

The "crowd" were six inseparable young couples (of which he and Millie were members) who considered any pastime insipid which lacked the full complement of their number in its participation. Not any of them were engaged yet; but the pairing of these young fledglings meant some pretty mating and nesting in future time, though the majority of the sextette would have blushingly and cynically disclaimed any present idea of such serious and important prospects.

Hart had little to do in the way of talk, but he had no bashfulness in owning to himself about Millie. She was to be "his girl" always, as now, if only she remained willing. He could answer for his own sentiments, and as to their families- no room for doubt existed with regard to them.

The pleasure had been embarrassingly manifest. Hart's nerves grew tense yet at the remembrance of the open congratulations which had taken place at the ward entertainment between their respective parents, upon the evident liking of the young people for each other, when his and Millie's "beauing" was as yet but a fortnight old. It had almost "broken it up" at first, but the sentiment had proven too strong to be snapped by the little gust of bashfulness and self-consciousness which followed and it had come now to all but an open understanding between them.

He was to take a two-year's study of dentistry in New York to equip himself with a profession, and if when he came back, she was still the same, they would be married. This thought, too, helped to tinge the wonderful morning.

How cool and green the hills looked near at hand, with their shadows filtered into halftones by the morning sunshine. A pretty spot for a home, with the pines and cedars running down the hill slopes to the very edge of the yard.

The house was set back from the street under a shade of poplar and cottonwood trees, and Hart leaned down, trying to glimpse of the doorway under them, before getting out of the buggy. He thought she might be on the porch waiting. Then he tied the hitching-strap to a tree and went in.

The front door was open, and Hart rapped on it; a little girl came into the hall from a side room. It was Millie's sister.

"Hello, Fanny," said Hart. "Is Millie ready?" "No. She ain't going."

"Not going! why what's the matter! Is she sick?"

"No," said Fannie. "She ain't sick. She can't go. Pa won't let her."

"Can I see her a minute?" asked Hart, confidently.

"She told me to give you this," said Fannie in answer, handing him a note. The child acted shy and strange, something entirely new to Hart's long acquaintance with her.

"She said to read it when you was alone," went on Fannie, as Hart, with characteristic directness was about to break the seal and at once settle the mystery.

"Oh!" said Hart. He turned away quietly, satisfied that something more serious than he could imagine had caused this strange and for-real proceeding. Once away from the house he opened and read her letter. It contained the following:

Dear Hart!

Father has refused to let me go to the Grove with you today, and he has also tom me to tell you that you can't come to see me any more. It is something about that case that was tried in court the other day. He says that your testimony not only betrayed and sacrificed your brother, but the principles of your Church as well. You know, dear Hart, just how father feels about these things, and I hope you will not blame me for what I believe to be his unjust judgment. I know you too well to believe for a moment that you would do anything that your conscience could reproach you for, and I am sure you can explain all to your own and father's satisfaction. Try not to be angry with him or me, and believe that I am, as ever,

Your loving,

Millie 267

Hart crumpled the note into his pocket with an indignant and impatient gesture. Not because of Millie. He could ask for nothing sweeter nor fuller than her expression of sympathy, but his clear conscience and the double blow he had received through his disappointment and pride made him unable to suppress a swift feeling of resentment against the man who had punished him in so harsh a way for an uncommitted, or at least purely innocent, fault.

The facts of the matter were these: In the trial of his half-brother for polygamy, Hart had been called upon to testify in the case, and the sharp examination had called forth certain damaging statements against the defendant. The second marriage, in fact, had been of too long duration and too publicly acknowledged to make possible a successful defense under any circumstances, and Hart had but followed the instructions of his brother in answering frankly as to what he knew in regard to the reputed relation existing between the two. It ended in a six months' sentence, which the brother was now fulfilling with every show of patience and cheer. This was the gist of the circumstances which had called down upon him David Hurst's unexpected anger. Hart was too well acquainted with the man's character to be at all surprised at the step, if the latter believed him really culpable.

No fault on earth, there was, that could not be more easily pardoned by him, than that of turning in any way against the Church Mormonism being to him a jewel, in whose defense he would elect as willingly to die as live.

For his devotion, nothing, indeed, could be but praise. Hart had been forced always to admire the strict integrity-the uncompromising adherence to principle which was his predominant trait of character-a trait as fixed as the trills to the earth. He came of a long line of Calvinistic ancestors who were as willing to be burnt as they were to burn for religious conviction; as willing to sacrifice a son as an enemy, to principle; and the trait had descended in direct force to David Hurst, making him, in any serious or important matter, a stern antagonist to compromise or quibbling, and in the question of his religion ready to become a voluntary martyr rather than slight its cause. With this commendable integrity and fervor, however, there was a fault of temperament which made his zeal sometimes objectionable, unmingled as it was with the discretion and forbearance by which ends are so much better and quicker gained through bluster. His spirituality was of a bristling sort. that pricked rather than soothed: goaded rather than led, and repulsed instead of won.

It was a common description in the ward, when David preached, that "Brother Hurst scolded the congregation," his discourse imitating of toner the Caudle style, than that of an evangel of Christ-harshly pointing out the shadows of the world, without unfolding any light which might dissipate the darkness.

This was the man with whose prejudices or peculiarities Hart Richfield had involuntarily clashed, and in whose hands lay the privilege of influencing at least one part of his destiny for good or ill. Hart's knowledge of the grain of gold in the man's character had made him lenient in many cases where a display of ill-directed zeal or anger had awakened severe judgement from others. But to theorize generously and dispassionately about others' grievances and one's own are two separate things; and Hart for the first time was able to realize how cruel the sting of an unmerited and harsh rebuke, prompted by however honest and worthy a motive.

He rode back through the lanes and meadows with a sore heart. The enchantment had faded from the dawn and landscape. The sun-brightened fields looked dry and parched, and the long road, fretted by a light wind that faced him, showed a scurry of gray dust that rose over the wheels and filled his throat. This and the rest of the disagreeable happenings made him glad to reach home.

In about two hours' time, Miles Hentley, Hart's particular friend, rode back from the grove to find out the cause of the missing couple's absence.

"We thought possibly you'd been tipped over," said Miles, "and the crowd appointed me a committee to investigate." Hart told him the occurrence and Miles persisted in laughing at the268entire affair. "It will all come out right," he said, "and I for one shouldn't let it spoil my pleasure-I'd spend the day at the Grove just the same."

But Hart was too miserable to think of that. He stayed about the house all day-sitting on the front porch and trying to fix his mind on the Dental Journal, for which he had recently subscribed. But it was in vain. His thoughts whirled and revolved inevitably upon the engrossing slight. The house was situated in the nearer limits of_______ addition-the main road leading past his home and on towards the Hurst farm at the extreme outskirts.

Sometime in the afternoon Hart recognized David Hurst's buggy coming in the distance, and upon its approaching nearer, saw that it was the man himself in the seat driving. Hart walked down to the gate. Hurst drove past

looking straight ahead.

"Mr. Hurst."

The other turned.

"I want to speak with you a moment."

David drew rein, looking at Hart in silence.

"I want to ask you, Mr. Hurst, if you think the stand you have taken with regard to me and Millie is entirely justifiable," he said quietly.

David Hurst leaned toward him over the buggy.

"Hart," he said impressively, "I can't put in words how I felt when I read in the paper what you'd done. I couldn't have fell worse if it had been my own son. To think that a lad that I've watched grow up from a babe to manhood, born in the Church, reared in the Church, and with parents that have suffered persecution, and given up all that they had on earth for its sake, should have turned traitor and betrayed its principles to our enemies, and one of his own flesh and blood, to further the ends of their hatred, is almost more than I can believe, even with the proof that I have. I tell you Hart, I'd rather have seen you buried than to see you live for this."

Hart kept silent until he ended. The man's sincerity was so evident that it helped to keep in check the resentment rising in his heart at the severe arraignment.

"I suppose you are referring to my testimony in my brother's case," he said at length; "and on my part, I can assure you that I never would have dreamed it possible for any one on earth to take such a view of it as you have expressed. In the first place the case would have been decided as it was, without my testimony. My brother himself recognized the hopelessness of making a defence, and advised all of us to attempt no further reservation than the examination would permit."

"I'd have seen them in Tophet," interrupted David Hurst warmly, "before I'd a helped to make it easy for 'em to carry on their persecution."

"I simply answered the questions they put to me," said Hart. "I couldn't do less than that."

"They'd have had to take more trouble than asking, to get it out of me. Red hot irons couldn't have made me tell what you told, if it had been an enemy on trial, let alone one of my own kin."

Hart's face flushed.

"I have explained the circumstances," he said, "and can feel that I have nothing to reproach myself for; with regard to my part in the trial my conscience is absolutely clear."

David Hurst straightened himself up as if to go, then turned and looked at Hart. The face which had been flushed and angry became pale.

"Hart Richfield," he said slowly, "I've looked on you and loved you always as if you were my own son. I've been proud of you and your good name and standing in the community, but I tell you when you dare to stand up before me and talk of a clear conscience with the knowledge in your heart of having sided with our enemies against your people and the principles of your Church, I want none of you. And I warn you now that from this time on, unless you acknowledge your fault and repent before the Lord, you'll go down, till you're brought to the dust, to mourn for it in sackcloth and ashes."

Hart Richfield for a moment was deadly pale, then his face flushed with hot resentment.

"I've done nothing to repent of nor to be made to mourn for," he said; "and if it was you or my father I'd do the same thing again; I-" 269

David Hurst interrupted him. His face was flushed again, and his eyes blazing with anger. He leaned far out over the buggy and shook his fist in Hart's face.

"If you'd ever have dared to take the stand against me that you did in that case," he said, "I'd have smashed your face so that your own mother would never have known you!"

Then he picked up the reins and drove away.

That evening, after dark, Hart's father drove over to the Hurst farm. Both parents had taken the affair seriously to heart.

Priceless, next to their religious faith, was the good name and standing of their. beloved son in the Church and community, and the thought that anything so like the nature of a curse as that pronounced by David Hurst had descended upon his head, was to this good and devout couple something almost like a tragedy.

"I for one sha'n't let such a thing pass by," said Jacob Richfield; "It's a wrong to me as well as to Hart, and I mean to go to Brother Hurst and lay the whole matter before him in its true light. Then if he wants to make it right be can; if not, it will rest on his own head."

"I don't believe but what he will make it right, when you've explained it to him," said Mrs. Richfield. "I believe David Hurst would do whatever he thought was right, no matter how much he had to humble himself."

"I know that," said her husband. If I didn't I shouldn't think of going near him. But Hart will never get over this unless he does make amends, nor I neither, for that matter; and I'll be fair enough to give him the facts in the case, anyway, and then let him act for himself."

"The trouble will be," said Mrs. Richfield significantly, "to make him see that he is in the wrong."

"That's where the trouble usually does come in with David Hurst," answered her husband.

He went away, coming back after a long evening, with spirit sorer than when he left home.

"Well," he said to his wife, who was waiting for him, sitting down and taking off his hat with an emphatic air, "I've had my trouble for my pains this time."

"You don't tell me," said Mrs. Richfield.

"I've heard of stiff-necked people before," he answered slowly, "but if there was ever an incarnation of stiff-neckedness, I believe it's David Hurst."

"I want to hear all about it," said his wife anxiously.

Her husband drew his chair up to a little leaf-table and commenced to eat from a bowl of bread and milk placed ready for him, with nervous excitement.

"To sum it all up in a nutshell," he said, "the man wouldn't hear a thing I had to say. I couldn't tell him anything, nor explain a word about the affair. He knew all about it, and didn't want to hear any more. There wasn't an iota of excuse for Hart, under any kind of circumstances, he declared, and he'd live to see the day every word he'd said to him would be fulfilled."

"I can't believe it," said Mrs. Richfield, the tears filling her eyes.

"'Well, Brother Hurst,' I said, 'I come in a peaceable and friendly spirit-though I don't consider it my place to make the advances-to come to an understanding with you if possible, so there would be no bad feelings between us. I know my boy's heart better than anyone, and I know he wouldn't do any more to hurt the Church or this people than you would yourself. But if this is your stand after all I've done to explain matters, I've nothing more to say on the subject.' Then he went on and talked an hour, all to the end that he'd done righteously in rebuking Hart, and that he had nothing to retract. At last I saw it was no use arguing, and I came away."

"Poor Hart!" said Mrs. Richfield, "I guess he'll feel worse than anyone knows about losing Millie."

"I told Brother Hurst so; and I said 'twas a shame to separate them, and he told me in plain terms that he'd rather see her dead than that she should marry him. I tell you, Annie, I've had just about all I could do to keep my temper within bounds tonight."

"I guess you have," said his wife.

"Now, I ain't going to worry anymore about it," declared Jacob, with a trusting way that he had; "I'm going to leave the whole matter in270the hands of the Lord."

In the fall Hart went to New York to take up the study of dentistry. He had seen nothing of Millie in the meantime and went away without the privilege of a word of farewell. How different had been his "castles"-those dawn-built structures, vanished now into gray air! The event had made a perceptible change in both the young people-evident to familiar and loving hearts, if to none else. Hart had become strangely taciturn and thoughtful, if not morose, and had given up all pleasures and his meetings as well, staying closely at home; while Millie went about the Hurst household, a shadowy negative of her former self. Not a quiet negative, though. Her unhappiness found expression in a continual discontent and peevishness which was as unpleasant to those about her as it was unusual to her hitherto even and cheerful disposition.

"She's no more like herself than black is like white," her mother said to David Hurst one day. "It's getting so we can hardly live in the same house with her-she's so fretful."

"I've noticed it," said her husband, "and more than all that, she's neglecting her meetings and the association. There's always some excuse ready with her to get out of going. Either you or I shall have to take her in hand now, and have her do different. It is pure stubbornness, her giving up to this spirit."

"I don't know about that, David," said his wife, "Millie was never willful in her life before and you have only to look at her to know she ain't well."

"Well, have something done for her. I'11 tell Dr. Haight to come over today and see if he can't give her a tonic or something to help her."

"I don't believe medicine would do her a mite of good. If you want to know just what I think, I believe it's nothing but her fretting about Hart Richfield that ails her."

"Then it's time she was coming to her senses. I'll have a talk with her myself tomorrow." This threat was carried out; resulting in a protracted conversation between the two in the parlor, the next day, from which Millie emerged with eyes betraying signs of weeping.

She commenced to go regularly to her meetings again, and went occasionally to the "Mutual" though with an air that revealed better than objections could have done, her actual lack of interest in their concerns.

"Millie's the last one on earth I could ever have believed would turn so shrewish," said her mother to the others. But she was gentle and forbearing of the child's fretful outburst, guessing at the unhappy heart whose secret had caused the change.

"Brother Andy, I'm glad to see you around again," shouted David Hurst from his buggy, driving past a vine-covered adobe cottage on his way home one afternoon in the late spring.

Andy Gale rose from the porch steps and limped down his tulip-edged path to the gate.

"How are you Brother Hurst," he said giving his thin hand into the other's strong grasp. "Yes," in reply to his neighbor's first greeting, "I'm glad to be well again: I just told Sister Gale that it was pay enough for hibernating in a sick room all winter to come out again with the rest of the June roses."

"We all know your heart's as fresh as they are, if your frame's not, Brother Andy," said David affectionately. The old man was a tenderly loved soul in the community, his sympathetic, gentle, and brave spirit attracting hearts with a spell as subtle and steady as the magnet's.

"Well, maybe it is," he answered, "but I guess a little pruning wouldn't hurt it. How are things up town, now; the Commonwealers gone yet?"

"Not all; I've just been to one of their open air meetings today. I was passing, and thought I'd wait and hear what they had to say."

"Pretty threatening talk engaged in, I understand."

"Terrible! Scandalous! I never thought the time would come in any place in this country, that such talk would be allowed, or countenanced, let alone in our own quiet little valleys in the mountains."

"Well, we can rest sure it will go no further than talk, with us here, but with the nation I fear it will be a more serious affair."

"It will, unless steps are taken to crush it out." 271

"Brother Hurst," said Andy solemnly, "this problem that has risen in the midst of the nation will not be crushed out until the Lord's purposes are fulfilled. If we think this scourge has come about by accident-we forget the predictions that have been uttered by our prophets since the foundation of the Church. I tell you, Brother Hurst, it is the beginning of the end. The Lord has been patient long enough with this nation, and now, the times of threshing for the harvest have begun. What is all this trouble, whose uproar is filling the land, but the outcome of the selfishness and iniquity of those into whose hands have fallen the power of governing the people? Since the emancipation of the slaves, what effort has been made by the government for the advancement of human right? None that have not been backed by selfish and mercenary interests of individuals seeking their own and not another's gain. For nearly thirty years the parties of this nation have been making a fetich of the tariff question whilst abuses have been rolling up whose problem the justest tariff measure on earth can never solve."

"I guess you're right about that. The tariff would hardly serve effectually in the present instance either way. Protection can't put all the unemployed at work, now, any more than it has in the past; and, on the other hand, as the politicians say-cheap articles don't benefit a man much if he hasn't got the money to buy them."

"It's a shibboleth," said Andy solemnly, "a war cry, that men quarrel for, while they pass graver questions by. Joseph Smith foresaw this time. I've heard him say often that a crisis would come when the great parties of this nation would have to consider the cause of humanity and live out the law of equality and brotherhood which Christ declared to be the only perfect system, or they would split asunder and go to the wall. In Nationalism, Populism, and the hundred and one movements that are being made in the direction of bringing about the establishment of that system, we can see as plain as Belshazzar the handwriting that predicts the downfall of the selfish and useless powers that have usurped the place of right so long."

"These questions are certainly figuring in the affairs of the nation now." said David.

He had always a pleasure in hearing Andy talk. There was a gift of foresight and prediction belonging to the spiritual side of the old man's nature, and his thoughts gave one material, always, for remembrance and reflection.

"Why Brother Hurst," the latter went on, in his quietly earnest way. "what is this Nationalism we hear so much about now-a-days, but the very system revealed to us by prophecy, years before this agitation began?

"Here is that young fellow, Hart Richfield, just back from New York and Boston, where they are in the thick of the movement, explaining Nationalism to me as if it was some new thing just heard of. I told him to go home and read up on the Order of Enoch in his Doctrine and Covenants, and see if the two systems wasn't as near alike as two peas. 'Of course they differ a little in detail,' I said, 'but the principle's just the same.'"

"That's just about how it goes," said David Hurst quietly. "The young people will rush off into the world for something they can find right at home."

"So I told him. But he came right back at me with a question that fairly swamped me, smart as I am. 'I've heard of the Order of Enoch, of course, Brother Gale,' he said, 'but with the people here it seems to be practically a theory. Back East, now, they are trying to put it into practice-that's what a right principle is made for, isn't it?' I can tell you, Brother Hurst, I felt-quat! Of course I told him we intended to practice it some time-when the right time came. But he thought with such an important principle imparted to our trust we ought to have commenced it long ago. And I don't know but what he's right. At any rate the Lord has seemed to see fit to put into the hearts of others to bring about the establishment of this system on the earth, and all we can do now is to fall in and help the work along."

"I've said it a thousand times over," answered David Hurst, earnestly, "that some time we would be called to task for our lackness and negligence in attending to the principle. And I272believe that the trials of these hard times that are on us are a lesson to us, as well as to the nation, for our selfishness and forgetfulness."

"Brother Hurst," said Andy solemnly, "it's not alone in this matter that we Latter-day Saints merit chastisement. It's in our everyday life as well. For a half a century we've been priding ourselves on having a gospel that ought to make us Christ-like if anything could! But how many of us live up to the letter of his teachings? How many of us enjoy the blessing that ought to come from a right observance of his word? Have we less sickness, less deaths, less hardships and worry than other people? No. And yet the Book of Mormon tells us that the ancient inhabitants of this earth who had the same gospel, lived so purely at times that for long periods no afflictions or trouble came upon them. Now, if they could do that, why shouldn't we? Because we don't take the trouble to live to deserve it. We're just as ready to hate as to love, to curse as to bless, to let die as to let live! and the result is that we have trials come on us that we never would have, if we'd live up to our commandments and light.

"I want to ask you why it is that some of our people are running after this Christian Science? Is it because that doctrine has more truth than Mormonism, any purer principles than our religion, any greater power of healing than our system? No. But because we've been careless of our privileges, and of our way of living, careless of our gifts as we have been of our Enoch system, till we're in danger of losing what power and influence have ever been bestowed to our trust."

David Hurst winced. He realized of course that the neighbors must know that Millie had taken to "running after Christian Science," and the mention of anything approaching the subject, seemed to him a cruel sting. Yet he could not believe the kindly old man meant malice, and he answered frankly:

"Brother Gale, I have a daughter who, to my sorrow, has seen fit to go outside the Church for spiritual comfort; but I can't think that it's because every good thing she needs is not contained in this religion."

"Why, man, there's nothing good that's not contained in it! But the trouble is, in nine cases out of ten, though-like the Order of Enoch, we don't take the pains to prove it. I tell you, Brother Hurst, the time is coming when we've got to live every word of our religion to keep its blessings. And I believe all these trying things have come about to bring us to it."

David Hurst rode homeward with a thoughtful heart. Andy Gale's talk had come home to him with unusual power and suggestion. A new light had seemed to enter his soul, and by it he saw clearly for the first time in his life the web of prejudice and self-will in which he had been entangled for many years. His thoughts kept going back to and reiterating Andy's words. "As ready to hate as to love, to curse as to bless." Yes. He knew too surely that that could apply to himself. And about Millie, too? Was not his conscience sore there? How many times had she been harshly repulsed? And that, too, when she had been all love and kindness. It had made him angry to see the sudden change in her of late, since she had taken up Christian Science, for she had attributed it all to that. Was not love, and gentleness, and the forbearance and all those considerations of which she was so tenacious now, in Mormonism also? Indeed yes! But, had he always applied them? Alas! Too many instances were in his memory to let his conscience boast here!

And Hart Richfield! Had he possibly been wrong in that affair? In the two years that had passed since then, no doubt had crossed his mind. Only once a shadow had flitted, when after a year in which Hart's family had not spoken, the good old couple had come to him at the time of the Temple dedication and freely proffered their forgiveness and friendship.

"We can't go into that holy place holding hard feelings or resentment against a living soul," they had said, their lips quivering, and he could not but guess then, how hard it was for them; especially after reports had come that their son was drifting away from Mormonism, as if in fulfillment of his word-a trial harder than any on earth for them to bear. He could see now how selfish, how ungenerous it was for him to let them make the first advances of peace. To him, who, without any personal right273or business in the affairs had taken it upon himself to interfere-and chastise their son. How blind he had been! As he rode on, tears were in his eyes, and he was praying silently. When he reached the Richfield cottage he tied his horse and went in.

"Sister Richfield," he said as she came forward to greet him, "is your son Hart at home?" "Hart," he went on quickly, as Hart, hearing his name, looked up from his desk, "I've come here today in humility and repentance to make amends if I can, for the wrong I committed against you two years ago. I took upon myself to judge you then for a fault that was grievous in my eyes, not seeing that I was committing a greater one by my lack of charity and brotherly forbearance. I see it now, and I am ashamed of it. I'm ashamed for the slight I put upon you, and more than all for the fit of anger and spleen I exhibited toward you that day at the gate. I'm ashamed that I let Brother and Sister Richfield, here, come to me with offers of peace, whilst I held back and rejoiced in my pride and self-righteousness. And I want Hart, and I want you friends, to forgive me, if you can, for it and to try and take me back into your friendship and esteem."

"Millie," said her father some two weeks afterward, "how do you like the idea of giving a picnic to some of your young friends here at the farm on the Twenty-fourth? There's room under the orchard-trees there for a floor to dance on, and we might put up a pavilion over in the pines across the creek for refreshments-and the swings and other amusements we could think up would make a first rate holiday for the folks."

"Father! You don't really mean it!" cried Millie in delighted amaze. She had often thought of the plan, but the hints she had thrown out twice as "feelers" in that direction had been met by so chilling a douche by the head of the house that she had not dared to crystallize them into a formal suggestion. And now it had come at his own will! Not that it was a surprise that it would have been a month since. He had been so changed of late-so full of gentleness and love towards them all in the household, that this last evidence of considerate forethought for her happiness seemed indeed but natural in this kind father whom she was newly learning to know and love aright. And yet-it seemed, indeed, too good to be true!

"Oh! Pa!" shouted Fannie, who had overheard the precious proposal, "will you let us have bonfires and ice cream?"

"Do you want 'em mixed?" asked her father.

"Yes," replied Fan, eagerly, "and oh! can we have some Chinese lanterns to hang in the air?"

"In the air or on the trees, Fan?" asked Millie laughing. "Your idea of combining the elements is somewhat supernatural."

"Well, can we?" insisted Fan.

"I shouldn't be surprised," answered her father. Then as she bounded away to apprise the rest of the household of the princely event promised, he turned to Millie.

"I guess daughter," he said, "you'll need some one to help you plan out and carry on the affair, and I thought perhaps you'd better ask Hart Richfield over to take some of the responsibility off your shoulders. He's apt to have new ideas, and-"

"Father!" Millie's slim form was shaken with sobs, and her arms were clinging close around his neck. David Hurst's strong hand gently stroked the short auburn curls pressed tight against his shoulder.

"There daughter! There my little girl!" he said.

The important day soon came at the Hurst farm. In the house, on the porches and lawns, in the pavilion across the creek, and upon the smooth floor laid down in the orchard grove-groups of young people-pretty girls in dainty white and pink, and blue dresses, and good-looking young fellows in cool nobby summer suits had laughed and talked and danced, and downed ices and lemonades and sandwiches with purest enjoyment all the afternoon, and showed no signs of tiring of it until the furthest hours of evening.

Millie in her white swiss dress, flitting here, and there, and everywhere throughout the house and grounds in her role of hostess, made Hart think of a snow-white butterfly he had chased once in childhood across fields and274meadows, and through strips of orchard, only to vanish, eventually when he had about imprisoned the pretty whisp of light under his hat-so far up in the air, that even his strained glance could not pursue it.

Today he had shadowed Millie throughout the grounds with like success so far as futile following went, and in his disappointment he had told himself that she would probably slip from him forever in some such effectual, if not solemn way, in which he had lost the butterfly.

He had been with her frequently during the past week but had not dared to speak of his newly-aroused hope, lest it might prove the step too far beyond the limit of her father's willing concessions. So he had put it off from day to day. He had not had a word with her today since the people began to arrive at two o'clock. It was now twilight. The lanterns were lit about the porches and in the orchard, and Hart for a moment was sitting apart, enjoying the fanciful scene made by the colored lights and the pretty groupings tinder the trees.

"Is that you, Hart?" asked Millie's voice suddenly near by. "I was looking for you," she said coming towards him in the dusk. "Will you come with me to look for little May Burns and Fannie? We can't find them anywhere about the place, and mother's afraid they've strolled up the canyon. She wants me to find them before father knows."

Hart put her hand under Ills arm, and they went quietly across the creek and towards the canyon. As they walked along the lonely road, Hart told Millie of his thought about the butterfly.

"I don't see why that particular circumstance should suggest me," said Millie laughing. "I don't believe I shall go so far as to die to escape you, and that seems to me to be the only possible way to establish an analogy."

"There are other ways of losing you as hopelessly," said Hart, tinging his tone with his blue mood.

They walked on a few steps in silence, then Millie spoke softly.

"Hart!"

"Yes," he answered.

"Why don't you drop your hat over the butterfly?"

"Millie!" cried Hart.

They were quite alone; but if a hundred had been near no one could have told whether it was the gurgling water or a kiss; and before Hart had released her, they heard Fannie's and May's voices just ahead in the darkness. They were crying pitifully, and Hart and Millie hurried toward them anxiously.

"Fannie!" called Hart reassuringly as they approached, "It's all right, Millie and I are here to take you safely home."

"I don't want you to," came a reply in wailing, petulant tones, "I want Annie and Jim to!"

"Why folks are you with them?" cried Millie and Hart in a breath. Millie's cousin Ada and her fiancé were in a buggy, each holding a weeping child in their arms.

"Yes," said Ada, "we got tired of staying around the grounds, so Jim hitched up and we took the children up the canyon for a ride. "What are you crying for, Fan," asked Millie, "are you afraid of the dark, or that you'll be reminded about not asking leave to go, when you get home?"

"I ain't afraid of either," snapped Fannie.

"She says she knows the refreshments will be eat up," said Jim explainingly.

"You saw to that yourself before you came away, Fan," volunteered Millie, unsympathetically.

But only Hart's assertion of countless freezers waiting to disgorge their entire treasures at the "open sesame" of the two certain small wanderers brought peace eventually to the mournful, aching hearts. Finally the buggy went on with its rejoicing load, Millie and Hart bringing up the rear of the triumphal procession.

As the latter walked homeward, Millie told Hart about the change in her father; and Hart told her of his work, and plans for the future. She was interested in his new politics as well, and Hart told her about that, too.

"I've found out one thing, though," said Hart finally before they reached home, "in everything I've taken hold of that amounts to anything, I've discovered in studying the subject up, that we've got something in the same275line just as good, if not a great deal better, in

Mormonism."

"I've found that out, too," said Millie.

"That dear old gold-brick, Andy Gale," went on Hart, "put the whole truth in a nutshell when he told me, that people travel all over the universe-and discover Utah!"

"Hart," said Millie presently, in a shy but earnest tone, "I feel that it is only right to tell you before-hand-that I wouldn't be married any way but in the temple-for anything on earth!"

"Why, neither would I!" said Hart.

Nephi Anderson [^3] Lester Amsden's Love

I.

"God moves in a mysterious way, His wonders to perform." This was certainly exemplified in the history of Lester Amsden's love; and although the cynic and the scoffer may scorn the thought that God has anything to do with the loves and hates of man, the careful student understands that our Heavenly Father takes cognizance of our every act and overrules it for our good. Lester Amsden understands this now; but he did not some forty years ago, in the early springtime of his love.

At that time Lester was a young man of twenty. He was the son of a well-to-do Ohio farmer and had enjoyed all the privileges in the way of education which he desired; and Lester had a liking for learning and books. His father was proud of him, and looked to see his son become a useful, honorable man.

Now, hearts of twenty summers, as every one knows, are very attractive to Cupid's darts. It was the same old story. Verna Chase attended the same high school as did Lester and it was there the fatal arrow hit its mark. It was not Verna's beauty that accomplished this, for she was no beauty in the common meaning of that term; it was her goodness, and as Lester thought, her greatness of heart. Bright and intelligent as she was, her knowledge made her truly wise. The qualities of heart and mind were here mingled in due proportions.

So, in the course of events, Lester and Verna "kept company," and everything predicted the usual ending. But it was not to be. There came a separation, a drifting apart to an end which neither foresaw. It happened in this way: At an evening party in the village, Lester was introduced to a young lady from New York, who was on a visit to some relatives in Ohio. She was a society belle, gifted with a beautiful face, possessed of many graces of her sex which she sometimes used for foolish purposes. That evening Lester received her particular attention, playing on his vanity a little and causing him to lose his better judgment, to the neglect of his partner.

The story cannot be followed through all its details. Enough that Lester was under the influence of a flirt, and simple, unostentatious Verna Chase was slighted. To further this separation something strange happened. Two Mormon missionaries arrived at the village and held meetings. The results of these meetings were that Mr. Chase and his daughter (Mrs. Chase was dead) joined the Mormon faith, and in a short time sold their small possessions and moved westward; where, no one in the locality knew. Lester did not interfere. He did not even visit her and bid her good bye. He was too much occupied with someone else. 276

A few months, and the summer was gone. The society belle must return home. She left very quietly, keeping out of Lester's way. A few days later, he received a letter from her. In it she thanked him for his kindness in exerting himself so greatly for her pleasure; hoped he would grow up and become a brilliant young man, receive a good education, etc.

The letter opened his eyes considerably. His sensitive nature was touched to the quick. He saw what a dupe he had been, and how he had been deceiving himself with a false infatuation. The reaction brought to Lester's mind a striking contrast; one was a beauty, vain and heartless; the other, not so fair in face, but far more beautiful in all that goes to make the noblest type of woman. Lester's conscience began to trouble him. He had permitted Verna Chase to be deluded by knavish preachers and leave her home to follow them. He had stood idly by, nor spoken a word in remonstrance; and now that she was gone he could not atone for it. Then Lester tried to reason it all away, but it was no use; Verna Chase was in his mind continually, and he could not resist that pure, steady regard for her which awoke to newness of life and grew brighter and stronger.

About this time Lester's father died. His mother had gone before him years ago, so now he was alone.

A few months passed. A restless desire to find Verna Chase had come over him. Westward the finger of fate seemed to point, and westward he must go unless he wished to be alone always. So he felt. And he shaped his course to that end, little knowing what the result would be.

II.

In the autumn of 184- Lester Amsden rode out from his native village and turned his face towards the setting sun. He had chosen to travel on horseback rather than by vehicle, as he would be much freer, and be at a better advantage on his journey. He learned that he would have to cross two states besides his own to reach the object of his search. So he bade his friends good bye, telling them that he would not be away long. Lester had confided his secret to no one; it was too sacred for that; within the inmost recesses of his breast the battle had been fought. The convictions of his mind had settled to a fixed purpose, and that purpose was to find Verna Chase, and if possible rectify the mistake he had made.

Lester concluded that the best plan he could adopt was to follow the route taken by Mr. Chase. This he could do by inquiry. The plan worked well; and he had crossed his own state and Indiana without any difficulty. In the latter state he gained some information which troubled him. At a small town, two persons answering his description had stayed a number of days, the young lady having been very ill. She had, however, recovered enough to travel on.

He had not traveled far into the state of Illinois before he heard some very alarming stories concerning the Mormons. Though conflicting in many details, he concluded that the main fact must be true, which was that the Mormons had been driven from the state, across the Mississippi river into the western country beyond. As he neared his destination his conclusion was strengthened by the many evidences which he saw. Frequently he would meet companies of armed men traversing the country. But he had no trouble with them. Once or twice he was stopped, but he gave a satisfactory account of himself and he was permitted to pass on his way. Lester pondered on this condition of affairs; but he could not account for it. Bad as he thought the Mormons to be, he could not convince himself that they deserved to be threatened with armed violence. Of course they had brought this upon themselves by some overt act. This he could not doubt, as in this country freedom of religions belief was granted to all. But Verna Chase was with this people. Deluded, or not deluded, she was yet Verna to him, simple, trusting, and, he had an assurance, faithful still. She might need just such protection and aid as he could give her. Then Lester would reason with himself as he rode along, and his imagination would draw vivid pictures of surging, boisterous mobs threatening her-till he would unconsciously 277 urge his horse to a faster gait.

At last from a small rise in the prairie Lester was shown the "Mormon City," Nauvoo and a few minutes' brisk canter brought him to one of its streets. As he rode along the dusty road viewing the well-kept gardens and fields on either side, he forgot for the moment that he was in a deserted city. Being weary from his long ride that day he soon drew rein by a house near the roadside. Fastening his horse to the fence, he strode down the path leading to the house. Knocking at the door, he waited; no one answered. He knocked again louder than before; still no response; then he walked around to the back; he saw no one. Being thirsty be tried to get a drink from the well, but the bucket was gone. Everything was still. No usual sounds of busy life were heard. The silence was oppressive. It was all very strange and bewildering to Lester, till it flashed upon his mind that he had entered an abandoned city. "Is every home like this?" he thought. Yes. There they stood on every hand, silent, tenantless. The millwheel hung high and dry in the sun. No fire was seen in the smithy, no stroke was heard from the workshop. The inhabitants were gone; but where?

Lester Amsden mounted again, and, riding down the street, neared a portion of the city which gave some signs of life. Lester's hope revived. A man came riding up the street towards him, whom he hailed and asked for information concerning a friend of his, by the name of Lawrence Chase. The stranger turned

in his saddle and bluntly asked:

"Is he a Mormon?"

"Yes, I believe he is," Lester answered. "

There-" said the stranger, and he stretched out his arm at full length, and, with his bony forefinger, pointed squarely at the sun, which was then sinking in the western horizon, leaving a stream of light across the river. With this significant gesture, he rode on in silence.

As night was now coming on, our traveler sought and found shelter with one of the few remaining citizens of the place. That night was spent in seeking intelligence regarding Mr. Chase and his daughter, but he could gain no clue to their whereabouts. He learned that that part of the state had been in great turmoil lately, and it would be nearly impossible to gain any reliable information about them. The body of the Mormon people had emigrated westward, and in that direction he must search.

The next morning Lester arose early and took a stroll around the town. In his walk he came upon many scenes that touched his heart with no uncertain sympathy.

A number of days were spent in Nauvoo. He then got a boat and crossed the river into Iowa. Here he learned that not all of the Mormons had gone to the west. but that many were scattered over the country in various directions. Following a clue. which proved to be a false one, he wandered from place to place without any success. They must have gone with the westward company, he concluded, and are now likely to be in the Rocky Mountains. It was getting late in the year. Winter's storms would soon sweep over the wild plains and deserts, and it would be impossible to go farther at present. It was with pangs of regret that Lester saw he must wait until the next spring. He had thought to find his heart's desire, his Verna, more easily. Still his resolution did not waiver, and he turned homeward again with a fixed purpose, to settle his affairs and prepare for the expected journey.

III.

The winter passed. Summer came and went. Winter again congealed the outer earth. Still Lester Amsden delayed his journey. He had trouble in disposing of his property, and he could not go penniless. The summer of the second year from his visit to Nauvoo was well advanced ere he arrived in the west again. Soon after his arrival he joined a company of hunters and trappers and set out for the Rockies. On the plains of Nebraska they met a company of Mormons returning for supplies to the Missouri River; and Lester's first duty was to inquire of them about the object of his search. The captain of the company was a large, pleasant-faced man, and when he heard Lester's inquiry, he rested his foot on the hub of his wagon wheel and began tapping his fingers on the tire.

"Lawrence Chase? Verna Chase?" he repeated

half aloud. "Let me see-are you a relative?" Lester informed him that he was not. "An interested friend, perhaps?"

"Yes, yes!" exclaimed Lester, "you know them, friend, your actions show it. Tell me-"

"Well, now," interrupted the pioneer, "don't be in such haste. I will tell you all I know about them, seeing that you are so much concerned."

Lester thanked him. Here was news at last. His heart quickened its beating.

"Yes," the captain began, "I am acquainted with Lawrence Chase, and was acquainted with his daughter Verna."

Lester tried to catch the true meaning of the words. There was something mysterious about them, and a terrible suspicion flashed through his mind. The speaker saw the painful emotion, and in a kind tone continued:

"My friend, I did not mean to pain you, but you will wish to know the truth?"

"Yes, of course," in a haft dazed manner. "Your suppositions are, no doubt, correct. Lawrence Chase you will find in the Great Salt Lake Valley. Verna has gone to another world you will find all that is left of her earthly tabernacle about seven miles out on yonder prairie,"

Lester's face blanched to a deadly color. His grip fastened to the wagon with a crushing force. The words stunned him, till when the truth he understood, he cried out in the agony of his soul, "Great God, she is dead!"

After a time Lester calmed himself and listened to the particulars of the captain's story. There was no mistake. It was too true that Verna Chase was no more of this earth. All his endeavors had been in vain. His star had set. All was darkness, and his journey would have to end. He asked his informer to direct him to the grave. True to his resolve lie would follow her to the last. Receiving full instructions, he was soon galloping over a desolate region of country, and was not long in finding the mound. Dismounting from Ills horse, he advanced to the grave.

Not a flower, not a shrub, not a spear of grass, not a solitary leaf of green could be seen to break the gray, dismal waste. The sun had done its work; even the earth was baked and cracked. No tree threw its cool shade over her last resting place. No murmuring brook trickled past. No waters were there whose waves might sing her requiem. The gentle breeze had nothing to play upon. The air was full of lone, intense solitude.

Lester stood as one spellbound. He gazed around on the melancholy landscape, and then his eye became fixed on the little mound of soil and pebbles, beneath which slumbered the dust of Verna Chase; and, as he stood, his thoughts went back-back to the first awakening of his love, till he seemed to see her once again and hold communion with her eternal part, which spoke to him in the silent language of God. He had not seen her true worth before. His human eye had been too weak to gaze past the erring mortal into the purer motives of the soul; but now her peerless beauty shone before him. His soul was full. Tears glided down his bronzed cheeks. He did not try to check them. He was alone and he yielded to the emotion which filled his breast. How long he remained thus, Lester could never tell. At last, when he became conscious of his surroundings, the sun had set behind the western prairie, and the evening shades were fast following in its wake. He turned to go, but lingered. Bending his knee upon that lone grave, he gathered a pebble to keep in memory of the beloved dead.

IV.

Lester Amsden was not a religious man. He had thought but little of the great problems of life. As in the instance of many others, it had taken a grave to turn his mind to the contemplation of God and His providences. Still he had been taught some of the principles of Christianity in his youth, which had left a faint impression of truth on his mind. In his sorrow, Lester thought of these early teachings and tried to gain some comfort and hope from them. First he tried to form some conception of a God. He was "without body, parts or passions." This be tried to reason out, but failed; then he pondered on existence in a heavenly state, and images of winged beingsdwelling in shadowy uncertainty flitted through his mind. Verna's form came up before him, an angel clad in heavenly garments, and his yearning heart went out to her. If he could but hold her in his arms once and imprint one kiss upon that loving face-but no; the solemn words of the minister rang in his ears like a death knell

"Till death do yon part." There was no such love in heaven. That ended at the grave. The preacher had said so; every one thought so; it must be true.

Oh, the utter disappearance of hope in that soul! Oh, the darkness and despair of that mind! The future was a blank; a dark, cheerless uncertainty. Verna Chase was beyond Iris reach. He must give her up forever. So thought Lester Amsden, and so concluded.

Lester had no inclination to go back to the East; in fact it would have been a hazardous undertaking, as he would have to travel back alone most of the way; so he kept on Iris western route. He would try his fortune in the west; and he had a desire to see this peculiar people with whom Verna Chase had once cast her lot.

In due time Salt Lake Valley was reached, and inquiry was made for Lawrence Chase. Lester was soon directed to his residence, where he was most heartily received. Mr. Chase was very pleased to see him, and bade him make his home there as long as he desired.

From Mr. Chase, Lester heard the story of their pilgrimage, from their home in Ohio to the Rocky Mountains; of their embracing the gospel, their persecutions in Nauvoo, and Verna's death on the plains, caused from exposure and hardships. It was a sad narrative; and the father's eye grew moist as he told of that exodus, which marked the prairie with his people's dead. Lester now learned that Verna had been true to him; in all her varied experiences she had expressed a hope that he would yet come to her. He tried to gain comfort from this; but what consolation could be had by one who thought that death ended all?

Lester was in no hurry to leave the hospitable roof thus offered him. So he stayed and mingled with the Saints, whom he found a different people from what he had believed them to be. He soon became interested in Mr. Chase's talk and the books he gave him to read. His friend would explain to him the principles of the gospel. and Lester began to see their beauty and worth.

A little east of the Mormon settlement the Wasatch mountains reared their lofty peaks. Some distance up their slope could be traced u water mark, which plainly indicated the existence, in the past, of a vast inland sea. Not far from Mr. Chase's home this mark widened into a tiny plateau. A little spring had pushed its waters through the mountainside and had found a moment's rest on this level ere it went tumbling on its way. The grass here was of the brightest green; and a cottonwood vied with a birch bush in casting the deepest shade.

To this beautiful retreat Lester would take his books and read and ponder over their truths. From his perch on the mountainside he could see the valley at his feet, and catch a glimpse of the lake in the distance.

On a warm summer day, Lester Amsden was here lying on the grass; at his side a half-open book. A peep within the covers disclosed the title, "Key to Theology." Lester was in a deep study. His eye rested on the distant western mountain, but his mind went farther, higher. There was a new light in his eyes, as in truth there was in his soul. The dark cloud of doubt and despair was lifting and he could see the bright blue sky beyond. Oh, the glad awakening of that hope which had been crushed, as now with bright wings it was again arising, awakened by the teachings of God's servants; and the future which before had been dark and dismal was now flooded with a light that dazed him, as he gazed. These teachings promised him eternal life in the world to come, surrounded by loved ones, if he would comply with the ordinances of the gospel. Not that vague uncertainty promised by the world, but something real and tangible. In that celestial world man would be perfected; there his every faculty would be developed and cultivated to the highest degree. The emotions and affections which exist in mortal man will surely exist in the celestial being; and if a love was pure and noble here, surely it will not be lost but will be quickened280by a heavenly flame and become stronger, nobler.

Then, Verna was not lost to him! She might be his, even yet!

The thought surged through his brain, and with fevered haste he sought out his friend to confirm his hope, the new hope which had taken possession of him.

That night, for the first time in many years, Lester Amsden kneeled by his bedside and prayed and in his simple way thanked his Heavenly Father for the arisen sun, for the light that had dawned upon his soul. Next morning he was baptized in the river, and the Holy Spirit sealed upon him the truth of what he had believed to be true.

Some years after, Verna Chase was married to Lester Amsden; startle not kind reader, if, as was the case, a world separated the bride and the bridegroom; for it was solemnized by one who had the authority from God, and whatever he sealed on earth was sealed in heaven.

Virginia Sorensen [^4] The Darling Lady

The first time I was aware of something special about Mother was on a Sunday. Barely old enough for school, yet I began that day to feel a new presence in the air. My father's tenderness came to have a meaning and I began to perceive the direction of his gestures of love.

It was one of those blazing days when nothing helps, even lemonade and whirling fans and blinds tightly drawn first to the east and then to the west as the sun moves. Some of our neighbors escaped to the mountains after Sunday School, and my sister Helen and I watched enviously as they carried out their picnic baskets and fishing rods and drove away. In Utah, among the mountains, one can arrive at another climate after an hour or two of climbing, even in midsummer. But we could only gaze at the cool blue peaks, for Dad must work even on the sacred Day of Rest. As Brigham Young always said, the railroad is an immoral institution by its very nature, its engines hooting gaily as it rushes by the sober people in their go-to-meeting clothes. To us, the only difference from weekdays, before we were old enough for Sunday School, was that we had a later dinner. Dad came home at three, not six, so dinner was about half past three instead of at noon; we had only bread and milk at late Sunday bedtime, with great squares of cheese.

About five that particular Sunday, Dad said from among his piles of newspapers, "Why don't we go up to that band concert in the park? It'll be cooler."

The park. The band. The siren mountains vanished from our horizon and left not a trace.

Mother sat up on the couch where she liked to rest after dinner. "That's a lovely idea," she said. "We can take a few things and eat on the grass."

A picnic besides. We began to dance.

"But I should have known sooner. We'll need some things."

Helen cried, "We can get them at The Corner."

Stores should not be open on the Sabbath. But this one, no more than a small shed perched at the corner of our block, was never really closed. Nor, for that matter, ever really open. Nobody was there when you went in. Mother sent us rather often for a loaf of bread or a cake of yeast, little things that are apt to be forgotten on a Saturday shopping list. "Run down to The Corner and get it," she would say, and give us her little purse. There was no street to cross, so there were no admonitions. For a long time I thought the little shop was actually named The Corner, and was surprised when I281learned it had once had another name on the sign over the door. It looked bigger than it actually was, having one of those false fronts a few feet higher than the roof; winter and summer, smoke wandered over this toward the sky, haphazard blue smoke from no visible chimney.

Whenever we went in, a bell on the door tinkled. Then a distant voice called, "Yes, yes, I'm coming !"

It was a voice deliberately oversweet, like the voices of women being polite at a party. And when she came in to serve us, the sweet voice came from a smile we instinctively knew was forced. She called us "darlings" in almost every sentence she spoke to us. "Well, well, darlings, and what will it be today?" When we told this at home, Dad laughed. "All the people who trade with her are her darlings," Mother said.

So it became a family thing to speak of The Darling Lady down at The Corner. When one of us was called from another room, we often answered with an imitation of that dripping voice. But then we had dozens of imitations, some funny (we thought) and some, I see now, rather cruel. We mimicked poor Davey Wright, who stuttered, and Minnie Fox, who giggled at everything, no matter what, in a high and helpless way. We imitated Mother when she scolded, too-she was always comical because she somehow could not manage to scold as if she really meant it. We were always imitating the wife of the solemn judge who lived on the next block. Her Danish maid worked now and then for us and reported that the Lady Judge was simply too genteel. When her eldest son, a tall boy already in high school, did something of which she disapproved, she would say, "My dear boy, if you do not behave"-and she would wave her thimble finger, armed with a fine gold thimble-"I shall have to give you three thumps-one, two, three!" With each count she would thump gently on his forehead, and we also thumped away, weak with giggles.

But the Darling Lady was the oddest of all. When the bell tinkled, she came through a dark green curtain hanging over a door behind the counter. She came like a small, soft mole appearing gently in the grass. She never appeared suddenly, and was always blinking, as if really emerging from the dark. In what deep strange recesses she led her life, behind that curtain, one could only imagine. But her mysterious existence there troubled us, sometimes, and we asked each other, "Where are her folks?" When we asked Mother, she said they must live in another town.

"Yes, and what will it be today, darlings?" she would ask, peering over the counter, pressing her hands upon it. There was a downy fuzz on the delicate thin skin on the backs of her hands.

That Sunday it was bread for sandwiches, and pickles, and potato chips. And mustard. This time we had a list. She read the items with profound attention and provided them with slow ceremonious motions, laying everything on the counter in a row, very neatly. Nothing could have been more different from the brisk efficiency of the clerk at the regular grocery store.

"And will that be all?"

Helen was a year and a half older than I was, and could even read the list by herself. "Yes, Ma'am," she said.

The lady touched each thing then, lightly with her fingertips, writing tiny figures in a column on her roll of wrapping paper. Then she stood murmuring over the result as if she might be reading a poem to herself or perhaps making a little prayer. When she announced the amount we owed her, she always did it tentatively, with a look that seemed sorry that it had to be so much or that we must pay at all.

We always handed her the purse, and she counted out of it with ceremony, naming the coins one by one as if she were teaching us their names. Perhaps she was. As she finished her incantation that particular day, the bell suddenly tinkled, and there, as if magically summoned, stood Mother. She had been running. She looked flushed and hot.

For a second I thought we had done something wrong. How could we have failed and how could Mother know already? The row of things still stood on the counter.

"Those pink cookies, the jumbles-isn't that282what they're called, the huge ones? I forgot; we'll want something sweet at the last. And peanuts too. In the shells. There's a game we play with them."

The lady stood looking at Mother, her hands spread again on the counter, supporting her. "You are going on a picnic? Not to the canyon?" she asked, and her voice was surprisingly anxious, as if she were asking whether we were going around the world in a balloon.

"No, it's too late for that. We're just going to the park," Mother said.

The jumbles were in a big glass jar and had the brightest pink frosting I ever saw. As the lady took them out, one by one, she said to Mother, "I'm glad you're not going to the mountains. It's dangerous on those rough roads." She stood looking at Mother, one of the cookies arrested in mid-air, in her hand. Did you know I lost mine?" she asked in a low voice. "It was toward the end for me, but they wanted me to go. We went on wagons then. I didn't know any better."

Whatever could she mean? Yet Mother seemed to understand and made the clucking sound women always make when they feel sorry or disgusted about something. It is odd that I can remember even what she wore that day, a white dress with a wide belt; her sleeves were rolled up above her elbows, her collar lying open because of the heat. Her hair was coal black, and her eyes were dark brown, and I thought she was the most beautiful creature in the world. "I've only begun this time," she said with a laugh. "Can you tell already?"

"It's a look on a woman's face: I can always tells" the lady said. "And then, your husband-"

"Imagine!" Mother said. "He always tells people right away."

The lady turned and began slowly scooping peanuts into a brown bag. We often imitated her slowness, too, and watching her now we could hardly keep from bursting into laughter. Mother knew; she frowned at us and shook her bead. Then she took the purse herself and began to count out the money. When the lady handed over the bags, she said, "It's a good thing if a man is pleased."

It was because of this mysterious exchange, I suppose, that I noticed the delicate touch of my father, lifting Mother tenderly from the grass with his two hands grasping hers. "Here!" he said once, leaping up when Mother moved the basket. "You should let me do that." When I wanted to see the band over the heads of the crowd, he lifted me to his shoulder, and Mother looked up and said, "What an elephant! It's time she stopped being the baby."

The bandstand stood among trees, a platform on which folding chairs and music stands were set in a double semi-circle. All of the musicians had red coats and little red caps with golden cords on them. When they began to play, the horns shone brightly in the light of white globes looped above them like strings of beads. A canyon breeze came down as we listened, as it always did in the evening, and all the leaves trembled over us, in time-it seemed to me-with the wailing of the horns.

By then the picnic itself was finished, and the quilt spread on the grass had been shaken free of crumbs. But the game was still to come, for it was played in the dark. We had played it often enough in our own yard at home, but here, in the little piece of the park we had staked out for our own, it was far more exciting. Dad had hidden peanuts, while we covered our eyes, as one hides colored eggs at Easter, behind trees, under the corners of the quilt, tucked under the handle of the basket, even by the bridge that led over Main Ditch, flowing along the street beside the park. It had a delicious cool music of its own, that ditch, and along its banks the grass was longer and greener, and the peppermint mixed with it gave its fragrance up to us when we trod on it with our Sunday shoes. We searched, laughing and shouting. Mother called now and then, "Now don't any of you fall in!"

The two of them lay on the quilt, together, looking up at the trees. They always rested after supper, lying on a couch at home which we thought had a special name. "Esther," we called it, because Dad always said, "Now we will go and see Esther." I was in school before l knew that he really said "siesta" and not "Esther" at all. 283

That night, as always at home, we kept running off and returning to report to them. We counted our findings, making piles of peanuts at each corner of the blanket.

"You've not found every one yet?' Dad said every time. "There are two hundred altogether." He lay with his face at Mother's neck, and barely turned when he spoke to us. "Maybe you didn't look on the other side of the bridge

Once, when I came back to my pile to add some peanuts and count what I had, Mother was saying something about the Darling Lady. "When I went for those cookies, she said you told her. How did you happen to do that? She's so odd- Did she tell you about losing a baby, toward the end?"

"I didn't tell her. Not that I remember. She was coming out the other day when I passed, and I just said hello."

Mother's voice was lazy and contented. "Anyway, she says she knows by my face. Maybe it's true that there's a special look." And she added: "I didn't even realize she had been married. Did you?"

"Yes, I knew. She's one of those-" He noticed me just then and lifted his brows and said, "Here Little Pitcher," and asked me how many nuts I had in my pile.

Those what? It was something they didn't want me to hear. Those. It was years before I asked and was told that the poor Darling Lady was one of the polygamous wives left over when the Manifesto ended the public practice' of what was called Celestial Marriage. She was given the little store to maintain herself when her husband died; the first and legitimate wife apparently divided the estate. It always seemed a shame to me that she never inherited First-Wifeship during her husband's lifetime, the way Sister Carpenter did. For years she had lived alone, on the same block as Brother Carpenter and his first wife. The day the first wife died she simply rolled her clothes into a bundle and moved in before the corpse was even moved out. The housekeeping hadn't a hitch between one and the other, a great blessing for Brother Carpenter, everybody said. Even if the second wife never had a chance to cut the first weddingcake, she helped bet husband cut the one provided by the State of Utah for his centennial.

But the poor Darling Lady missed out on all the advantages. After that Sunday, I always felt this: she was of the mysterious Those over which my mother clucked her sympathetic tongue. As the hot summer changed into chilly fall, I remember going on occasional errands, and when winter came in earnest, the Darling Lady appeared from a warm shining beyond the curtain. I saw firelight around the edges and wished I might ask to stand by her open fire, a thing I loved to do. But one would as soon ask to open a letter addressed to somebody else. She wore a dark shawl and hurried, trembling, to provide for our needs. I felt sorry to bring her into the chill.

"And how is Mother now, darlings?" she always asked before we left, shivering and holding the shawl tightly with one hand.

We always said, "Fine, thank you," but were puzzled by the serious air of her question, for Mother was never sick. On the contrary, she was filled with energy and gladness and had never seemed so pretty before. Before Christmas we learned with delight that a new baby was growing inside where she had become fat and without a lap for us to sit on.

It was the fifteenth of January we were never to forget. Snow had been falling for several days, and the window wells were high with it and the paths had to be shoveled free each morning. I woke suddenly in the cold dark. Mother always raised our window a little, for fresh air, no matter what the weather. Helen was sitting up in bed. "Mother! Dad!" It was her crying that had wakened me.

There was another sound, beyond our closed door. Voices, but the sound under them was like crying, like groaning. It was terrible to hear.

"Mother! Mother!" I joined Helen in calling the name. A horrible creeping smell came to us, a new presence in the dark. It smelled of fear. I could not make another sound in the clutch of it. The crying ceased, but Helen went right on calling. "Mother! Dad!" But nobody carne and nobody came. As we lay and waited for the284answers that had never failed us before, wind blew along the window sill above the bed; snow touched the pane with sounds like sighing. We didn't dare get up and approach the bedroom door, I don't quite know why; something was too awful beyond. We simply lay, whining in a sad duet. The long, shuddering depths of my own crying I remember as if it had been last night, and the way I held my breath to listen hopefully and then began to cry again.

Suddenly there was a voice at the window. We both sat up at once, facing the square of snowy dark, and there was a shape, a head, and from where the window stood open to the night came a familiar voice. "It's all right, darlings! She'll be all right soon. Sssh!"

We dived together beneath the quilts and lay paralyzed with listening. The Darling Lady. Nothing to fear. And yet we lay tied together in the warm bed, hardly breathing. "You'll worry her if you go on crying. Ssssh... Ssssh... Don't cry." She spoke as one speaks to a crying child on one's lap in a rocking chair. Sweetly and softly.

We made no more sound. And presently her voice faded away. And then, at last, out of the silence, we heard our door open and Father was there speaking to us in his familiar, hearty voice. He warmed and comforted us with glasses of hot milk and said we had a fine new baby sister. He said he had heard us cry but had been busy just then taking care of the little baby. He did not mention the Darling Lady, and neither did we, until later. When we did, he laughed and said we must have imagined that she came on such a stormy night.

But we looked at each other, knowing what we knew. Yet that night seemed far off and long ago, for our house was a special heaven, wonderful beyond belief, with the new baby in it. We ran the neighborhood with our news. Why we did not go to The Corner and tell the Darling Lady, I do not know. But we did not. We hurried home again and peered endlessly at the tiny marvel in the basket and at the crisp nurse in a white dress and white stockings and shoes. Grandmother, whom we adored, arrived the day the nurse departed, and we went with Dad to meet her wonderful panting train, She brought us oranges and grapefruit from her own trees and shells from the sea, and she slept on a couch in our room and told us stories in the warm darkness. All our friends and relations came to visit, and bright cards came in every mail. Gifts for the baby came every day, like frankincense and myrrh tied with blue ribbons. Dad brought flowers and a huge box of chocolates that Mother opened ceremoniously on her bed every evening after supper. We could each choose one piece, which we did only after endless deliberations, from variously colored scalloped cups.

It was after Mother was up and around again, looking frail and lovely in a soft pink robe and lippers edged with rosy fur, that Grandmother said one morning, "There's not enough butter for lunch." And Mother said, "Maybe you can get some at The Corner."

Helen was off playing somewhere, and Grandmother and I went together, I proudly showing her the way. I dragged my sled, I remember, though most of the big snow had melted away. But when we arrived at The Corner, the door that had always opened before to the tinkling of the bell was closed and locked. Grandmother peered into the window where ancient advertisements hung, one over the other.

"She's there," I said. "She's always there." We knocked and knocked, and then Grandmother walked to the side of the building and looked along a narrow walk that led to a back door. From across the street, then, a passing woman called to us. "She's gone to the hospital!" Her voice had the importance of carrying news. She started across to us. "Are you relative?"

"No," Grandmother said. "I'm staying with my daughter down the block. We needed some butter for lunch."

"Oh. Oh, I see," the woman said. "I didn't know you, so I thought-I know she has some folks somewhere." She stood shaking her head. "I live right across here, and I was the first one to notice she wasn't here. There was milk left out Monday, and a box of bread on the step. She was sick for three days before a soul knew. They say it's pneumonia." 285

Grandmother nodded and sighed and made the woman-cluck of pity. We started for home in silence, Then I asked, "What's pneumonia?"

"A bad cold," she said. "Pneumonia is a cold so bad that you can't breathe at all. So be careful you don't catch one." To Mother at home she said, "No butter. The place is closed."

"Well, then," Mother said cheerfully, "we'll just have to do the way Daddy says they do over the river."

"Do without," I said, proud to know the words to say, like knowing the answer to a riddle. When Helen came home, I was proud to tell her the bad news about the Darling Lady.

"Maybe she got it the night she came to that window," she said, taking the words from my mind. We looked at each other. But I'm afraid we didn't think about it again. Everything at home was familiar and warm and full of delightful surprises with Grandmother there. The Corner, as the butter had been, was thereafter done without. And hardly missed.

The next summer somebody broke into the place. In the manner of children everywhere, our neighborhood mobs smashed with stones the windows of any place left vacant very long. So with The Corner. Mother and Dad said it was bad of children to do such things, and to climb in as well was even worse. "Probably after whatever stock she might have had left," Dad said.

"Poor thing, she didn't have much," said Mother. "It had got so she never had what I wanted. Milk and bread, that was about all."

"She had peanuts," I said stoutly. "And jumbles."

Autumn came. One day Helen and I and another playmate found ourselves behind the old place as we searched for a pup that had strayed away. Every single window of The Corner was smashed, even in the back. We stopped and peered through one of the jagged panes.

There were only a few things, a tumbled bed and three or four chairs overturned. Dishes and odd bits of this and that stood on an open cupboard that had ragged curtains on the doors. There were salt and pepper shakers still standing on the table, and a crumpled cloth and a smashed sugar bowl. Dirt was scattered over everything, and mouse tolleys, and there was a peculiar smell. Dust and rust and mold. And age, maybe. There was no fireplace, after all, but only a small cookstove, the door of the firebox standing open to show a heap of ash. The stovepipe that had once hung over it was warped and rusted, hanging half out of a gaping hole in the wall. All the time, then, in that one little room. Waiting for the tinkle of the bell. How slowly she had risen from her chair, answering, how slowly she had always moved. She must have had a terrible lot of time. I felt a hollow open at the pit of my stomach and a heaviness upon my shoulders. To be old. To be alone. Only for a second, though. Not yet.

"It's not nice to look into windows!" I cried, and turned quickly away.

I began to run. Helen came running after me, panting, and took my hand. "She was nice," she said.

That night, we looked at the window and at each other. "Did she die?" I asked. "Do you think she died?"

"She was awfully old," my sister said. Presently she added, "She really didn't say Darling to everybody. I went with Irma once and she didn't say Darling to her. I asked some other kids and she didn't say Darling to any of them. They didn't even know why we called her the Darling Lady."

So it was she became a heroine to us, a comfort on many a winter night. Sometimes we lay and pretended that she came again, and we got up and asked her in. We took her in to see the baby, and she sat by the fire, and we brought her a glass of hot milk.

"I wish we had," Helen said.

We pretended that she sat there rocking and sipping and getting her feet dry, with her slippers by the stove. "Well, darling, this is nice," she always said. 286

Eileen G. Kump [^5] The Willows

Amy was a child when Congress passed the Edmunds Bill, assuring the end of polygamous living in Utah, but she was old enough to know that Aunt Edna was not her aunt at all but Will's mother and that Will was her favorite brother even though he was three years younger than she was and therefore not quite an equal. And when the heavy snows of 1884 had melted up north allowing the U.S. marshals through to do their duty in the south, when fear hung around their hunted mothers and father like weeping willows, she and Will still had to bundle their dolls and dishes in the green scarf and head for the orchard.

As they walked, Amy poked Will hard. "I looked already," he growled. "Did not!"

Amy knew he liked to watch his toes nuzzle the dust but she also knew that looking up was a lot more exciting than looking down because red hills wiggle under hot sun. Besides, God probably watched over from up there. Probably he did. That high he could even see Pa and the secret place.

Will followed Amy in and out the young trees that grew down the middle of town. They

saw a woman out on the porch bending over

her big wooden tub. Of course they did not stop. You could tell when a mother pretended to look but did not really look at what she was doing that it was not a good day to visit. The children walked slowly past and Amy poked Will every time he forgot to look up.

The cooper shop was still empty. Amy ran toward the closed door and slid her fingers along four new churns. Every day they felt smoother, rounder. newer. Oh, she hoped they would sit there forever! But the wish was a stone in her stomach and she tugged at Will to hurry.

By the time Amy and Will got to the orchard, the Sevy boys were up a plum tree. Amy frowned in their direction and let go a long groan. This had been a perfect place, private and perfect. She and Will had cleared away rocks and bee weeds. They had even dug themselves their own pile of dirt. The trees spread shade big enough to sit in and nearby was City Creek for mud-making. Amy made up her mind that she would not leave and she would pay no notice to the Sevys.

Amy and Will crouched side by side over a dirt house, their small hands shaping, smoothing, caressing. Their real houses were just alike but Will's ma had planted sweet peas along each side of her broad plank walk. In Amy's dooryard, there was only violet tamarisk.

Amy was pushing a twig into her tiny yard when a green plum struck the dirt house. She glared upward at four dangling legs.

"Damn, that was a fine one!" shouted Fred Sevy.

"Damn, this is a fine one, too!" yelled Phil. Amy couldn't stand it. Not only did the Sevy boys have a pa who walked down the street in broad day but they said swear words in a painless way that made Amy shudder and tingle at the same time. Clamping a hand tight over each ear, she threw back her head and

stuck out her tongue.

"Gentiles!"

Then she looked at Will. He had become worshipful. He bent toward her and put his mouth against her ear. "I hate them Sevys," he whispered.

Amy cupped her hand around his ear and whispered back. "They are gentiles, Will. Both of them."

"We hate gentiles," he said. "We hate 'em." Amy nodded twice, long and slow, looking Will right in the eyes the whole time. Then she sat up straight and began to pat and mold the dirt house as if nothing had happened.

"I forgot. Pa said we don't hate anybody. Not even the Sevys. Now let's play." Sometimes287Amy got tired explaining, but there were some things even a five-year-old ought to know. Of course, there were big folks' secrets they were too little to know, like why John Saunders disappeared into Red Canyon every afternoon with a lunch basket and a water keg, or why the brethren took lookout turns on top of the canyon wall. At first sight of the marshal's buggy a boulder would come crashing down. Of course little children like Will were too young to know that.

But he still leaned toward her, whispering, waiting. "The Sews swear, huh."

"Gentiles don't know better," Amy said. "Why don't they?"

"Because they're Gentiles." Amy had heard Brother Swenson tell Pa when the Sews moved in that Mr. Sew was one, so likely it had to do with not going to meeting or building uneven fences or letting your beard go.

"What is a gentile?" asked Will, his voice way above a whisper now.

"Something going to hell!" yelled Phil Sevy. "Something going right down to hell, dammit!" A splatter of wet pits hit Will square in the face and he was instantly on his feet, red faced and funny looking because the knees of his overalls caked into bends even though he stretched on tip-toe. He did not wait for Amy to come up with another of her wonderful words that wasn't swearing.

"You-you muh-gar-ries you!" he screamed. "You mean old muh-gar-ries!"

Amy caught herself or she would have fallen right over at the sound of that word. She could not have heard what she thought she heard! Not said aloud, shouted even. And not from Will! Why, he was a child! She had been almost eight when she was told about McGary.

"They are muh-gar-ries, aren't they, Amy?"

But she had heard. There he went again.

"Shhh," she said. "Shhh!"

She could not think what to do and there was nobody to ask. Aunt Edna would probably scold Will good.

"Will Taylor," she said, "What do you

know? You tell me right now what you know."

"He's bad."

"You never saw him, I bet!"

"I didn't see him, but Ma said she'd tie knots in his beard and yank it out." Will leaned so close to Amy that his mouth made her ear wet. "You seen him?"

Amy stiffened and rubbed her ear. "Course I have, almost. And I bet Aunt Edna didn't say that, either." Amy had heard her own mother say she would like to put epsom salts in the marshal's mush, but somehow Aunt Edna's threat was better. Did she really want to hurt him? Was he wicked? Maybe he was a gentile like the Sews. She could see Aunt Edna stretching on her tip-toes, reaching but unable to reach the bigness with just the tip of its huge beard showing.

"Aunt Edna wouldn't say that so you could hear."

"She did, though. She did, honest, Amy," pleaded Will.

Amy still doubted it, but she was weary with envy and disappointment and her voice fell. "You're too little to talk about McGary, Will, let alone see him. Besides, if you saw him you

might have to lie, and you can't even lie yet." "Could you lie?"

Amy felt old and wise again as she watched Will's eyes grow big and his mouth slowly come open. "Sure I could. Most of the big kids can. But Abbie Smith can't, and she's ten. One day she almost told."

"What did she tell?"

"Where her pa was, of course. Anyway, she sure got it, too." Amy handed Will two small tin cups and wrapped the wooden dolls in her green scarf. She could suddenly think of nothing but Pa. He was somewhere for sure, somewhere high, and he missed her too probably. He-

"We shouldn't talk about it, Will," she said. "Come on, let's play Salt Lake City."

Will obeyed, as always, and with a few quick stamps of his bare feet the house was flattened. He ran to the creek with cups and then watched in awe as Amy molded mud into disks the exact size of the tin saucers. As always happened when Will was delighted with her, he giggled as he watched. She handed one saucer to Will and took the other between small hands red with dirt. 288

"We better play or it will be supper time and we'll have to go. You be the pa and I'll be the ma."

"Where's the other ma?" yelled Phil Sevy. "Mormons can't have just one ma!"

"This is only play, Phil Sevy, so you shut up!"

"You shut up," echoed Will bravely.

"Shhh, Will," said Amy. "Remember what I told you."

The magic of mud pies and the frown with which Will played the papa withdrew Amy completely from thoughts of McGary and the swearing Sews. She lifted her cup with her fingers instead of her whole hand and she talked fine. Soon she was in Salt Lake City and, in her finest cape and manners, chatting over store pastries.

The warning sound broke Amy's make believe into a million pieces. There was the sudden clap of rock against rock, of something hurling its way down the mountain. It was not a loud sound but it might as well have broken the earth right in two. Amy sat motionless, staring down the road past the trees and the silent shops and the empty porches and knowing there was nobody in the world except her and Will.

"Here comes McGary," yelled the Sevy boys as they leaped from their tree and sped laughing up the road. "Run, Mormons, run! Run from the black buggy, ya woman lovers! Run to Arizona !"

Amy did not move.

"They're just foolin', aren't they, Amy? Who is muh-gar-rie, huh?" whispered Will.

Amy tried bard to enjoy being eight and knowing. Her whole self burr to tell Will all about it. But of course she must not, and she must hide, and hide Will, too, and not tell. They ought to hide somewhere right now!

"He's coming, Will. He's coming around the east: bend right now." She thought about Pa and about Abbie Smith almost telling and she wished she was with her mother at the mill. But Mama would not be at the mill. By now she would be hid. If she had heard the boulder she

would be safe by now. If she heard the boulder

Suddenly Amy was on her feet and running. "Ma's at the mill! She's tending the mill and she won't hear," Amy shouted back. You better go somewhere so McGary won't ask you things?' Amy's bare feet sank in the soft earth along the ditchbank like wooden spoons in new butter and the tall grass sliced at her legs. The wooden plank slapped against her feet where she crossed Lund's dooryard and she stumbled over a hoe in the ploughed field where she had dropped potatoes that very morning. Without slowing, she ran the long trail up to the mill, the trail that no amount of walking could pack. Here and there rocks had been bared and rounded, but the earth had remained sand soft.

"MAW Amy screamed as she ran through the mill. "Ma? Her voice sounded hollow in the empty room. She found Lee Robertson out

back waiting for flour. "Where's Ma?"

"She's hid, thank God."

God! Of course! He could help! He had brought them Aunt Edna, and he had saved Pa's

life when he got poisoned with sheep dip. "Where did God hide her?"

But Lee didn't say. Instead he stiffened and looked past Amy. At the sound of a boot against the wood floor, she whirled, almost backing into the water wheel. The boot belonged to a body that filled the doorway. It was in Sunday clothes, nice ones, and behind it at the end of the path was a black-topped buggy. Across the road stood the Sevy boys, half smiling, pale.

"Where's the miller?" The marshal looked at Lee, then at Amy. She swallowed hard two times and tried to stand tall. She tried to see the knives and pistols big kids said were hidden in the beard that lay on McGary's black vest. But the beard was no bigger than Pa's and it was combed.

"You're a pretty little thing, aren't you."

Amy backed up another step. "

How old are you?" "

Pa's gone."

The big man squatted and smiled. His voice was gentle. His eyes, almost buried in bushes of eyebrow, were kind. "I just want to talk to him," he said.

"Pa isn't around," Amy said. Maybe she289wouldn't get to lie. Pa hadn't been home since the night Zephyr was born and the only [way] she had known he was home then was by going outside and peeking through a tear in the blind.

"Where is he?"

"Pa's been gone a long time. I don't know where."

"Who runs the mill?"

Amy hesitated. "Ma."

McGary's face brightened. "Well, I'd like to see your mother. Where is she?"

"I don't know."

The eyes turned. They looked slowly around the room and Amy wondered as McGary stood how Aunt Edna could even think of hurting anyone so big. He hurried through the mill, looking everywhere. Suddenly he seized a sack of grist and threw it against the wall. "Damn cohabs," he muttered. "Damn smart cohabs."

Amy moved behind Lee. Cohabs! A new word! A new word that might not be swearing!

"Your bird has flown," said Lee. Amy felt brave behind him, and she thought the way he said things exactly right.

McGary's face was dark and worried as he came toward Amy again. He squatted once more and looked into her eyes. "Are you sure you don't want to tell me where your folks are?"

Amy shook her head. "I don't know where." McGary stood up and looked across at Lee before hurrying out the door. "This is a hell of a mill to run without a miller, young man." He ran down the path.

Lee laughed as he took his full sack of flour from the mill. "You sure got spunk, Amy Taylor. Weren't you scared?"

Amy could not answer. She sat in the doorway and watched the buggy go. By the time it was out of her sight her insides ached and she noticed that her legs were shaking.

"Your ma's at the willows. She's safe enough," said Lee. "McGary won't likely be back today now he knows we've outsmarted him again."

Amy knew that Lee meant she might as well go home, and she started down the trail. Slivers from the mill floor stung as her feet spread the warm sand and she did not know why but her eyes suddenly stung too and made tears that tasted sandy and salty, and then she was running again, through her own mother's dooryard and garden spot, past the tithing house, along Swenson's fence and under it. Across the wide field lay a sea of green willows, taller than tamarisk and almost as thick where their clumps began. Long ago when Pa broke his leg she had gathered the long saplings and sat for hours watching him weave baskets. The firmest and greenest willows he kept out to slit and tap into whistles.

As Amy slid into them, the willows gave way, falling wide. Amy moved quickly, tearfully among the tiny clearings. In each, two or three women sat, their knees drawn up to make an arm rest or to make room for someone else. Mary Swenson was crying, her head back, eyes shut as if she were at prayers. One old woman stitched on patches. Aunt Edna was looking straight ahead as if she were thinking about her sweet peas. The black curls on her forehead were wet.

Amy stopped. There were so many women. But when she finally saw her mother seated alone among the thickest willows she ran and fell into her lap.

"Ma! Ma!" The tears were gone and Amy's heart leaped. "I saw him, and I almost lied, and he's got a combed-"

"Amy!" The single word and her mother's strong arms jerked Amy to her feet and then two coarse hands held her face tight between them. Strands of her mother's long hair, usually piled smooth and shiny, hung loose around the browned cheekbones that looked to Amy like fists.

"Amy Taylor, you ought to be whipped!" The hands were too tight against Amy's face. "How old are you, Amy?" The hands shook her and the eyes in which Amy had read so many nice things were different than she had ever

seen them. "Are you five years old?"

"I'm eight. Will's five."

"Then go right home, and don't ever, ever look for me again!" The hands turned her but held on. "What would we do if Pa had to go away and not come back? What if Aunt Edna and her children all went?" Then the hands290pushed.

Amy slipped from the willows. Will could not go away. Some of the children and mothers had disappeared, but Will would not. Pa might go to jail though if she did not remember she was eight. How would it be different for Pa to be away in jail instead of away hiding? Some way it would be different. As Amy slid slowly under the fence, she tightened her mouth in imitation of her mother. Her tears made pebbles in the dry earth and she tried to fit the mother who talked about Pa as if he were God inside the woman in the willows. She tried to remember her excitement and the new word, but her cheeks still burned and her head was fuzzy inside. When Pa got angry, he thumped her head with his big thumbnail. Ma did not get angry.

As Amy turned the corner of the tithing house, she heard a noise behind her and looking back saw her mother in the shadow of the building. "There's bread and milk in the cool-room, Amy. Maggie is at Aunt Edna's so you put the babies to bed."

It was black outside by the time Amy had set the milk and bread back in the coolroom and convinced Ben that Ma would be in bed with him when be woke up. She rocked Zephyr until she slept, then climbed into the corner bunk that hung suspended by big ropes laced through boles in the wall. She sank deep into the mattress to wait for Maggie. The moon stared through a knot hole just like the eye of a coyote, and she wished Maggie would hurry up.

Amy wasn't sure what woke her, whether it was the talking or the quickly moving feet or the light ridging the door, but her father's voice, low and flowing, became suddenly clear. She slid from the bunk, opened the kitchen door, and slipped inside. Aunt Edna was rushing brick and forth and so was Ma, like they did when they bottled or got ready for a picnic. The table was piled high with things Amy barely saw because there, sitting in front of the fireplace with his back to her, was Pa. She stared at the big bent shoulders, wanting to climb right over them into the lap. But her mother's voice came anxiously.

"Get into bed, Amy. Please."

Pa turned so fast that Amy fell against the door, startled. He smiled at her and before she could even smile back he reached out and picked her up. He drew her tight against the big buttons, the rough shirt, and held her. The chair began to tip back and forth, to the edge of a squeak but not full on it. Warm in the fire, unbearably happy, Amy did not say anything for a long time. Then she started wishing Will was there, too. It was wrong, him not knowing. Amy curled there, remembering Will and McGary. She could hardly stand it. She must not talk. She must act her age.

But the squirms could not be helped finally and she was sitting up, pushing herself loose and looking into Pa's face. His hair was not as black as it had been and the beard that had shamed all other beards in town when Pa babied it was too long. But the eyes were the same.

"You're every bit as big as McGary, I bet," Amy said.

"Bigger," said Pa. "With the Lord, I'm bigger." He spoke softly and squeezed her again and Amy laughed and was bubbly inside at the sound of Pa's voice.

"I saw McGary today," said Amy. "And I didn't tell him anything." She waited for Pa to reply but he just pulled her tight against him. "Will and me were at the orchard alone when the rock fell." Pa didn't seem to be listening. He lifted her high and carried her back toward her bunk. "McGary begged me to tell, Papa, but I remembered."

When Papa laid her down, she felt the big hands with their softening callouses slip back over her forehead to the tips of her braids. He kissed her cheek. She must not ask questions. She must not. But she touched his sleeve. "Will you be here when I wake up?"

"Not this time. I've got to play hide and seek with Brother McGary a little longer." Pa stood for a long time looking about him, then stepped over to Zephyr's crib and straightened the quilt.

"Go back to sleep, Amy." Pa shut the door behind him.

Amy lay for a long time hearing the voices291and trying to see Pa move through the light around the door. Why had Pa come and why didn't Aunt Edna and Mama act happier about it? If he was Brother McGary, was he good? How could that be? He had to be bad. But there were no knives and pistols in his beard. She was sure of that.

Daylight usually teased Amy awake, but morning was full on her face before she woke. She and Will might not have time for a single make believe before she had to drop potatoes! As she dressed she listened for Will outside. He would be calling her. Then suddenly there were footsteps moving along the porch. Good. Mama was home. As Amy pulled on her dress she could hardly wait to see Will's eyes grow big and his mouth flop open when she told him the new word that McGary had said. It didn't sound like swearing. Probably it wasn't.

She stepped out the door into the shade of the tamarisk at the foot of the rise separating Aunt Edna's house from her mother's. "Will!" She waited. When he didn't run out the door and toward her, she climbed on, calling again, much louder than she had intended. She stepped to the porch. "Will!" Aunt Edna would scold her for sure for being unladylike.

The door of the house was ajar. Amy stepped inside. The rooms were empty. Except for the wash bench and a table and the black stove, the house was bare. Even the corn husk beds were gone and the ladder to the garret where Will slept lay on the floor. Beside it, bundled around the dolls and dishes, was the green scarf. Amy's heart pounded. Will didn't know hardly anything! But he was gone and so was Aunt Edna and Emma and baby Seth. And, so was the oval mirror from Salt Lake City.

Amy wanted to run down the hill to Ma. She would know all about it. Mama!

But she must not ask. She thought about Pa's shirt that scratched and tickled her face She must help. She must lie and she mustn't ask Mama questions, no matter what. She must remember she was eight.

Picking up the scarf of toys, she walked out side and sat on the edge of the porch, pushing her toes into the dust the way Will did ant feeling as if she would burst with things about Pa and McGary and cohabs. Slowly and tenderly she undid the chain of knots Will had tied around their toys and laid the dolls and dishes in a neat row. She tried to make believe, but she kept hearing the Sevys laughing from the tree and she kept seeing Ma in the willows and feeling her strong hands. Damn Sevys. The words pushed to come out but could not. "I guess I won't play," she said aloud, as if she hoped the dolls and dishes would not care. "I don't have a pa anyhow." She looked up and then she saw the shadow. McGary was standing in the back doorway of her mother's house, his face dark and worried again. Then he saw Amy and the face was not as dark and the legs moved toward her. Your bird has flown, McGary. As he came rapidly up the rise, his enormous silver belt buckle gathered light. Amy stood. The marshal's beard was combed, but the marshal was a gentile. He had to be. She arched her back against the porch post and waited.

Douglas H. Thayer [^6] Under the Cottonwoods

Paul kept both sweaty hands on the steering wheel and breathed through his mouth. Her diaper dirty, Lisa lay just behind him in the back of the station wagon on the mattress. Valerie was asleep farther back and Richard lay over behind Beth. Richard had stopped crying for Lisa's bottle, but he still whimpered. They had just passed the Lehi turnoff, and from the elevation of the freeway Utah Lake glared to the west like a huge aluminum roof in the afternoon August sun. The air conditioning on the new Buick had gone out just after they left Reno, but now Beth was afraid that if theyrolled down the windows another hornet might get in and sting one of the children. He had had to stop and kill a hornet just before they came to Lehi, and since then the only circulation had been the air vents.

Paul glanced over at Beth. Five months pregnant, she sat sweaty and flushed, silent, one of her church books open on her lap. Counting miscarriages, it was her seventh pregnancy in the nine years they had been married. He had wanted to fly out from San Francisco and rent a car in Salt Lake City, but Beth said that they would need the new Buick for all of the running around the wedding would involve. His brother Mark, a year home from his mission, was getting married, and Beth's sister Stephanie was the maid of honor. If they had flown out he might have had an extra day on Strawberry Reservoir fishing. It would be nice to fish two days instead of just the usual one. As a boy he had always fished the lower Provo River, until the army engineers gutted it on flood control.

Even while he was in dental school and then later in his orthodontics residency, they had tried to get home on vacation each summer, but it wasn't always a rest. One year they stayed with his parents, the next with Beth's, and it seemed as if they had a family dinner or canyon picnic every evening, with both families invited, including his and Beth's married brothers and sisters and their children. One night his mother always had the neighbors and family friends over for a buffet on the back lawn, and the mothers. of the boys he had known told him about their sons, who were doctors, lawyers, professors, and engineers, told what positions they held in the Church, how many children they had, if they had bought new houses. But the mothers whose sons had not achieved were silent. told him what a fine example he was. One night three mothers told him that.

All his life he had been an example. At first he had to be an example for his younger brothers and sisters, then for the neighborhood boys, for his classmates. In the army he had to be the example of a Mormon for his whole company, never do or say anything that would discredit the Church. His example was supposed to help other servicemen to become interested in the Church, investigate it, join. And before they would do that they had to find that he was clean, wholesome, spiritual, happy, different than they were, had something they didn't have, which they would ask him about. On his mission he had to be an example for his junior companion, for the elders in his zone when he became a zone leader, and finally for all of the elders in the mission when he became assistant to the mission president. When he went to Washington to dental school, he had to be an example too, both he and Beth, for all the dental students and their wives. Now in the Palo Alto Ward he had to be an example for all of the Stanford students; he and Beth were what they wanted to become. It was as if being an example were more important than being a person.

He even felt guilty when he took a day of their vacation to go fishing, was away from the family when the vacation was so short. He liked Strawberry best in the late evening when most of the other fishermen had gone home, the boat motors silent, lights on in the fishing camps. Then he fly fished for the big rainbow trout, waded out in the dark cool water with his hip-boots, used a weighted bubble on his spinning outfit to cast his fly seventy or eighty feet out, trolled it back slowly, waited there in the darkness for a big fish to strike, watched the circles where they fed in the moonlight or jumped silver into the air. The Provo-River German browns were gold and the Strawberry rainbows rose-silver.

"Richard, be quiet. You're too big for Lisa's bottle."

"He'll be all right, dear," Beth said, "as soon as we get home. He's just tired."

From the freeway Paul watched the whole valley pass. New homes lined the edges of the Orem bench on the left, many of the orchards gone now where he picked fruit as a boy, and new homes lined the roads below the freeway. From Lehi on he had watched for a flock of pigeons but had seen only gulls flying toward the lake. Because the gulls had rescued Brigham Young and the pioneers from the crickets, they were the state bird, protected by state law. As a boy he rode his bike down the county roads293trying to spot flocks of pigeons by the flash of their wings in the sun when they wheeled. His flock had all been white. He had traded all over Provo for white pigeons because he liked to see them flying over the neighborhood against the blue sky. At night, his bedroom window open, he lay and listened to the pigeons cooing in their coop on the side of the garage.

But after he was thirteen or fourteen, he couldn't remember being a boy. He had graduated from Provo High School, filled a mission for the Church, been in the army, gotten married, graduated from B.Y.U. and then dental school, finished an orthodontics residency and been in practice one year. He would build a house, a clinic of his own, he and Beth would have three or four more children, and he would probably move up from second counselor to bishop in the Palo Alto Ward, be in the high council, maybe be stake president in ten years. He had done and would do all of those things he was expected to, but his whole life seemed so ordered, predetermined, rushed, tense. At times he felt like a robot, had little sense of controlling his own life, being individual.

He needed memories of his boyhood for balance now, a knowledge that at one time in his life he had been spontaneous, free, full of emotion without obligation, unaware of time, purely physical. But he didn't have that horde of memories he could bring out and look at. In his yearbooks he was a serious-looking, almost fierce boy in a tie and long-sleeved shirt who was a member of the chemistry and mathematics clubs and vice-president of his seminary class. Because he had an after-school job, he hadn't played any varsity sports of been in any school plays. He was never the most preferred boy, a student-body officer, or member of the junior-prom committee. He was the student with the third highest grade-point average to graduate his year. When he looked at the pictures of all the pretty girls who had been his classmates he couldn't remember kissing any of them. And among the pictures of the boys he found few that were the faces of friends.

"Paul, hadn't we better stop at the rest area and clean up a little before we get home?" Beth turned to look at him. "I need to change the baby, and I don't want your mother to see us looking like this."

"Okay." They always stopped to clean up before they drove into Provo.

They passed Geneva Steel Plant, two miles of railroad tracks, tanks, towers, smokestacks, blast furnaces, and metal buildings all shimmering in the heat and the thin grey smoke. His mother would come running out to take the children to bathe them and get them ready for supper and then to go to sleep in the clean fresh beds in Bob's room, his youngest brother who was on a mission in Brazil. Beth's parents would come over as soon as she called them. The house would be gleaming, everything scrubbed, polished and washed, the refrigerator and freezer full of food, and the lawns and yard like carpet. Every summer his mother spent two or three weeks preparing for their visit, and the order and cleanliness, he knew, were a physical expression of her love. He had spent his life trying to achieve the happiness and perfection his mother wanted for him, and now he was doing it for Beth, he felt.

Ahead on the left, running at right angles to the freeway, a line of cottonwood trees marked the Provo River, the biggest clump marking the spot where their swimming hole had been by the railroad bridges. The water had been fifteen feet deep off the big flat boulders they called the ledge. The cottonwoods were like a great green tent, the river making everything cool in spite of the hot Utah desert sun. And they swam, dived, swung out on their rope swing, had water fights, played tag, their brown naked wet bodies flashing in the sun like metal when they left the shade. Each group of boys had a favorite hole, the river a series of holes for six or seven miles from the mouth of the canyon to the lake. No one bothered them except the older boys, who, after they were finished in the fruit orchards, swam in the late afternoons. Tired, he liked to float, close his eyes against the sun, or to lie on the warm ledge and drop pellets of bread to the minnows, watch for trout. But when Provo grew after the War and people started building houses along the river, the army engineers walked their big Caterpillars down the riverbed to pile up rock flood-control294dikes, tear out all the holes, make a canal out of the river. That had ended the swimming and the fishing.

The "Rest Area Ahead" sign came up. Paul flipped on the blinker, lifted his foot off the gas and turned in, stopping in a patch of shade under three cottonwoods that the state road commission had managed to leave standing. The cement walk led to the fountain, three canopied green picnic tables and the squat new restrooms.

"Come on, miserable," he said, and reached back over the seat to pull Richard out by the arm, took one of the blankets and spread it in the shade. Valerie was still asleep by the back window. When he gave Richard Lisa's bottle he was quiet.

"Oh, honey," Beth said, "he's too old. You'll ruin his training." She knelt on the seat to reach in the back for the diaper bag.

"Anything to keep him quiet for five minutes." Two big Diesels pounded by trailing black exhaust. Across the freeway and along the river the big cottonwoods around the hole, some of them six or seven feet thick and eighty feet high, were still left. The hundred-yard-wide band of willows and trees along both sides of the river was gone except for the big trees. He had been back to stand there on the ledge, which still remained, and look at the channel lined with white glaring rocks. He had been alive there under the trees, full of a kind of freedom, sensation, and pure careless joy he had never known afterward, a sense of being.

He turned. "I'll be back in ten or fifteen minutes, Beth. I'm going to walk over to the river."

"Oh, Paul honey, we haven't got time now for you to go over to that swimming hole of yours. Your mother expects us for supper and we all have to bathe first."

They had stopped to call from Salt Lake City. He looked at his watch. It was four-thirty. "We've got time," and he was already walking. He would hurry. He had told Beth about the swimming hole, and last year driving in on the new freeway he slowed down to point out the trees. He talked about it to friends and even to patients. Paul slid down through the space between the bridge abutment and the chain-link fence and climbed down the high rock dike to where the hornets lit along the trickle of water in the bottom, the only water that came down the channel except during the spring runoff. When he got under the freeway bridges and up on the cut hay field, Beth honked at him. She stood pointing at her watch. He waved, walked across the field and into the trees, where it was cooler. He stopped to look up into the high limbs, breathe the cottonwood smell, then walked through the trees out onto the shaded ledge. With the water gone the real coolness was gone too, along with all the frogs, minnows and trout.

The hole had been about half the size of a tennis court, and smooth, just enough water flowing in and out to keep it fresh and cool. The first thing that he always did once he got his clothes pulled off was to run and dive as far out as he could off the ledge, cut down, down, down, into the cool clear water, then shoot up out of it again, the water giving him sensation all over. He ran and dived many times, then finally stayed under, glided smooth and clean, pushing with his arms, following minnows. When he swung out on the rope swing, the air cooled his wet naked body, and when he let go, dropped, the sensation went up through to his skull. Later, spread-eagled on the ledge with the other boys, he felt his body full of the sensation of heat.

He liked to fish alone. He pulled on his Levis, the copper rivets burning his skin, put on his gym shoes, took his pole and walked up through the trees. He waded in the river, rolled his worm through the shaded holes and pockets, caught chubs, suckers. Tap, tap, tap, the trout bit, then hooked, fought, went deep, made sudden rushes, the pole an extension of his arm, bringing the feeling into his body, connecting him and the trout. Tired, the trout rose out of the deep water, flashed gold, the rushes shorter, and he pulled it up onto the rocks, held it in both hands to smash its head, cleaned it, threw the entrails to the gulls. Fresh from the water the German browns were beautiful, gold with red, black, and orange dots like jewels, but the beauty faded. When he took fish home his295father told him about the big ones he had caught on the river as a boy.

Reaching down, Paul picked up one of the warm water-smooth rocks, held it for a moment, then lobbed it out into the channel. A gull flew past him low going upstream, turning its head from side to side looking for something to eat. He was eight when he first saw the gold monument to the gulls on Temple Square in Salt Lake City. In the Church, gulls were a sacred bird.

His father convinced his mother that it was safe for him to swim in the river, but before he could go he had to practice the piano and finish his work. He weeded, hoed, and irrigated the garden, mowed, trimmed, raked, and watered the lawn, weeded the front flower beds, washed the house windows on the outside, washed the car for Sunday. The checks on his mother's daily list showed that he had worked hard, been a good example for his younger brothers and sisters. And when he began to do jobs for his grandmother's friends, who paid him, his mother helped him keep an account of his money so that he could pay his tithing. Most of his money he saved for his mission and college, although he could spend some.

His mother said, "Everything you do is a reflection of yourself, Paul. People know you by what you do." He believed this, saw that it was true, and out of pride, love for his mother and father, he wanted to do everything right, fulfill their high opinion of him, reward their hard work and struggle, be an example. The polished windows, trimmed neat lawns, weedless garden became a mirror of himself, like his clothes, speech, and Sunday-school attendance, his Boy Scout badges. When he pulled weeds it was as if he pulled them out of his own flesh, and he was impatient for them to dry so that he could burn them. Work was moral. Thus he became fierce about right and wrong younger than most boys, sought the perfection he was taught was possible, believed he too would become a God.

Work took him away from the river the summer before the army engineers destroyed it. He didn't have time anymore for play, or if he did it was only in the evenings or when the Orem farmers didn't have cherries, apricots, peaches, pears, or apples to be picked, because at fourteen he was old enough to work in the orchards, fill the baskets with fruit. Sweaty, his mouth dry with dust from the trees, he broke off steins until the ends of his fingers became numb. He worked both hands at a time, kept a steady stream of fruit going into the canvas brig, felt the growing weight against his stomach and loins, tried to pick more than the other boys. In his mind he added up how much money he wits making at 5¢ a bushel, knew how much it wash possible to make in an hour. He stopped only to eat lunch or, standing on a high ladder, to watch the farmer's flock of pigeons wheeling over the orchard. When he quit work each afternoon, he looked down the row of trees to see the sixty or seventy baskets of peaches, pears, or apples he had picked. He didn't like the farmer to haul any of his baskets off before the end of the day. He was always anxious to get home to tell his mother how much he had picked.

"You'll make a fine dentist, son," she often said, encouraged him. She wanted him to have a better life than his father had working for the Union Pacific Railroad in the shops. All the mothers in the neighborhood were ambitious for their sons, talked of them going on to college, graduating, going to medical school, dental school, law school, graduate school, set them to work early to earn their way if their fathers couldn't afford the educations their mothers wanted for them. And in this way they were already in competition with each other at fourteen and fifteen, although they didn't know that then.

He became frantic about time. He had a calendar in his room, a clock, wore a watch, became aware of seconds, minutes, hours, days, weeks, months. The work had to be done well, but it had also to be accomplished in a given time. There was so much to do, so little time to do it in, practice the piano, go to school, work, study, be active in the Church. He had to be able to look back on a day and see what he had done with his twenty-four hours, how he had used them. Money earned and things accomplished, Boy Scout and priesthood awards and296badges won became a way of measuring time. And he had a time chart on his wall, put little checks in the squares, made a new chart each month, saved the old charts in a pile because they showed what he had done, were another way of measuring time. Two years on a mission, six months in the army, four years in college, four in dental school, two in his residency, one in practice-his life had become too much an exercise in the proper use of time.

Paul listened. Behind him a steady pattern of honking came through the trees from the freeway. It was Beth. He looked at his watch. He should go. Another gull flew up the channel. Gulls worked. They searched the lake shore and the river banks for dead fish, fed on insects in the freshly plowed ground, dropped onto the streets of Provo to pick up fallen ice cream cones, parts of sandwiches, fruit, patrolled Strawberry Reservoir to consume the red entrails of cleaned fish. Gulls were heavy slow birds, never seemed to be flying, but walking, not like his pigeons. Evenings he climbed up the telephone pole at the back of their yard so that he could watch his white pigeons flying over the houses and trees. When he fed them from his hand, they circled the backyard, fluttered down to him, their white wings flashing in the twilight.

Something else had happened to him here that summer he was fourteen which helped to stop his boyhood. He became aware of his body and through it his inner-self. His body had always been for sensing water, sun and air, and all of his responses were spontaneous, not observed. But lying on the ledge in the sun the days he wasn't picking fruit, he began to watch his body. He touched his arms, legs, chest, ran the flat of his hand over his new muscles, became aware finally that be was male. And at times his whole being seemed focused in his loins. Arms wrapped around his legs, he pulled tight, chin resting on his knees, watched the water, waited for a voice to explain to him the chemistry of his pounding blood.

The boy's folklore of sex didn't help him understand puberty because for him the body was sacred, an instrument for the purposes of God and not his own, to provide temples for the spirits waiting to come to earth to be reared in Mormon homes. He had to be clean, pure; sexual sin was next in evil to the shedding of innocent blood. Sex wasn't freedom, delight or interest, but already obligation, a topic he couldn't talk about with other boys because he had to be an example, be perfect. He turned inward on himself to watch his every emotion, which led him to discover hate, lust, vanity, jealousy and rage, that goodness was inside, not outside. He became preoccupied with his own guilt. The Sunday-School lessons, priesthood. lessons, Boy Scout oath and law, all the things his mother taught him, all the commandments that hung over him like a net, fell, and he grew silent, stabbed his sins alone.

"What's the matter, Paul," his father asked him one Sunday that summer after dinner, "something wrong?"

"Yes, don't you feel well, Paul?" his mother said and reached over to put her hand on his forehead.

His father took him swimming one evening after that. "I thought that we might go down to that swimming hole of yours, Paul. You've been working hard out in the peaches." His father's naked body was pale in the darkness, his stomach soft, his shoulders round and stooped. After his father was in the water, Paul took off his shorts and dove in from the ledge. "This is great, son. We should do it more often." His father laughed, shouted, splashed, got up on the ledge once to run and dive in, all the time telling him how much fun he had had on the river as a boy. Once in the darkness their bodies touched. "Sorry, son." But then under the cottonwoods in the dark water shaded from the moon his father became silent, the only sounds the crickets and frogs, the splash of a heavy fish in the next hole. His father was silent when they got out to dry themselves with towels. They stopped at Cook's Ice Cream for malts on the way home. "Well, son, would you like another one?"

"No thanks, Dad."

"You're welcome to it."

He shook his head. They sat silent in the booth for a moment, then his father paid and they left, and his father put his hand on his297shoulder as they walked to the car.

He wanted to talk to his father, ask him many questions, hear answers, but he couldn't. He couldn't admit to what he felt, to his emotions, drives, new appetites, thought that he might hurt his father's high opinion of him, sadden his father. He wanted to do and be all of those things his parents wanted of him, wanted the perfection, Godhood, his mother talked about, would sacrifice anything for her belief in that, even himself. So he couldn't talk to his father, use his father's understanding instead of his own. He couldn't let his father protect his boyhood for him, shield him for another three or four years, help him avoid the developing fierceness about his own life.

Reaching down, Paul picked up a dry branch, began to break off small pieces and flip them into the channel. He became lonely. It was easier not to have too many friends, easier to believe in his own perfection that way. He didn't really talk to his classmates, fellows in the army, missionary companions, let them be part of him, touch him. Even with Beth now, as much as he loved her, it was hard to talk, to tell her what was inside, what he really felt, and for the same reasons. He didn't want to hurt her or lessen her opinion of him, suggest that perhaps he had not been or was not all that she had thought, hoped, imagined. He tried very hard to be the kind of person she wanted him to be, or the kind he thought she wanted him to be. At times he had the feeling that he was an actor performing a role in a play.

After that one night his father never swam with him again, but he rode his bicycle down alone in the evenings that summer to fish. He fished in the darkness, had learned to fly fish, cast the big wet fly where the German brown trout came up in the shallows to feed on minnows. He bought a dip net so that he could hold the trout in the water, shine his flashlight down to see them gold and jeweled before he killed and cleaned them to take home. His mother wrapped them in wax paper and they faded white before she fried them. When he swam at night he swam quietly, head up, or floated, listened, watched the stars through the openings in the cottonwoods. He held onto the swing, the arches slowly growing shorter unti the swing stopped, his feet touching the water then let go, slipped down into the water, stayed under as long as he could. He didn't take a towel, stood to let the night breeze dry his body.

Out of his desire for purity, he became preoccupied with being physically clean. He showered twice a day, polished his shoes every time he left the house, combed his hair at every mirror and window, carried a toothbrush in his briefcase, changed his shirts twice a day, liked to wear fresh ironed shirts. So in this way he lost all delight in his body. He distrusted it, became uneasy because of what he now felt, and so after fourteen he had no memory of his body being wonderful. If he hadn't had to work after school, had time for football, basketball, wrestling, sensing his body hot, sweaty, breathless, knew that he was like other boys, it would have been better. He didn't follow professional or college sports now, but when he had a chance he went to the Palo Alto High School games and meets, tried to imagine himself passing, catching the ball, shooting baskets, running, swimming, see himself, live it all vicariously. He wanted to find his body, take back the responsibility for his own life so that he could begin to love out of himself.

Beth was honking again. Paul flipped the last piece of the branch into the channel, turned, and walked back through the trees and out into the sun, stopping in the hay stubble to pull the cheat grass from his socks. Beth sat in the Buick with the front doors open when he got back to the rest area. Lisa had her bottle, Richard played with a string of plastic blocks on the mattress, and Valerie lay on her stomach coloring. Beth put her book down, got out and walked to the fountain and dampened a clean diaper. "You look hot, darling," she said and handed it to him. He wiped off his sweaty face, neck and hands. Beth had emptied the litter bag, wiped the fingerprints off the inside of the windows, straightened up the back of the station wagon, put on new makeup and combed her hair. "Your shoes are dusty." He wiped them off and she took the diaper back. He put on the clean shirt she had gotten out for him,298tipping the sideview mirror back to comb his hair.

"Your mother will be wondering where we are. She will think that we had an accident."

"Yes, I guess she will. I'm sorry that I took so long, dear."

He tightened his seat belt, pulled out to the freeway, then nosed into the heavy late-afternoon traffic. They crossed the river, and the "Provo Next Exit" sign came up. Going up on the off ramp he saw the tops of trees and houses, felt the old surge of joy he always felt at coming home, remembered how he had felt when he returned from his mission and the army, how fiercely he loved home. They came off the loop and drove up Center Street past all of the new service stations built for the freeway traffic and then past Pioneer Park, stopping at the semaphore on Fifth West. Richard climbed over into the front seat. "Grandmaw," he said, "Grandmaw."

Paul turned right on Third West, then left on Second South. Except that the old Provo High School building had been torn down, the neighborhood hadn't changed; all of the new houses and construction were in the northeast part of town. The corner telephone pole had always been the goal for their games of grey wolf and kick the can. "There's Mark sitting on the porch with your mother and father. I wonder where Darlene is?"<_P> Beth started to wave.

"She's probably got plenty to do if they're getting married Wednesday, honey," he said.

His mother, father and Mark started down the steps waving as he turned into the driveway.

After the welcome was over and his mother and Beth had taken the children into the house to bathe them and get them ready for supper and bed, he, Mark, and his father unloaded the Buick. Later, standing on the front porch alone with Mark, he asked him if he wanted to go fishing up on Strawberry one evening before he got married. "Sure," Mark said, "I've been planning on it just like every summer and so has Dad."

"Good." He still had his old spinning outfit, although he had bought new hip-boots. In the darkness he would stand in the thigh-deep cool water, cast out into the lake, slowly troll the fly in, every second expecting a strike, see the beautiful silver rainbow trout leap shining in the moonlight. Mark and his father would kill the trout they caught, clean them, leave the entrails on the shore for the patrolling gulls the next morning. But he wouldn't. After he had fought a trout, felt the movement and pull, the heavy pulse coming up through the line and rod into his hand and arm, seen it in front of him in the water, he would free it. He would hold the rainbow in the net to see it shining rose-silver, pull the hook from the lip, then release it, see the trout hover then flash back into the deep water, vanish.

Donald R. Marshall [^7] The Week-end

When Thalia Beale's mother died, she knew that a change was in order. That is, Thalia knew. Of course her mother must have known too, for her last words, as she rolled her filmy eyes one final time in their yellow-gray cavities, were "You've been good, Thalia. Always stay-." Thalia was not quite sure what her mother had meant. There was little question about her remaining good. She scarcely had a desire to be otherwise. But "stay"? If her mother's last request had concerned her staying on in the little house in Ephraim, then here indeed was a problem of quite a different sort.

I guess it was a great loss for Thalia. Her father was killed when the scaffolding gave way back when they were first laying bricks for the299Whitney house. She wasn't more than a year and a half old then and the only brother she might have had in this world died of diphtheria before she was even born. For forty-three years Thalia and her mother (Elvina and Thalia we always called them) lived alone together. Before her mother took ill - but this, mind you, was a long time ago - they did things the two of them: they went visiting (not, of course, a great deal, but they did like to stop in on Sophora and Pauline and sometimes take a fruitcake or a pint of bulberry jelly down to Walter and his mother), they quilted together (usually over at Reva Willis's house because she had the frames), and they even took the train once to Boulder, Colorado, to attend the Hinckley reunion, only that was the summer that Homer and Ruth got word that Jeddie B. had been killed in Guam and the whole thing had to be called off. For a year or more they came to Relief Society meetings together, but Elvina got her feelings hurt again over the bazaar (some say both the loaves of bread she baked went for fifty cents a piece and nobody knows what all became of the four bottles of chili sauce and pickle relish) and told Nilene Bolander that that was the last they would ever see of her inside that chapel. Thalia came out to Sunday School fairly regularly before Elvina got so sick, but after that she stayed right at home with her most of the time. There was a time just before that when Thalia seemed to take quite an. interest in MIA for a while and was even asked to take a position -speech and drama director was what they wanted her for - but when Elvina got wind that Brother Bettenson had his eye on Thalia for that scoutmaster with five kids whose wife had up and left him, she put a fast stop to that. We didn't see much of Thalia at church at all after that. The visiting teachers, though, they continued to go there and, like as not, the home teachers as well, but Cora Stokes and Idonna both said that it was not likely that Thalia would even step foot in the chapel as long as Elvina was drawing breath.

But it was a great loss for Thalia. I suspect her mother was her whole life. Thalia did have her outside interests. You'd see her taking walks, long walks she'd take clear out to Haney's south pasture and way up to the other end of town past the cemetery and who knows where all. But I guess that's partly what kept her thin, those walks. And she would take a class or two up at the school. You'd see her bringing home a stack of books now and then from the library that she couldn't possibly have read in a year. And then, of course, she had her work. She did it all at home, typing and proofreading. With the college and all, I don't think she ever lacked for work. That and Elvina's relief check kept them going. Heaven knows Thalia must have always eaten like a bird and I doubt if either one of them ever gave two hoots for a new dress. The last time Elvina was out of the house she had on that same black crepe she must have got for Woodruff's funeral and I think she would just as leave have been buried in it. Thalia, she always seemed content in just that little gray sweater of hers and a plain wool skirt a darn sight longer than mine or yours or anybody else's. Most likely her life was always just as full as yours or mine, in its own way. I do know she saved her money and bought a TV set for the two of them. And I suspect that she was just as happy there caring for her mother as she would have been if things had been different for her somehow.

Things were different after her mother died. Thalia sensed this almost immediately The day after the company left she spent the morning at the cemetery, arranging and rearranging in the cold wind the few wilted flowers that had survived the chill March gusts, and pulling up a few dried weeds stranded among the dingy patches of crusted snow on the Beale plot. But this task occupied only a few minutes; most of the time she walked without plan or purpose between the rows of headstones, under the bare branches of the gray trees, over the frozen and sterile earth. When the gnawing in her empty stomach finally brought her to gather her coat about her and walk down the long road to the little frame house, she began to sense that nothing inside those quiet walls could ever be, had ever been, the substance needed to assuage her incessant hunger. One would have thought that the little house with its single straggling brown vine and the vacant spot where the300hollyhocks came and went each year would have seemed unbearably empty when she stepped inside, that the almost hollow stillness of its rooms might have made it seem suddenly almost uncomfortably and unnecessarily large. Yet Thalia was surprised how the house, bereft as it was of fully one half of the life that had wheezed and coughed within it, now seemed different to her for its very smallness and for the uncanny impression of maximum occupancy, not spaciousness, that pervaded the four rooms, pushing at the yellowing papered walls and crowding the dark corners filled with ceramic knickknacks and tinted photos in their dusty cardboard frames. Thalia sensed this difference as soon as she opened the front door and was met by the almost suffocating hot smell of gray days indoors accumulated upon gray days, days of boiled cabbage and camomile tea, of camphor, Vicks Vapo-Rub, and dark brown cough syrup. What should have been conspicuously missing from the house now suddenly seemed overwhelmingly present. Her hand fluttered at her collar. The stifling warmth from the oil hearer almost took her breath; the unending multi-colored circles of the braided rug beneath her caused her head to spin. She let herself sink down upon the brown davenport with its faded afghan and crocheted doilies, taking care, like a visitor, to sit only on the edge rather than giving herself to its sagging and lumpy softness. "I'm a stranger," she heard herself say quietly. The words, heard not without some odd sense of pleasure, even caused her body to tingle a little. "I don't belong here."

She had no business running off like that. If Elvina had lived you can bet she wouldn't have just up and run off one day without so much as a how-do-you-do. What got into her I guess we'll never know. But I suppose that when you get right down to it, it was the grief that drove her. She must have just grieved so after her mother died that she couldn't bear being in that empty house. It's hard on a person, after you've waited hand and foot on someone else, to find yourself alone in the world. Believe me, I know. Anyway, Thalia somehow got it in her head to run off to California. I don't think she told a soul. She must have just woke up one morning with the notion that she had to get away and marched right down and got her a ticket on the bus and away she went. I don't begrudge her a little trip. I suppose she felt she had it coming. But what beats me is what in the world she thought she'd find in California. Velta Lytle asked her if it was relatives or something she went to see but Thalia just told her no it was not. So there you are. Now Lige and Elouise go down there almost once a year but, good Lord, they've got more folks down there than they've got up here, with Carl and Melba down at Oceanside and Cleora and her family still in Anaheim. But Thalia, now, had no more business than the man in the moon to go scooting off where she didn't know a living soul. Why on earth she didn't go up to Tremonton with Myrtle Dawn and Nida for a week or two after the funeral -or let Nils and Leona take her back with them to Blanding- sure beats me. Idonna said that as far as she could tell Thalia just shut up the house one day without a thought as to who was going to feed that cat or water her plants and off she went. And I know for a fact that Elvina had a canary that she wouldn't have parted with for the world, and now who, I ask you, did Thalia think was going to feed that poor bird with the house locked up tighter than a drum and nobody the wiser? Of course the poor thing died. Cora Stokes told me that. And I don't know if Thalia just left the cat in there to die too or if she turned it out to fend for itself. But I suspect she didn't give it a thought one way or another. But then again, who are we to judge? Grief just turned her mind, I guess, and off she went.

Thalia's mind kept turning. "You've been good, Thalia. Always stay-." Stay? She looked around the dark little room until her eyes stopped at the Woolworth card table cramped in the corner, one wobbly leg threatening to collapse under the heavy looseleaf folder, the Smith-Corona in its worn case, the tottering tower of books stacked hastily against the wall the day before the funeral. The books would be due at the library March 23 and would have to be taken back. But there were no classes to hold her. For almost the first time in thirteen years, she had not enrolled in any courses at301Snow College. How lucky for her! She had deliberated - 'stewed around" her mother had said -going back into Theatre Arts. Oh, not seriously. She would never try out for any of the parts, never let them talk her into being in one of their productions. Just a class or two. And not for credit. She would have just paid her auditing fee again and sat in the back with her notebooks while Dr. Hall talked over the hissing radiator to his class about Marlowe or Chekhov or Ibsen. She had thought too about trying Art one more time but then she remembered the stack of pale watercolors. yellowing secretly under her cot - the still lifes With their lopsided vases and muddy onions cramped between anemic tomatoes, the landscapes with the light-green trees and stiff barns - and Mr. Swanstrom pleading, "Loosen up! Loosen up!" ("Why, I don't think the man's fit to be a painting teacher," her mother had said.) She had tried the course first from Mr. Weedly, then four years later from Mr. Folger who kept forgetting her name, then twice from Mr. Swanstrom, but she could hear them all, like a Greek chorus, chanting "Don't be afraid to put color in your brush! Let yourself go!" She had not wanted to go into English a third time. Not just yet. If Miss Hibbard taught Wuthering Heights again- or Jane Eyre or Tess of the D'Urburvilles - she would ask permission to audit and sit once more in the corner by the door, but she would not go back to creative writing. "Your work betrays a lack of experience, "Dr. Woolley had written on one of her little stories. She had hidden the penciled comment from Mother but her own sense of humiliation kept her from going back. She longed to write, to open a magazine one day and find her name, in type not too large and maybe not so dark, in some small corner of the page. It almost made her tremble. But not, she quickly reminded herself, until she had had her little adventure, her-again she trembled - "experience."

She moved around in the dim little room. There was nothing to hold her now. Beyond the doorway that led to the quiet kitchen with its sallow oilcloth and linoleum, she could see the bedroom door, slightly ajar, the room's bilious yellow-green hue, consequence of March's light wasting through the dull blinds, oozing infectiously into the remainder of the house. Nothing to hold her back. How fortunate that she had not tried to take a class, that she had contented herself with looking into whatever books had enticed her from their dusty shelves in the library. She looked back at the books on the card table. The Art of Writing Fiction, Fairy Mythology in Shakespeare, Arthurian Legends in Medieval Art, Art as Experience, Wildlife Along the Pacific Trail, Art and Artists in California. There was little doubt about where she would go if she indeed really dared to go. The beautiful words had called to her each time she saw them written, a far-away whisper of sea and cypress, luring her on; Carmel-by-the-Sea. To say them again to herself made her tremble. Could she really allow herself to go? The books would have to be taken back, she reminded herself. And the fern. Someone would have to water the fern. She could take it to Walter and Maude. Poor Maude would like something green. Her eyes surveyed each item cramped in the dim corners of the room. The cat was gone. No need to worry about Flossie, poor thing. Was it wrong not to have told her mother in those last days that Flossie too had been withering away - distemper Mr. Stubbs at the drug store had suggested - and was finally buried out back under the plum trees? And Dickie too, as if something contagious, unnoticed under the heavy medicinal smells, had spread through the whole house, poor Dickie too had begun to lose her feathers and stopped her quiet little song. There had still been some of the Hartz seeds in the glass feeder when she found the bird lying stiffly on its back. And Flossie couldn't be blamed - everyone marveled at how they got on together - unless something in Flossie's own illness had caused her to do something to Dickie that she had not known about. But that was not likely. Poor Flossie herself had been beneath the bare trees two days before Dickie was finally laid beside her. Thalia stared at the empty cage dimly lighted by the little window facing the street. Something fluttered briefly in her chest. There was nothing now to hold her.

But then I suppose there are worse things than letting a canary starve to death in its cage.302Lord knows, though, that Thalia was devoted to Elvina and attentive as could be. It makes you wonder sometimes how she could have suddenly been so selfish as to let those animals just wither away while she gallivanted off to some ritzy resort. Lord knows where she stayed or who she thought was going to pay for her whims. It's grief, that's all there is to it. It must have been grief, because it was just not like Thalia to go off and do a thing so completely uncalled for and unnatural.

Listen, do you want to know what she told Nell Lister? Not that Thalia was ever one to tell anyone anything, but Nell has a way of getting things out. Talk about your woman's intuition. Lord, you've never seen a person that's got the knack of reading between the lines Nell's got. Point her out a woman on the street with a suitcase in her hand and she'll tell you the whole story. Just like her Aunt Thule used to be. Thule even read tea leaves until she saw a house in flames in her cup one day and a week later her own son Ned set fire to the seminary building. Be that as it may, here's what Thalia told Nell: she went down there, she said, to have a little adventure for herself. Now your guess is as good as mine what she meant by that. But she told Nell that she had one weekend that she will never forget as long as she lives. Now I want you to keep in mind that Thalia Beale is almost as old as I am. In fact, she was in the same class as my younger sister Lila June, but Lila now was always a pretty little thing. Now what business Thalia thought she had to go down there around all those artists and poets-and hippies, too, mind you - sure beats me. I can tell you one thing: she never showed her face at church down there any more than here. LaRee Shurtz and her husband are there at Pacific Grove Ward and when Lena wrote and asked them if they ever saw Thalia, LaRee was surprised to even know that Thalia had been down there at all.

Well, anyway, she went down there to this Carmel place until she got good and tired and then she went over to Monterey and stayed there for a while. Monterey, you might recall, is down there where all those soldiers and sailors and I suppose marines and everything else have their bases. Reva's oldest boy Garn was there at the Naval Post Graduate School and I think Delma Lowder's got a boy at Fort Ord right now. Well, Thalia never let on but I've got a hunch there was some man involved. And Thalia Beale forty-three years old. Who knows what all went on. She said she bought her a book that told her a lot of things she'd always wanted to know and that she was really beginning to appreciate the wonders of Nature. Nature, my foot. When Nell asked Thalia how she found the people down there, Thalia just sort of hemmed and hawed and finally owned up that there was some man she met at the post office that was awfully good to her. Well, she says she had her one week-end, anyway, that she just did everything she had always dreamed about and some things, mind you, she'd never even thought of. I'd like to think she has come back to her senses now, but Nell thinks and Idonna will tell you the same thing-that Thalia has no regret for whatever she did.

Thalia did not regret that she had chosen Carmel-by-the-Sea. Them had been anxious moments when she wanted to ask the bits driver to help her make immediate connections back to Ephraim, Utah. And the absolute incredibility of arriving in Monterey in the almost ethereal nebulosity of an evening fog had made her heart pound in her throat and her skin suddenly feel feverish as she pressed her forehead against the cool dampness of the bits window. But the salty, fishy moistness of the air had at once terrified her and thrilled her as she stepped down into the alien white mist and felt her legs almost buckle when her swollen feet touched the asphalt of this new world. Someone had pointed out the direction in which the ocean - how long she had dreamed of witnessing its dynamic actuality! - might be found, but she had felt better sitting in the corner of the bus station writing a postcard to herself ( "I have sailed forbidden seas and landed on barbarous coasts," she wrote with her lavender Flair pen) until 8:35 when another short bus ride through black pines and smoky darkness brought her at last to the dim lights of Carmel's sequestered cottages and hilly lanes. And in her room for $14.00 (she had been too weary to303carry her suitcase and her typewriter to more than three motels), still fully dressed in the wrinkled grey tweed, she had fallen asleep on the chenille spread while figuring how long she might stretch the remaining $229.37.

She was afraid to leave the room until the marks, pinkly visible on the left side of her face until after ten-thirty the next morning, could no longer reveal the secret of her inexperience. Then she left her two pieces of baggage with the woman at the desk, bought an orange at a little market (how it thrilled her to see the fruits and vegetables tucked among the tidy miniature shops clustered along the street that led down to the ocean), and spent the day with a crumpled copy of the weekly Carmel Pine Cone looking for a little room to rent. The village, its twisted trees and creeping vines and tiny lavender-blue flowers almost hiding the quaint houses, left her breathless. The silver-haired men with soft silk ascots, the slender women in their strange boots and gaucho hats leading dogs on long leashes- these made something cry out within her. And once when a bearded gentleman was showing her through the sky-lighted studio wing of a half-timbered Tudor home for rent, she even stepped back in the cool green shade of the hallway to cry against her white knuckles and then ran down the road to the beach to sob alone in the wind.

By evening, after three people had suggested that she try looking for something more suitable to her needs and pocketbook in one of the surrounding communities, she reluctantly picked up her bags and boarded the bus for Monterey. The place she found it was "only temporary" she kept telling herself - was a narrow little sleeping room with an electric hot plate and some yellow plastic dishes. It was not in a neighborhood she would have chosen but it looked less grim by daylight and was only a five-block walk from the public library. It would be only $90 a month the old deaf woman downstairs told her, if she would be careful about the electricity and furnish her own sheets and towels. Thalia stayed the month. For the first week she looked elsewhere but some areas of the town frightened her while her own little place on Union Street gradually offered some of the comfort and security of things grown familiar.

Nevertheless, her heart, she had to own, was in Carmel She went there almost every day by bus, always walking down to watch the blue waves crashing on the sand and, further out, against the rocks. She walked quietly through the tiny galleries, listening inconspicuously to others as they, eulogized, in loud and confident voices, paintings she couldn't understand. One day, feeling bold, she even determined to try to merge with the audience at a piano recital she had seen advertised. but her watch must have been slow for when she walked up the long hill to the church the doors were already closed and she had to listen to the music from the steps at the side door. At intermission she thought of peeping in to see if there might be a seat near the back but when the people with their fur stoles and little name cards pinned to their knits and jerseys fliltered out on the patio to sip coffee from tiny cups, she pretended she had only been admiring the architecture in passing, and hurried, her chest and eyes burning, up the hill to where the 3:30 bus to Monterey was just driving away.

When it rained she spent her afternoons near the big stone fireplace in the library at Carmel, but when the sun was out she tried to devote as much time as possible to exploring the shady little streets without sidewalks, stopping to read the identifying labels -names like Sea Cradle, Journey's End, Harbor Lights - which the neat cottages, with their ornamental doors and oriental gardens, bore instead of numbers. One day after much deliberation, she bought a shiny-covered book- one of two extravagant purchases she permitted herself during that month - that identified for her the trees and plants of the region. Afterwards she took much care to check the colored illustrations against the variety of unique and lovely things she found in her tittle excursions; memorizing that the blue myrtle was really ceanothus thyrsiflorus, she liked to think, might help her to fed less a stranger to this enchanted region. Her other extravagance came when she let herself<_P> buy a pink-orange sweater. She had seen a similar one in the window of a they boutique in 304 Carmel- "Italian imports: original creations in melon and coral" the little card had read - at the same time she had noticed in a reflection of herself in the same window that her own gray cardigan would not survive many more washings. The colors of the sweater in the window both terrified and excited her, and it was only after a long internal debate that she allowed herself to search out something similar, it finally being her fortune to locate the one she bought- luckily marked down on a Discontinued Items Sale - in the Monterey Sprouse-Reitz. The first day she wore it to Carmel she felt everyone's eyes on her. It was ten days before she dared to take it from the drawer and try it again.

The month passed quickly. She had hoped that when April came she might write to someone and say, "Our spring here is lovely! There is so much to see and do!" but, even though it seemed quite true, she was unable to write it and was unable furthermore to even think of who she might write it to. Twice she had gone to the post office in Carmel and asked at the General Delivery counter if there was, by chance, anything for Thalia Beale. There never was - for who even knew where she had gone except Walter and Maude who only knew it was "somewhere out there in Californy "? - but the little man behind the counter had, on both occasions, looked at her sympathetically with his apologetic eyes and once even asked "Are you just here on a visit?" One Sunday morning, having missed the bus to Carmel, she had walked down Monterey's deserted main street and experienced a sudden longing for the familiar streets and faces of Ephraim. At first she had refused to recognize it, but as it grew stronger she even went to a telephone directory to try to locate the church: she would know no one, she had reasoned, yet perhaps she might feel some sense of belonging. But the nearest church listed had been Pacific Grove; fearing to venture by bus to an area even less familiar to her, she had settled for going back to her room and writing three little poems all of which she tore up in tears before she fell asleep on her bed at five o 'clock.

The idea for the week-end had been growing since the day she discovered that her adventure in Carmel-by-the-Sea would have to be primarily the adventure of a daily visitor, of an onlooker, an outsider. It had started that first evening as she waited disappointedly by the road for the bus to take her back to Monterey to look for a place to stay. And each day thereafter as she rode the bus back down the highway through the pines, she had added mental notes to the original plan. Finally, in mid-April, she sat in her narrow room and carefully counted the rewards of her frugality: besides the money required for her return ticket, $53.15 remained. This time, as she took her bags and made the twenty-minute trip to Carmel, it seemed as though tiny wings were flapping wildly inside her breast. Her own boldness made her tremble. Her little adventure was one that she wanted no one, and yet, strangely, everyone, to know.

The week-end was going to be beautiful. Yet when she arrived at the house she had chosen after days of meticulously studying the Want Ads at the library, the experience was not without a tinge of disappointment. Its hacienda-appearance seemed somehow less exotic and more stark than it had that late sunny afternoon when she had followed trembingly behind the boisterous realtor through the tangled garden and throughout its bone-white rooms with their mock-Florentine tapestries and Moroccan cushions. Yet she was so fortunate to have it at all, she tom herself; it would have been impossible to rent such a place for three mere days, she had been informed, were it not that a couple from Honduras had just vacated it and the new tenants were not due from Connecticut until Monday. It would be $45 for the three days half of what she had paid for a month in Monterey, she worried-yet it was precisely, or at least almost precisely, what she had come for. And she must have it. She must not wince, must not falter.

Two things bothered her, however. The street appeared as quaint as any other, but why, oh why, she asked herself, could it not have borne a name like the ones running below it Monte Verde, Camino Real, Casanova - or even Dolores, the one above it? Why must it have been called simply Lincoln ? And there was305something else, but this she had resolved to do something about. The house- once she even tremblingly dared to call it "my hacienda" to herself - had somehow escaped the wonderful little epithets she had seen tacked on rustic gates and ornate lamp posts elsewhere in the village. Not La Casablanca, not even Wee Hide-away, the house was simply identified, evidently because of its original owner, by a little wooden placard that read Vosbrink. But she had planned ahead here: having found on one of her excursions a piece of driftwood large enough to cover the weathered placard, she had carefully lettered upon it with her watercolors the name product of much deliberation and many nervous headaches - which she had chosen. For several days she had invented new names, trying them out quietly to herself-Thrushmore, Sea Room, Set Adrift, Linnet's Landing - but she finally settled on something foreign that she had seen on a magazine at the library: BEAUMONDE.

For the three glorious days Thalia's heart ached with inexpressible passion -joy or sadness, she could not be entirely sure which. She wore her new sweater every day and whenever she left the house she carried with her the looseleaf in which she had jotted down her impressions, the beginnings of poems, even the idea for- the thought made her tremble- a novel, which she had reluctantly promised herself to identify, had anyone ever asked, as her "work in progress. "Much of her time she spent walking through the rooms of her house, remarking confidently, if quietly, to the white walls. "This room is especially nice during our rainy season. And here, on the patio, is where I usually spend my afternoons." Twice, indeed, she took a little snack of V-8 juice and Ritz Crackers and went out to sit on the little bench under the gnarled cypress. Although she had jotted down lists of things to do during her little week-end, she found it difficult deciding how to do them. Friday after she had put things into a drawer and hung up her wool suit in one of the spacious closets, she had gone leisurely about her schedule, even determining that night to sleep as late as she wanted in the big Spanish bed, but when she had opened her eyes at 8:30 on Saturday, she was cross with herself for wasting such valuable time and made certain that every precious moment counted for the two remaining days. She delighted in being just a five-minute walk away from the shops and galleries on Ocean Avenue and, each day. on one of her little pilgrimages, she treated herself to something special. This was not counting the three scented candles and the jasmine incense she had bravely bought to burn in her hacienda while she read her new flower book and worked on her poems; these were little surprises that came from the shops she had previously not allowed herself to enter. There was no limit to what she might have, she promised herself, no limit except the diminishing budget she had set aside for these last three beautiful days. One day she chose a Danish pastry at a tiny bakery where the pink-cheeked lady spoke with an accent; on another she had a hot-fudge sundae in the red-and-white-striped candy parlor she had passed so many times; and on the third day, after much vacillation, she went into the Mediterranean Market and emerged with a bottle of marinated artichokes. She was disappointed that she did not particularly like them, but contented herself with the knowledge that there were people back in Ephraim who did not even know whether they liked them or not. The thoughts of Ephraim caused her to become suddenly and unexpectedly excited. She wondered if anyone had died, if anyone would looked changed, if the hollyhocks could possibly be starting to bloom.

Like I say, you'll see her puttering around out there by her hollyhocks or she'll be passing by here in that little gray sweater of hers on her way out to the edge of town or Lord knows where. With Elvina gone she doesn't like to stay there in the house too much, I suspect. But I guess she's got plenty to do. Lloyd Tenney over at the school is working on his master's (he and Rayona Riggs's boy have both gone up to Utah State almost every summer) and Frieda says that Thalia's typing his thesis for him. It's on breeding sheep and the various diseases they get and I don't know what all. She normally gets twenty-five cents a page but Frieda says she306asked her to do it for twenty. I don't know how many she can do an hour, but then, when it gets right down to it, with Elvina gone, what else has she got to do?

I suspect she's glad to be back home here. People are different down there. Nell asked her if she thought she'd ever want to sell the house (Dewey's boy has been looking for a little place just about that size) and go down there to liveand Thalia said no, she didn't hardly think she would. She said she didn't really think she would fit in. And, of course, you know as well as I do that it's best if she stays here. Elvina would have wanted that. And too, if like she says she had her a week-end she'll never forget, well, I guess she'll always have that to remember. Lord forgive her. 307

This dialogue was published in the New York Herald on January 1, 1844. Parley P. Pratt wrote: "Visiting North Bridge, a short distance from Boston, and baring a day's leisure, I wrote a dialogue entitled 'Joe Smith and the Devil,' which was afterwards published in the New York Herald. and in various papers in America and Europe. It was finally published and republished in pamphlet form, and had a wide circulation; few persons knowing or mistrusting who was the author."

Josephine Spencer's biographical data is found with her poem, "The Long Steel Road," presented earlier in this book. This story was published in the Contributor, 15 (1893-94).

Nephi Anderson (1865-1923), author, editor and youth leader, achieved renown in Mormon circles for his many manuals and outlines, articles, essays, stories, and novels, all of which taught, clearly and pleasantly, the doctrines of the Church. Best known among his novels are Added Upon (1896), Marcus King, Mormon (1897), The Castle Builder (1902), and John St. John (1917). Born in Christiania, Norway, Anderson and his parents emigrated to Utah in 1871. Anderson later returned to his native land as a missionary, was a teacher and Superintendent of schools in Brigham City, Utah, and filled a second mission to Great Britain. After several editorships with Church journals, he was called to edit the Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine and to guide the Genealogical Society of Utah. He continued to write stories such as this throughout his life. "Lester Amsden's Love" was published in the Contributor.

Virginia Sorensen (1912- ) spent her childhood in Springville, Utah. After graduating from Brigham Young University, Mrs. Sorensen published her first novel, about the Nauvoo period, A Little Lower Than the Angels (1942), followed by On This Star, The Evening and the Morning-both set in Manti, Utah-and two other Mormon novels, Many Heavens, and Kingdom Come; one of her hooks for young people, Miracles on Maple Hill, received the Newberry Medal in 1957. Her collection of Mormon-centered short stories, Where Nothing Is Long Ago, Memories of a Mormon Childhood, from which this story is taken, was published in 1963.

Eileen G. Kump ( 1927- ), who lives in Smithfield, Utah, is a housewife-writer who formerly taught English and creative writing at Brigham Young University and Utah State University. She has published several stories in BYU Studies, Out of the Best Books, Western Humanities Review, and Dialogue, and has a volume of short stories in preparation. Mrs. Kump has studied writing in the Stanford Writer's Workshop. This story, "The Willows," appears in Dialogue.

Douglas H. Thayer (1929. ) is best known for his carefully crafted short stories. A prize-winning author, Thayer has published in LDS Church magazines, BYU Studies, Colorado Quarterly, Dialogue, and Prairie Schooner. He is a native of Provo, Utah, where he now lives and teaches creative writing at Brigham Young University. This story was published in Dialogue: Vol. 7, No. 3, Autumn 1972.

Donald R. Marshall (1934- ) was reared in Panguitch, Utah, but presently resides in Provo, Utah, where he is an assistant professor in humanities and comparative literature at Brigham Young University and a freelance photographer and writer. Marshall began his writing career early, winning, at fifteen, a silver medal in The Deseret News for "excellence in writing and art." A world traveler, Marshall has published a well-received book of Mormon-oriented short stories, The Rummage Sale (1972), from which this story has been taken.

---
Notas:
[^1] An irreverent, but it seems to me. downright honest critic of Christianity argues in effect. "If a child is born to me healthy and bright-eyed, you tell me, God loves you. If a child is born without a spine, or hopelessly paralyzed. you tell me, God still loves you. Frankly, that kind of love I can do without. If God causes or permits events that my worst mortal enemy would not permit, then both the idea of 'God' and 'love' are absurd." That these persons were trying to torture you, perhaps take your life.
[^2] One day my family sat watching the big screen production of the "Greatest Story Ever Told." You see a sinister Herod send his soldiers to Bethelehem. Then come the screams of mothers, glimpses of blood-smirched swords pulled from children's bodies. Then you see Mary and Joseph who have received divine warning, walking peacefully with their Babe toward the safety of Egypt. As this scene closed, the hand of my little girl came into mine and she whispered, confused and frightened, "Daddy, didn't Heavenly Father care about those other children?" That all this was against your will.
[^3] Third is the universal outcry of our own souls in tribulation. "Why?" and "Why me?" We speak much of worthiness and blessedness and of keeping the laws that result in both. But there is, in this cry, the sense of what some call "frustrated entitlement." We have, in measure (not perfectly but close enough) kept the law; and we aspire through dark and dawn to do better. We feel a certain inner worthiness, a sense of "deserving better." But no better comes. Only worse. And still worse. Others we think of as less worthy seem to prosper. We do not demand ease. But we sense injustice and we crave, alas, a little mercy. And how long can we hold on to this slipping rope, and pray in faith? Let alone in love? That the highest service he would render you would be to pull them off.
