Neal A. Lambert, Richard E. Cracroft, Believing People: Literature of the Latter-day Saints ( 1979)

7 THE NOVEL

God, the best storyteller, has made a better story out of Joseph and the Mormon wandering than fiction will ever equal,

Bernard DeVoto308309

INTRODUCTION

More discursive in form and much broader in format, the novel offers remarkable possibilities for expressing and exploring the religious experience of the individual and the historical experience of a people. And when the history is striking and the religious experience itself so remarkable, it is not surprising that Mormons and Mormonism have been the subjects for literally hundreds of novels. While the Great Mormon Novel is still waiting for the Great Mormon novelist to come along, other pieces of varying attitudes toward Mormonism and varying levels of accomplishment have poured from the press. By and large, Mormons and Mormonism, until 1939, fared badly in the hands of both Gentile and Saint. Susa Young Gates, in 1909, published John Stevens' Courtship, a romance of the "Echo Canyon War," another of the faith-promoting stories so popular among the Mormons. Nephi Anderson achieved the same kind of fiction with his continuingly Popular (among Mormons at least) Added Upon, its settings including pre-earth life, earth life, and postmortal existence; to this work he added Marcus King, Mormon (1909), and John St. John (1917), as well as several similar moralistic but artistically unpromising novels.

As with Anderson's other novels and stories, Marcus King, Mormon is didactic, written to demonstrate to Latter-day Saints how the Lord will prosper those who "cleave unto the truth." King, an eastern sectarian minister of one year's experience, concludes through his studies that "much of the theology he had learned at college and that which he was supposed to teach, was dim and of doubtful meaning .... He had been asking for light, and God had sent it to him" in the person of Elder James, who preached Mormonism to King. In the following excerpt, taken from the novel's beginning, we follow King in his decision to embrace Mormonism, despite the heartbreak caused by the rejection of his fiancee, Alice Merton:310311

Nephi Anderson [^1] From Marcus King, Mormon

Chapter 2

The Mormon missionary, Elder James, continued to be a frequent visitor at the home of the Reverend Marcus King. An intimate friendship had grown up between them, and they already treated each other as brothers. Elder James was a plain, simple man, a little older than Marcus, not learned in the schools, but thoroughly conversant with the scriptures. His language was often faulty when measured by the rules of grammar. His coat was not strictly of the ministerial cut; and altogether his manner was awkward and smattered considerably of the backwoods.

One evening during the week following the Sunday last mentioned, Elder James was at the clergyman's residence. They had been considering some gospel subjects, and the missionary had been relating some of his experiences on the wild plains of the West.

"Mr. King," said the Elder, "you may wonder why such an uneducated, unpolished man as I should be sent out to preach the gospel; but the truth is that we all go as the call finds us, both the learned and the unlearned-I mean in regard to worldly wisdom. As for me, I have had very little chance for schooling. You know some of our history in Ohio, Missouri, and Illinois. I, with my parents, have been through it all, and you can understand what chances I could have amid continuous mobbings and drivings and confusion; and then, the last few years have been spent in the heart of the great American desert, trying to force bread from a barren waste. My face is yet tanned from exposure, and my hands have not yet lost their callousness. But for all that, my friend, we have the pure gospel of Jesus Christ, and what is more, divine authority to teach it."

"I say amen to that," replied Marcus. He went to the table, and picking up a small volume, opened it and said: "Would you like to know what I had to do to become a minister? what all who preach in our church must do, before they can become ministers? Well, here it is, stated plainly in our rules of discipline. First, we must be graduates of some college; second, take a two years' course in divinity; then pass a critical examination; and at last be taken for a time on trial; and all this, because as it here reads, 'It is highly reproachful to religion, and dangerous to the church to entrust the ministry to weak and ignorant man.' What do you think of that?"

"I think that 'God hath chosen the foolish things of the earth to confound the wise,' even as he did in days of old when he called simple fishermen directly from their nets to be ministers of the gospel. Mind you, I do not depreciate an education. A scholarly man, if he would let God use him, would certainly be a shining shaft in God's hand; but it has been the experience of all time that the Almighty has worked with the weak things of the world. They are more pliable in his hand. Not that the servants of the Lord will always remain weak, though they must remain humble."

"To change the subject," said Marcus, "how would you like to preach in the church next Sunday?"

"I would like nothing better, providing it is with everybody's consent."

"Well, I don't know about that. I would have to take the responsibility. I am going to resign. I can't stand this double dealing any longer; but I would like to hear you explain your principles in your simple way to my congregation, preach a sermon like the one you gave at the schoolhouse in Willow the other evening. How would it do, if, after I make my explanations and reasons for my action, I call upon you to explain the first principles?"

"No; it would be taking undue advantage of the people. We have had meetings here in your town; we have distributed tracts to every house that would receive one. We have given them every opportunity. Your plan would only bring on opposition."

"Yes; I can see it. I had, friend James, made312up my mind to preach no more, but I must give my reasons for resigning, and I'm going to do it next Sunday."

"You have considered well the step you are taking? You know the consequences?"

"Yes, to both your questions. I have been three months now thinking about it. I am going to test your promise. 'For what shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?' As for the consequence, I know my act will make a sensation, but l cannot help that. I must follow the light as God reveals it to me. God must help me in the result. Brother, pray for me that I may have strength to go through the ordeal."

Could Marcus King have taken two others with him, he would cheerfully have faced the world. One of these was his mother and the other was Alice Merton. He had carefully introduced the new doctrines to them both, placing tracts and books in their hands to read; but usually they had treated them as trifling things not to be taken seriously. His mother had received the Mormon elder kindly at first, but when his visits continued and Marcus had him to dinner nearly every day, she had objected.

"I don't want him here," she had said with some warmth. "It is the talk of the town already, that you, Marcus, who should be a defender of the people against impostors and wicked men, take into your very home a member of the vile Mormon sect. What is it coming to? Are we to be disgraced? Has he won you over to his pernicious faith?"

Marcus had tried to explain matters, but when she found that he was actually in sympathy with the Mormon, and that he defended him, she had been overcome with emotion. The same scene had been repeated again and again until Marcus plainly saw that further reasonings would be useless.

As for Alice Merton, Marcus loved her as he had loved no other woman, but he had decided what to choose between love and duty. "Seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you," was a promise which he meant to prove. He had not talked much with her on his changed views; and she, seemingly, did not get any meaning from the little figures of speech which he had used. She had partly assented to some of the views expressed in the pamphlets he had given her, but the fact that they had come from a source so "foul as Mormonism" was enough to make them of no consequence.

One day when they had been out sailing on the river, he had asked her if she would have loved him just the same had he not been a preacher, but just a common laborer, say, for example, a mason or a farmer. She had laughed heartily at the question, and had taken her sailor hat and had fanned his red face. He had pressed her for an answer, and she had said, how could she know. Then, doubtless, they never would have met.

"But suppose I should now resign my pastorate and turn farmer, a real farmer I mean, to wear overalls and work in the fields, would you marry me next month as you have promised?" He had not smiled, but seemed to mean what he said, and the tears had come into the blue eyes of Alice.

"You are cruel," she had said.

"Forgive me if you think so, Mice; but I ask you the question in all earnestness. It may come to that yet. We know not what life has before us. My Alice loves me and will be mine, whatever befalls, will she not?" And she had yielded her head into his arm, and had whispered "Yes."

On Friday afternoon Marcus had finished the outlines of what he should say the next Sabbath. He could not bring himself to write it out in full. He had thought to speak to various leading members of his congregation about the step he was to take so that it would not be such a surprise; but that might bring on an opposition that would prevent him from saying anything, and he wanted to make the explanation to the whole congregation. So he said not a word, not even to his brethren in the church.

That Friday evening he called on Alice. The time was opportune. Mr. Merton was away on business, and Mrs. Merton had retired with a headache. They would be alone, and Marcus could speak the plain truth undisturbed. Mice looked her best. The dress of soft white, the roses in her bosom and hair, the quiet, saddened313smile on the fair face-all this beauty went to Marcus with a force that made his heart throb with pain.

Marcus could not hide his emotion, try as he would.

"What is the matter?" she asked, as he took her hands. They sat on the sofa, and he looked into her face for a long time. Then he said:

"Alice, I am going to resign my pastorate next Sunday."

She said nothing, but her hands trembled.

"I am going to be plain Mr. King. Will that make any difference in your love'?"

"No; if that is all. I will love Farmer Marcus King the same as the Reverend Marcus King. My word and promise is the same."

"But, darling, you suspect more than that. You can guess by this time why I am compelled to resign."

"What should I know? You have never told me."

"I have found that my position is a false one. My authority as a servant of God is an assumed one; the doctrines I have been teaching, that is some of them, are not true. God has opened my eyes to a greater light, and Alice, my darling, I am compelled to accept that."

"And that light is Mormonism?" said Alice, whose face was ashen gray.

"Yes; it is known by that name, but in truth, it is the pure gospel of Jesus Christ. Listen, Alice, oh, listen to me,"-she had turned away her head-"do not condemn me; do not reject the light. We will pray God together. He will open your eyes as he has mine. We will begin our new life together, stand by each other through the trials that will come. O, Alice, you cannot conceive of the beauty and the grandeur this new light has opened up to me, will open up to you, my darling. You may not fully understand it now, but you will-Alice, I cannot go out in the cold world without you."

She did not cry out, she did not weep; her love had changed to fierce resentfulness; her tears had turned to ice.

"Ah, yes: I see it all now; you are going to join the Mormons."

'I know that is a harsh and evil-sounding word, but if you could only understand the truth, Alice, it would lose that aspect."

"I hate the word, Marcus. The brand of the devil clings to it. I shrink from it as I do from perdition. Do not name it again!"

"Then is it all over between us. Alice? you love me no longer? You will not be my wife?"

"Marcus King, a Mormon, I cannot, will not marry. Be any other honest thing on earth and I will hold good my promise. Descend to the lowest depth of the commoner, be a farmer, a hod carrier, and I will be true to you, but- but that other -never Marcus, never!"

He saw that it was useless. His hope was gone; and yet Ire loved her, loved her more than ever. They had both arisen, trod now they stood facing each other.

Then a power seethed to come to him. a power not of human origin. He took her hands again, and sire made no resistance. He looked steadily into her eyes, and as he gazed they softened. Tears slowly filled them, and the whole marble form relaxed. He clasped her in his arms, and he was hardly conscious of what he said:

"Darling, darling, you are mine, my very own, for time and eternity. None but I can own you, Remember that, Alice, remember it. You are mine!"

He kissed her again and again, then gently laying her on the sofa, he passed from the room.

Following this dramatic scene, Marcus King confronts his congregation and attempts to preach Mormonism to them. Rejected, he resigns and goes West, without Alice. En route to the mountains he becomes a friend to Janet Harmon and her mother, refined and educated converts to Mormonism who have come from a town near Marcus's home. Janet's story is parallel to that of Marcus. She, too, had been rejected by her fiance when he learned of her new Church affiliation.

On reaching the mountains, King falls seriously ill and is nursed to health by Janet, who has fallen in love with him. Unable to forget his vow to Alice Merton, Marcus cannot allow himself to314reciprocate Janet's love and loses himself in the building of a new community. He soon becomes a bishop. Counseled to marry, and persuaded by a genuine affection for Janet, he asks for her hand. She accepts, stipulating that he travel back East to test his feelings for Alice Merton.

King goes, arriving in Hungerton just as Alice is being married. King interrupts the ceremony with a dramatic, "I am Marcus King. Alice, do not marry that man. You are mine, mine, Alice, by the eternal laws of God." Alice, who is seriously ill, faints, and her father gladly cancels the wedding to a man whom he considered an adventurer (a man who turns out to be the former fiancé of Janet Harmon). Alice, however, is dying. Marcus remains by her bedside for several months, teaching her the gospel, which she accepts, thrilled by prospects of eternal life and eternal marriage to Marcus King. On her death, King returns to Utah and his lovely Janet. Here is an excerpt from the concluding chapter of the novel:

Chapter 16

It was one of those sublime winter evenings only seen in the clear atmosphere of the high western regions. The whole earth was white below, and the sky above was deep blue, set with innumerable twinkling diamond points. To the west the plain stretched like a vast sheet of purest white. To the east the mountains arose, buried under their ermine covering. Every rocky crag, each deep hollow, was decked and filled with snow until the otherwise rough surface was shining smooth.

The well-trodden snow creaked under their feet as Marcus and Janet walked arm in arm down the principal street of Hemla.

"What is this business of so much importance?" asked he.

"Well, they didn't tell me, of course," she answered. "All I was to do was to bring you there and ask no questions."

"Strange, they couldn't manage for another day without getting after a fellow the day he gets home-I wanted to spend the evening with you, Janet."

"Well," she laughed, as she clung the closer to his arm, "am I not with you?"

"Yes, but-halloa, what's this? Who's living in my house?"

"Let's go in and see."

They paused in front of the house Marcus had left unfinished. He saw that it was now completed. A bright light gleamed from the windows, and the smoke curled from the chimney. Janet led down the path and knocked on the door. When it was opened, there was a room full of people.

"Brothers and sisters," said Janet, "let me introduce you to the bishop of Hemla."

Then what a scene there was! The crowd filled two large rooms, and around he must go and shake every one by the hand. Then there were welcomes and questions and words of jolly banter, until Marcus was fairly carried away by it all. When he had made the rounds, Janet was again at his side. The older members of the company each took a candle and marched two by two into the third room. In the center was a long table spread with food. As they filed in and seated themselves on the benches on each side, the candles were placed in wooden blocks with holes in. Marcus and Janet sat at the head of the table. A blessing was asked, and then one of Marcus's counselors made a speech of welcome, to which Marcus replied in a few words.

Then the eating began, and right merrily it went on for a time. Suddenly, in the midst of the confusion, somebody pounded on the table for order, and Brother Wood arose.

"I want to speak in this meetin'," he began, '"cause Brother Johnson didn't tell it all. I reckon Brother King ought'er know why we have took such liberties with his house, an' I want ter tell him." ["That's right. Go ahead".]

"Well, yer see, when a man's on a mission his affairs at home kinder stop, an' when he gits back, he has to begin all over again. I've seen it lots o' times." ["Hear, hear! So have I. "]

"So, thinks I, Brother King'll need a house when he comes home to put his wife in, 'cause then o' course he'll take fur good Brother Brigham's advice. [Loud applause.] Well, an' right now I must make a confession. All you315folks thought I had orders from Brother King to go ahead with the house, but I didn't; I done it on my own hook. ["Oh, oh. "] Yes, I could see that the Bishop didn't know nothin' about buildin' log houses, an' that the way he was doin' it would spile a lot o' good logs, so while all his beautiful plans and drawin's on paper was locked up in his box, I went to work an' finished this house 'cording to my notion." [Tremendous applause and laughter. ]

"An' folks," with a wave of his hand, "I tell ye, with the 'ception of the meetin'house, it's the finest in the town. It has all the latest improvements an'-"

His speech, which was the longest he had ever been known to make, was interrupted by a burst of song from the other rooms, and Brother Wood had to sit down.

So the evening passed, and at its close Marcus again thanked them all, and especially Brother Wood. Marcus and Janet stood by the door and shook each one by the hand as they went home. John and Eliza were the last.

"You folks go on home," said John to Marcus. "we'll see to the house."

Marcus wrapped Janet's cloak about her with a tender touch, and they walked home in the starlight.

The next afternoon it snowed. Marcus went over to Janet's. She was alone. The grate was full of a warm fire. The little room looked very much the same as it did three years ago. Janet must have expected company. She did not wear her working dress, and there was just a tiny wave in her hair.

"Janet," said Marcus, "I believe you have grown. You look taller."

"You must be mistaken; but I have had fine health. Haven't been sick a day. Perhaps that accounts for it."

"You certainly look well; and Janet, you have grown so beautiful!"

"O shame, Marcus, to tell such stories!"

He sat down by the blazing hearth, placed a chair near him and motioned Janet to take it. Then they sat for some time looking into the fire.

"You got my letters that I wrote after leaving Hungerton?"

"Yes."

"Would you like to see a picture of Alice?" He took it from his pocket and handed it to her.

"It agrees with my mental picture. I thought she looked like that."

Then they talked for some time about his experiences, and the affairs at home.

"Who was that man Alice was about to marry?" asked Janet.

"Didn't I tell you his name? Let me see. I've nearly forgotten it. Oh, yes, it was Carlton, George Carlton, I believe."

"Why, Marcus, that was the name of my-but no, it couldn't be the same man."

"He was a tall, broad-shouldered, black-haired man. I saw him only once-in the church."

"It must have been. I heard he had gone in the direction of Hungerton, but, but-how strange! The man to whom I was once engaged answered to the same name and description."

"That is strange. Could it have been the same fellow?"

"But that's all in the past, and I don't like to talk about it," said she.

"Then we won't."

"Tell me more about Mice." She looked again at the photograph. He drew a ring from his pocket, took her hand, and tried it on her finger.

"Does it fit?" he asked.

"Exactly."

"That was Alice's ring."

"And do you want me to wear it?"

"Alice sent it to you. One of her last requests was that I give you the ring with her love and blessing."

"Thank you. Poor, dear Mice! I shall wear it always."

"She got your letter as I told you, and pondered long over it. She died with full faith in the gospel and a fair understanding of its principles. When we go to the Endowment House we must do her work for her."

"Yes, certainly. I have thought of the same."

Then the door softly opened and someone stole in and placed one hand over each of their eyes. 316

"Guess who it is."

"Mother," exclaimed both at once.

"Then don't sit the fire out," said Sister Harmon ....

This novel, popular and typical, attempts to introduce some further realistic complexity into the story by portraying the apostasy of Brother James, who had baptized Marcus. James leaves the Church but is later reconverted and baptized by Bishop King. Anderson's work, little studied and generally ignored today, is of interest to modern Mormons, less for the literary than for the cultural insights it provides.

The non-Mormons, more anxious to condemn than persuade, did little better with Mormon topics. Such novels as Joaquin Miller's The Danites of the Sierras (1881) was popular as the play: Apples of Sodom (1883); Alfred H. Henry's uninteresting By Order of the Prophet (1902), and Pierre Benoit's Le Lac Sale (1921) are vigorously antipolygamous and typical of the genre.

Bernard De Voto, in his The Chariot of Fire (1926), became a forerunner of the growing interest of writers in Mormonism; and Vardis Fisher, in Toilers of the Hills (1928), demonstrated his own increasing recognition of the literary values inherent in the faith of his youth. Susan Ertz, in 1933, published The Proselyte, only partially successful, but, because of its popularity, important in turning a wider audience toward Mormon subjects. George Snell's two books about Mormons, The Great Adam (1934) and Root, Hog and Die (1936), show a sensitivity to the great fictional possibilities inherent in Mormon topics.

Vardis Fisher's Children of God (1939) began a new era in the Mormon novel. Technically far more sophisticated than previous treatments, the book attempts to present the whole sweep of the Mormon story from the first vision of Joseph Smith in 1820 down to the Manifesto of 1890 and the end of resistance by the Church to the United States government. As the subtitle of the novel suggests, Fisher's purpose is to render "An American Epic," and in the grand sweep of its subject and the rolling cadences of its most memorable prose, the book is impressive. But in his imaginative reconstruction of the characters and events of this well-known epoch, Fisher finds difficulty in matching his vision of the Mormon experience with the spiritual motivations of the Mormons themselves. The result is an interesting but less than profound expression of this complex of remarkable history and significant people. The novel is, nevertheless, one to be reckoned with as one of the most noted fictional treatments of the Latter-day Saints. Realizing the futility of any attempt to give the sense of a book by representative passages, we nevertheless offer a small sample of Fisher's prose as encouragement and enticement to the reader to take the book in hand. The following passages are taken from the early pages of the book and show the quality of Fisher's prose and the manner of his imaginative reshaping of events and characters well known to Mormons. The student of Mormon history will note with interest Fisher's freedoms with history in some instances and, conversely, his careful use of historical documents in others. 317

Vardis Fisher [^2] From Children of God

Chapter 1

In the frontierland of western New York, Palmyra was only a small town, but more itinerant evangelists had come to it than the pious Smiths could remember. Here, and in the thinly settled wilderness roundabout, there had been in the early years of the nineteenth century one religious revival after another, with crusaders invoking all the terrors of hell upon an unbelieving world. Farther east, in such nests of infidelity as Yale and Bowdoin College, students were reading the French atheists, swearing by the memory of Tom Paine, and predicting that in another century Christianity would be as dead as Jonathan Edwards. Persons who pretended to be civilized went to church, if indeed they went at all, with caps drawn down to hide their cynical faces; and they sat in dark corners and smiled. God to them was a generic term for every Jehovah and Zeus who had lived as a dark and terrible myth in the minds of men ....

Though only fourteen in the spring of 1820, he was a tall and handsome youth. lie wore patched trousers herd by suspenders made of sheeting; a calico shirt that was almost as black as the rich soil in the forests northward; a ragged hat through the holes of which his un-combed flaxen hair thrust up in tiny golden sheaves; and shoes so worn that they barely kept to his feet. He had huge feet and incongruously small hands, and full blue eyes that were half-hidden by the longest and heaviest lashes in Palmyra. They were humorless eyes. Joe had never laughed, and his smile was rare, especially since he had seen priest fight against priest, and each claim, for himself alone, an intimate fellowship with God.

He was not smiling on this golden afternoon. For an hour he had listened to the most violent exhortation that had ever come to his ears, to the most graphic description of the torments of Hell, to the most impassioned plea for repentance. One statement stood in his mind italicized in words of flame: "Does it not say in the Epistle of James, first chapter, fifth verse, that if any of you lack wisdom you are to ask God who giveth unto all men liberally? Does it not say to ask God and it shall be given unto you? That is the message I bring you today!"

That was the message Joe was remembering when he slipped quietly away from the crowd and went to the old family Bible which he had read so many times that much of it he knew by heart. That is the verse he was saying over and over to himself as he went down a path and into the woods back of his home. Spring was upon the earth again. The violets were out; and the trailing arbutus, first sign of renascence to the early colonists, was hanging fragrant pink and white flowers against a prodigal background of green. The white baneberry would be blooming soon. He liked the mayflower best because of its fragrance, but the baneberry aroused his liveliest fancy: its berries, each with a purple spot like an eye, seemed to be looking in all directions, the eyes bulged out of their sockets and the pupils grotesquely dilated. He had often examined the fruit, wondering if there was vision in it and deciding that there might be; for God's world was curious and beyond the understanding of men ....

His parents, he was remembering now, had often been close to God. When the family lived in Randolph, Lucy suffered with fever and the doctors gave her up. Unwilling to die, she had cried out to God and she had heard a clear voice say, "Seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you." Thereupon she recovered quickly and Sought instruction, going from one minister to another; but though these men knew much of the Bible they seemed to be strangers to God, and she turned away from318them and brooded over her doubts. As a matter of fact, during their entire married life, while renting a farm in Tunbridge or going bankrupt in Randolph, or eking out a bare living in Sharon and Lebanon and Norwich, Lucy and Joseph had tirelessly asked of God a sign of the right church and had been given no sign. The son, more oppressed by doubts than his brothers Sam and Hy or his sister Sophronia, all of whom had become Presbyterians, was determined to learn which sect-if, indeed, there was any-God still smiled upon and approved.

There had been no sign in anything he could remember now: none in the way his giant of a father dropped humbly to his knees and prayed until sweat poured down his checks; none in the evenings when the father set his spectacles on his nose and looked around him and said, "Hyrum, Samuel, Joseph, get ready for your prayers"; none in the monotonous intoning of meaningless lines:

Another day has passed and gone, We lay our garments by...

For the old doubts and questions lived again the next morning.

There had been no sign among the evangelists. The Methodist had cried, "Lo, here is the right church!" and the next month the Presbyterian had said, "Lo, the right church is over here!" and the Baptist had thundered: "They are all wrong! Here is the Church of God!" There was no sign in the way priest fought against priest, convert against convert, until God withdrew from the confusion of anger and spite, and the problem was more darkly unanswerable than before. There had been nothing, indeed, in all these years except that golden verse from the Epistle of James. This Joe murmured over and over, wondering if he should ask of God and if God would hear...

An hour later he had not moved. His hands still reached out to green leaf and blue flower, and his eyes still looked at the golden glory of the afternoon sun. For several minutes he had been feeling strange and lost, as if a great and nameless power had possessed the woods and hushed the song of birds. The sky had darkened. He sat up, feeling alarm, and gazed around him; and then softly, with his eyes on the blue vault above him, he moved to his knees and clasped hands to his breast. For a long moment he hardly realized that he was praying-for he had never prayed aloud before; nor did he quite understand what he said. He was obscurely aware of his trembling body and the strange deep passion of his voice; but his prayer, filled with biblical phrases and archaic terms, seemed not to be his at all. He listened as if to another voice and was moved to deep astonishment. He seemed almost to be standing apart and looking at himself, kneeling here in leaf-depth, and speaking in impassioned wonder to a great blue pasture with its solitary golden sun. After a little, he knew there were tears in his eyes and tears wet and running on his cheeks as the whole world listened to the anxious humble asking of his voice...

He stopped praying and for a long moment was still. His senses were swimming. All the meaning of his mind and body was withdrawing to a far and infinite meaning, as if a great power were sucking him dry, as if there would be left kneeling here only his flesh and his bones. The world had darkened. He felt sudden and awful terror. He strove to cry aloud but his hot tongue filled his mouth and throat; he tried to move but seemed to be roped to the earth. There was soft and unreal music in his ears as light and darkness fought to possess his mind. Without knowing what he did, he sank slowly to the earth, as if moved by a force not of his will, and lay on his back with his wide blue gaze on the sky. Without stirring a finger, without even blinking, he lay as one dead; and then very softly his eyelids closed upon the awful terror in his eyes...

He saw first an intimation of brightness far out in the universe: it grew like the softness of morning, like a gentle flowering out of utter darkness, as if heaven were overflowing the wastelands of night as brilliance spilled from God's robe as He walked. For a long moment the light spread and gathered strength and then suddenly fell downward in a broad beam of terrible splendor, in a great and blinding pillar that touched the earth and lay far out in a319white column of eternity. Then, with startling swiftness, two persons appeared in this stupendous shaft of light, the Father and the Son; and they were exactly alike in countenance and in the incandescence of their glory. They walked down the beam as down a highway of light; and one called the prostrate lad by name and pointed to his companion and said, "This is my beloved Son. Hear Him!" The Son spoke. He declared in the voice of a great organ that all the creeds of earth were an abomination in His sight, and that those who professed them wore an aspect of godliness but were corrupt, drawing near to Him with their lips and mocking Him with alien hearts; and added that a new church would be established under the leadership of a new prophet. The voice died away in echoes that rolled in solemn music, and the highway of light slowly faded, with Father and Son standing as vanishing silhouettes against the infinite. The light closed like a shutter to a thin wraith of holiness and slowly withdrew to the lone glittering point of a star.

When Joe came to his senses he was still lying on his back. He strove to move but was so weak that for a moment he could stir neither arms nor legs, nor do more than blink his eyes; but presently he sat up, feeling as if all the blood had been let from his veins. He was amazed to find himself here, with birds singing around him and a fragrant breeze coming from the western hills. Remembering his vision of God and the Son, he looked around him, wondering about them and himself and trying to understand. After a little, he rose to his feet, weak and unnerved, and turned toward the log house which his father had built in a clearing. Upon approaching, he paused for a moment and gazed at the rough logs and hewn facings, and the roof of poles and earth, remembering that Jesus was born in a manger. Then he went inside. At once, sensing that all was not well with her son, his mother came to him anxiously and looked at his white face and troubled eyes. She carried a hand-painted oilcloth cover for a table; and across the room he saw a dozen more on which she had been working.

"What is the trouble, my boy?"

He resented her. Both God and the Son had talked to him, but as likely as not she would say, with the Baptist preacher, that nobody had visions in these days. He stared at her and his gaze was curious. She had a high forehead, a resolute thrust of chin; she was very wide between her pate eyes. Her eyes were so pale a blue, indeed, that his occurred to him, with a shrug of distaste, that she had washed them too much with tears. He remembered that she was and always had been the aggressive manager of this household.

Lucy looked at her son, the strangest child who had been born to her.

"Tell me, boy. Something troubles you."

"Never mind me," he said, turning away. "I am well enough off."

"But something has happened. Tell me." "Why should 17"

"Because I am your mother."

Choosing his words slowly, he said: "I have learned that Presbyterianism is not true."

Lucy stiffened. "My boy, how do you know that?"

"Would you believe me?"

"Of course."

Joseph drew himself to his fullest height. "Because," he said proudly, "I have just talked with God."

"You have- What is this you're saying!"

"I have had a vision. I have talked with the Son. But you," he said, staring at her with reproachful blue eyes, "would never believe that. A sinful world will never believe. But I swear it is true."

"My boy, of course I believe. What wonderful thing are you telling me?" She was trembling and gazing at him with anxious eyes. "The blessed Lord Himself talked to you? Tell me."

"Yes, He spoke to me," said Joseph, and he trembled also.

"What did He say?"

"I went out," he said, looking away, "to pray and to ask advice." He considered a moment and then fell into the biblical manner of speaking which, since early childhood, he had used when alone. "It says in the Epistle of James that whoso lacketh vision, he shall seek of God who giveth liberally. I prayed, and lo, it came to pass that God and the Son appeared to320me in glory that was brighter than the noonday sun; and, verily, they did say unto me that all churches are an abomination in their sight." He paused, breathing heavily and remembering. "And it came to pass that I did behold God and the Son in a great light, and the Son spake unto me, saying, 'Verily, verily, I say unto you, my servant Joseph, that a new church will be established in these latter days and you will be my prophet.'" He stopped again, not knowing with certainty whether the Lord had said that; not knowing, indeed, what had or had not been said. "He said I would be held as evil by all men and in all tongues. He said, 'Verily, the Church of God will be established among all tongues and kindreds. Behold, I, the Lord, will establish my church through you, even unto all men who have cursed me and brought shame upon me. And so let it be.' That," said Joseph, turning strange blue eyes on his mother, "is what the Lord said unto me."

"My boy, my holy!" she cried, touching him reverently. He looked at her face and saw that she believed, and in his own heart he pronounced it good. "I must go tell your father," she said, her voice shaking like her body. "Oh, my boy!"

"I warn you," he said solemnly, "that scoffers and unbelievers and sinners will say I lie."

"But you don't lie! Oh, it is true, true! God has made Himself manifest with a sign."

"Verily," said Joseph, "it is so."

Beside herself with joy, she went to find her husband; and Joseph left the house, walking with new pride in his dirty ragged clothes. He wanted to be alone again. There could be no lie in this that he had told but he wanted to be alone to examine his heart and Iris conscience and learn if God were still speaking through them. He went into the woods and sat under a great oak; the softness of early dusk was upon the western hills. In all directions, he reflected, there were millions of persons, living in evil ways, praising God with their lips but with their hearts turned against Him; fighting priest against priest and sect against sect, with the church that Christ founded as dead as last year's leaf. Westward in Buffalo, south in Waterloo and Fayette, east in Utica and Pitts field and Tunbridge, ministers were crying, "Lo, here is the true church!" and every one of them was an abomination in the sight of God. They were hypocrites and Pharisees all. They wore the vestments of holiness, but their minds were unclean and their hearts were turned to the Devil. As he sat here, telling the vision over and over, giving to it the meaning which he was certain it must have had, he believed deeply that God had spoken and called him to prophethood. He wondered if his father would doubt.

Joseph Smith, the elder, did not doubt. A man six feet two in height and of great bulk, he was sober of mien, and impatient of the light heart and the careless tongue. He also had had visions, though he had never talked with God, and he saw no reason at till why he should question the tale of his son. After hearing it, he was thoughtful a long while, solemnly pondering what had been told. At last he said:

"When are you to start tiffs new church?"

"I don't know," said his son. "I'm to wait until the Lord speaks again."

Joseph looked at the other members of his family, gathered around. His older brothers, Sam and fly, gazed at him with earnest belief;

and his sister trembled and bit her lip.

"What size was God?" asked Sam.

"The size of man," said Joseph. "God is like us, only He is pure and glorified."

"And you say the Lord looked like Him?"

"They were just alike but more beautiful and holy than I could tell you."

"Did the Lord," asked Lucy, "say when He would come again?"

"No. He told me to prepare myself. He said He would establish a church through me and it would be the true church."

Joseph did not welcome questions. There were uncertainties in his mind, too, and he wished to be alone with them and inquire into the doubts. In this night he did not sleep well. He tossed in his dreams and awoke often, believing that God was near. Sitting up, he would search the attic room for a sign, a light, and he would listen: and then he would lie down again, knowing well that God would not speak to him for many days. Now arid then he wondered unhappily if the Lord had spoken to him at all321but after remembering, after saying over and over the words he had told his parents, unconsciously adding little by little to what had been said. he knew that he was a prophet with a great mission on earth.

In the days that followed. nevertheless, he struggled with doubts and despair, until the thought came suddenly that he was being tempted, as prophets had been tempted of old. He felt better then. God was placing burdens upon his belief and his will. "Verily." he said to himself. walking in the woods. "it is so."<_P> He resolved to cleanse his heart of all evil and be ready for the next vision. So certain after a while became Iris belief in himself as a prophet that he sought the Methodist minister and told of what he had seen and heard. That large man, with his heavy face and his small eyes, was speechless with amazement.

"What lie are you telling? You say God talked to you, a mere child!"

"I do say that God and the Son talked to me. Verily, it is true."

"What blasphemy! My boy. you will be struck dead for that!"

"I expect to be persecuted, even as Jesus was."

The man mined red with fury. He laid a heavy hand on Joseph's shoulder and shook him and admonished him with a thick finger. "You go home and lake a physic! This is the most horrible blasphemy I ever listened to. God does not reveal Himself any more, or speak in person to mankind. There are no prophets today. And certainly," he added. shaking the lad again, "if there was a prophet. be wouldn't be no beardless ragamuffin like you. You cease this terrible abomination before lightning blasts you!"

"But I tell you God did manifest Himself unto me and speak unto me, even as He spake unto Moses. If I lie about that -"

"Stop! You're a child of the Devil, I say. You are fevered and need some blood-letting and you go home now and take a physic."

Joseph shook the hand off and stepped back. "Priests of all churches will persecute me and say evil things against me. Nobody believed Paul when he was brought before King Agrippa. They said he was mad. But Paul knew he had heard God, and I know I heard and saw God; and if I denied that-"

"You abominable upstart!"

"You can persecute me. All the priests with evil hearts can say evil things against me, lo, even as they were said of Jesus. But if I was to

be crucified for it, I would not deny the Lord." "I tell you, boy, a devil is in you!" "I expect many priests to say that."

"You run home and take a physic. And don't tell this blasphemous story to anyone else. Go home now!"

When Joseph entered the log house, the oilier members of Iris family were there. His mother was working on another oilcloth cover for a stand; his father was searching the Bible; his brother Hyrum was standing by a broken window and looking out. Joseph crossed the slabs of the floor and sat on a block of wood that was used for a chair. Already persons were saying he was mad or possessed of devils; there was ribald laughter when he walked the streets. Upon entering the town, he saw persons come from store and harness shop, from tavern and trading post and barn to stare at him, or to snicker softly and jeer. But when he looked at the members of his family and knew that they believed in his mission. be felt better; and quietly he climbed a ladder to the attic and sought his barren room. knowing that God had spoken to him and would speak again.

Following hard on the success of Fisher's work (for which he won the Harper Prize for 1939) were other Mormon books by Mormon writers. In fact, the 1940s was a decade rich in Mormon Americana, with Jean Woodman's Glory ,Spent (1940), Paul Bailey's tale of American Fork, For This My Glory (1940), Hoffman Birney's Ann Carmeny (1941), and a novel for young people by Rhoda Nelson, This is Freedom (1940). During the same period Mormons wrote some books which, claiming to be novels, are really updated treatises similar to Nephi Anderson's works. Such322are Otto Shrag's The Locusts (1943)and O. F. Ursenbach's The Quest (1945). Two other important works of fiction were published in the late 1940s-Helen Cortez Stafford's Sweet Love Remembered (1946) and Blanche Cannon's Nothing Ever Happens Sunday Morning (1948).

But the novels of the 1940s which most clearly rivaled Fisher's popular Children of God were Maurine Whipple's Giant Joshua (1940) and Virginia Sorensen's A Little Lower than the Angels (1942). Add to these Elinor Pryor's And Never Yield and Lorene Pearson's The Harvest Waits (1941), and one has a collection of perhaps the most significant of the Mormon novels.

Virginia Sorensen's A Little Lower than the Angels, about life in pre-exile Nauvoo, is concerned with universal questions of love and loyalty and faith and, secondly, with Mormonism and polygamy. This novel, as one of the best, deserves representation in this collection. However, demands of space and the fact that Mrs. Sorensen is represented in the short story section preclude our excerpting her fine novel.

Focusing also on the universal themes inherent in an intensely Mormon subject and setting, Maurine Whipple in The Giant Joshua richly evokes both. Whipple draws on the history of the settlement of St. George to depict the hardships experienced by a would-be rebel, Clorinda Maclntyre.

As was the life of every pioneer to Utah's Dixie, so was Clorinda's life difficult. But her trials were compounded by her doubts, by her inward struggle to become a Latter-day Saint when she questioned the value of the goal. In addition, at seventeen she marries Abijah MacIntyre, a middle-aged man whom she never really loves nor always respects. As his third wife, Clory resents her treatment at the hands of the jealous, domineering, and superstitious first wife, Bathsheba. while envying the apparent calm and resignation of the second wife, Willie.

Rebellious, proud, young, Clory falls in love with Abijah's oldest son, Freeborn, who, chafing at his lot and miserable in his unfulfilled love for his father's third wife, rebels yet refuses to leave and is killed in a futile attempt to save the dam from breaking. Humbled by Free's death and by the deaths, in childbirth and from plague. of her children, the tenacious Clory earns Abijah's love as well as the love and sometimes grudging respect of the other wives. her friend Pal (Palmyra), and the community.

On the way to maturity, Clory shares with her fellow-pioneers the hardships of settlement- of scratching out crops amidst drought; of grasshopper invasions, dam-building and floods; of waiting in poverty for husbands to complete church missions to foreign lands; of seeing those husbands return to face imprisonment for violation of antipolygamy laws; of experiencing heartbreak as those same husbands, under duress from the government, disband their families by choosing one among their wives.

We have chosen to represent Miss Whipple's style with two sections near the conclusion of the book. The first section, which opens with the heralded return of prominent Mormon leaders from imprisonment in the Utah State Penitentiary for cohabitation (under the Edmunds-Tucker Act), demonstrates Whipple's humanistic handling of the character of Mormon apostle and St. George colonizer, Erastus Snow; 323

Maurine Whipple [^3] From The Giant Joshua

They were coming home [from prison], those heroes of the Cotton Mission, Erastus Snow and David Wight. Each with the State's ubiquitous blessing, five-dollar bill, and fifteen-dollar store order for a suit of clothes.

Not since Brother Brigham's day had such an air of festivity pervaded the town. Bands and flying flags. A sumptuous fruit feast in the basement of the Tabernacle. Fall grapes brushed with the bloom of the shadows on the pastel mountains, melons like the new green springing up in the hedgerows after the rains, quinces as golden as the autumn sunshine. And flowers-those wide windowsills of the Tabernacle dripping zinnias, tawny tiger lilies. fringed and spicy pinks, Sweet William clusters, and yellow pools of goldenrod.

Pal and Lucy in a very mania of activity ... please, Clory. may Patience-Elizabeth borrow your tortoise-shell combs for the welcoming parade? David must not know we've gone hungry, he must not know we've lacked a thing-not a thing! ... Marianne and Aunt Ket and Martha are all dolled up, but Lucy and I will smile so hard David'll never notice we're wearing the same dresses as when he left!

Clory gave of her few gewgaws, the flowers in her garden, the fruit Gottlieb still insisted on bringing her. And when the children had gone and the neighbors had gone, 'Sheba and the Yeast Lady and Serena, when she could no longer hear even the tender shrilling of the fife, she went, herself, out between the up-ended beer bottles of the path, out between the roses distilling themselves into the dusk, up through the quiet streets, diagonally across to the square where the old bowery had stood, up past the T. O. [Tithing Office] to the Tabernacle, puffing somewhat now because the street began to climb... on this corner the Social Hall she had once thought so grand and now seemed such a meager old maid of a building. Was it Free in his buckskins she could see standing there in the doorway?... And then Main Street was through with and Mount Hope began. A road that spiraled and elbowed and presently dropped you off with the soaring red flanks of the Sugar Loaf at your back and the world spread out down below ...

The Welcoming Parade. Clory watched it, dwarfed with distance, the Martial Band and the Silver Band, instruments catching the last gleam of the sun. Brother Wheelock, home from prison. again ignoring the Deps and the Underground, being very youthful on the drums whose gay tattoo echoed among hills that such a short time ago had known only the coyote chorus.

Time had no meaning up here. She sat there watching the carriages and wagons spill their little antlike people into the Tabernacle, itself antlike from here. Watching them spill out again, the bands roll tootling home... The twilight lay in crimson pools among the boulders, stroked the Black Ridge with a mist of lavender, a singularly clear mist that left the valleys in shadow and rode only the slopes with a nebulous softness. You could drown yourself in that mist...

Erastus found her there, an older Erastus with flabby paunch and the skin of his cheeks hanging in folds. He came toward her over the rocks, and shaved head and face gave him a queerly innocent expression like baby who has leaped suddenly into maturity. He did not seem at all surprised to see her there.

He sank down beside her with a sigh of utter content ("I'll steal only a moment," he'd promised Ket. "I've got to get the feel of the whole valley before I know I'm really home"), dangled his legs over the edge, and bent his gaze upon Clory. Apostle Snow-who had always swung off on a side road because of a red flag sticking up and a silent call for help, leaving his council stewing in its own juice the whole evening. Apostle Snow, with his eyes full of compassion and understanding. He studied324Clory's swollen figure. Her lips twisted.

"Abijah's last gift to me. It would be the only one to carry the whole way."

Suddenly she began to talk as she had not talked in months.

"... So you see I'm a failure. I'm like Free-I didn't obey counsel either. Why, I haven't even got a testimony!"

Erastus writhed his lips. "Ptsahh!"

A testimony. "I know that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God. I know that the Gospel is true"-the old phrases he had heard all his life.

"Prison has taught me many things, Clorinda Agatha... But I'll tell you-I'm not sure what a testimony is, myself."

He laughed a little. Heresy!

"The way I look at it, the thing we've got that's immortal is an Idea. And maybe that's why we've been persecuted... Maybe, human nature being what it is, the world will always stamp upon that Idea ... But you can't kill it, Clorinda Agatha - it's older than the world."

His words seemed to come from out of the past, as if they had lived forever, as old as lime, as old as the rocks.

"Thou shalt love they neighbor... Everybody's reaching for it, only some religions are going 'cross-lots, some kitty-cornered... None of us have yet come within a million miles of it, but the big thing is that we try. And as long as we try and admit we're trying, there's hope. A mosque or a pagoda or a Tabernacle...and maybe we're a little closer to it in the Tabernacle because we've gone out for it deliberately, colonized for it, I believe that to be Zion's mission to mankind, Clorinda Agatha. to create among these barren hills a little inviolate world. a little sanctuary where the Brotherhood of Man and The Fatherhood of God are not just words but living, breathing realities..."

He came back to Clory then, to her own personal problem. and reached over and patted her hand.

Dusk was seeping from the floor of the valley like a wave that would engulf them, but for the moment they were caught up into light.

"Some of us may lose, Clorinda Agatha. There are bound to be mistakes, and we've made our share, and right now Zion is reeling from body-blows ..."

He reached into his pocket and brought out the Church's last Epistle.

"President Taylor dying in exile...our leaders bunted like rabbits...." " 'The war is openly and undisguisedly made upon our religion,' "he read. " 'To induce men to repudiate that, every encouragement is given.... The man who agrees to discard his wives, escapes imprisonment and is applauded; while the man who will not-admit his past life has been a fraud and a lie, who will not say to the world, 'I intended to deceive my God, my brethren, and my wives by making covenants I did not expect to keep' is besides being punished to the frill extent of the law, compelled to endure the reproaches, taunts, and insults era brutal judge ...Whether it be life or death, freedom, or imprisonment, prosperity or adversity .....'"

Erastus shook his bald bead.

"No man knows

And then Iris voice grew impassioned again, his worried old eyes bright with the Dream:

"You may lose, Clorinda Agatha. I may lose. Zion may lose, for the time. But the Idea" he saw all those myriads, the oppressed and downtrodden, marching hand in hand straight into the dawn of a better world-"the Idea can't lose."

The shadows of the twilight gave his tired old face turned up to the stars the stern tenderness of an archangel.

The following section, the conclusion of the book, finds Clory MacIntyre dying after her final attempt at giving childbirth. Abijah, now in Logan, Utah, with the teenage wife whom he chose to accompany him instead of his two other wives, is presiding over the Logan Temple. Forced by the aw to remain behind, Clory, slowly dying, realizes that she has at last attained her sought-for testimony: 325

This business of dying was just as Willie said, not half so bad as living. If only the voices wouldn't keep calling her back from the softness, the peace... At first she thought she must be sinking into that first early bed of cattail fuzz. but then her bands explored the mattress and she knew. Her house and its memories rose all about her, the house that had once been a dugout, and she knew the place of rest toward which she was drifting was really death. But it was glorious and she felt a vague resentment toward the voices, like timeless buzzing bees, that kept calling her back.

"Clory never crosses anybody..." (That would be Pal.) "She's like a well. No matter how long you tell her your troubles she's still up to the brim with sympathy..."

That's kind of you, Pal. She wanted to say it, but the effort was too great,

"I've buried my whole neighborhood and laid them out." (That would be 'Sheba's comfortable voice-'Sheba was always comfortable around deaths.) "I hope she goes in her sleep it's a nice way to go as long as it has to be done. I don't think a person ought to have to know about it!" (Let's see...what was 'Sheba's record now? A thousand bodies?) It was queer to think of herself as a body-queer and not true. For the part of her that counted would be gathering little wild-stars along the Milky Way...

On and on. Days merging into other days. Already the footprints of Indian summer blotted out by the first autumn rains, sliding down invisible gray ribbons, thrumming gently on the roof. Until she grew impatient with life and its clutching hands. Why wouldn't they let her go?

She lay suspended in a dream of peace. For the first time in her life no decisions to make, no counsel to obey... It was ridiculously easy. All you had to do was let go and the tide carried you out... She was vaguely aware now and then that grief lay beyond the fringe of her dream, but the thought only made her impatient-yes, and pitying for the poor blind fools who lived beyond the fringe.

Only once did reality stab through her dream. 'Sheba-with her ideas of comfort-came whispering: "Clory, can you hear me? Do you understand what I'm saying? I thought you'd like to know-I've just had a letter from Abijah and he said Young Julia's had a miscarriage..."

And suddenly that indestructible something that had always been Clory began to bubble and laugh until it routed even the dream.

"She's losing her mind!" gasped 'Sheba.

A soundless bowl broke from her lips. She panted, and was lost again in another convulsion of mirth.

The distressed faces around the bed swam toward her and she tried to reassure them.

"Clory! Clory! What's the matter?" That would be Hannah Merinda.

But all she could do was to shake her head and laugh up at them with her eyes.

What an awful thing to happen to Abijah!

And then the faces swath away again and the dream returned.

Sometimes she sang, little catches of the songs that had defied a wilderness. "Come, come, ye saints..." Singing as if she wrote in her heart's blood her own wistful cadenza, singing as if to seal with her blood the final resolving chords. And sometimes in the long hush of the night, when the watchers around her bed dozed sprawling in stark unlovely attitudes, she would hear the Tabernacle town clock striking and know with a sort of detached omniscience that it was a senseless sound, because nothing ever really dies. Even those toil-stooped "Clary Dutchmen" would be peddling at the gates of heaven: "Peaches for lumber, two bits for a few. Come out de wagon, I tast-ee for you!"

Time marching on, but the dreams of the past going with it. Someday the pioneers who had lived and loved and fought would all be nothing more than names carved on stones for curious children to read, sprinkle idly with flowers... and dash shouting on by. Someday her house would be dust... but she knew with a sureness like a loved handclasp that above the dust. there would still be a pulsing in the air on bright moonlit nights-the remembered throb of a heart.

Erastus came, with his kind old eyes and326little familiar grimace...and suddenly his quiet voice rang with a queer prophetic power. He was not Erastus any longer, he was Brother Brigham, catching her up in his strange and mystic spell.

All the rivers run into the sea: yet the sea is not full.

Our generation passeth away and another generation cometh: but the earth abideth forever.

The torch was lit, even if it were only a tallow slut, Life would go on... She saw them, the whole heroic cavalcade, marching toward more deathless stars. And she knew with an ancient exultation (she who had never been farther than Cedar Fort, to be in all the history books!) that she would not have changed a moment of it. Tomahawk and war whoop, bran mush and lucerne greens, Virgin bloat, the Year of the Plagues, of Reign of Terror. She felt a detached pity for the generations yet to come who couldn't plan anti build a world. Here, she cried, reaching her bandaged hands across the years, here it is: the Land of the Unlocked Do o r . . .

But here was Jimmie, with his eyes full of tears (such silly things, tears!)-her hostage to the future. She saw him strong and unafraid, wide-shouldered to carry the Dream. Each generation with its desert to, cross ... but one must make an effort to tell them that there are always the Joshua trees, if poor stumbling humans will but lift up their eyes... Always the Joshua trees. pointing toward the Promised Land.

Shake off the encompassing mists, make the voice gay (Jimmie always loved gaiety!) "You know how boys are!... This I would say to you, my children: 'Love much and laugh more, at yourselves if nothing better ...'"

And now there is no more time. Already the radiance is trembling on the horizon, the flushed light leans down from the west, the Great Smile beckons. And suddenly, with the shock of a thousand exploding light-balls, she recognizes the Great Smile at last. That which she had searched for all her life had been right there in her heart all the time. She, Clorinda MacIntyre, had a testimony!...

"Jimmie," she said very clearly and distinctly, "will you see that my fingernails look nice? Sometimes the women neglect fingernails."

The 1940s also saw, in Samuel W, Taylor's Heaven Knows Why (1948), the first of several important humorous works about Mormondom. Taylor followed it in 1951 with the autobiographical Family Kingdom. He writes of Mormon life as only he, born and reared in polygamous families, could tell it, with the sympathy of a believer and the authority of a participant, yet with the objectivity of a professional. Heaven Knows Why is a comic novel whose hero, Jackson Skinner Whitetop, has surprising visions and startling encounters with bishoprics, the Word of Wisdom, apostates, and Mormons in general.

Other novels of the fifties include Amelia Bean's The Fancher Train (1958), a good historical novel, as well as Papa Married a Mormon ( 1955 ) and Mamma's Boarding House (1958) by John D. Fitzgerald. A similar treatment of the Mormon family theme is seen in A House of Many Rooms (1956) by Rodello Hunter, who recently published a personal memoir-novel, A Daughter of Zion (1972). One of the better novels of the decade was Richard Scowcroft's Children of the Covenant (1955), a well-written "anti-Mormon" novel. The hero gropes, on his return from a mission, with reconciling his faith with the twentieth century. Such a novel is typical of that which, claims Kenneth B. Hunsaker, "infuriates the staunch Mormon and amuses the non-Mormon but moves neither to action. It demands too much knowledge of Mormons and Mormonism ever to have a wide audience, and since it offends the majority of those who Idol have that knowledge, its obscurity seems inevitable." Scowcroft overcomes this difficulty by featuring, in his most recent "Mormon" novel, The Ordeal of Dudley Dean (1969), an apostate Mormon and his son as the central characters, who, divorced from Mormon culture, plunge back into it for a time. Such a327circumstance enables Scowcroft to involve more fully his non-Mormon readers; however. the Mormon background in the novel is unbelievable and unconvincing.

More convincing are Ardyth Kennelly's two novels. The Peaceable Kingdom (1949). and its sequel, Up Home (1955), occasionally tedious. about Linnea Ecklund's life as a plural wife in Utah. Written in short story form, the two novels are collections of anecdotes. Polygamy and its implications are also part of Claire Noall's recent Surely the Night (1972), which deals in a readable fashion with the life of a Mormon midwife who aspires to become a female M.D., a la Dr. Romania Pratt and Dr. Ellis Shipp. She succeeds, but in the process is forced out of the arms of her polygamous husband. Another recent novel. The Jawbone of an Ass ( 1970), by Glenna Wood. is the first of a projected tetralogy. Though Mrs. Wood's work suffers in characterization by a too-heavy reliance on unwieldy symbols revolving about history and theology, she has attempted to deal artistically and significantly with the experience of a Mormon woman torn between her artistic and emotional desires and the religious faith she loves.

Mormons become tangential figures in other modern works, such as Allen Drury's Advise and Consent (1959), Robert Lewis Taylor's The Travels of Jaimie McPheeters (1958), Wallace Stegner's novel about Joe Hill, The Preacher and the Slave (1950), and Mark Harris's Wake Up, Stupid (1959).

Thus Monsoons and Mormonism continue to figure in longer fiction. And Latter-day Saint readers continue to call for "the great Mormon novel," but many, viewing the difficulties of dealing with Mormon themes, which requires of non-Mormons either an intensive knowledge of Mormonism or an ability of Mormons to overlook a writer's ignorance of his subject, think of Bernard DeVoto's dictum that his Mormon novel is by far "the best book [he is] never going to write."

Further information regarding the Mormon novel can be gleaned from two articles on which the editors have depended heavily for this bibliographical essay: Dale L. Morgan's "Mormon Storytellers," in Ray B. West's Rocky Mountain Reader, and Kenneth B. Hunsaker's "Mid Century Mormon Novels," in Dialogue, 4 (1969), 123-28. Hunsaker's dissertation, "The Twentieth Century Mormon Novel" (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan, 1969), and Cassie Hyde Hock's dissertations, "The Mormons in Fiction" (Boulder: University of Colorado, 1941 ), are also invaluable.328329

Nephi Anderson (1865-1923), author, editor and youth leader, achieved renown in Mormon circles for his many manuals and outlines, articles, essays, stories, and novels, all of which taught, clearly and pleasantly, the doctrines of the Church. Best known among his novels are Added Upon (1896), Marcus King, Mormon (1897), The Castle Builder (1902), and John St. John (1917). Born in Christiania, Norway, Anderson and his parents emigrated to Utah in 1871. Anderson later returned to his native land as a missionary, was a teacher and Superintendent of schools in Brigham City, Utah, and filled a second mission to Great Britain. After several editorships with Church journals, he was called to edit the Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine and to guide the Genealogical Society of Utah. He continued to write stories such as this throughout his life. "Lester Amsden's Love" was published in the Contributor.

Vardis Fisher (1895-1968), a native of Idaho, taught at the University of Utah (1925-28) and New York University (1928- 31 ). A prolific novelist, Fisher published Toilers of the Hills (1928) and Dark Bridwell (1931), then turned to the American frontier, penning his Vridar Hunter tetralogy, based generally on his own experience as a sensitive Mormon confronting the Freudian world. He also wrote many novels dealing with the saga of the mountain man. His most important Mormon novel is Children of God (1939) from which this chapter is taken. His collected stories, Love and Death, were published in 1959.

Maurine Whipple (1917- ) is from St. George, Utah-the scene of her novel, The Giant Joshua, which she published in 1940. A writer and a lecturer, Miss Whipple has written This is the Place: Utah, and has published articles in Collier's, the Saturday Evening Post, Look, Life, Time, Pageant, and numerous other journals and periodicals. She is currently working on two other novels, sequels to The Giant Joshua.

---
Notas:
[^1] An irreverent, but it seems to me. downright honest critic of Christianity argues in effect. "If a child is born to me healthy and bright-eyed, you tell me, God loves you. If a child is born without a spine, or hopelessly paralyzed. you tell me, God still loves you. Frankly, that kind of love I can do without. If God causes or permits events that my worst mortal enemy would not permit, then both the idea of 'God' and 'love' are absurd." That these persons were trying to torture you, perhaps take your life.
[^2] One day my family sat watching the big screen production of the "Greatest Story Ever Told." You see a sinister Herod send his soldiers to Bethelehem. Then come the screams of mothers, glimpses of blood-smirched swords pulled from children's bodies. Then you see Mary and Joseph who have received divine warning, walking peacefully with their Babe toward the safety of Egypt. As this scene closed, the hand of my little girl came into mine and she whispered, confused and frightened, "Daddy, didn't Heavenly Father care about those other children?" That all this was against your will.
[^3] Third is the universal outcry of our own souls in tribulation. "Why?" and "Why me?" We speak much of worthiness and blessedness and of keeping the laws that result in both. But there is, in this cry, the sense of what some call "frustrated entitlement." We have, in measure (not perfectly but close enough) kept the law; and we aspire through dark and dawn to do better. We feel a certain inner worthiness, a sense of "deserving better." But no better comes. Only worse. And still worse. Others we think of as less worthy seem to prosper. We do not demand ease. But we sense injustice and we crave, alas, a little mercy. And how long can we hold on to this slipping rope, and pray in faith? Let alone in love? That the highest service he would render you would be to pull them off.
