Neal A. Lambert, Richard E. Cracroft, Believing People: Literature of the Latter-day Saints ( 1979)

8 DRAMA

It is my purpose in this play to show the close connection between heaven and earth.

Clinton F. Larson330331

INTRODUCTION

Unlike other nineteenth-century Christian American faiths, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, has, from its beginnings, officially encouraged drama as an integral part of Mormon life. Joseph Smith established the Nauvoo Dramatic Company, and Brigham Young continued the tradition by creating and fostering the famous Salt Lake Theater. Modern Church authorities have encouraged, through the Church Drama Committee, ward and stake productions, of one- and three-act plays and musical dramas. In recent years Church support was again confirmed in the revival of Promised Valley, which plays to full houses for several weeks each summer. And the Church and its members continue to throng to such elaborately staged pageants as those performed yearly at the Hill Cumorah, near Palmyra, New York, and at the Manti Temple in Utah.

Because the Mutual Improvement Association has become the vehicle for producing the many plays which have enlivened the stages of ward houses throughout the Church, such dramas follow rigid standards set by Church committees. Cast with young people, often with little regard for their abilities, and produced in a short time and on low budgets, such plays are generally looked upon by Church members as sources of amusement and entertainment rather than as profound or thought-provoking literary experiences. For the most part, such dramas avoid confrontation with serious issues, and the generally bland production usually ends up offering more stereotypes than insights, more clichés than clarifications of the human predicament.

Despite such natural limitations, however, one- and three-act plays continue to be popular, and many young Latter-day Saints have emerged from several years' experience in the MIA roadshow and drama productions with a new appreciation for the theater. Indeed, nearly every ward and branch in the Church numbers a few members who can claim considerable practical expertise in the dramatic arts, much of it arising from years of experience in Mormon productions. Though still in its adolescence, Church drama may yet encourage a more significant contribution to contemporary religious drama.

Till now, however, it is primarily the Utah universities and colleges which have led the small but burgeoning movement toward a more sophisticated rendering of the Mormon experience in theater. Of these schools, Brigham Young University, naturally, has made its stages most available for Mormon-oriented productions, and the annual Mormon Arts Festival at Brigham Young University has contributed significantly to the fostering of the Mormon drama. Productions of such works as Martin Kelly's And They Shall Be Gathered, Douglas Stewart's A Day, a Night, and a Day, Orson Scott Card's Stone Tables, and Charles W. Whitman's Play the Drum So It Is Heard Again are four among a number of examples which could be cited as important contributions to the Mormon stage. David Wright's Still the Mountain Wind, and Speak Ye Tenderly of Kings were produced at Utah State University and Brigham Young University, and underscore the keen loss332the Mormon culture suffered in Wright's early death.

Limitations imposed upon the editors by the economics of publishing preclude our presenting examples of Mormon drama in this book; otherwise we would have included an example of Clinton F. Larson's very Mormon poetic drama-probably The Mantle of the Prophet. A remarkably literary piece, The Mantle of the Prophet, is replete with grand rhythms, vivid language, and richly lyrical passages-all of which make this piece perhaps better suited for reader's theater. Certainly, at its best, the poetry of Larson's plays raises the audience from the mundane to the aesthetic and spiritual, as well-known events of Mormon history become impressive moments of universal insight. In other plays, such as The Brother of Jared, Corian tumr, and Moroni, Larson uses stories from the Book of Mormon as his point of departure. The result of these and his other plays about Church history, LDS scripture, and the Holy Bible is a spiritual enrichment which would be unlikely in other genres.

We should also have liked to include a representative of yet another significant branch of Mormon theater, the dramatic musical, generally in the tragi-comedy tradition. Carol Lynn Pearson's well-wrought The Order is Love stands clearly at the head of this form. Tim Order is Love, with music by Lex De Azevedo, is the finest in the line of musical dramas characterized by Promised Valley (1947). Evoking a similar respect for the sweep of Mormon history, Mrs. Pearson's play discovers in that history a vigorous universality at times sobering and at other times wonderfully funny. Skirting the in-group narrowness typical of so many Mormon productions, Mrs. Pearson deals with a number of human problems which are not easily solved: the pressures of the group against the ideals of the individual, the conflicts between generations, the dissonances that resonate where the old meets the new. Thus her play can be enjoyed on several levels and becomes, as a kind of Mormon Fiddler on the Roof, a harbinger of good things to come.
