Joan B. MacDonald, Holiness of Everyday Life ( 1995)

Part 2:

Relationships

Chapter 2:

Ourselves

And the soul, if she is to know herself, must look into the soul: The stranger and the enemy, we saw him in the mirror. —George Seferis

Who are you?

Who am I?

Oh, I know, I know—I am a child of God, and so my needs are great.

But what does that mean? And if I am a child of God, why am I not more godly? And does knowing I am a child of God really answer the question "Who am I?" What is personhood and personality, and how do those concepts relate to the question of who I am? What is my personal mission here on earth, or do I even have one? These are some of the questions that flit in and out of our minds or rumble somewhere in our subconsciouses, growling like a hungry stomach.

Who are we—really?

Enemy to God or Child of God—Which or When?

The natural man is an enemy to God, and has been from the fall of Adam. (Mosiah 3:19.)

Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is. (1 John 3:2.)

Natural man? Enemy to God? Or God's own beloved sons and daughters? Or is it both; sometimes one, sometimes the other? Which are we most of the time? Which says the most about our essential nature? Which were we first?

First we were sons and daughters of God. We became "natural" when we came to earth, participated in the fall, and became proud, rebellious, and self-centered. Those "natural" tendencies of our fallen selves are attributes we fight and struggle with all of our lives. Moving beyond the natural man to become more and more that which we already are, children of God, is what our life on earth is for.

Becoming

I went to a women's discussion circle several years ago. The leader started the discussion by having everyone in the room introduce themselves and tell the group one thing about themselves that defined who they were. When the discussion came back to her, she said there was only one word that accurately described herself; that word was becoming.

The scriptures state that we are all children of God and that "it doth not yet appear what we shall be."

This is unsettling. "Who am I?" we ask. The scriptures answer, You are a child of God and so you can't yet fully understand who you are or who you are becoming. All you can know for sure is that you are in process.

This is also liberating. We are becoming. We are not done yet. We will never be done in this life. Awareness of this can free us from self-imposed restrictions. We are freed from role-playing, script-following, and self-limitations. We are led into openness: open now to all possibilities and directions, open to ideas, open to different ways of being, open to the promptings of the Spirit. All of life becomes a walk in faith. Since we do not know for sure exactly where we are going or who we are becoming, life can be lived as described in the beautiful hymn "Lead, Kindly Light":

Lead, kindly Light, amid th' encircling gloom; Lead thou me on! The night is dark, and I am far from home; Lead thou me on! Keep thou my feet; I do not ask to see The distant scene—one step enough for me. I was not ever thus, nor pray'd that thou Shouldst lead me on. I loved to choose and see my path; but now, Lead thou me on! I loved the garish day, and, spite of fears, Pride ruled my will. Remember not past years. So long thy pow'r hath blessed me, sure it still Will lead me on O'er moor and glen, o'er crag and torrent, till The night is gone. And with the morn those angel faces smile, Which I have loved long since, And lost awhile! [^1]

As we watch our children grow, we know that, at any stage of childhood, they are not finished yet; but neither are they finished once they become adults. Nor are they, or we, finished once we marry and take on new roles as husbands and wives; nor are we finished once we become parents; nor are we finished when we move into middle age and that rocky, redefining period psychiatry refers to as "midlife crisis"; nor are we finished when we become old, even if we've managed to attain a measure of wisdom along the way; nor are we finished when we die. Becoming is eternal and turns all of life into an ever-new and grand adventure!

So, the first part of the answer to the question "Who am I?" is that we are becoming. We can't fully understand yet what we are becoming, but there is one thing we can know for sure: We are becoming that which we already are. Erich Fromm describes this process in a discussion on the source of the human conscience.

It is important to distinguish between an "authoritarian" and a "humanistic" ethics. An authoritarian conscience . . . is the voice of an internalized authority, such as parents, state, religion. . . . This type of conscience . . . guarantees that the person can be relied upon to act always according to the demands of his conscience; but it becomes dangerous when the authorities command evil things. . . .

Quite different from the authoritarian . . . conscience is the "humanistic" . . . conscience. It is not the internalized voice of an authority whom we are eager to please and afraid of displeasing; it is the voice of our total personality expressing the demands of life and growth. "Good" for the humanistic conscience is all that furthers life; "evil" is all that arrests and strangles it. The humanistic conscience is the voice of our self which summons us back to ourselves, to become what we potentially are. [^2]

The story of Paul the Apostle illustrates this principle. Saul was a Jew who vigorously persecuted Christians. He was cruel, vicious, and relentless—this seemed to be who Saul was. But on the road to Damascus, he met the Lord and was changed forever. He became Paul, the apostle, kind, gentle, believer in grace and reconciler of Gentile and Jew. The question is, which persona represents the truth about this man? Which was his essence? Which was his soul? What was he like in the premortal existence?

In most discussions we hear about Paul's conversion, it is assumed that Saul is the real person and Paul is the changed, converted one. This assumption raises some serious problems. If he was evil, why did God choose him? If Christ thrust conversion onto an unseeking Saul, what does that mean for the doctrine of agency? And if God was willing to grab Saul by the scruff of his neck and turn him into Paul, why didn't he do the same thing to other evil leaders, such as Hitler, Mafia bosses, or Saddam Hussein? Perhaps our basic assumption about Paul is wrong. Perhaps Paul was not the converted or changed Saul; perhaps Saul was the changed and corrupted Paul.

Surely we revealed something of ourselves to our Heavenly Father during the premortal existence. And always, there is the possibility that when we come to earth, the circumstances we find ourselves in will profoundly influence and alter who we were there and what we started out to be. The only plausible explanation for what happened to Saul on the road to Damascus is not that a truly evil man was changed into a truly good man; the only plausible explanation is that a false front was revealed and then stripped away. Paul was not blinded after his conversion; he was blind before. His confrontation with the Lord on the road to Damascus opened his eyes, revealing what had been there all along—a man of God.

So are we, many times, blind to who we truly are. We know the natural man so well. We focus on it and try to fight our natural and sometimes evil tendencies, and in so doing we lose sight of the real truth about who we are and who we are becoming. We need to change our basic assumptions about ourselves. We were first children of God. And we are becoming that which we already are—Gods to be. When we act from that assumption, we can focus on the light and goodness within ourselves and the light that leads us on. We become more conscious of, and more responsive to, our yearnings to be close to and act like God. Gradually, throughout eternity, the natural man falls away, and, like a snake shedding its skin, our truer selves come to light and move toward God.

As Meister Eckhart said:

The seed of God is in us. Given an intelligent and hard-working farmer and a diligent field hand, it will thrive and grow up to God, whose seed it is; and accordingly its fruits will be God-nature. Pear seeds grow up into pear trees, nut seeds into nut trees, and God seed into God. [^3]

Beginners All

The scriptures often admonish us to become like little children. There are many ways to interpret that admonition, but we would probably all agree that we are not to remain childish or naive. The interpretation that I have always preferred is that we are to remain open and teachable. Eastern religions say it another way, admonishing their followers to consider themselves as beginners throughout their lives. Like the idea of becoming, the idea of always beginning brings a kind of freedom. To be a beginner is to be free to make and admit mistakes. To be a beginner is to be free to start over with any aspect of our lives. To be a beginner is to be free to redefine ourselves whenever, however, and however often we might choose, for truly you and I are not the same people today that we were last year or even last week, and we will not be the same tomorrow as we are today. To be a beginner is to free ourselves from preconceptions, misconceptions, judgments, and expectations. To be a beginner is to remove ourselves from any ruts we may be in and to free ourselves from the chains of habit. We try to move into each new day empty and open, receptive to whatever new insights we might gain and whatever lessons we can learn.

I've never been able to be that open all the time, so to help myself, I like to play little mind games, my own version of "let's pretend." You might want to try some of these exercises. The next time you go to church on Sunday, go as if you've never been there before. Pretend you were raised a Hindu, for example. You've never before heard the talks or prayers or hymns you will hear today. You've never met the people before. You've never considered the ideas before. Open up! Go with no expectations, no preconceptions, no judgments, no resentments, and no fond memories. You'll hear things you've never noticed before, be surprised by what has become commonplace, and notice and want to befriend people whom you might have overlooked before.

Pretend to be new at old things. Try it the next time you go to the temple. Pretend you're going for the first time. Go without expectations, no questions needing to be answered, no ideas you have wondered about, no things that have helped you in the past. Go empty, just to see what it's like. You'll notice things you've never seen before.

Try it the next time you and your spouse go on a date. Pretend it's your first one. Ask the questions you would ask on a first date. What are your hobbies and interests? What is your favorite subject to read about? What do you like best about your job? Then ask those kinds of questions, but in the context of being married. What do you like best about being married? What do you admire most about each of our children? What do you worry about most? What did you do before you were married that you don't do now and that you miss the most?

Try it with your children. Pretend you're the babysitter and you've never met the kids before. What upsets you? Are you overlooking problems as a mom or dad that you would not tolerate in a neighbor's family? Those are the things you need to spend some time on next.

Try it with yourself. Today you are starting brand new. Just for today the calendar is wiped clean. There are no obligations or commitments. The bills are paid and there is no correspondence or phone calls to make. Think about what you would be like if your circumstances were different. Who would you be if you were single instead of married, or married instead of single? What would you do with your time if you had no children, if your job were different, or if you had no job. Is there some central part of you that would be unchanged if you were homeless or handicapped or of a different race or gender? We can never truly know the answers to these questions, but our imagination can take us far when we let it. Using our imaginations in this way can help us define the part of ourselves, our values and character traits, that we would want to remain strong and constant regardless of our circumstances.

And finally, do the beginner exercise with yourself in a different way. Keep your circumstances the way they presently are but approach the tasks and obligations of the day as if you were doing each thing for the first time. Free yourself to create new routines and new patterns to your doing. Look at all you have to do as if you've never set priorities before. Would you prioritize your tasks differently? Or would you do things in the same way but see new meaning in each task?

Self-Development

If we are all children of God and are all trying to become like God, what does that mean for individuality? What role does choice play when I am trying to become like God? Are we all going after the same thing, all becoming the same persona? Of course not. We all have different talents and abilities, different interests, and different ways of perceiving ourselves, the world, and even the gospel. We each emphasize different things, respond to different things, and respond to the same things in different ways. That is a major reason why "child of God" is not a sufficient answer to the question "Who am I?" Our "becoming" throughout life is not just becoming like our Heavenly Father. Indeed, it implies our becoming, as fully as we can, who we most truly are as personalities; becoming truer and truer to our own best selves. This implies great effort, painfully honest introspection, and commitment to personal development.

When we think about personal development, a few things immediately come to mind: identifying and developing talents, keeping physically fit through exercise and good nutrition, and keeping spiritually fit through regular scripture study. All of these further our personal development. However, if we look closer, we realize much more is involved in personal development than these "to do" types of things. We often have problems with our own development because we get caught up in role-playing and become confused about who we really are. This goes right back to the question "Who am I?" Often we just don't know.

There are many reasons we don't know. One reason is that we are not conditioned or taught to know. From earliest childhood we are taught to conform, to obey the rules, and to live up to the expectations of others. In school we follow a prescribed curriculum outlined by others, and we are most successful when we answer teachers with what they want to hear. We are seldom encouraged to think for ourselves, to question, or to challenge authority. At church it's the same story. The answers are known. Learn to repeat them and you'll be fine. At home it's not much different. We must live up to our parents' expectations.

Once we reach adulthood, we are expected to marry and have children, and our gender then defines who we are. A woman is a wife and mother, and she is expected to find total fulfillment in serving in that capacity. If she does not, we may feel that something is wrong with her. A man is the family provider and begins to be defined by his job. I am no longer John Greene. I am now Mr. Carpenter or Mr. Engineer. Since we're all raised to please others and comply with authority, we often lose the ability to hear our own voices. Frantically striving to please others, we forget what pleases us.

Try to remember what pleases you. Try to remember what you liked to do in high school and college. We often forget what pleases us, but if we are to become who we most truly are, and if we are to avoid getting lost along the way, we need to remember. It is not selfish to develop our talents or pursue our own interests occasionally. Heavenly Father would not have given us our individual talents and interests if he did not intend for us to use them.

When I was five or six years into child-rearing, I realized that I wasn't much fun anymore. All the fun outings, vacation ideas, and adventures were coming from my husband. I read a magazine article about how often women lose themselves in child-rearing (leading to the "empty nest" syndrome when children are grown). The article suggested remembering what you liked to do most when you were in high school. I have wonderful memories of Girl Scouts as a high-school student. As a matter of fact, most of the lullabies I sang to my children were camp songs. How could I have forgotten! Remembering helped me start again. I took more walks in the woods with my children, and I volunteered to be a Girl Scout leader in my daughter's troop. I had a wonderful time, had more to contribute to the family, and learned a valuable lesson: I learned the value of remembering. As the children got older and I had a little more free time, I remembered how much I enjoyed reading in high school and which types of books I liked best. I started reading again and soon was reading everything I could get my hands on. After a couple of years of voracious reading, I started writing this book. You never know where a little remembering might lead you.

Solitude can also help. It's hard to find time to be alone, especially the kind of time I'm thinking about here, but now and then life presents us with the opportunity: a husband's business trip, a wife's visit to her family, parents or roommates leaving town for a week. Have you ever noticed that we are sometimes different when we're living alone than we are when surrounded by family or friends? How do you do things differently when you're alone? Do you sleep later or get up earlier? Do you go to bed earlier or later? Do you listen to different kinds of music or watch different kinds of television programs when you're alone? Do you call a different set of friends when you're on your own? Do you eat differently, work differently, or think differently when you're alone than when surrounded by family and friends? The next time you have an opportunity to be alone for a few days, keep a journal and note the ways in which you are different. If your different ways of being seem positive to you, incorporate one or two of them into your usual routine. If some of your different ways of being reveal a weakness or a fault, you've gained insight into yourself. Set some goals, talk to some friends, read a book, or ask the Lord for help to begin overcoming the weakness or correcting the fault. The insights you gain in this process may help solve relationship problems when the family is back together.

We need other times of solitude too. Regular, small times. Daily times, if possible. We all need time to be alone with ourselves, to rest from the business of our days, to separate from others and reconnect with the reality of God. From experiences in quiet, introspective times, times with the scriptures, or times of prayer, we get back in touch with the central truth of who we are in a way that goes beyond definition or description in words. We reach out to touch God, he touches us, and we find our selfhood nurtured and affirmed.

Howard Thurman wrote:

There is no clear distinction between mind and spirit, but there is a quality of mind that is more than thought and the process of thought: this quality involves feelings and the wholeness in which the life of man has its being. . . . There is the rest of detachment and withdrawal when the spirit moves into the depths of the region of the Great Silence, where world weariness is washed away and blurred vision is once again prepared for the focus of the long view. . . . Here God speaks without words and the self listens without ears. Here at last, glimpses of the meaning . . . of one's own life are seen with all their striving. To accept this is one meaning of the good line, "Rest in the Lord . . ." [^4]

To wash away world-weariness and rest in the Lord—what a beautiful image! Why do we let ourselves get so busy we deny ourselves that experience? We must make time for ourselves alone with God. We must make this time happen. Early in the morning. At lunchtime. At night after everyone's asleep. In the kitchen, office, car, or bedroom. Time and space for our spiritual devotions can and must be made. We must realize that when we neglect our own self-development, we are also damaging our relationships with our families and friends. Regardless of service we may be performing, we are withholding ourselves from God and his influence. We are pitchers, not fountains; we simply have nothing to offer without frequent trips to the well. Most of all let yourself enjoy the process; becoming who you most truly are, looking at each day brand new, and pursuing the whole, complex beauty of personal development. Then offer it all, the process and the product, to yourself, your family, and your God.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] M. Scott Peck, The Road Less Traveled (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1978), pp. 81-83.
[^2] Brown, Human Intimacy, p. 125.
[^3] William Faulkner, in Stephen B. Oates, William Faulkner: The Man and the Artist (New York: Harper and Row, 1987), p. 249.
[^4] Brown, Human Intimacy.
