Joan B. MacDonald, Holiness of Everyday Life ( 1995)

Chapter 3:

Marriage

Go from me. Yet I feel that I shall stand Henceforward in thy shadow. Nevermore Alone upon the threshold of my door Of individual life, I shall command The uses of my soul, nor lift my hand Serenely in the sunshine as before, Without the sense of that which I forbore— Thy touch upon the palm. The widest land Doom takes to part us, leaves thy heart in mine With pulses that beat double. What I do And what I dream include thee, as the wine Must taste of its own grapes. And when I sue God for myself, He hears that name of thine, And sees within my eyes the tears of two. —Elizabeth Barrett Browning

Ah, marriage. The young long for it; the already married aren't so sure. Marriage starts with falling in love. Romance, happiness, and high hopes fill our hearts. We marry, and then life sets in: bills need to be paid, babies cared for, work performed—like so much else in life, love becomes hard work. Also, like so much else in life, that hard work turns out to be to our benefit.

Have you ever wondered why marriage plays so important a role in the plan of salvation? Marriage is more than a good thing in Mormon theology; it is also a moral obligation. Why? The obvious answer is, of course, procreation. Marriage and family are the vehicle our Heavenly Father uses to bring his spirit children to earth. Still, since most of us will marry anyway, what would be the harm if a few people chose to remain single? Yet the prophets have clearly and emphatically spoken on this, teaching that if someone remains single by choice, that person's eternal salvation is jeopardized. Why? What's the big deal, anyway?

I believe the big deal is love—not the falling-in-love ecstasy where marriage begins, but the working-at-love, satisfying yet difficult, where marriage ends up.

Martin Luther stated that marriage is the school of love. John the Beloved wrote, "Beloved, let us love one another: for love is of God; and every one that loveth is born of God, and knoweth God. He that loveth not knoweth not God; for God is love." (1 John 4:7-8.)

Love is important, but we often find it difficult even to figure out what it is. Oh, we know the feeling all right; we know the ecstasy of falling in love, the joy when our children are born, the comfort we enjoy with our friends. But the working-at-love, the love we have to learn about, the love the Lord commands us to give—that love, we're not so sure of.

If marriage is the school of love, what is it about loving we are to learn? If love is hard work, what is the work we must do? I found answers to these questions in M. Scott Peck's The Road Less Traveled:

I define love thus: The will to extend one's self for the purpose of nurturing one's own or another's spiritual growth. . . .

. . . The act of extending one's limits implies effort. One extends one's limits only by exceeding them, and exceeding limits requires effort. When we love someone our love becomes demonstrable or real only through our exertion—through the fact that for that someone . . . we take an extra step or walk an extra mile. Love is not effortless. To the contrary, love is effortful.

Finally, by use of the word "will" I have attempted to transcend the distinction between desire and action. Desire is not necessarily translated into action.

. . . Everyone in our culture desires to some extent to be loving, yet many are not in fact loving. I therefore conclude that the desire to love is not itself love. Love is as love does. Love is an act of will—namely, both an intention and an action. Will also implies choice. We do not have to love. We choose to love. No matter how much we may think we are loving, if we are in fact not loving, it is because we have chosen not to love and therefore do not love despite our good intentions. On the other hand, whenever we do actually exert ourselves in the cause of spiritual growth, it is because we have chosen to do so. The choice to love has been made. [^1]

To truly love another requires self-discipline, sacrifice, patience, hope, and faith. It requires putting aside our preoccupations to make space in our thoughts for the other person's thoughts. It requires paying close attention, listening, sharing of ourselves, and suffering together. It requires all of these things daily, hourly, and at inconvenient times, year after year.

Marriage, more than any other relationship, teaches us about three components of love: commitment, acceptance, and communication.

Commitment

I chose to discuss commitment first because it is the foundation on which the other two components of love rest. When a spouse is committed to the marriage, the other spouse can't help but be aware of that commitment. Likewise, when the commitment of one or both spouses is weak or lacking, that lack of commitment becomes a major factor in inhibiting both acceptance and communication, simply because acceptance and honest communication both contain an element of risk. It is difficult to be honest and open in our communication, to express anger, dissatisfaction, or assertiveness, if we fear that those very expressions could lead to the dissolution of our marriage.

Commitment in marriage is twofold. First, it includes commitment to the institution of marriage itself—commitment to endure to the end, regardless of circumstances or problems that come up along the way. As Leo Buscaglia's mother was fond of saying, "Murder—maybe. Divorce—never!"

The second is the commitment to put into the marriage whatever it takes to make it a satisfying and meaningful relationship. A good marriage requires hard work, compromise, goodwill, and frequent, sometimes painful, struggle. Marriage is more often an emotional wrestling match than it is candlelight and roses. That isn't because couples just don't get along well; rather, it is because of the very nature of the relationship. Marriage comes loaded with issues that need to be worked through so the family can function and the relationship thrive—issues such as the division of family responsibilities, the identification and appropriate use of each person's abilities, the management of financial resources, dominance and submission, the degree of independence or dependence each person requires or is willing to allow the other, and breaking down personal barriers to invite the other into our private thoughts and feelings. As Victor L. Brown, Jr., wrote:

Intimacy must include an active commitment to those we claim to love. And to endure, intimacy must be part of an ongoing structure. Breaking through the barrier that guards close relationships takes major effort and energy. It is at once a simple yet difficult experience. It is partially based on the sheer duration of years together. Even more important is a respect for the partner's personality coupled with an intense personal devotion to the marriage, a commitment of character. [^2]

It is in marriage and the struggles we experience there that we come to understand what commitment feels like—the determination and courage it imparts, the suffering we must sometimes endure, and the steadfastness we must have in the face of vacillating emotions.

Those are invaluable lessons. Emotions do vacillate, times do get tough, spouses do disappoint each other. Commitment keeps the ship of marriage on an even keel. As we learn the requirements of commitment in marriage, we are then better prepared to follow through on our commitments to the Lord. Although we sometimes don't want to admit it, emotional vacillation occurs also in our spiritual relationships. I have loved God, and I have hated God. I have stepped out in faith, and I have shrunk in fear. I have felt and born strong testimony, and I have felt confused and filled with doubts. I have felt the Spirit so strongly I was sure I could have reached out and touched God, and I have felt so lost and alone I wondered if God truly existed. I often thought I was alone in those feelings. I know now that they are common. I've seen surveys that indicate up to 70 percent of active Church members have gone through periods of doubt strong enough to call that doubt loss of testimony. Doubt has been reported as persisting anywhere from a few months to more than a decade. What keeps people active in the Church when they feel "out of it"? Commitment. What we learn of commitment in marriage helps us through trials of our faith, and what we learn of commitment during trials of our faith can help us endure hard times in our marriage. Indeed, trials of faith can cause trials in our marriage, and vice versa. Enduring these trials together and sharing our spouses' troubles both enrich the marriage and build testimony.

To demonstrate the value of commitment in marriage, even in a period of doubt, let us look at how a "crisis of faith" might be experienced in a strong, committed marriage. We'll start with an active LDS couple who were married in the temple. Over the years they have had children, worked hard, and fulfilled their Church obligations. Then something happens to one of them—adversity of some sort: illness, an accident, or a death in the family. It might be exposure to previously unknown information or ideas. It might be a "midlife crisis," with its attendant questioning of all the so-called givens in one's life. Whatever the cause, one partner is now questioning and filled with doubts. For that person all the "knowing" has disappeared from his or her testimony. If there is strong commitment and support in the marriage, this crisis of faith can be a time of tremendous growth and deep-felt sharing. The troubled partner can share all doubts, questions, anger, or resentment, even if that anger is directed toward God. The couple can then work through the problems together. The doubting partner can feel free to ask questions out loud and to seek answers from his or her partner. He or she can also feel free to seek help from the bishop or a professional counselor because nothing is being hidden. As the problems are worked through, as questions are asked and answers found, one thing remains constant—the couple's commitment to each other and to the marriage. If one spouse's faith remains sure, as is usually the case, through his or her support and compassion, the troubled spouse feels free to share his or her burdens, his or her doubts. In the fasting, prayers, study, and suffering of the "sure" spouse, God "hears that name of thine, and sees within my eyes the tears of two," as Elizabeth Barrett Browning put it. When the crisis is over and testimony is regained, imagine the couple's joy and gratitude at having successfully weathered such a storm.

I have seen this scenario played out in the lives of several of my friends. Our former bishop was totally inactive in the Church for more than a decade. He was busy, successful, and brilliant. His career was too important to him to allow time to be given to the Church, and his faith was too simplistic to satisfy his mind. However, those ten years of inactivity were terribly difficult for his wife. Still, because of her commitment to her husband and their marriage, she had the strength to do the spiritual work of two. She remained fully active, taught their children, and offered many prayers on her husband's behalf. Since reentering Church activity, her husband has been bishop of two large wards. She is immensely proud of what he has both overcome and become, and he is grateful for her faithful prayers that helped him back. They both learned a great deal about commitment and love through their experience together.

Acceptance

Bishops and parents commonly counsel young people who are about to marry to take time the first few years to really get to know each other. Young people are told that they don't really know each other until after they have lived together awhile. People often forget, however, that this is true not only at the beginning of marriage but also throughout a couple's life together. Why? People change. Sometimes people change dramatically. Interests and hobbies change. Perspective, understanding, and abilities all change over the years. We must continue getting to know each other (which means communicating with each other). As we do, there must be an atmosphere of acceptance. Each spouse must allow the other to do his or her own becoming.

Heavenly Father recognizes and respects each individual's personality. He leads us each in different ways at different times. He challenges us each in different ways. He chastens us each in different ways. He teaches us each in different ways. Each spouse needs to allow the other to discover and develop his or her own personal relationship with God. Each spouse needs to allow the other to follow his or her own inner voice. Your Church callings won't be the same as your spouse's as you progress through life. Your "burning causes" probably won't be the same either. Your stumbling blocks, problems, and personal crises won't always be the same. All of these things are shared in marriage, but they cannot be dictated by one spouse to another. We cannot insist that because something is important to us, it must be of equal importance to our partner. Likewise, if something is important to our partner but seems rather unimportant to us, we can neither make the issue our own nor dismiss it as insignificant. Rather, we can respect the issue and its importance to our partner, offer our interest and support, and reserve our best efforts and greatest energy for our own issues.

Heavenly Father's most precious gift is our agency. Agency is the bedrock principle on which the entire plan of salvation is based. Acceptance of one's partner within the marriage relationship establishes an atmosphere in which each person is free to be. Spiritual growth requires following the promptings of the Spirit. It is hard to follow the light if your spouse feels threatened and keeps trying to blow it out!

On the other hand, personal freedom is bound by limits. Sometimes personal interests, desires, doubts, or drives must be curtailed for the good of the family. Sometimes one partner must act as a dam to the other's doubts, fears, or desires if, acting out of deep moral conviction, that partner sees the other as driving himself or herself into danger. I think of the tragic story Carol Lynn Pearson recounts in Goodbye—I Love You. The book is the story of Sister Pearson's marriage to a man who had homosexual tendencies. After four children and many happy years, he left the marriage to fully explore homosexuality. He moved to San Francisco and had numerous affairs but could never find a partner with whom he could share his soul in the way he had with his wife. Eventually he contracted AIDS and came back home, where Sister Pearson nursed him until his death. This example is an extreme one, and homosexuality is a complex issue—one I do not pretend to understand. The point is, there are boundaries to our freedom—which we cross at our peril. Marriage itself creates boundaries and, from time to time, each partner may exert pressure on the other to remain within those bounds.

In his book Freedom and Destiny, Rollo May uses the analogy of a river to describe the relationship between freedom and destiny. The flow of the river represents personal freedom, the banks of the river represent personal destiny—the limits of one's freedom. Without the banks, the river overflows, is dissipated, and disappears into the sand. Flowing within the confines of its banks, the river has direction, force, and vitality. So it is in marriage. The marriage becomes part of one's destiny and imposes certain limits on personal freedom. Within those limits, each partner works out his or her own personal and spiritual growth. There must be acceptance, allowance, and freedom, but these must be balanced with limits, consideration for others, and sacrifice for the common good. Thus the couple grows together, sometimes in different ways or at different times, or even in different directions, but with one another's support and within agreed-upon limits and boundaries.

Communication

Commitment is the head of a marriage—the reasoning, choice-making, conscious mind that keeps marriage stable and moving forward. Commitment is great glue. Acceptance is the heart of marriage: the trust, confidence, and affection that rejoices in the partners' individual personalities and recognizes individual needs and desires. Communication is the door that opens from the mind to the heart and back again.

So entwined are these three attributes of a growing marriage that they become difficult to separate. The strengthening of the relationship outlined in the "crisis of faith" example depends on the troubled partner's communicating doubts and questions to his or her spouse. Earlier I pointed out that people change. It is important for us to allow our partner (and ourselves, too) the freedom to change. As we change and grow, it is important to talk to each other. If we don't, we may find that eventually we no longer know each other.

Yet even in the best of marriages, talking freely can be difficult. Think about the way you talk to your best friend. With our best friends we can say almost anything; the words just spill out. This free, open communication can be difficult in marriage because marriage is such an emotionally charged relationship. The love is more intense, the desire to please is more intense, the disappointment is more intense, the hate is more intense, and the expectations are higher than in any other relationship. Honest talk within marriage can be scary.

Communication is difficult in marriage because the marriage relationship is loaded with the issues I mentioned earlier: the division of family responsibilities, the identification and use of individual abilities, the management of finances, dominance and submission, independence and dependence. These issues are not present in the same degree outside the family. These are thorny issues. I repeat, honest talk within marriage can be scary.

Yet talk we must. We must be sufficiently committed to the quality of the relationship to take the risk. We must also offer one another enough acceptance to minimize the risk. The talking and sharing that occur in a good marriage, like everything else discussed in this book, contain a spiritual element. The ability to think and talk, the development and use of language, is unique to human beings. We can understand the power of words when we read the word of God or hear a good sacrament meeting talk. Language, spirituality, and morality are all closely linked. The connection is amusingly but powerfully described by William Faulkner:

When the last ding-dong of doom has clanged and faded from the last worthless rock hanging tideless in the last red and dying evening, . . . even then there will still be one more sound: that of [man's] puny inexhaustible voice, still talking . . . not because he alone among creatures has an inexhaustible voice, but because he has a soul, a spirit capable of compassion and sacrifice and endurance. [^3]

Man keeps on talking, man longs to talk, not just because man has a voice and language but because man has a soul. The spirit and the body, the soul of man, longs to share itself with another. That longing results in and is met and satisfied by marriage. But the longing to share is met and often satisfied only when the sharing continues, and the sharing can continue only when partners make a concerted effort to keep communication open, honest, and free-flowing. Communicating feelings and thoughts creates and enhances intimacy. Locking feelings up within ourselves creates alienation and isolation—but often we do it anyway. To some extent, even the most verbal and open couple will withhold feelings from one another, and most of us do it to an extent that harms the relationship at some time or another. That is quite natural. Victor L. Brown, Jr., speaks of the "barriers that guard human relationships." [^4] We all have those barriers. One of marriages greatest challenges is to balance necessary respect for one's own and one's partner's barriers with the necessary breaking through of personal barriers so that intimacy may occur. To break through the barriers, we must confront a powerful force—the force of silence.

Silence can be wonderful, and many of marriage's special and intimate moments are accompanied by silence. That is not the kind of silence to which I am referring. The silence that is destructive to human relationships is the silence that accompanies fear, denial, anger, and hurt.

Denial is the response that many of us mere mortals give to significant problems that arise in our lives. We pretend problems don't exist in the hope they will go away or solve themselves. Silence protects our pretense. As long as we don't talk about the problems, we can go on pretending all is well. To break the silence that accompanies denial requires tremendous courage and a willingness to face the very problems we have been avoiding in the past. In those cases, the process of breaking silence is nothing more or less than communal repentance. The first steps in this repentance are recognition of the problem and confession. As with personal repentance, the first steps are the hardest.

Fear in the context of close family relationships is, in reality, the anxiety that accompanies allowing ourselves to be vulnerable. Communication can break through the barriers that guard all close relationships. Those barriers are the psychic boundaries we put up to protect ourselves. Open, close communication pierces the barriers, requiring us to "drop our guard." And to "drop our guard" is to become and feel vulnerable. We expose our tenderness, risking rejection or hurt; we expose our anxieties, revealing that we are often less than confident; we expose our anger and dissatisfaction, risking damage to the relationship. Afraid of such exposure, we often retreat into silence.

To take the risk, to break the silence, to begin the conversation—these take effort, courage, and self-discipline. Here again is the work of love, the extending of oneself for the sake of another. The risk we are taking—the risk of rejection or disappointment—feels like nothing less than offering our hearts to be broken. But wasn't that the message of the Savior's life; from his first sermon to his death on the cross, he offered his heart to be broken. Marriage is a lifelong opportunity for us to offer our hearts to another—even if it means occasionally having them broken. We offer our hearts in many ways—in small acts of kindness, consideration, and respect—but none is so great as the offering we make in communication: listening with full attention and empathy, talking with true and honest feeling, sharing with each other the good, the bad, and the ugly. Talk and listen; talk of doubts, talk of fears, talk of tenderness, talk of anger, talk of embarrassments, talk of accomplishments, talk of disappointments, talk of joy, talk of remorse, talk of hopes and dreams. As partners in marriage, we need to offer our hearts to one another. As we do, our barriers will melt and our hearts will soften, and a soft heart is fertile ground for the Spirit of God.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Nibley, Old Testament and Related Studies, p. 76.
[^2] William Shakespeare, As You Like It, act 3, scene 2.
[^3] Berends, Whole Child/Whole Parent.
[^4] Sherrie Johnson, Spiritually Centered Motherhood (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1983), p. 3.
