Joan B. MacDonald, Holiness of Everyday Life ( 1995)

PART 3:

Magnifying Spiritual Growth

Chapter 6:

Repentance

In this life many things happen in which we play a shameful part. Those of us who are strong forgive ourselves and go on. The weak wallow in their shame and allow it to devour them. There is no one of us without sin, child. There ought to be some comfort in that. . . . Change is an easy thing to decide and a difficult thing to do. It is the day-to-day struggle of it that defeats people. Do not despair if old ways look good to you. Despair only if you fall into them too often. —Karleen Koen

A few months ago I attended a stake conference. The theme was repentance. Six men and women spoke during the session. Without exception, the speakers introduced their talks with the comment that they were addressing only those in the congregation who had committed serious transgressions and were thus in need of repentance. The implication was that the rest of us were fine and need not concern ourselves with repentance. We all know that is not true, and yet we often talk, think, and act as if it were.

What is repentance, and what does it have to do with the average, active, commandment-keeping Latter-day Saint? And more in keeping with the theme of this book, how does repentance relate to the experiences of our daily lives?

In the Church we speak of the process of repentance as involving four essential steps:

Recognizing Wrongdoing (Sin)

The speakers at stake conference made their mistakes at step one. So do most of us. When we think of sin, we usually think of the "biggies": adultery, dishonesty, breaking the Word of Wisdom, child abuse, inactivity, and so on. There are problems with that way of thinking about sin. The first problem is that many of us use these sins to excuse ourselves from thinking seriously about our own sins; these are sins somebody else commits. The second problem is that when we think of sin in that way, we narrow our perception of sins to actions only; we completely overlook the role of thoughts, attitudes, and motivations. Yet the scriptures make clear that, even in the midst of doing right, we can be wrong.

The Apostle Paul wrote of the last days, "Men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, trucebreakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good, traitors, heady, highminded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God." (2 Timothy 3:2-4.)

The sins of action listed here are bragging, blaspheming, disobedience, dishonesty, and slander. The sins of being are selfishness, envy, pride, ingratitude, conceit, and hedonism. Who among us can honestly say we are free from selfishness, envy, pride, or conceit? More disturbing still, our good actions are sometimes motivated by sins of being, by envy, conceit, competitiveness, or self-righteousness. But does motivation matter? And if so, how much?

In "Murder in the Cathedral," by T. S. Eliot, Thomas Becket has a fascinating struggle with a person (himself) described as "the tempter." Thomas Becket's struggle with himself centers around his motivations for making a choice that might result in his martyrdom:

TEMPTER: What can compare with glory of Saints

Dwelling forever in presence of God?

What earthly glory, of king or emperor,

What earthly pride, that is not poverty

Compared with richness of heavenly grandeur?

Seek the way of martyrdom, make yourself the lowest

On earth, to be high in heaven.

And see far off below you, where the gulf is fixed,

Your persecutors, in timeless torment,

Parched passion, beyond expiation.

THOMAS: No!

Who are you, tempting with my own desires? . . .

Others offered real goods, worthless

But real. You only offer

Dreams to damnation.

TEMPTER: You have often dreamt them.

THOMAS: Is there no way, in my soul's sickness,

Does not lead to damnation in pride?

I well know that these temptations

Mean present vanity and future torment.

Can sinful pride be driven out

Only by more sinful? Can I neither act nor suffer

Without perdition? . . .

The last temptation is the greatest treason:

To do the right deed for the wrong reason. . . .

To become servant of God was never my wish.

Servant of God has chance of greater sin

And sorrow, than the man who serves a king.

For those who serve a greater cause may make the cause serve them. [^1]

Becket was tempted to make a right choice, martyrdom, not because it was the right thing to do, but because it would earn him eternal glory and lead to the damnation of his enemies. Before he could "choose the right" and have that choice be truly right, he had to rid his heart of pride and the desire for revenge. Motivation matters.

An interesting commentary on the significance of motivation in right- and wrongdoing is seen in the beliefs about heaven held by the followers of Emanuel Swedenborg. Swedenborg describes an afterlife remarkably similar to our own understanding, complete with three degrees of glory: a telestial kingdom, a terrestrial kingdom, and a celestial kingdom. Entrance to any of these kingdoms, he says, is not dependent upon good works or compliance with the performance of ordinances. It is assumed that all who enter any of the three kingdoms have participated in required ordinances and spent their lives engaged in good works, for these are three levels of heaven. The determining factor for an individual's final destination is not the quality or quantity of good works performed but rather the motivation behind them. Those going to the telestial kingdom are those whose good deeds are motivated by a sense of duty; those going to the terrestrial kingdom are those motivated by a love of truth; those invited into the celestial kingdom are those motivated by a love for God. Sense of duty, love of truth, and love for God—all three of these motivations are righteous. If I could get to the point in my own life where all my actions were motivated by one of these three, I would have come a long way in my own spiritual progression. The sins Paul lists in 2 Timothy, envy, pride, ingratitude, conceit, and love of pleasure, are just a few of the "sins of being/motivation" human beings are prone to. We could add selfishness, laziness, fearfulness, lust, and greed. It would require an entire book to discuss each of these. I have chosen three—pride, fear, and laziness—that I would like to discuss to help us begin to overcome these problems and to illustrate that repentance is a complex and lifelong effort.

Pride, Fear, and Laziness: The Problems

President Benson identified pride as the universal sin. But what is pride? How does the pride that is harmful differ from healthy self-esteem? What of the feeling of calm confidence that accompanies right doing? Is that pride? What of the powerful ego that is often seen in effective leaders, even righteous leaders? Is that pride? I'm not sure I have answers to those questions. I am neither a psychologist nor a theologian. But I do have some ideas based on my own experiences with both the good and bad aspects of pride. It seems to me that self-esteem, calm confidence from right doing, and strong egos are all based on one thing—the truth. They are based on the truth because people with high self-esteem and strong egos are people who know and accept the truth about themselves. Their self-esteem is based on personal integrity. Moreover, self-esteem is often accompanied by sincere humility and a sense of deep gratitude to God.

The kind of pride President Benson referred to is often called false pride. It is based on pretense. In some ways we all fall short, we all disappoint ourselves. We use false pride to shelter ourselves from our disappointment. The more honest we are, the more self-esteem we have and the more capable we are of accepting our shortcomings with grace or even humor. But to some degree we all cover up. We use many techniques to cover our self-disappointment and soothe our wounded self-esteem. We put on fancy clothes and gather possessions. We criticize, judge, and gossip. We join cliques, eager to associate with the bright, the witty, and the beautiful, eager to avoid the slow or unattractive. False pride seeks to build up and exalt a false sense of self-goodness, often at the expense of others.

Self-esteem often seeks cooperation and the common good. False pride almost always contains an element of competition. Competition may be great when playing games, but it has no place in the personal relationships within a religious community such as our wards.

A wonderful sister in our ward has spent the past several years studying the New Testament. She has taken many courses at Wellesley College and Harvard in both the New Testament and Greek. She has often shared what she has learned with our ward or stake in Gospel Doctrine and Relief Society lessons, Women's Conference addresses, and special classes she has offered. When she was studying the letters of Paul, she often told us of Paul's insistence that we remove competition from our relationships. In fact, charity was defined as "seeking the good of the other without competition or proving." Think about that—to seek the good of another without competition or trying to prove anything. Think about your daily interactions with other people at work, school, home, or church. At work, could you seek the good of your customers or co-workers with no thought given to competing with co-workers or proving something to your boss? At school, could you learn for the sake of learning, help fellow students for the sake of helping, and remove competitiveness from your relationships? At home, could you seek the good of your spouse, children, parents, or siblings without competing with someone or trying to prove yourself? At church, could you help another for the sake of helping and remove "keeping up with the Joneses," "in-groups," and "out-groups" from your ward? Thinking about these situations makes me feel discouraged, as I do when someone quotes the scripture "Be ye therefore perfect." Removing pride, competitiveness, and proving from our motivations would require extraordinary effort! And so I lament, and maybe you do too, with Thomas Beckett, "Can sinful pride be driven out?"

Fear is the second problem on our list.

Fear is the opposite of faith. In Lectures on Faith, Joseph Smith says, "Faith is the principle of action in all intelligent beings. Faith . . . is the moving cause of all action." [^2] Faith is a principle of action. Fear then, as the opposite of faith, is a principle of inaction. Fear is the motivation for our sins of omission. Unlike pride, fear itself is not a sin. In fact, the definition of courage is to act in the face of fear. The motivation and strength to act in the face of fear come from faith.

Fear is as common to the human condition as is pride. The story of Job points out some interesting things about fear. Job was a man of God, successful in the community, a strong family man, and a spiritually centered man. Yet when misfortune began to assail him, one of the first things he said was, "The thing which I greatly feared is come upon me." (Job 3:25.) In spite of his faith, a faith that eventually triumphed in his life, Job was beset by hidden and secret fears. So are we all.

Like Job, many of us fear loss: loss of material possessions; loss of a family member through death, disease, or sin; loss of status; loss of security.

Most of us also fear exposure. We want to appear competent and capable, yet we don't always feel that way. We often feel weak, vulnerable, and inadequate, and we fear that others will discover our weakness. So we hide. We become super-people, hiding behind a mask of extraordinary capability or worldly achievement, or we become shy and hide behind a thin veneer of meekness. We hide from others and we hide from ourselves; perhaps most significantly, we hide from God. We don't want anyone to discover our vulnerability. But then, horror of horrors, like Job's, our fears come upon us, and we are exposed for all the world to see. Our children grow up and become teenagers, they grow restless and unhappy, they become rebellious or get into trouble—and they don't even have the decency to do it in the privacy of our homes. They do it publicly, for all the world to see. Or, the children we desperately hoped for don't materialize. Or the economy goes through a recession and we lose our jobs, our homes, or our life's savings. Or we move into our thirties or forties and it becomes obvious to all that we're not going to marry. Or we get fat or go bald or lose our health, or all three! The list could go on and on, for the fact is, we are all human. We are all vulnerable, and, at some point in our lives, our fears do come upon us. We are exposed for what we are: sometimes good, sometimes not so good, sometimes strong, sometimes weak, sometimes capable, sometimes inadequate, sometimes courageous, often afraid.

Though fear most often leads to sins of omission, it can also lead to dishonesty or deceit. Afraid of punishment, criticism, ridicule, or exposure, we lie. We lie to others and we lie to ourselves. Fear is not so much a sin to be repented of as an obstacle to overcome on the path of repentance. The first step is the same as the first step in all repentance: to identify the problem. We must look within ourselves to discover (uncover) our fears. We then must face and accept them, look them right in the eye, and say, "Yes! You are mine. You are a part of who I am!" Only then can we begin to make overcoming our fears part of our process of repentance.

The final sin I would like to discuss, a sin as universal as both pride and fear, is laziness. I would like to quote from M. Scott Peck's The Road Less Traveled. Here he is discussing the causes of sin:

Our failure to conduct—or to conduct fully and wholeheartedly—this internal debate between good and evil is the cause of those evil actions that constitute sin. In debating the wisdom of a proposed course of action, human beings routinely fail to obtain God's side of the issue. They fail to consult or listen to the God within them, the knowledge of rightness which inherently resides within the minds of all [human beings]. We make this failure because we are lazy. It is work to hold these internal debates. They require time and energy just to conduct them. And if we take them seriously—if we seriously listen to this "God within us"—we usually find ourselves being urged to take the more difficult path, the path of more effort rather than less. To conduct the debate is to open ourselves to suffering and struggle. Each and every one of us, more or less frequently, will hold back from this work, will also seek to avoid this painful step. Like Adam and Eve, and every one of our ancestors before us, we are all lazy. [^3]

Here, then, is the essence of our problems with repentance. It is so much easier to think of repentance as something someone else needs. It is so much easier to define the big sins only. But if we have to examine our motives even for our good deeds, if we have to uncover and face our fears, if we have to conduct the "internal debate"—that's hard and often painful work! Yet it is work in which we must be constantly engaged. We must be engaged because repentance is simply another word for spiritual growth—growth toward God, and, unfortunately, if we are not growing toward God, we are growing away from him. In the final analysis it comes down to this—we succumb to our laziness or we begin the task of repentance, of examining our motives and confronting our fears.

Pride, Fear, Laziness: Some Help

Regular self-examination is the first step on the road of repentance. To conduct the "internal debate": What did I do today? How was I feeling while I was doing it? How did I feel afterward? Was I judgmental, self-congratulatory, or smug? What did I fail to do? What were my motives? Was I afraid? Was I lazy or were there other priorities? Am I being too hard on myself?—not in this context; this is the time to let yourself be filled with self-doubt.

Regularly spending time in this kind of self-examination accomplishes more than just recognition of sin. The very act of examining ourselves and our motives diminishes pride and increases humility. The act of discovering our fears itself requires courage. And the whole process is hard work that requires great self-discipline. Just by beginning, we find ourselves moved down the road toward our goal. As we become more conscious of our pride, our fears, and our laziness, we become uncomfortable. We respond to that discomfort in one of two ways: either we stop doing the self-examination and hide from ourselves, or we act. Action is the next step in the process of repentance.

Confess, Ask Forgiveness, Forsake Sin?

These final three steps of repentance are pretty straight-forward when one thinks of sins as wrongdoing, but when sin is defined in terms of motives and fears, things become a little more complex. How does one forsake pride, fear, or laziness? Let me illustrate just how difficult this is with the problem of pride.

Here we are on a bright, sunny Monday morning. We said our prayers this morning. We confessed our pride and our competitiveness to God and asked his forgiveness. We got up determined to free our behavior from all misguided or self-seeking motivations. We get to work (it could be school or parenting) and start by offering today's efforts to the glory of God. We're doing well. We've never been quite so productive or cheerful as we work. Then the boss comes by, pats us on the back, and compliments our efforts; or maybe the boss doesn't even notice our efforts; or maybe someone at the next desk is looking at us as if we're crazy; or maybe we notice we're doing twice as much as anyone else in the room. Now the trouble begins. Little thoughts just pop up into our minds. Thoughts like "Ha, I'll show Joe (or the boss) who does the best work around here" or "Why don't they quit talking and get to work. Do I have to do everything around here?" and then "Oh no! I wasn't going to be this way today."

Pride, fear, and laziness are not easy to forsake. All three seem to grow within our hearts, minds, and habits like weeds in a garden. How do we forsake and never repeat those kinds of sins? We don't forsake. We grow. And, like all growing things, we do it just a little at a time. With grosser sins repentance is forsaking; more often repentance is growing—slowly growing away from sin and toward God. However, there are actions we can take and techniques we can use to move the process along. We've already mentioned two. The first is regular self-examination, the second is prayer. There are other techniques for each problem, and I will discuss them one at a time.

Pride

I have a friend who is a physical therapist. She recently told me a wonderful story of an incident at her work. Her "sin" or "wrong way of being" was not so much competition or proving as it was self-involvement at an inappropriate time. Our egos have many ways of interfering, and pride wears many masks.

She was with an elderly patient in the patient's hospital room. She was putting her patient through a series of therapeutic exercises. However, she was not "with" the patient. As she worked, her mind was with the next patient, and the next, reviewing her afternoon, filled with herself. She suddenly became conscious of that and was slightly embarrassed, feeling she was slighting her patient in some way. She prayed, saying, "Dear Lord, how would you be if you were here treating this patient?" Immediately her mind shifted, but not in the way she expected. She thought she might imagine herself as the Savior treating the patient; instead, in her mind, her patient became the Savior. This patient had my friend's full attention now! During the rest of the therapy session my friend treated her patient with the same gentle, tender touch and full attention she would have given a newborn baby. When the session was over, the patient complimented my friend on her kindness. Neither the good deed nor the praise received prompted feelings of pride in my friend. She felt as if she had participated in a sacred experience and left the room feeling both humble and grateful.

A similar story is told of Mother Teresa of Calcutta. A patient was waiting to be treated. The patient had an ugly, filthy wound crawling with maggots. The young nun who was assigned to treat the patient could not bring herself to touch the wound; she shrank in revulsion. Mother Teresa gave the young nun a look of mild reproof and said gently, "My dear, this is Jesus." She then proceeded to cleanse and dress the wound herself.

Imagine doing all your work or good deeds as if to or for the Savior. Where is there room for feelings of competition or proving? When your work or service are done and they are good, they are just that. Good. And you don't feel pride, for you've only been a vehicle, a conduit for the Lord. You feel privileged, you feel humble, and you feel grateful.

A second technique is to avoid too much struggling with your pride. Bring it to awareness, become conscious of it, but don't fight it. Instead replace it. We need to realize when competition or proving enters the picture, but then we need to immediately shift our attention to the first part—seeking the good of the other. In the first illustration—the one at the office—what might our response to our co-workers be if we remembered to seek the good for them? In parenting or marriage, friendship or church service, what might we be like if we reminded ourselves to seek the good of the other? In the context of work or home, seeking the good of another might sometimes require confrontation or honest expression of anger. The key is to first examine our motives and then speak with the benefit of the other foremost in our minds.

Fear

We've already discussed one of the major antidotes for fear. We've all heard the truism "to banish fear you must do the thing you fear." This is extremely difficult, for we all shrink from doing that which we fear. It is best to start small, using self-examination to set short-term goals for actions that help counter fears. Start with sins of omission. You might visit or home teach a less-active but not hostile member to help overcome anxiety about sharing the gospel; bear your testimony more often; if you are shy, introduce yourself to one person you don't know each month; if you are outgoing, move beyond your close circle of friends to regularly invite the elderly, single, or less active into your home. These types of things, and many more, can be used to extend ourselves, to regularly act in the face of small fears and anxieties so that faith and action gradually replace and minimize fears. As our fears are reduced, we become more spontaneous, and we are freer to act in response to promptings of the Spirit. The importance of challenging ourselves in this way cannot be overemphasized. Thinking about spiritual growth, thinking about repentance, is an important first step, but it has no value unless it is followed by action. Consider this advice exchanged between two devils concerning a man who had a recent profound spiritual experience:

The great thing is to prevent his doing anything. As long as he does not convert it into action, it does not matter how much he thinks about this new repentance. Let the little brute wallow in it. Let him, if he has any bent that way, write a book about it; that is often an excellent way of sterilising the seeds which the Enemy plants in a human soul. Let him do anything but act. No amount of piety in his imagination and affections will harm us if we can keep it out of his will. . . . The more often he feels without acting, the less he will be able ever to act, and, in the long run, the less he will be able to feel. [^4]

When you feel afraid—act. When you feel compassion—act. When you feel offended, hurt, or angry—speak up. When you see a problem that needs correcting—act. When your children need a lesson on a particular subject—prepare the lesson and present it at family night. The more often you act on hunches, insights, or promptings, ignoring any fear or reticence that may come up, the less often you will be afraid. A word of warning—don't get so carried away you become insensitive; sometimes not acting is an act of kindness.

Action is the solution when we are afraid of doing. We have discussed other kinds of fear as well, primarily fear of exposure. We are afraid of exposing ourselves as vulnerable and imperfect. This type of fear can be a real problem in the Church. We are a people who value success. We have the "Molly Mormons" and the "Perfect Pauls," super-moms and super-dads who are super successful.

We often see each other only at church events in our "Sunday best." We often assume that "Sunday best" is an honest reflection of everyone else, while we know it is not an honest reflection of ourselves.

"If they only knew what my life was really like," we think.

Well—what if they knew?

What then?

Would we be excommunicated? "Banned from Boston?" I doubt it. If they only knew—if we only let them know. If we all let each other know our truer selves, we might have more of a wonderful thing called community. Letting others know our real selves used to be called confession. It used to be public, and when it went private a few hundred years after Christ's death, a great tool for repentance and personal growth was lost. I have a born-again Christian friend named Lisa. Lisa has testimony meeting at the church she attends, as do we. Her testimony meetings are a little different from ours. They don't bear testimony of their church or their leaders. They don't bear testimony that God lives or that Jesus is the Christ; these are assumed common knowledge. Instead they bear testimony of God working in their lives, of his power, and they start with a confession. When Lisa bears her testimony, she tells her entire conversion story. It is quite a story, complete with alcohol, drugs, and homosexuality, all repented of with God's help. The first time she bore her testimony, she was understandably nervous. We talked about it the following week. She told me of others who had born their testimonies the same day. I particularly remember the story of one man. He could be any one of us. He was a successful businessman and was highly esteemed in the congregation. He had suffered severe financial losses. He began his testimony by telling of those losses. He did not go on to tell how God had saved him from financial disaster. Instead, he talked of how God had used his financial crisis to reveal to him his own weaknesses. Because of his financial setback, he had become aware of his attachment to material things and of an insidious form of pride and arrogance that often accompanies financial success. He openly confessed these traits and apologized to any in the congregation he might have hurt. Then he thanked his Heavenly Father for the valuable lesson. My friend Lisa and this man had nothing to fear because they had nothing to hide. For Jesus' sake, they were willing to open their lives to be examined by the members of their congregation. In so doing, they exercised their faith, casting themselves upon God's mercy and the mercy of their fellow parishioners. They also opened the way for fellow parishioners to offer support, encouragement, forgiveness, and love.

Contrast this with a recent experience of a member of my ward. This woman was relatively new in our ward. We were having a joint Relief Society-priesthood meeting, and the subject for discussion was depression. During the lesson, this new member of our ward raised her hand and shared her personal struggles with depression. In private after the lesson, another member of our congregation reproached this woman, telling her that she had made a "serious mistake" in being so open.

Experiences like this cause me to fear. I fear it will be a long time before Mormon congregations and communities open up. How do we overcome fear living in a culture that wears an "all is well" mask? We have to start small, and we can. We can be more open at home, thus making our relationships there more honest and more intimate. We can be more open with our close friends, expressing fears and confiding failures and weaknesses. We might have difficulty being open in testimony meeting but find it easier in priesthood or Relief Society lessons. It might help us if we remember that wearing that "all is well" mask is known as hypocrisy in the scriptures.

Fear is the opposite of faith. Action and confession are acts of faith. We must begin somewhere, for just as we cannot love God if we don't love our fellowman, we cannot pretend to have faith in God if we don't have faith in each other.

Laziness

The final sin we must grow out of if we are to grow toward God is laziness. The answer to laziness is self-discipline. Self-discipline is the bedrock on which all other repentance rests. All of the steps we've been describing here—self-examination, monitoring our thoughts and motivations, replacing pride with humility and gratitude, reducing competitiveness, acting in the face of fear, and confessing our vulnerability to each other—all require self-discipline. All these steps require hard work and great effort. All these steps are painful, and our natural tendency is to avoid them. We build and strengthen our self-discipline, and thus repent of laziness, every time we repent of pride or fear. Self-discipline is an aspect of repentance that we must exercise if we are to have any hope of truly repenting, of growing toward God. What will help us with this arduous task? Where do we get the motivation to embark and strength to continue on the road of repentance? The motivation is provided by love, love for ourselves, love for the precious people in our lives, and, ultimately, love for God.

"The stranger and the enemy, we saw him in the mirror." To look in that mirror and begin to deal with what we see there can be terrifying, but we are sustained even as we tremble. We are sustained by our love for God and our intense desire to be with him again; we are sustained by a sure knowledge of his love for us; we are sustained by grace. Being sustained, we look, and looking, we begin. The process of repentance has begun—rest assured, in this lifetime, it will never end.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Recognize wrongdoing (sin). T. S. Eliot, Murder in the Cathedral (New York: Harcourt, Brace and World, 1935), pp. 30, 39-40.
[^2] Experience Godly sorrow for sin. Lectures on Faith, pp. 7, 11.
[^3] Ask for forgiveness and, where possible, make restitution. Peck, The Road Less Traveled, p. 273.
[^4] Forsake the sin and never repeat it. C. S. Lewis, The Screwtape Letters (New York: Macmillan Publishing Co., 1961), pp. 69-70.
