Joan B. MacDonald, Holiness of Everyday Life ( 1995)

Chapter 7:

Service

Caring is the greatest thing, caring matters most. —Frederick Von Hugel (last words)

Some years ago I experienced a "spiritual crisis." I wasn't sure anymore. I found myself at the periphery of ward activity. My questions and troubled countenance set me apart, and people began to avoid me. I was often without a car, and it became difficult to get rides to Relief Society. I called the friends who had always been willing to help before, but cars were suddenly full. I was determined to attend and went so far as putting my baby in my bicycle basket and riding my bike to Relief Society. I felt hurt, though, and began to tire of the effort. One Tuesday I decided just to skip it. A little after noon, my doorbell rang. On my front step stood Caroline, a sister from my ward. She had just moved into the ward, and we didn't know each other very well. She had six children and was also without a car during the day. She had asked another sister to bring her to my home that day, drop her off, and pick her up again after our visit. She busied three young children with toys in my front yard and came in to talk. She had noticed that I was troubled, and she was concerned that I had not attended Relief Society that day. We talked at length. As she rose to go, she looked into my eyes and said, "Joan, I want you to know that for as long as you need me, I am going to be your guardian angel. You will be in my prayers morning and night. I will not let you falter." We cried, we embraced, and she left. The following Sunday, Caroline handed me an envelope, saying she had found a poem while cleaning and thought it might help me. I opened the envelope. It contained a scrap of paper, yellow and frayed with age. Written on it, in beautiful calligraphy, was this poem:

Be like the bird which, pausing in its flight, on a limb too slight, feels it give way beneath him yet sings, Knowing he has wings. Victor Hugo

I kept that poem in my purse for years and read it whenever I felt troubled. I survived my crisis, though I've not forgotten it. Neither have I forgotten the sweet sister who responded to the prompting of the Spirit and came to minister to me.

Many years later I had an opportunity to offer similar support to a co-worker. I didn't take it. I didn't take it because it came at a busy place during a busy time, and it was just so inconvenient! I didn't even see the problem as an opportunity for service. All I saw was the aggravation, until another co-worker addressed the problem, rendered the service, and left me feeling ashamed of myself.

I worked part-time from 3:00 to 11:00 P.M. in a hospital hematology lab. The troubled co-worker was new to our department. I'll call her Michelle. She trained for a few weeks on the day shift and was then moved onto the evening shift with me and another technician to complete her training. We knew she had problems when she began, but we didn't know how much they would interfere with her work. Her husband had left her three months earlier, on Christmas Eve! She had a seventeen-year-old daughter and a fourteen-year-old son. She was having serious difficulty with her son. He was angry, rebellious, and often deeply depressed. He would call her every night she worked, and they would argue over the phone for forty-five minutes to an hour. The phone calls destroyed Michelle. She would rave about her husband, complain about her son, wring her hands about her need to work the evening shift while leaving her son alone—and she would cry. Invariably we sent her home between 8:00 and 9:00 in tears. Then it was our turn to complain. Why did she have to bring her problems to work with her? Why couldn't she accept reality and work during the day shift when her son was in school so she could be home in the evening when he needed her? And most of all, how could she put us in such an awkward position! Eventually Michelle had a nervous breakdown. I was not working the night it happened, but I was there, visiting the lab with my daughter to work on a science fair project. I saw Michelle's dazed expression, I heard her crying, and I joined with fellow employees complaining about her in the next room. A student, working her way through college as a phlebotomist, came to Michelle's aid. The student called around to find a replacement for Michelle, took her to the emergency room, stayed with her until a psychiatrist arrived, and made sure she had transportation home.

That was the beginning of Michelle's turnaround; she's been through a lot, but she's fine now. I often wonder what might have happened if Debbie, our student phlebotomist, had not been there for her. Interestingly enough, Debbie was ostracized by her co-workers that evening. She was told she shouldn't have gotten involved—it was none of her business. I worked with Debbie three days later. I complimented her on her actions. The rest of us had offered judgment—she had offered help. She looked at me and said, "You know I'm Catholic, and I take my religion seriously. I walked into this room and saw her sitting there looking so miserable—my heart just went out to her. What else could I do?" My heart just went out to her. "Good grief," I thought, "where was my heart?"

Service. What kind of service does our Heavenly Father want from us, and what does Heavenly Father want us to learn or gain from the service we render to others? I believe that Heavenly Father wants far more than our willing acceptance of Church callings. I believe that what he wants most is illustrated in both of these stories.

He wants our hearts.

He wants our hearts softened.

He wants our hearts open.

He wants our hearts, minds, schedules, and bodies, available and responsive.

A softened, open heart renders a type of service that has a unique characteristic—spontaneity. A softened, open heart is responsive to promptings of the Spirit and responsive to need. Service rendered is then both appropriate and timely. To give service spontaneously, responding to need at the time the need is expressed, is a tremendous challenge. The expressed need almost always takes us by surprise. It interferes with our busy schedules and intrudes upon our preoccupied minds. To render service responsively is always inconvenient. My friend not only inconvenienced herself to come to my aid, she also inconvenienced her children and the sister who was planning on driving her home. It was my very unwillingness to accept inconvenience that caused me to harden my heart to my co-worker's pain.

To render service responsively also entails risk and requires courage. Debbie was ostracized by co-workers for leaving her post to help another. When Caroline rang my doorbell, she had no idea how she would be received; she wasn't even sure I had a problem. All she knew was that I hadn't shown up on that particular Tuesday. I might have had a sick child, making her "rush to my rescue" seem melodramatic or ill-conceived. I might have greeted her with hostility or rejection. Stepping into the unknown to offer assistance to another is scary business, but step we must. The Savior admonishes us time and time again to serve one another. Some of that service is offered as we fill our callings and assignments in the Church, but more is needed. Responsiveness is needed. Open, tender hearts are needed. Caring is needed, for truly, in service, "Caring is the greatest thing, caring matters most."

Accepting Service from Others

Service is a two-way street. Sometimes we are the givers, but we all have problems and we all have pain. When it's our turn to suffer, we need to allow others the opportunity to serve. To decline offers of service from others is sin. The sin is pride, and it is contagious. If we put on the "I can handle it myself" front for others, others will put on the same front for us. Before long an entire congregation can be pretending and filled with isolated, fragmented individuals and families.

My visiting teacher has traveled a lot. Before moving into our ward, she spent several years in Germany. She often comments on the high level of spirituality she found there. She attributes that spirituality to the tradition of service within the ward. It was a military ward with members frequently moving in and out. When a family moved into the ward, members would gather to help wallpaper, paint, or drape the new member's home. When a family moved out, the members would gather to help pack and clean. My friend wasn't accustomed to this kind of help and politely declined the offers extended to her. She became quite ill, and the offers increased. She continued to decline. One Sunday she was called into the stake president's office (he was a personal friend and knew the situation). Gently at first and then with increasing sternness, he called my friend to repentance. He called her attention to the high level of spirituality in the ward. He pointed out the possibility that the spirituality was related to the tradition of service. He suggested that her unwillingness to accept service might be interfering with the Lord's work!

She changed and began to accept when members called with offers to help. Being ill, she was grateful for the help. Being humble, she was grateful for the lesson. She's never forgotten. She talked me into having a painting party when I was painting my living room, and she continues to believe that giving and accepting service are key elements of a healthy, spirit-filled congregation.

Community, Nation, and World

Latter-day Saints are busy folk. We're busy with our large families, we're busy with our Church callings, we're busy with our LDS friends. Latter-day Saints are also responsible, sensitive, spiritual folk. Add up the two, and you get guilt. I've never known an active Mormon who didn't want to do more! In a way, our guilt is deserved. We have a reputation for taking good care of each other, but we often fall short in the area of community service. We have much more to offer than we often do. As I discuss service to the larger community, I hope to do two things: motivate at least some readers to serve in their communities, and provide reasonable guidelines for deciding where, when, and how much service to offer.

The Problem

Many who would serve don't, simply because the need is so great that they know neither where to begin nor where to stop. The problems in our communities, states, nations, and world are so large that even to begin to make a contribution seems like a full-time job. Or we feel defeated at the onset—the "what difference can one person make?" syndrome. Knowing I can't solve the whole problem, I do nothing. I heard a story at stake conference last year that speaks to this problem.

The story took place on a beach several miles long on the coast of Maine. A man was strolling along the beach the day after a storm. The storm had washed up a bed of starfish, and the beach was covered with hundreds of thousands of starfish, dying in the sun. As the man walked along, shaking his head in dismay, he came upon a small boy who was picking starfish up, one by one, and heaving them back into the ocean. The man stopped to talk.

"Too bad, eh?" he said.

"Yeah, they're going to die," the boy said as he tossed one back into the water.

"There must be thousands," said the man.

The boy surveyed the scene. "Maybe a million," he said as he tossed another one.

They stood silently for a few minutes as the boy threw three or four more back into the sea.

"Why do you bother?" asked the man. "You're not going to make any difference."

The boy looked down at the starfish in his hand. As he threw it into the ocean, he said, "I can make a difference to this one."

We can all make a difference for one.

I recently saw a book with an intriguing title: All I Can Do Is All I Can Do and All I Can Do Is Enough. We can evaluate commitments at home and church; we can determine all we can do and do it. Even if it is only three PTA meetings a year, if that is honestly all we can do, it is enough. At least for now.

What One Person Can Do

There are many factors to be considered before offering service in the community. I would like to consider four: personal interests, available time, personal talents and abilities, and, finally, opportunity.

Your personal interests should play an important role in choosing how you might serve in the community. I am not thinking of personal interests in terms of hobbies or activities you might enjoy. I am thinking more of social issues that you find yourself caring deeply about.

I have a burning issue. It is a problem in our communities and nation that "grabs" me. I become passionate whenever I talk to friends or neighbors about it. My burning issue is public education. There are other issues in our world that are more pressing, more urgent. There are many issues equally important. But they don't touch me the way "my" issue does. When feeling overwhelmed by the needs of our complicated world; when I see television programs or read newspaper articles about AIDS, the environment, pornography, drug abuse, homelessness, and so on, I remember two things: (1) all I can do is all I can do; and (2) right now only one issue really lights my fire, and that's where I choose to serve. When choosing where and how to offer your time, choose something personally meaningful to you. Work to solve problems you get worked up about. When we can bring passion and commitment to our service, the service will be far more effective and far more satisfying.

The second factor to consider when offering community service is available time.

"To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven" is something I seemed to hear quoted in Relief Society at least once a month when my children were small. It didn't make me feel less guilty, only more impatient. Now that my children are all in school and I have a bit more time, I realize that it's true. Now I also realize that when you are conscientiously raising your children, you are already rendering a tremendous service to your community and nation.

I truly believe that parents are the only people who simply cannot afford much time to give to community service. Children at home connect us to a multitude of service opportunities—PTA, school volunteer programs, Boy and Girl Scouts, and so on—that we don't seem connected to when our children are grown and have left home. So parents have plenty of opportunity but not much time. Parents need to be careful to balance available time between parenting, Church callings, and community service. Attending a PTA meeting or spending an hour a week volunteering in the school library are activities almost any parent can do. Coaching a soccer team or becoming the PTA president, on the other hand, require much more time and energy and, therefore, more careful consideration before volunteering. Parents need to remember that their primary community service is in their own homes, and sometimes that has to be enough.

The single adult, the newly married childless couple, and the couple whose children have grown and left home often do have time. Some singles and elderly may even regard time not as a liability but as an asset. Many singles and retired people are lonely or find themselves with too much time on their hands. Singles who long for children, or the elderly who miss their children, can find great enrichment and personal satisfaction in the local school library or pediatrics ward. Foster parenting, grandparenting, and Big Brothers and Sisters offer similar opportunities for service to young people. Others might want to offer their time to their peers. Whatever your choice, the need is great, the opportunities endless, and the rewards rich and deep.

One last word about time. Sometimes the time is ripe when time doesn't seem available. Issues come and issues go, needs come and needs go. Problems arise and are sometimes solved. If you want to be part of the solution to a particular problem, you may have to act when the time is ripe, whether time is available or not. It can be done. Priorities can be rearranged and schedules reworked. Sometimes you just have to do what you have to do.

The third factor to consider when choosing community service is personal resources. By that I mean your personal talents, abilities, and relative wealth.

Where much is given, much is expected. Where a medium amount is given, a medium amount is expected. We can all serve in Primary, though we all don't have the ability to be Primary president. We can all talk to a troubled friend, though we all don't have the ability to be a bishop. Some can build a shelter for the homeless; others can only take their used clothing to the local Deseret Industries or Salvation Army. Don't feel guilty because you can't give what you don't possess! Don't judge others because they can give only what they do possess! Whether it is time, talent, leadership ability, or money, gear your contribution to your available resources and don't bite off more than you can chew. If, on the other hand, you can chew a lot, then—for heaven's sake—take a big bite!

The final factor to consider is opportunity. There is only one thing I want to say about opportunity: bloom where you are planted. It's hard to help with problems associated with declining inner city neighborhoods in Los Angeles, New York, or Boston if you live in a suburb of Provo. However, you can keep your own neighborhood clean and safe, and you can make sure there are plenty of wholesome activities for the young people growing up in your own neighborhood. The Savior set an example of the power inherent in serving in our own communities. He knew he was to be the Savior of the whole world, yet he did not leave Israel and go off to Rome to find his mission. He stayed in the area of his own home and the context of his own culture. He confronted the evil he found there, he alleviated the suffering he met with, and he addressed the problems in his own community, in his own culture, and in his own religious institution. In so doing, he changed forever the social structure and ethical standards of an entire civilization. There is great power in small things. Heavenly Father doesn't ask us to change the world; he asks us to change our hearts. He asks us to care about and care for one another. He asks us to help. What else can we do?
