Joan B. MacDonald, Holiness of Everyday Life ( 1995)

Chapter 8:

Grace

I was found of them that sought me not; I was made manifest unto them that asked not after me. —Romans 10:20

In December 1989, we had a lovely Relief Society lesson on the Atonement. I gave the answer "grace" to a question asked by the teacher. I don't recall the question; if I did I would tell you what it was. I do recall the teacher's response to my answer. "Grace," she said. "That's a concept we don't talk about much in the Church. What does the word grace mean to you?" I sat speechless, trying to collect my thoughts about a word that melts my heart and brings sweetness to my soul every time I hear it. I could not answer her question then. I will attempt to answer it now.

The quotation from Romans that introduces this chapter expresses a universal truth, though somewhat obliquely: "I was found by those who sought me not." How can God be found by those who do not seek him? And for those who do seek God, where does the desire to seek him come from? And what about those who find God even as they run and hide from him? Whether we be seekers, indifferent, or runners, God always seeks us first. First, last, and always, in every circumstance and stage of our lives, our Heavenly Father strives to bring us to himself. Missionaries testify of this as they meet investigators who have often been seeking "something" for a long time, driven by a need that comes from beyond themselves. Members of the Church repenting of sins large or small will testify to this truth. Inactive members returning to activity will testify to this truth. Heavenly Father seeks after us always, nurturing us, prodding us, prompting us, correcting and inviting us. Moreover, unlike the gift of the Holy Ghost, this seeking does not seem to depend on any personal righteousness on our part. Indeed, it often comes when we are at our worst, farthest from God, or in dire straits, and it comes repeatedly, even if we continue in sin. Although, as the scriptures say, "the Spirit of God will not always strive with man," it has been my experience that the Spirit is not easily discouraged!

Grace Defined

Interestingly, this concept, this spiritual fact of life—that God meets us right where we are to bring us where he wants us to be—makes many Latter-day Saints uncomfortable. Where does that leave blessings predicated on obedience? What about keeping the commandments and those all-important works? Well, many blessings are predicated on obedience, and keeping the commandments and doing good works, are, of course, essential to living a spiritual life. But now we are talking about something else. We are talking about grace. Just what is grace anyway? Why is this concept so difficult to get a handle on? Why do Latter-day Saints tend to be so defensive about grace, immediately turning any meaningful discussion of grace into a discussion of works?

I'd like to start by mentioning what grace is not.

Grace is not faith. Grace, in fact, often precedes faith, even ignites faith. It often builds faith, but it is not faith.

Grace is not a free ride. Grace is the very experience that calls people to good works, and the experience of grace in the midst of sin can be an uncomfortable experience indeed. Grace is definitely not a free ride.

Grace is not salvation. Grace helps bring about salvation. Grace often opens people to the possibility of salvation, and, as we work out our salvation, grace supports and sustains us, prompts us, guides us, opens and closes doors, and picks us up when we get knocked down.

Grace is not exaltation, though without grace, exaltation is an impossibility.

Grace is not the Holy Ghost, gifts of the Spirit, or the light of Christ. The Holy Ghost, gifts of the Spirit, the light of Christ, faith, salvation, exaltation, and a host of other things are all manifestations of grace, but they are not, in themselves, grace.

What then, is grace?

In Mormon Doctrine, Elder Bruce R. McConkie defines grace in this way: "God's grace consists in his love, mercy, and condescension toward his children." [^1]

In The Road Less Traveled, M. Scott Peck gives this definition: "Grace is a powerful force originating outside of human consciousness that nurtures the spiritual growth of human beings." [^2]

"God's love, mercy, and condescension toward man." I've experienced that love, mercy, and condescension. So have you.

"A powerful force that nurtures the spiritual growth of human beings." I've experienced that powerful force—a force that has sometimes pulled, sometimes pushed, sometimes touched, sometimes opened doors, sometimes closed doors, sometimes opened or expanded my heart, my mind, or events in my life. Indeed, this force, this love, sometimes seems part of the very heartbeat of life.

As the Apostle Paul taught: "[God] made from one every nation of men to live on all the face of the earth, having determined allotted periods and the boundaries of their habitation, that they should seek God, in the hope that they might feel after him and find him. Yet he is not far from each one of us, for 'in him we live and move and have our being.'" (Acts 17:26-28, RSV; emphasis added.)

I believe that grace is the part of God in which we all live, move, and have our being. Like the water in which fishes swim, like the air we breathe, the grace of God is the medium in which human beings be.

Manifestations of Grace

If grace is the medium in which human beings be, then its manifestations must be many. They are many indeed. If we but open our eyes, we will find our world teeming with glorious manifestations of the grace of God.

All of creation testifies to the grace of God. The greenest greens, the bluest blues, the sparkle in the air on a sunny day, the incredible night sky, the rhythm of the seasons, all animal and plant life with its multiplicity and diversity, our own bodies and their intricate workings, the order found in nuclear physics—all manifest the glorious grace of God.

The plan of salvation and the atonement of Christ are manifestations of God's endless grace. We were loved, carefully nurtured, and prepared even in the premortal existence. When the plan of salvation was formed, all provision was made for us to be able to return to our Heavenly Father. Christ carefully prepared himself so he could come to earth and successfully complete his pain-filled mission—a mission that ended with his freely offering his life, while his Father looked on, held back, and suffered with him, that we might someday return to him.

The image of our heavenly parents painfully watching as careless and evil people crucified the Savior brings to mind another manifestation of grace, a manifestation that has brought chaos, evil, and much suffering into the world and yet stands as one of God's greatest gifts—the gift of agency. The right to choose and be self-determinant, to seek knowledge and understanding in our own way and at our own pace, to even turn away from goodness and from God himself, is a gift beyond description. Granting human beings agency requires Heavenly Father's continual self-discipline and guarantees his ongoing suffering and pain, for even though he could, and even though to do so would ease suffering, many times God simply will not intervene in the affairs of men.

Although to preserve our agency, God will not often intervene in our affairs uninvited, his involvement in the lives of those who seek him is remarkable. In the opening paragraphs of this chapter, I described God's willingness to work with us when we seek after him. The beatitudes state, "Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they shall be filled." (Matthew 5:6.) Grace says that the hungering and thirsting are themselves gifts from God. And after the hungering and thirsting, we are filled—we become more righteous. How do we become more righteous? First, we desire to—we hunger and thirst for grace. And then we work to become more righteous, and that too is prompted by and filled with grace.

Indeed, Heavenly Father's grace permeates and surrounds us, informing everything we do—all thought, all feeling, all experience, and all our work. If we, as Latter-day Saints, attempt to separate grace and works, we are doomed to fail and to expose ourselves as naive or arrogant or both.

As the Psalmist sang:

Whither shall I go from thy spirit? Or whither shall I flee from thy presence? If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there: If I make my bed in hell, behold, thou art there; If I take the wings of the morning, And dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea, Even there shall thy hand lead me, And thy right hand shall hold me. (Psalm 139:7-10.)

Grace always precedes good works; always supports, sustains, and smooths out good works; and always follows good works, just as good works are our main response to grace. I've seen this acted out with the bold strokes of a wonderful work of art in the life of a friend.

Grace and Works

First, I'd like to qualify my definition of good works. When we think about good works, we usually think of service, and rightly so. But here, I'd like to talk about another kind of work, a work that is far more challenging for most of us than service. That work is the work of our own salvation.

The relationship between grace and the work of our own salvation is like building a stairway. Grace is the ground on which we stand, supporting us and prompting our upward gaze. With the desire and insight grace affords us, we build a step (work); with the strength grace supplies us, we step up (work); with more grace and more work we build another, step up and build another, and so on throughout our lives.

In the case of my friend Lisa, she started out on shaky ground indeed. She had been raised in an alcoholic home and grew up to be an angry young woman. She smoked, drank heavily, used marijuana and cocaine, and was sexually promiscuous. She didn't "fit in," and she wasn't interested in "getting along." A couple of years after I met Lisa, she met a young man who was a born-again Christian studying for the ministry. This young man worked part-time at our place of business for about six months. After work, on his last day, he invited Lisa outside. They went to his car, and he spent three hours reading over the scriptures with her. When they were done, Lisa bowed her head and said a prayer, accepting Christ as her Savior. She was born again—moved from sin to grace—and then the work began: arduous, painful, sometimes excruciating work, with frequent stops to fill up with much-needed grace.

She started by trying to read the Bible regularly. She would do okay for a while and then fall back, or misplace her Bible, or leave for a weekend vacation intending to spend the entire time reading but leaving her scriptures at home. Still, she kept trying and prayed for help. Within six months, she was reading scriptures regularly. She had built step one.

Next, she took on her bad habits—and failed miserably. Determined, she visited a counselor at work. He told her she couldn't begin to change until she stopped her substance abuse. He challenged her to not use marijuana for one week. She succeeded. He continued to counsel with her and help her until she had succeeded in giving up all drugs except for cigarettes.

She began to search for a church and set a baptismal date for about a year from her first prayer in our friend's car. She set a date to quit smoking, and this time she succeeded. Now she faced a different problem. Her changes began to catch up with her, and she became depressed. In spite of her newfound faith, her life became flat and empty. She continued to pray and study the scriptures. She expressed her faith frequently. She was saved by grace, she had made many changes in her life through grace, and she was confident that grace would get her through her depression. She never spoke of how hard she had worked; she only occasionally complained of the pain she was enduring; she frequently attributed her success to God's grace.

Time went on, and she continued her work. She found a new therapist and joined a support group. She was baptized. She and a friend started a Bible study class at a local youth detention center. Gradually her depression lifted, and we began to see a whole new personality emerge, not quite as lively as before, but warmer, more caring, and more concerned with others. It was about three years after her conversion experience. I would often look at her and marvel at the growth and change she had achieved in such a short time. When I voiced my feelings, she quickly assured me that she had done nothing on her own; it was all through the grace of God. Still, I had seen how hard she had worked—or at least I thought I had. Little did I know.

One night, Lisa and I were working alone together. We were discussing TV talk shows and their frequent homosexual themes. We then began discussing homosexuality in general. I told her about Carol Lynn Pearson's book Goodbye, I Love You and how her husband felt so strongly that homosexuality was a part of his nature that he needed to explore it and figure it out. She said, "God doesn't make homosexuals. Homosexuality is a dysfunction." She then gave a plausible explanation of how and why it develops. She paused and said, "I should know. I'm gay." My jaw dropped. My heart stopped. I couldn't say anything—so she did. She told me the rest of her story.

She told me of her struggles in the early days following her conversion. She told me of her pain when she severed all her former relationships and moved out of her apartment to start a new life. She told me of the support group for homosexual Christians that had helped her gain both spiritual and psychological understanding. She told me of her fear and anxiety when, just prior to her baptism, she shared the fact of her homosexuality with a friend from the congregation she was joining, and of her relief and joy when her friend assured her of Christ's love and acceptance of her with whatever problems or flaws she had. She told of her despair and discouragement when, several months after her baptism, she slipped into an affair with another young woman from the congregation. She told of her repentance and continued counseling with both professional counselors and her pastor. And she taught me about grace—the grace that had brought her to Christ three years before; the grace that had showed her which step needed to be taken next; the grace that had opened doors and put just the right people in her life just when she was ready for what those people had to offer; the grace that had strengthened, supported, and comforted her as she had worked through the long process of her repentance and change.

I felt the Spirit as she shared her story with me, and when she was done, we worked in silence. After a while, she said, "Joan, you're awfully quiet. What are you thinking?" I had to tell her. I looked right into her eyes and said, "I feel like I'm in the presence of a holy work. When God makes his presence known, when we feel his Spirit right here with us—well, silence seems appropriate." We just looked at each other for a minute, and then we smiled.

Today Lisa has gone back to school. She is majoring in psychology and hopes to become a Christian counselor. She is engaged to be married to a fine young man from her congregation. Her fiancÃ© knows her history and shares her commitment to continued growth. They continue to receive counseling both from their pastor and professionals. Lisa's life as a Christian will probably never be easy. Her disturbed past will probably continue to cast shadows on her life. There will always be struggle. Yet, she has great faith, and so do I, that through the grace of God, and her own willingness to work, she will make it.

Grace and Daily Living

In the beginning of this chapter, I compared grace to air and water. Here, I admit there are some problems with that analogy. Air and water are not only equally available to the life forms living in them, but they also permeate that life. To turn from them, to shut them out, is to die. We have no real choice but to use and be affected by them. Not so grace. Although I believe grace is equally available to all human beings, and that it can surround and permeate us, it can also be refused. We can, and many do, live oblivious to grace. We can, and many do, turn away from grace. We can, and many do, grow in grace.

The question then becomes, for seekers of greater spiritual growth, what specific things can we do to help us increase in grace? Can we bring more grace to our works and more work to our grace? I believe we can, and I believe that is best done in the context of our daily lives.

Think about the times in your life when you have felt the Spirit. Think about the times in sacrament or testimony meeting, baptismal services, or the temple. Then think about how you were living three days later. Were those Spirit-filled moments life-changing? Probably not. They are often comforting, often inspiring, but usually quite transient, temporary, isolated experiences with little impact on the reality of our daily lives. We need to bring that spirit into our daily lives. We need to become conscious of and responsive to the grace that is ever present. If we can't, of what use is our religion?

Sara Wenger Shenk wrote:

Where can ordinary folk find a theology which springs from our everyday tasks and returns to invigorate us right where we are? My sense is that either faith must give me food for the road on a blurred, beleaguered morning, or it might as well . . . be stashed between two gilded book covers and set on a museum shelf to molder.

If it isn't possible to know the quickening presence of God in the everyday routine, one might as well ship religiosity off to a seminary library and leave it there. Either God is the God of all life, or God is on the reserve shelf, available and relevant only to a sanctified elite. [^3]

When Jesus taught his followers, did he expound and theologize? Did he take them into the synagogue and temple and teach great and complex doctrines? Did he even commonly lead them in prayer? No, he did not. Jesus taught his followers using stories, stories based on the common, the down-to-earth, and the everyday. He used images of the housewife sweeping, the shepherd, the fisherman, and the farmer. He lit lamps, removed splinters from eyes, built houses, and planted seeds. He used the knowable experiences of our daily lives to grant us glimpses of the grace of God.

The fact is, increasing in grace is not only best done in the context of our daily lives; it actually cannot be done anywhere else. And there are concrete steps we can take to help.

Many of these steps have already been discussed, but I'd like to restate them here in the context of growing in grace.

We can, and many do, live our lives oblivious to grace. The first step in changing that is to become more conscious of grace, to increase our awareness. We must open our eyes that we may see, and see that we may rejoice.

We must notice when prayers are answered and blessings given. We must choose to see God and his work more often in the work we do. We can see order and purity emerge as we clean. We can see God's love and charity more clearly as we develop integrity or practice peacemaking in the workplace. We can see health and strength and vigor as we work or as we watch our children participate in sports. Watching our children grow and learn, we can become aware of our own need to remain teachable throughout our lives. As we become more alert to ways in which eternal truth and spiritual gifts are inextricably woven into the fabric of practical daily experience, we feel gratitude, wonder, and joy. When we feel gratitude and wonder, we want to express it. We find our thoughts turning to God with greater frequency. Prayer fills our hearts until our days become one long, drawn-out prayer filled with gratitude: Sanctify my work, Lord, that it will bear fruit. Help me with this, Lord, I'm in over my head. And we grow in grace. Our lives fill with grace. We become quieter, more centered, more grace-full.

As the awareness of God's grace increases in our lives, so does our desire for service. Being more attuned to God, we become more aware of opportunities for small acts of service, and we feel prompted to act more frequently. If we respond to these promptings and act, we serve more. Gradually, we begin to offer all our activities, at home, at work, and in the community, to God. We slowly weed out those activities, thoughts, and responses that cannot be offered to God. When we are conscious of his continual presence in our lives, unworthy thoughts and activities make us feel uncomfortable, prodding us to do battle with our baser desires and increase our righteousness. And we grow in grace.

The next step, after increasing our awareness and our service, is to deliberately bring more of God into our homes and daily lives: "These words, which I command thee this day, shall be in thine heart: and thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children, and shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up." (Deuteronomy 6:6-7.)

We have family home evening and daily family prayer, but not enough of us do these things enough of the time. Even if we are doing these things, they are not enough. I would like to recommend to you a wonderful book filled with ideas for family traditions and celebrations that will help bring the Spirit into our homes: Why Not Celebrate! by Sara Wenger Shenk. The book is divided into four sections: daily rituals, weekly rhythms, yearly festivities, and celebrations for anytime. Mrs. Shenk is a Mennonite. In the introduction to her book, she eloquently makes her case for using rituals and celebrations in daily family life:

I like to celebrate! At the same time, I'm not much for elaborate productions. . . . I know there are folks who have a flair for festivity, folks who can pull off an enormous bash and love every minute of the preparations. Not me! My style is to search for sacred meaning within the small, everyday moments, to revere the silences, the clasped hands, the broken loaf, the first evening star. One can compose a symphony of simple beauty out of the stuff that fills an ordinary day. By God's grace, that which is common becomes sacred and points to the reality of God in our midst. . . .

Why have we forgotten that it is through our senses, all of them, that our hearts are enlarged so that God may enter in? . . . Our senses are the vehicles through which the Spirit of God enters into our constricted thought to make space for grace. [^4]

In her chapter on yearly festivities, there are wonderful ideas for celebrating every event of the Christian calendar, the major Jewish holidays (Did you ever wish you could include a Passover celebration in your Easter traditions but didn't know how? It's here.), Valentine's Day, Mother's and Father's Day, and the last day of school. There's even a program in memory of Hiroshima that ends with the song "Let There Be Peace on Earth."

Imagine how enriched our personal and family lives could be by adding just a few of these traditions and celebrations to our lives. "But we're already so busy," we think. We rush around from task to task with "to do" lists for one day that require two weeks to complete! How can we add anything to our already busy lives! In fact, many of these ideas are designed to help slow us down; others take little time and require little or no preparation. Let me illustrate with two examples, both celebrations of Christian seasons that Latter-day Saints, to our detriment, don't commonly observe.

The first is Advent. Advent is the first season of the Christian year and begins on December 1. Including Advent in your Christmas preparations is a wonderful way to slow down the Christmas rush and bring back a spiritual focus to a holiday that has become far too secular.

Many members of the Church begin their holiday decorating with the making of a wreath. In our ward, the Relief Society has a wreath-making party every year. This makes Advent an easy season to include in our family celebrations, and the wreath is a wonderful way to begin. We are all familiar with what the wreath symbolizes—the eternal circle, the continuation of life in the evergreen boughs. Knowing its history makes the symbolism even more powerful. The wreath, in fact, predates Christianity. It is borrowed. Gertrude Mueller Nelson wrote of this tradition:

Pre-Christian peoples who lived far north and who suffered the archetypal loss of life and light with the disappearance of the sun had a way of wooing back life and hope. . . . Their solution was to bring all ordinary action and daily routine to a halt. They gave in to the nature of winter, came away from their fields and put away their tools. They removed the wheels from their carts and wagons, festooned them with greens and lights and brought them indoors to hang in their halls. They brought the wheels indoors as a sign of a different time, a time to stop and turn inward. . . .

Imagine what would happen if we were to understand that ancient prescription for this season literally and remove—just one—say just the right front tire from our automobiles and use this for our Advent wreath. Indeed, things would stop. Our daily routines would come to a halt and we would have the leisure to incubate. . . .

Then the wreath is blessed: O God, by whose word all things are made holy, pour blessings on this wreath, our sacrificed wheel, and may it remind us to slow down our hectic pace and make our hearts ready for the coming of Christ your Son and our Lord. The very sounds and smells help us to know that Advent is here again. The story of Adam and Eve, the readings from Isaiah and the words of John the Baptist are familiar to us by now. We think about the days when humankind had fallen from intimate "walking with God," each of us aware in some way that we are preparing for Him again to "come down and dance with us." [^5]

What a wonderful image of the sacrificed wheel! What would our Christmas be like if we did all of our shopping, gifts, cards, wrap, and errands before December 1. Then on December 1, we hang our wreath, our sacrificed busyness, alongside an Advent calendar. With the calendar we count the days, each day including a few gifts wrapped, a goody baked, some secrets kept, a scripture read, inching up to Christmas with an ever-increasing spiritual focus. And we "make space for grace."

The second illustration comes from a season Latter-day Saints completely ignore. It does not exist for us. In its commonly observed form, I'm not sure it needs to exist for us, yet it has the potential to bring increased continuity to our yearly celebrations. The season is Lent.

For years, I have felt, and my children have expressed, the sense of a gap between Christmas and Easter. There is an empty space, a void. Christmas celebrates the birth of the Savior; Easter celebrates his death and resurrection; but when do we celebrate his life? When can we focus on his ministry and his teachings? Lent provides just such an opportunity. Lent begins six and a half weeks before Easter, on Ash Wednesday. We don't need to mark our foreheads with ashes and spend Lent focusing on ourselves and our shortcomings. Instead, we can use Ash Wednesday as a reminder that it is time to think about Christ's ministry. Introduce the season by reading the account of his baptism and his retreat into the wilderness for forty days of fasting and prayer. Then use the Sermon on the Mount for nightly scripture reading at the supper table. Even the youngest children and the busiest of families can manage to read, perhaps even memorize, one beatitude a night. The only preparation required is to put a Bible on the table with the plates and cups. By the time Easter arrives, you've spent four to six weeks with the Sermon on the Mount, and Easter has a whole new meaning. You and your family will feel more acutely the suffering and loss of the Crucifixion, the hope and joy of the Resurrection. But don't stop at Easter. Continue your nightly reading for a week or two after Easter, but this time, use the Book of Mormon and Acts. Read 3 Nephi with your children to build their testimonies of the risen Lord. Read the story of Pentecost in Acts to introduce them to the transforming power of the Holy Ghost. And "make space for grace."

These are celebrations of holidays—annual, occasional events. But what traditions, habits, and daily doings can be used to increase our awareness of God's presence in our daily lives? Almost anything will do—anything that stills you for a moment; anything that expresses love, compassion, or kindness; anything that honestly confesses weakness or uncertainty and thus opens up the possibility for growth. Many are things you are already doing—reading to your children, joining hands as you bless the food, taking evening walks, gardening together (or alone for that matter), having priesthood blessings when you or your children are sick—all open awareness and invite God into the realm of the everyday.

God's grace is all around us. His love is evidenced everywhere. As Paul writes, "I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. (Romans 8:38-39.)

As we increase our awareness of his grace, as we celebrate his presence in our every day, we are moved to exclaim with the poets and mystics:

All things were new; and all the creation gave another smell unto me than before, beyond what words can utter. (George Fox.)

As to me, I know of nothing else but miracles. (Walt Whitman.)

The clouds above us join and separate The breeze in the courtyard leaves and returns Life is like that So why not relax Who can keep us from celebrating? (Yu Lin.)

Who indeed!

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Address our Heavenly Father. Thornton Wilder, Our Town (New York: Harper and Row, 1957), p. 100.
[^2] Thank him for our blessings. "Jesus, the Very Thought of Thee," Hymns, no. 141.
[^3] Ask him for the things we stand in need of. Robert Fulgham, It Was on Fire When I Lay Down on It (New York: Villard Books, 1989), p. 59.
[^4] Close in the name of Jesus Christ. Shenk, Why Not Celebrate! p. 18.
[^5] Michael Stark and Michael Washburn, "Beyond the Norm: A Speculative Model of Self-Realization," Journal of Religion and Health 16:58-59.
