Joan B. MacDonald, Holiness of Everyday Life ( 1995)

Chapter 9:

Worship

Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name. —Matthew 6:9

A year ago last Christmas, we bought a beautiful telescope for our daughter. It was a little more complex than any of us cared to deal with, and we didn't have much success in finding anything but the moon. The moon is beautiful through a telescope, of course, but we soon tired of looking just at the moon, and the telescope sat unused in our back room for more than a year. Then just last week we were visited by an old college friend of my husband's. As it got late, he suggested we take the telescope outside and do a little stargazing. Our friend suggested looking at a particular star that was just rising above two trees on the horizon. As my husband looked through the scope, our friend eagerly asked if it was a star or a planet. My husband wasn't sure, so I looked. The object was larger and brighter than any star we had seen through the telescope before, and it had a kind of oblong shape to it. As I focused back and forth, I saw something else. "Oh my gosh!" I exclaimed. "I think there's a ring! Oh my gosh, there is a ring. It's Saturn!" I ran inside and shouted to my three children, "Hurry, come see. We've found Saturn!" Everyone took turns looking and exclaiming such adolescent superlatives as "wow" and "awesome." In between each child, I had to look again. I was like a kid myself, jumping up and down on my back porch. It's really true! It's really there! I'm looking at Saturn! The universe is really like the scientists say it is, and I can see it right here in my own backyard! It's all so grand!

The universe is a grand miracle, but we don't have to look into the depths of the cosmos to realize it. As we gaze into the heavens, as we enjoy the vast beauty of the earth, and as we enjoy our own health and growth, we realize that we live amid the miraculous. We are surrounded by the miraculous. We are infused with the miraculous. We are miracles ourselves. In Our Town, by Thornton Wilder, Emily speaks of the common miracles we enjoy everyday as she leaves the world to return to her grave: "Good-by, Good-by world. Good-by, Grover's Corner . . . Mama and Papa. Good-by to clocks ticking . . . and Mama's sunflowers. . . . . And new-ironed dresses and hot baths . . . and sleeping and waking up. Oh, earth, you're too wonderful for anybody to realize you." Then she looks at the Stage Manager and asks through her tears: "Do any human beings ever realize life while they live it?—every, every minute?"

"No," he replies. "The saints and poets, maybe—they do some." [^1]

The saints and poets aren't the only ones; we can some too. As we think of human life and development; conception; childbirth; child growth and unfolding; how we can think, articulate, and share our thoughts one with another; our senses—touch, smell, eyesight; the balance between the sun, moon, earth, and stars, reflected on the minutest scale in atoms, electrons, protons, and even subatomic particles; and finally the gospel, the plan of salvation, the Atonement, and eternal life with our families and loved ones—as we think of all these things, we must realize there is nothing between Sunday morning and Saturday evening that is not wonderful and miraculous, and we sink to our knees in humble, grateful worship of our Heavenly Father. Worship is what our church activity must center around. Worship is what our lives must be about. How else can we respond to all we have been given?

Worship is both formal and informal, and I am afraid we don't do enough of either. I would like to examine our formal worship first, to look both at what's missing and what's there that we might use to improve our personal participation in community worship.

Worship and Sacrament Meeting

If one of your children asked you to explain the purpose of sacrament meeting, how would you answer? I have always heard that purpose stated as twofold: to partake of the sacrament and to learn more of the gospel. Worship is not usually mentioned. The fact that it is not one of the stated purposes of sacrament meeting does not mean it does not occur. Reverence is felt by many during the sacrament and during prayers. Praise is always expressed in our hymns and sometimes in the spoken prayers. Unfortunately though, for far too many Latter-day Saints, reverence is a fleeting and only occasional experience, and praise to the Lord is expressed only in song.

Adding to the problem that worship is not one of the express purposes of sacrament meeting is our suspicion of elaborate ritual and any language traditionally associated with it. Thus we come to regard the concept of worship with suspicion as we associate it with Catholic and Protestant traditions. If we examine this suspicion, we immediately realize how inappropriate it is.

In fact, we find examples of and admonitions to worship throughout the Standard Works:

Worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness. (1 Chronicles 16:29.)

I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people, saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgement is come: and worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters. (Revelation 14:6-7.)

Worship him with all your might, mind, and strength. (2 Nephi 25:29.)

You shall fall down and worship the Father in my name. (D&C 18:40.)

We don't fall down when we worship God in sacrament meeting, nor do we kneel when we say our community prayers. That doesn't mean we can withhold our worship. Heads must be bowed, hearts humble, and ears open as our public prayers are spoken. Singing should be joined enthusiastically by all adults and can be heartfelt and joyous. God's praises need to be thought and spoken more during prayers and sacrament meeting talks. As a church, we would be wise and, I believe, greatly blessed if we stopped playing with our children during sacrament meeting, prepared our Sunday School lessons during the week, and came together for an hour as a community to wholly and completely worship God together. Done well and with meaning, this kind of worship-in-community reaches deep into our souls, nourishing our love for God and for each other.

Reverence

Reverence and worship go hand in hand, and reverence is more than being quiet. The dictionary defines reverence as a feeling of profound awe and respect. A couple of years ago I was serving as a counselor in our Primary presidency. Reverence is a common theme in Primary, and we discussed it often. One of our concerns was how to help children realize that reverence was more than just being quiet. We wanted them to feel reverence, to feel profound awe and respect. I was asked to conduct a sharing time on reverence. I had been taking a class on meditation and visualization, and I thought a visualization exercise might help. I approached that sharing time with more than a little bit of anxiety. I had never seen this kind of thing done in an LDS setting. I wasn't sure how it would be received. Here is what the children and I did.

First I told the children what reverence is and that we were going to do an exercise to help them experience it. I asked them to sit quietly and do everything I told them. (After you read through this, you might try the exercise yourself.) I asked them to close their eyes. Then I asked them to imagine themselves in the following scenario: You are walking down a path in a meadow. The meadow is filled with beautiful flowers. Birds are singing. The sky is blue and the sun is warm. You feel quiet and happy. As you walk, you realize that someone is approaching you from far down the path. You walk toward each other for a while. Now you can see him clearly. You stop as you realize it is the Savior.

He continues to walk steadily toward you. As he nears, you fall to your knees. He stops before you, reaches down to take your hand, and lifts you to your feet. Then he embraces you. As his arms fold around you, you feel his spirit wash over your entire body. He steps back, and as you look into his eyes you see his gentle love and concern for you. You stay there for a moment just looking into his eyes. Then, slowly, you turn and go back the way you have come. You walk back through the meadow and into your seats in this room. Now, open your eyes.

The room was totally still. Many of the children had tears in their eyes as I asked them to remember to take this imaginary walk with Jesus during the sacrament quiet time. I recalled with them the words to one of our sacrament hymns: "Jesus, the very thought of thee / With sweetness fills my breast." [^2]

If we adults can also remember to focus our thoughts on the Savior during our sacrament meetings, both reverence and worship will become more common experiences for us.

Worship and Prayer

What does the Church teach about prayer? What do we teach our children about prayer in Primary? We teach our children and each other to pray using the following four steps:

I have heard many talks given in Primary, sacrament meeting, and Relief Society on the subject of prayer. Many have used the above outline, but neither it nor any of the talks or lessons I've heard have ever mentioned worship or praise as being an important part of prayer. Now let's look at what the Savior taught about prayer. His teaching was done through a single powerful example:

Our Father, which art in heaven Hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our debts, As we forgive our debtors. And lead us not into temptation, But deliver us from evil: For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever. Amen. ( Matthew 6:9-13.)

What steps does the Savior's prayer follow? I've counted six. First he addresses our Heavenly Father. We got that one right! What comes next? Hallowed be thy name: worship and praise. Third, he surrenders himself to God's will. Fourth and fifth, he asks for those things he stands in need of—first physical needs and second protection from the adversary. Sixth and closing is pure worship and praise, celebrating his Heavenly Father. Twice, at the beginning and the end, we find simple yet powerful expressions of worship and praise. I believe we would find our prayers more meaningful and our spiritual lives deeply enriched if we followed the Savior's example more closely, including expressions of praise in both our public and our private prayers.

It is important to distinguish the difference between praise and thanksgiving. Gratitude and thanksgiving often lead to praise, but they are not the same as praise. To say "Thank you for my many blessings" is quite different from saying "Praise the Lord!" or "Hallelujah!" All of our scriptures are filled with examples of people singing, shouting, and praying praises to God. Journals of pioneers from the early days of the Church are also filled with expressions of praise to God. It seems contemporary Saints have become too sophisticated or too dignified to exclaim praises to God in either public or private prayers. The language of praise is language that sounds unnatural to us. We are simply not comfortable exclaiming, as Mary did in Luke 1:46, "My soul doth magnify the Lord," or as David did in Psalm 103:1, "Bless the Lord, O my soul: and all that is within me, bless his holy name." We may never be comfortable with language that has become associated in contemporary times with excessively emotional, even hysterical religiosity. However, if we abandon the language of praise altogether, relegating it only to worship in song, we are making a terrible mistake. We can keep our praise within the framework of dignity and restraint, but we still need to express it.

When I first joined the Church, there was a man in our congregation who began each of his prayers with dignified praise. He did it by beginning all of his prayers with the first two phrases of the Lord's prayer, "Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name." He would then pause for a moment, and in the silence of that pause I invariably felt a deep sense of reverence. His prayers then proceeded in the usual fashion, giving thanks and asking for blessings. Using the first two lines of the Lord's prayer or something similar such as "Dear Heavenly Father, praise be unto thee" to begin our prayers brings an immediate sense of just who we are addressing and puts us in a worshipful and receptive frame of mind for the rest of the prayer.

If we study the Magnificat in Luke 1:46-55 or any of the Psalms, we find a pattern in the way praise was offered to the Lord in biblical times. First are the exclamations of simple praise to the Lord. These are just an introduction and usually occupy only one or two verses. Following the exclamations of praise is a litany of the wonderful works of God, the glories of the creation, or a listing of specific ways the Lord blesses his people in general or the speaker in particular. This is another way we can increase our praises to the Lord in our prayers and particularly in our testimonies. When we bear testimony to one another, we need to do more than tell each other what we know to be true. We need to tell each other why and how we know it. We need to tell each other the ways God has been blessing us in our lives—the pain that was eased, the adversity that taught a valuable lesson, the problem solved. Describing to each other, in testimony, the ways Heavenly Father has been involved with our lives results in a litany of God's good works—the kind of praise and worship found in the scriptures. The language of praise needs to be our language, and words of praise should be on our lips and in our hearts whenever we address the Lord and often when we converse with each other. I would like to challenge you to incorporate more praise into your spiritual life. I would like to challenge you to refuse to allow yourself to present petitions or requests to the Lord until after you have uttered words of praise. I would like to challenge you to never end your prayers and rise from your knees without first praising your Heavenly Father. And I would like to challenge you to include a litany of praise to your Heavenly Father with every testimony you bear. I am convinced that if we do these things, our worship will be more meaningful and our blessings magnified.

Worship and Scripture Study

Have you ever worshiped God as you read the scriptures? You probably have, though you may not have realized it.

The General Authorities have often counseled us to ponder the scriptures. For a long time I wasn't sure just what that meant. I decided pondering meant meditating, and meditating meant thinking about what I was reading—trying to figure it all out. Then I read a quotation from President David O. McKay: "Meditation is the highest activity of the soul." Hmmm. Figuring something out or thinking about it didn't seem to me to be the highest activity of the soul. I was missing something here. Then I read the wonderfully simple words of Robert Fulgham: "To ponder . . . is to wonder at a deep level." [^3]

To wonder deeply. To wonder can mean two different things: (1) to wonder about—to try to figure it all out and (2) to wonder at—to stand in awe of—to worship.

It's happened to all of us, reading a particular verse or chapter; we've read it before but somehow it never struck us so hard before. But now—the heart stops—the figuring out stops—we're left breathless, speechless, for words cannot express the experience. For the moment we are still, knowing, intimate, with God. And we worship. We worship with more than words. We worship with our whole being.

Sara Wenger Shenk wrote of this act of worship:

Opening oneself to wonder . . . is one of the best ways I know of cultivating the presence of God. Without the ability to wonder, all things become commonplace. But, when we open ourselves to wonder, everything is potentially sacramental. . . .

. . . Being alive to the world nurtures a spirit of worship. By entering into the mystery of "how could this be," we embark on an adventure along a wonder-strewn pathway toward infinity. [^4]

Other thoughts apply here as well: "The sound stops short, the sense flows on." (Chinese saying.) "Be still, and know that I am God." (Psalm 46:10.)

Worship and Daily Living

The experience described above is not limited to scripture study, prayer, or temple attendance. Throughout this book, I have described how the mundane events of daily living can bring us face-to-face with God. At times I have been stopped in my tracks, emptied, stilled, even stunned—in my living room, in my backyard, at work—shaking my head in wonder at grace expressed in my co-workers' lives, looking into the eyes of my children and husband, working in my kitchen, or driving in my car. I hope you have too. For as we see the Lord and his attributes expressed around and in us and in others, as we understand and appreciate more fully the complex and wonderful creation that we are a part of, we develop a sense of awe and wonder, an attitude of humility and worship, throughout our day. This growing experience has been described by Michael Stark and Michael Washburn as "the perception of the miraculous":

Miraculous here refers not only to extraordinary phenomenon but also to the common place, for absolutely anything can evoke this special awareness provided that close enough attention is paid to it. Once perception is disengaged from the domination of preconception and personal interest, it is free to experience the world as it is in itself and to behold its inherent magnificence. . . .

Perception of the miraculous requires no faith or assumptions. It is simply a matter of paying full and close attention to the givens of life, i.e., to what is so ever-present that it is usually taken for granted. The true wonder of the world is available everywhere, in the minutest parts of our bodies, in the vast expanse of the cosmos, and in the intimate connectedness of these and all things. . . . We are part of a finely balanced eco-system in which interdependency go hand in hand with individuation. We are all individuals, but we are part of a greater whole, united in something vast and beautiful beyond description. Perception of the miraculous is the subjective essence of self-realization, the root from which man's highest features and experiences grow. [^5]

Words cannot describe the joy we feel when we learn to see the vast and the beautiful in our daily lives. Each time we perceive the miraculous, each time we appreciate beauty, each time we feel love, each time our problems result in our personal growth, each time we experience strength or creativity in our work, each breath we take, each step we walk presents us with manifestations of the grace, the goodness, and the greatness of our Heavenly Father. Worship him.

Worship him with words of gratitude and praise but worship him with your actions also. We have discussed worship with words. We have discussed worship with wonder. Now I would like to discuss worship with actions, not just the service actions that we normally think we can offer to God, but all of our actions. I would like to discuss consecration. To consecrate means to give all that we have and do to God. Consecration of our life to God is the only response possible for those who truly perceive God's goodness: "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great commandment." (Matthew 22:37-38.)

To consecrate our lives to God means we value nothing more than we value him and his service: "Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness." (Matthew 6:33.)

To consecrate our lives to God means we have no priority higher than knowing and serving and becoming one with God: "Though we walk in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh: (For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds;) Casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ." (2 Corinthians 10:3-5; emphasis added.)

To consecrate our lives to God means to bring every thought to the obedience of Christ. Consecration invites Christ to walk with us through our daily days. Consecration invites Christ into our jobs, our housework, our parenting, our marriages, our friendships and our church and community service. Consecration sees Christ and godliness expressed in our jobs, our housework, our parenting, our marriages, our friendships, and our service. Consecration surrenders all to God and sees God in everything and everywhere. Consecration makes each moment of our lives moments of worship. Consecration sanctifies our life and makes it holy.

Sara Wenger Shenk explains:

I want to breathe in fresh air, bandage a bleeding knee, pick up trash around the neighborhood, cook a meal and know that what I do is all done for the love of God.

Our favorite distinctions between sacred and secular are generally unhelpful. We cannot divide the spiritual from the practical. We are amphibious beings, creatures of spirit and of sense. It is through all the circumstances, inward and outward, that we are fed supernatural food.

With a little discipline we can learn to offer our activities, small and large, to God, doing what we would normally do but doing it for God.

As we do for God's sake what we normally do for ourselves, each deed, no matter how mundane, can become an act of worship. [^6]

The Apostle Paul wrote, "Brothers, I call upon you, by the mercies of God, to present your bodies to him, a living, consecrated sacrifice, well-pleasing to God—for that is the only kind of worship which is truly spiritual." (Romans 12:1, Revised Standard Version.)

In his commentary on the book of Romans, William Barclay discusses daily consecration as he interprets this verse:

"So," Paul says, "take your body; take all the tasks that you have to do every day; take the ordinary work of the shop, the factory, the shipyard, the mine; and offer that as an act of worship to God." The word in verse 1 which we, along with the Revised Standard Version have translated worship, has an interesting history. It is latreia, the noun of the verb latreuein. Originally, latreuein meant to work for hire or pay. It was the word used of the labouring man who gave his strength to an employer in return for the pay the employer would give him. . . . It then came to mean quite generally to serve; but it also came to mean that to which a man gives his whole life. For instance, a man could be said latreuein kallei, which means to give his life to the service of beauty. In that sense, it came very near meaning to dedicate one's life to. Finally, it came to be the word distinctively used of the service of the gods. In the Bible it never means human service; it is always used of service to and worship of God.

Here we have a most significant thing. True worship is the offering to God of one's body, and all that one does every day with it. Real worship is not the offering to God of a liturgy, however noble, and a ritual, however magnificent. Real worship is the offering of everyday life to him; not something transacted in a church, but something which sees the whole world as the temple of the living God. [^7]

William James said, "God and man have business together." We do. The issues of life are God's issues. Everyday life, everyday tasks, everyday worries and concerns, everyday triumphs and despairs, everyday lessons and learning, everyday moments, no matter how mundane, all belong to God.

It is with food, the pen, the hammer, the mop, and the checkbook; in the kitchen and in the office, in the yard and in the living room; with the child, with the boss, with the neighbor that we truly worship God and our hearts, minds, souls, and lives are sanctified.

If we allow it, our everyday days are holy days, our everyday nights are holy nights, and our everyday life is truly holiness to the Lord.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Address our Heavenly Father. Thornton Wilder, Our Town (New York: Harper and Row, 1957), p. 100.
[^2] Thank him for our blessings. "Jesus, the Very Thought of Thee," Hymns, no. 141.
[^3] Ask him for the things we stand in need of. Robert Fulgham, It Was on Fire When I Lay Down on It (New York: Villard Books, 1989), p. 59.
[^4] Close in the name of Jesus Christ. Shenk, Why Not Celebrate! p. 18.
[^5] Michael Stark and Michael Washburn, "Beyond the Norm: A Speculative Model of Self-Realization," Journal of Religion and Health 16:58-59.
[^6] Shenk, Why Not Celebrate!
[^7] William Barclay, The Daily Study Bible Series: The Letter to the Romans (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1975), pp. 156-57. 1995
