It’s a difficult time on the earth right now. While there is much good around us, sometimes I find myself becoming fearful and weary. Having to face the harshness of the world and the disasters that seem to be at every corner can be, well, exhausting.

Fortunately, we are blessed to know that the Savior can be a source of comfort in dark times. Perhaps this is one reason the scriptures invite us repeatedly to “come unto [Christ]” (3 Nephi 9:14), to “draw near unto [Him]” (Doctrine and Covenants 88:63), and to “come, follow [Him]” (Luke 18:22). We also frequently receive these invitations during general conference and at church.

While I’ve always strived to accept these invitations, I’ve sometimes wondered what it really means to come unto Christ. How do I invite and access His redeeming, healing, and enabling power? Have I ever truly connected with Him? Is there some secret formula? But as I’ve reflected on some of my past experiences, I’ve learned there’s a pattern that can help me—and each of us—come unto Christ.

“I believe in Christ; so come what may.”

This is my favorite line from my favorite hymn, “I Believe in Christ” (Hymns, no. 134). I cry every time I hear it! I even have the words written on a sticky note at my desk so I can see them every day.

I wrote down these lyrics during a dark period in my life, when I was facing many challenges, because they reminded me of two things: (1) the Savior is real, and (2) because of Him, I don’t have anything to fear. I love the power of these simple truths. And in their simplicity, I see that turning to Christ can be simple too.

President Russell M. Nelson taught:

“Choose to believe in Jesus Christ. …

“Faith in Jesus Christ is the greatest power available to us in this life.”

This powerful message reminds me that we often overcomplicate this basic principle of the gospel. We stumble and make mistakes as we strive to figure out how to seek Him when faith really comes down to a choice: the choice to believe in Him.

When I think of coming unto the Savior, I often ponder the woman with the issue of blood (see Mark 5:25–34). She literally reached for Him in faith, believing with all her heart that He could heal her if she could simply touch His clothes. And sure enough, when she touched Him, she immediately experienced the miracle of healing.

Of course, not all our woes and sorrows will be instantly dried up when we turn to the Savior. But just as this woman experienced, having faith that He is real, that He willingly sacrificed His life for us, and that He is ready to stand by us can motivate us to come unto Him and start feeling His enabling power in our lives.

But this isn’t a choice we make just once—we need to continue to seek Him so we can access His grace and enabling power throughout our lives. President Nelson taught about the importance of consistency in these efforts: “Nothing opens the heavens quite like the combination of increased purity, exact obedience, earnest seeking, daily feasting on the words of Christ in the Book of Mormon, and regular time committed to temple and family history work.”

We can also continue to seek Him by inviting the Spirit into our lives. Through the gift of the Holy Ghost, we can have a member of the Godhead dwell within us and more fully connect us with Heavenly Father and the Savior. How amazing is that? As President Nelson taught, “The most important truth the Holy Ghost will ever witness to you is that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the living God.”

The world’s distractions can make it easy to forget the significance of the small actions that bring us closer to the Savior. But I notice a stark contrast in my life between when I am “making time for the Lord” every day and when I am not.

Despite whatever troubles I might be facing, when I am consistently praying, following promptings, taking time to read the scriptures, helping my ancestors make covenants in the temple, and repenting of my sins, I feel an overall sense of joy, courage, confidence, and, ultimately, safety in my life. I also feel the Spirit, which helps me feel connected to Christ.

Recently I searched through a journal I’ve had for years to ponder times I’ve relied on the Savior. I read about the despair I felt as I witnessed addiction in my family, experienced unemployment, navigated seasons of uncertainty and loneliness, and struggled with my physical and mental health. I read about some of the darkest moments in my life, when my spirit felt crushed by the weight of my challenges.

But as I reflected on these experiences, I was brought to tears as the Spirit showed me how Christ comforted and led me through my challenges—and still does! Despite the trials in my life, I’ve been able to find so much joy. I’ve experienced the healing balm of forgiveness, witnessed miracles, and learned how to hold on to hope each day—and I know it’s all because of my Savior, Jesus Christ. He truly helps us to overcome the impossible.

Sometimes we might wait for earth-shattering evidence of the Savior in our lives. But as we make small efforts to act in imperfect faith, taking one step at a time in His direction, we might see that He has been showering us with joy, strength, and sustenance—that He has been with us all along. And as we recognize His power in our lives, we will see that we have indeed been coming unto Christ.

Elder Michael John U. Teh of the Seventy taught, “An increasing understanding that the Atonement of Jesus Christ applies to us personally and individually will help us know Him.” And it’s true! Pondering evidence of the Savior’s healing and enabling power and perfect love in my life has helped me deepen my gratitude for and devotion to becoming more like Him.

The invitation to “come unto Christ” is truly as simple as it sounds. For me, it starts with choosing to believe in Him and His Atonement, continuing to seek Him in small ways to keep His Spirit with me, and looking for evidence of His power in my life.

I invite you—especially during this Christmas season—to discover how coming unto Christ can help you personally. As you prayerfully ponder, the Spirit “will show unto you all things what ye should do” (2 Nephi 32:5).

The Savior is, and always has been, patiently waiting for us to follow Him. And as we do, He will reach out and help us become more than we are now.

Yes, the world is growing increasingly turbulent, and the future may seem daunting and uncertain. But President Nelson has also reminded us of what is certain: “When your spiritual foundation is built solidly upon Jesus Christ, you have no need to fear.”

And I truly believe that with all my heart.

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="153577607" id="aside1_p1"><strong>Chakell Wardleigh Herbert</strong> is an editor for the <cite><a href="https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/magazines/liahona">Liahona</a></cite> and <cite><a href="https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/magazines/ya-weekly">YA Weekly</a></cite>. You can usually find her smelling flowers; laughing with her husband, Jeffrey; taking a long time to tell stories because she keeps getting distracted; getting sucked into books and podcasts; or petting cute dogs. She has deep faith that with the Savior, nothing is impossible.</p> [/SIDEBAR]
