“Faith in Jesus Christ is the foundation of all belief and the conduit of divine power,” taught President Russell M. Nelson. He then continued:

“Everything good in life—every potential blessing of eternal significance—begins with faith. Allowing God to prevail in our lives begins with faith that He is willing to guide us. True repentance begins with faith that Jesus Christ has the power to cleanse, heal, and strengthen us.

“‘Deny not the power of God,’ the prophet Moroni declared, ‘for he worketh by power, according to the faith of the children of men’ [Moroni 10:7; emphasis added]. It is our faith that unlocks the power of God in our lives.”

How can we increase our faith in Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ, and what blessings will come into our lives as we do so? These recent teachings from prophets and apostles provide some insight.

“For the past year, we have all been dealing with dramatic and unexpected events.

“Amid such uncertainty, there is only one way to feel at peace—the real peace that passes all understanding. That peace is found in faith in the Lord Jesus Christ.”

President Russell M. Nelson, Facebook, Mar. 28, 2021, facebook.com/russell.m.nelson.

“We read in the Book of Mormon that the ancient prophet Nephi taught us that faith in Jesus Christ is the key to receiving revelations of truth and the key to having the confidence that we are following the Savior’s direction.

“Hearing that voice will come from our faith in Him. With sufficient faith, we will ask for direction with the intent to go and do whatever He asks. We will have developed the faith to know that whatever He asks will bless others, and we can be purified in the process because of His love for us.”

President Henry B. Eyring, Facebook, Nov. 17, 2021, facebook.com/henry.b.eyring.

“I frequently tell young adults that they are precious. I repeat this message often because I know it is true. I assure you that you are very, very precious to your Heavenly Father and to the Lord Jesus Christ.

“I realize there are a lot of pressures that are in the world today. There are a lot of voices in the world today via social media.

“But I want you to know that the most important voice, the most important thing that needs to occur in your lives, is to find some quiet time where you can just be quiet and actually know that our Heavenly Father loves you, that you are His son or His daughter, and that the Lord Jesus Christ is your Savior and your Redeemer.”

President M. Russell Ballard, Facebook, Jan. 8, 2021, facebook.com/mrussell.ballard.

“Studying the life of our Savior brings us closer to Him. … I invite you to take the time to know the Prince of Peace—His birth, life, message, and resurrection. The more we learn of Him and follow His example, the more peace we can feel in tumultuous times.”

Elder Jeffrey R. Holland, Facebook, Dec. 20, 2021, facebook.com/jeffreyr.holland.

“We reflect and rejoice in all the Savior has done for us. He gave His life as a vicarious Atonement, overcoming death and providing redemption for all mankind. I promise that following His light and example will bring us more joy, happiness, and peace in this life than anything else.”

Elder Quentin L. Cook, Facebook, Apr. 17, 2022, facebook.com/quentin.lcook.

“What do we learn from the Savior’s life that can strengthen our faith?

“Jesus showed us by His birth that the worth of a soul does not depend on his or her circumstances or surroundings. He, the great Creator of the earth, was born in poverty, in a stable among animals, because there was no room for Him and Joseph and Mary in the inn. We can have faith in Him, knowing that whoever we are and whatever our circumstances, He looks on our heart, and each of us is of great worth to Him.

“Jesus showed us by His life that each soul can grow and progress. The love of the Father and the Son is the foundation for our joy here and hereafter, but our Heavenly Father expects us to build on that foundation and grow as Jesus did. We can also grow step by step with His help.

“Jesus showed us by His suffering and death that love means service and sacrifice. As we serve and minister as He did, we can have perfect faith in the Savior. He has laid down His life for us, and now He has all power to protect and bless us as His friends.

“I give you my sure witness that the Resurrection of Jesus Christ is a fact. You can live with a perfect hope in Christ for the help you need now and for eternal life to come.”

Elder D. Todd Christofferson, Facebook, Mar. 16, 2021, facebook.com/dtodd.christofferson.

“At a devotional for French-speaking young adults, Kathy and I shared our thoughts and feelings about the principle of believing. The Apostle Paul said, ‘Faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen’ [Hebrews 11:1]. Substance. Evidence. This is what faith is. This is what belief is. It is real. It is part of our inner being.

“I encouraged these young adults to believe in these six important things:

“1. Believe in God.

“2. Believe you are a daughter or son of God and that He knows you personally and loves you completely.

“3. Believe that you can speak to your Heavenly Father and He will send His Spirit upon you.

“4. Believe that the kingdom of God is rolling forth across the world and that we each are an important part of preparing for the Second Coming of the Savior.

“5. Believe that others who you know will embrace the gospel of Jesus Christ.

“6. Believe that Jesus Christ is the Savior of the world.

“As your friend and fellow disciple, with no motivation except my love and respect for you, I assure you that your faith in Jesus Christ is not in vain. You will see Him again. All the world will know He is the Son of God. I have come to know Him and feel His presence. I witness with certainty that He lives, that He is resurrected, and that His love for us is beyond description.”

Elder Neil L. Andersen, Feb. 21, 2021, facebook.com/neill.andersen.

“As we make a determined effort, our faith in Jesus Christ grows. And as it grows, we receive heavenly gifts, power, and the ability to do what we could not do without it. As we strengthen our faith, suddenly there is another power: the power of Christ and His Atonement. You begin feeling His approval, His love, and His grace.”

Elder Neil L. Andersen, Feb. 13, 2022, facebook.com/neill.andersen.

“Connection gives life meaning.

“Connection with God, family, and each other (what I call covenant belonging) gives our lives our greatest, tenderest, deepest meaning.”

Elder Gerrit W. Gong, Facebook, Mar. 3, 2022, facebook.com/gerritw.gong.

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="153577021" id="aside1_p1">Study more from living prophets and apostles about faith in Jesus Christ through <a href="https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/general-conference/topics/faith">general conference</a> talks and <a class="cross-ref" href="/study/manual/gospel-topics/faith-in-jesus-christ?lang=eng">Gospel Topics</a>.</p> [/SIDEBAR]
