Are you chosen?

Growing up, I wasn’t that religious. I knew the basics of Christianity, but I always had more questions than faith and didn’t really think much of it. But I had always heard my devout, religious aunt repeat Matthew 22:14:

“For many are called, but few are chosen.”

“Chosen for what?” I would think.

I never understood what this verse truly meant, and I never bothered to ask her. I started to assume this verse of scripture meant that God must have a list of His favorite children who would fill up the seats of heaven—His chosen few.

I didn’t believe I was one of those favorites.

The older I got and the more I looked around at the way others lived, it seemed that no matter what I did in my life, whether good things or bad things, I would be insignificant if I wasn’t one of His “chosen.”

I didn’t even know how to reach that status!

Knowing this, I started to believe that I would never amount to much in God’s eyes. I wouldn’t inherit His blessings or promises because I wasn’t born a favorite.

These thoughts often filled me with anxiety. I desperately wished to learn more about what it meant to become one of God’s chosen people and what it took to receive His blessings.

One day, I was scrolling social media when I came across an advertisement for Come, Follow Me. When I clicked on the ad, I found a way to connect with missionaries from The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. My willingness to find answers and hope for my life led me to agree to meet with them.

Through their lessons and many prayers, I learned so much about the gospel of Jesus Christ, my purpose in life, and, most importantly, the perfect love Heavenly Father has for me—His divine child.

I was baptized and felt so much joy and understanding spilling into my life. But I still didn’t quite feel the reassurance I was longing for. My anxious thoughts prior to joining the Church had lessened, but I still didn’t know if I was one of God’s chosen few who would inherit all that He has. I wasn’t sure what more I could do to become one of those special people.

That all changed a few months later when I was watching general conference. I was hopeful I would find some answers to questions that still felt unsettling when Elder David A. Bednar of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles began to speak. I was shocked when I heard him mention the very same verse that had left me puzzled throughout my life.

I was suddenly struck with hope.

Elder Bednar explained that “[Heavenly Father] does not limit ‘the chosen’ to a restricted few. Instead, our hearts, our desires, our honoring of sacred gospel covenants and ordinances, our obedience to the commandments, and, most importantly, the Savior’s redeeming grace and mercy determine whether we are counted as one of God’s chosen.”

And in that moment, I knew—I am chosen.

Elder Bednar’s words gave me a deep feeling of gratitude that overwhelmed me. I felt more blessed than ever to have found The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

God doesn’t have favorites—He loves all His children with perfect love—but being chosen means we also choose Him too.

We are chosen because we choose to let Him prevail in our lives above everything else.

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="155929686" id="aside2_p1">We are chosen because we choose to let Him prevail in our lives above everything else.</p> [/SIDEBAR]

Elder Bednar inspired me to faithfully stay on the covenant path as I endure to the end. I also felt inspired by President Russell M. Nelson’s message to prioritize my relationship with Heavenly Father and to strive to forsake and overcome the world so that I can return to Him!

I testify that no matter your background, no matter your sins, no matter your inadequacies or self-doubt, because of Jesus Christ we all can be God’s “chosen.” We can live with our Heavenly Father again and inherit “all that [He] hath” (Doctrine and Covenants 84:38). If we come unto Christ, make and keep covenants, accept the fulness of His gospel, and strive to become like Him, being one of His chosen becomes a reality. That is such a beautiful gift from our loving Heavenly Father.

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="155929710" id="aside1_p1"><strong>Love Nxumalo</strong> lives in South Africa and is looking forward to attending college. She is passionate about music, literature, and the gospel. Life has its difficulties, but she knows that she is loved by Heavenly Father and is grateful for all the earthly angels He sends to minister to her.</p> [/SIDEBAR]
