On one occasion, the resurrected Lord Jesus Christ asked Peter, “Lovest thou me?” Peter answered, “Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I love thee.” Jesus asked two more times, “Lovest thou me?” Each time, Peter answered yes. And each time Jesus responded by saying, “Feed my lambs” or “Feed my sheep” (John 21:15–17).

In my office at Church headquarters, several images on the wall depict the Lord serving, blessing, and healing His sheep. They remind me of how deeply concerned He is with the welfare of all His Father’s children. He is the Good Shepherd. He knows and loves His sheep. That is why He gave Peter the charge to feed His sheep.

As members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and disciples of the Lord Jesus Christ, we are likewise invited to take part in the Lord’s work to care for and nurture others. We are called to feed the Lord’s sheep both temporally and spiritually.

“I am the light of the world,” Jesus said (John 8:12). When individuals and families have pressing temporal needs, however, it can be difficult for them to see His light and feel His Spirit. They may feel as if they are living in darkness.

The Church has many resources to help the Lord’s sheep improve their physical and emotional health, pursue education and employment, and become temporally prepared. Often those in need don’t know where to turn or what resources are available. Sometimes they may be too shy or embarrassed to ask for help. In keeping the Lord’s commandment to feed His sheep, we can help people find these resources.

All the Church’s resources are based on gospel principles. As individuals apply these spiritual principles to their temporal needs, it will strengthen their faith in Jesus Christ. In this way they can feel the Savior’s light in their lives, grow in spiritual strength, and continue along the covenant path that leads back to Heavenly Father and His Son, Jesus Christ.

Two important ways the Lord has given us to help feed His sheep are fasting and paying tithes and offerings.

When done in the right spirit, fasting is much more than going without food and drink. It is a matter of worship that strengthens our relationships with our families, friends and neighbors, and ultimately the Lord. I know that when I am in a spirit of fasting, I am more sensitive to the needs of others. I better understand how I can help them.

Paying tithing takes great faith, but it also increases faith. As our faith grows, the Spirit will prompt us to give a generous fast offering. Fast offerings provide an opportunity to anonymously give of our means to bless our brothers and sisters in spiritual or temporal need. Fasting and paying tithes and offerings brings us unity with the Lord, our families, and those we serve in the Church.

Jesus Christ ministered to everyone around Him. He especially sought for the one who needed Him most. When we go out as ministering brothers or sisters, we can find and minister to those in need. And when those you minister to know you truly care about them, they will feel gospel light and love from you and the Lord. They are also more likely to ask for support from you and the Church if they need it.

If you want to feed the Lord’s sheep, a wonderful place to start is to serve others, share the Lord’s light with them, and, if needed, point them to needed resources during your ministering visits.

One Sunday while serving as a bishop in Mexico, I sat on the stand just before sacrament meeting and noticed a sister come into the chapel. She was a recent convert and always seemed shy. The Spirit prompted me to find out how the ward council could help her feel more comfortable at church. I asked the Relief Society president to reach out to this sister.

Sometime later, the Relief Society president told me, “Bishop, this sister really needs to have teeth replaced.”

This was one of the reasons this sister was so shy. She didn’t talk or smile because she didn’t want anyone to see her teeth. The Relief Society president asked what we should do. I decided to arrange for a dentist to examine her and find out what needed to be done.

“Are you sure?” the Relief Society president asked. “It could be expensive.”

I told her we could go ahead. As a ward, we found a way to help this sister. When I saw her again, she was talking and smiling. I had never seen her smile before!

From that point on, this sister’s life changed. She became a more active member of the ward and eventually went to the temple. Today she is a temple ordinance worker. I am sure if I ever go to the temple where she serves, I will see her smiling.

I have found that when we observe the needs of others, we can strengthen them, help them overcome their challenges, nurture them, and help bring them to Jesus Christ. We should never assume what can or cannot be done. With the Lord’s help, we can find many opportunities to serve and bless His sheep.

In the New Testament, we read of the woman who suffered for 12 long years from an issue of blood. She exercised great faith in the Lord when she approached Him in a crowd. She believed with all her heart that if she just touched His clothes, she would be made whole. When she touched the hem of the Lord’s garment, she was immediately healed. (See Luke 8:43–44.) Jesus told her to be of good comfort and said, “Thy faith hath made thee whole; go in peace” (Luke 8:48).

If you need temporal or spiritual help, follow the example of this faithful woman and look to Jesus Christ. Stretch yourself spiritually and draw closer to the Lord than you ever have before. Through your own efforts and the power of Jesus Christ, you can work for your spiritual and temporal welfare. The Lord will provide the miracles you need to attain the spiritual and practical needs of life according to His own will, way, and timing.

The Lord’s question to Peter is one He could ask each of us: “Lovest thou me?” If our answer is yes, then we must put our words into action. As disciples of Jesus Christ, we declare our love for Him by how we feed His sheep.

Whether it happens here or on the other side of the veil, the Lord will pour out His blessings upon us as we apply His teachings and serve others as the Spirit directs. Many of those blessings are found within His Church today. If we are faithful, He promises that “all that my Father hath shall be given unto [you]” (Doctrine and Covenants 84:38).

You will feel the Lord’s love for you and find joy in your life as you spend your days feeding His sheep the way He would if He were living among us today.
