One Friday morning in 2013, Ojukwu M. Sesay entered a taxi from Jui to SS Camp in Freetown, Sierra Leone. As is common there, he was joining the taxi with other people already en route. The other two people in the taxi were missionaries for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. A discussion of faith and beliefs arose in the taxi. Ojukwu contributed that he believed that in the kinetic energy study of physics, faith is the potential within us, and our expressions and actions make the belief known and moving.

It was immediately after this contribution on the discussion, that one of the missionaries asked for his name, where he lives, and when he can be visited. When he answered their questions, they realized that he was not in their area for teaching. Upon reaching his drop-off point, they requested his phone number and told him that two other people would be calling him since they do not cover where he lives.

As promised, the other missionaries called and visited the following Saturday. They introduced the Church to Ojukwu and his family. He lived with his wife, children, brothers, and sisters. They were interested in the missionaries and wanted to know why they were in their family home. After they left, Ojukwu read the first lesson from the leaflet provided by the missionaries and explained it to his family.

While sharing thoughts with his wife and encouraging her to look at the truth surrounding the quotes, she became interested in the teachings. She asked him to visit the Church, so he attended the Jui Branch. Immediately after his first visit, he held a meeting with his family to explain about the Church he visited. He told them the way of worship was different from the other Pentecostal churches and his spirit found peace with the pattern of worship. The family continued to investigate and attend church services until three members of the family i.e., himself, his wife and his brother were baptized at the Jui Branch. His brother later went on a mission.

After their confirmation and obtaining a series of assignments, his wife, Ramatu Bintu Sesay, was called as the district public affair president and later as branch Primary president. He was called as the Young Men president. In 2018 there was a change in the leadership of the branch, and he was called as the first councilor of the branch presidency. He later served as the branch president of Jui Branch from 2019–2021. The family was sealed in the temple for time and all eternity in 2022.

Since February 2023, he has been the temple facility manager of the Freetown Sierra Leone Temple, which is under construction.
