Susette Fletcher Green, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women in the Covenant of Grace ( 1994)

The Covenant of Grace

"From Grace to Grace"

ELAINE L. JACK [^1]

Each year I look forward to the Women's Conference, anticipating seeing your faces, feeling your spirits, sensing your intensity of testimony and your commitment to Christ. What a blessing such conferences are for us, to share a time together—and in the company of angels.

The 1993 conference theme, "From Grace to Grace," refers to the Lord's grace, that all-encompassing love that knows no bounds. As the conference progressed, I gained a greater understanding of the grace of God in my life. To me, grace is much more than a word. It is an eternal principle with major force in our lives today. In her keynote address, "In the Covenant of Grace," Carol Madsen made grace very real when she said, "We all yearn to feel the touch of grace in our lives, moments that capture the soul and hold it, a willing hostage, away from the assaults and demands of the unjust world in which we live."

By prayerful study, we can appreciate more fully our "Covenant of Grace." We are a covenant-making people. A covenant is a mutual agreement or promise between two people. Our covenants hold great significance because we make them with the Lord. Each week as we take the sacrament, we covenant always to remember him. We covenant at baptism to take his name upon us, we covenant to pay our tithes, and we covenant in our temple ordinances.

The Savior has told us, "As I have loved you . . . love one another." (John 13:34.) During his earthly ministry he showed us how to apply "grace for grace." (Helaman 12:24.) To the woman at the well he offered kindness and concern. So can we. To Peter, Christ reached his hand over the waters, to lift his faltering disciple. To those who jeered at him, scourged him, and hung him on the cross, he said simply, "Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do." (Luke 23:34.) To the Nephites, he blessed their little children one by one and prayed unto the Father for them. These are our models of grace.

We are Latter-day Saint women not because of what we do but because we know who we are—daughters of God. We value such definition. While some choose to march or shout or trample others to find their place, we are secure. We are women of covenant. Our attention to "grace for grace" is not a strident shout for a rank in the world, a scramble for recognition or acclaim. It is a quiet reassurance speaking softly to our souls that peace and love, hope and gentility, reverence and joy bring about change and good works. Indeed, we stand before the world today to rejoice in the grace of God, the greatest power on earth. Our goodness reaches out to all around us. It changes lives and touches hearts, heals souls and lights the path for others to follow.

In the jumble of priorities in this world, I want you to know where I stand. I have always found direction in a poem of Relief Society General President Louise Y. Robison, which reads,

God, give me sympathy and sense And help me keep my courage high. God, give me calm and confidence And please—a twinkle in my eye. [^2]

Today we see all around us the adversary at work—and succeeding. He has twisted truths to his purposes, and throngs have followed. But there are amid the masses those who stand out, who witness by their lives the covenants they have made to the Lord. Sisters, we're in a different position than women of the world. We have made covenants with the Lord.

These covenants include our willingness to "lay aside the things of this world, and seek for the things of a better." (D&C 25:10.) I am dedicated to that charge. The merging of sacred and secular in every field and in every endeavor is a major contribution of our people in this challenging era. From gatherings such as the BYU-Relief Society Women's Conference, we can take into the world an understanding of eternal principles applied to earthly needs and measures.

I want you to know that I embrace the blessings that come from working with those who hold the Lord's priesthood in these last days. We must stand united as a people for the Lord to call us one. This is a church of eight and a half million people, a force for good yoked by priesthood power to accomplish the Lord's will. It was in response to the Lord that the sisters of the Relief Society put in place 151 years ago the call to action, "Charity Never Faileth." Today righteous women are making a difference in their homes, wards, governments, businesses, and neighborhoods. Often we feel the Savior's love in the touch of a friend, a note from a neighbor, a dandelion bouquet picked by a small child, a smile and a wave from across the street, or, while reading the scriptures, a silent but clearly enunciated answer to a pressing problem.

His cause is our only cause in these latter days. His work is not cluttered by other agendas. We are on the path of eternal life, and we must not be deterred.

I know that the Lord is with us, that his grace abounds in our lives. I have felt his love and support, his purpose, his consistency, his mercy, and his peace. I think of instances when the Lord has reached into my life. He didn't right the wrongs or fix things, but I have learned that his grace transcends circumstances that are mortal and reminds us of the joy of salvation and the sustaining power of righteousness. He has told us, "Be faithful and diligent in keeping the commandments of God, and I will encircle thee in the arms of my love." (D&C 6:20.) His grace is sufficient for us all. We have no need for more.

As we learn together of our Savior's love and the gift of grace in our lives, let us value that promise in Moroni 9:26, "May the grace of God the Father, whose throne is high in the heavens, and our Lord Jesus Christ, who sitteth on the right hand of his power . . . be, and abide with you forever." Forever, my sisters, is the Lord's "grace for grace" to his people.
