Susette Fletcher Green, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women in the Covenant of Grace ( 1994)

"Eve Heard All These Things and Was Glad": Grace and Learning by Experience

BRUCE C. HAFEN MARIE K. HAFEN [^1]

Bruce: We testify that because of the Atonement of Jesus Christ, we may learn from our experience without being condemned by our experience.

Soon after Adam and Eve found themselves in the lone and dreary world, the Lord told them, "As thou hast fallen thou mayest be redeemed." (Moses 5:9.) He urged them to accept the Atonement by repenting and calling upon God in the name of the Son forevermore. He promised not only to forgive their transgression in Eden but also to cause the sorrow and the bitterness of both Eden and mortality to become the source of great meaning and joy. When Adam realized that his experience with sin and suffering could enlighten and exalt him rather than condemn him, he exclaimed: "Blessed be the name of God, for because of my transgression my eyes are opened, and in this life I shall have joy, and again in the flesh I shall see God." (Moses 5:10; emphasis added.)

Eve had the same astonishing insight: if only they accepted the gospel, their sad experience would not destroy them—it would actually sanctify them! "Eve, his wife, heard all these things and was glad, saying: Were it not for our transgression we never should have had seed, and never should have known good and evil, and the joy of our redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedient." (Moses 5:11.)

This insight is a central message of the temple endowment, taught to us through the story of Adam and Eve. A friend once said to me, "If the temple is our holiest place of worship and learning, shouldn't it teach the Atonement, our most sacred and central doctrine? And to do that, shouldn't the endowment focus on the life of Christ rather than on the lives of Adam and Eve?"

The temple endowment does teach the Atonement, but it focuses on Adam and Eve to teach the story of receiving the Atonement. The Savior's life is the story of giving the Atonement. We who must receive the Atonement can identify with the Adam and Eve story so fully as to say, "That is the story of my life." When we see how much their story is our story, perhaps we too will exclaim, as Eve might have, Blessed be the name of God! Because Christ came, mortality is not my enemy. It is precisely because of my mortality that in this life I shall find joy, understanding, and even the presence of God! That is because the Atonement is not a doctrine of simply erasing black marks; the Atonement is fundamentally a doctrine of human development.

A woman who was preparing a lesson on the Atonement told me that she had always believed Christ's atonement plays no role in our lives until we stand before the judgment bar of God. She said our lives and sins would then be weighed in the balance and measured against the degree of our repentance. If we have repented, she thought, the Atonement would remove the stain of our sins and we could be exalted. If that is how it works, she wondered, what can the Atonement possibly have to do with our daily mortality? I believe that the Atonement blesses us not only on Judgment Day but also in the here and now of daily life. It is not a mere abstraction for some other place and time.

Moreover, because of the Atonement's developmental purpose, it also sanctifies all of our distress, not just the distress caused by our sins. One woman told me that as a child she had been the victim of extensive sexual abuse. Years later, as she tried to cope with the wrenching psychic and spiritual trauma caused by this experience, she prayed and searched the scriptures to find healing and relief. She knew that the Atonement is the source of God's most potent healing power, but she thought the Atonement compensated only for our sins. In the dark time of her childhood, she was not a sinner but had been sinned against. How could she repent when she was the victim? Yet her pain and her sense of shame felt much like the "exquisite pain" that Alma says is suffered by those who commit serious sin. That pain somehow made her feel like a transgressor. She also felt, as did the sinful Alma, shut out by feelings of estrangement from the presence of God. She yearned, as did Alma, for the healing and forgiving balm of Christ's love. Could she find what Alma found in our Lord's atonement? Could the Atonement heal her from being hurt by the sins of another person? She longed for understanding.

There are endless variations on this theme. I know parents who ache from losing children, both physically and spiritually, and they wonder, Did they fail their children, or did their children fail them? And I know a good and spiritual man who lost his business and his self-respect through misjudgments that were caused by a serious emotional disorder, not by his conscious choices. Yet, even when it is unclear just what they are accountable for, good people among us take upon themselves admirable responsibility for whatever happens to them. Much of that is as it should be. But not all of it, for we suffer not only from acting but from being acted upon. The bumptious bumper sticker version of this problem might be, "Utah—guilt without sin."

We hear today that those who are hurting can be helped by therapy. And often they are—there is, in fact, a healer's art at work in much professional treatment. Some people, however, assume that religion is of little help in solving serious personal problems; to them religion is just so many clichÃ©s and abstractions, so much history, so much irrelevance. In that view of religion, the Atonement is a sterile set of philosophical abstractions that deal only with sin and apply only after death.

But Jesus is the Great Healer, and his atonement is the heart of our theology. No therapist can match that healing power. When is the power of the Master Healer accessible to us? Should we be surprised to discover that the Atonement, the core doctrine of the gospel, applies to the core problems of our mortal lives—all of them?

The story of Adam and Eve teaches us that the Atonement is for all of life, each day of our lives. The Savior's gracious power not only heals and comforts but is also a source of personal growth and development, leading to an understanding of life and a fullness of joy. The Atonement is thus developmental and practical, not static and abstract.

According to Lehi, "If Adam had not transgressed he would not have fallen, but he would have remained in the garden of Eden." He and Eve "would have had no children; wherefore they would have remained in a state of innocence, having no joy, for they knew no misery; doing no good, for they knew no sin." (2 Nephi 2:22-23.) This passage seems to say what many parents have long suspected—if they had no children, they would have no misery. Yet without children and without misery, they would also have no joy. But, taught Lehi, the Fall—with its misery, its sorrow, and even its sin—was not a mistake or an accident. The Fall was consciously designed, misery and all, to bring us joy and freedom: "Adam fell that men might be; and men are, that they might have joy. And the Messiah cometh in the fulness of time . . . that they . . . become free forever, knowing good from evil; to act for themselves." (2 Nephi 2:25-26.)

The Lord taught Adam this same understanding of life. He said Adam's children would experience the bitterness of mortality, but "they taste the bitter, that they may know to prize the good." (Moses 6:55.) Indeed, "If they never should have bitter they could not know the sweet." (D&C 29:39; emphasis added.) And the role of the Atonement in that process is to compensate for—to heal us from—the effects of the bitter, after we do all we can do by ourselves: "It is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do." (2 Nephi 25:23.)

Thus does the grace of Christ, unlocked by his atoning sacrifice, heal us from the wounds of our sins and all our other infirmities. As we repent of our conscious sins, accept the gospel, and do all else we can do, we enter into a holy relationship with our Savior based on the two-way covenants made possible by his atonement. Through our covenant relationship with him, celebrated each week by the sacrament, he heals us in at least four distinct ways. First, he satisfies the eternal law of justice, relieving us of the burden of paying for our sins, so long as we repent of them. Second, his influence interacts with our righteous yearnings and our repentance to change our hearts until we desire goodness continually. Third, he bridges any chasm that separates and estranges us from God. Many things can create this sense of alienation—unintentional mistakes or undeserved discouragement and confusion, as well as sin. Regardless of whether his sheep run away or lose their way or are stolen away, the Good Shepherd will search for them when they are lost, pick them up, and carry them home, making them "at one" with him and his Father. That is the work of the great "at-one-ment." And, fourth, once we have done all we can do to make restitution, the Savior will help to compensate for the harm we may have done or the harms done to us, repairing and restoring our spiritual and psychic losses, whether caused by sin or other factors.

Among these four sources of healing, only the first two deal exclusively with the effects of conscious sin. We may become alienated from God or we may injure other people, not only through sinful acts but also by careless mistakes or by the consequences of unavoidable adversity. From the cumulative effect of these causes, we experience the bitter, which can teach us to know the sweet and prize the good. The grace of Jesus Christ makes that sweetness both possible and lasting by purging, healing, and cleansing us from the stains of all mortal bitterness, so long as we in good faith do "all we can do." (2 Nephi 25:23.) His grace lets us learn from our experience without being condemned by that experience. Thus does the Atonement enable our growth and our understanding. No wonder "Eve . . . heard all these things and was glad." (Moses 5:11.)

Beyond these ways of healing, the Lord's grace also adds a fifth, more affirmative dimension: he endows and blesses us with hope, charity, understanding, and joy as we move beyond forgiveness and healing toward the eternal life of possessing a divine nature. At that crowning stage, not only will we desire the good or even do good but we will, as the Lord said to Adam, "prize the good"—savor it, enjoy it, comprehend it. A developmental perspective helps us see that, desirable as it is for us to avoid evil or repent from it, it is not the same as doing—let alone prizing—the good.

A father once scolded his son a few days before Christmas because the little boy was terrorizing the house and creating a constant mess. The father said, "If you aren't good, Santa won't bring you anything." Soon the father wondered where his boy had gone—things were too quiet. He found him lying very still on his bed, looking stonily at the ceiling. "What are you doing?" the father asked. "I'm being good," said the boy. He was avoiding evil by avoiding movement. That is not what it means to prize the good. We seek more than neutrality, more than avoidance. We seek to be good, as the character of God himself is good in its very nature. And that state of being is, like charity, ultimately a gift of Christ's atonement, bestowed upon the humble followers of Christ after they learn from experience all they can discover alone about prizing the good.

Marie: So does the Atonement work in our lives as an event or as a process? If it is an event, life is a simple test that we either pass or fail. We compile a certain number of black marks and white marks. At life's end, we add up the marks, compute our repentance points, and check the score. Above some fixed level, the Atonement applies, our sins are paid for, and we go back to square one. From that perspective, repentance is essentially another white mark—something we do to earn forgiveness. But something is missing. For one thing, if the Atonement simply returns Adam and Eve to Eden, theirs is a story with no plot, no character development. Nothing really happens to them, because the Atonement erases what happens to them. There is nothing in this perspective about what it means to have learned to recognize evil and to prize the good.

Moreover, this view sees our repentance as mechanically earning enough grace to offset our black marks. If that is how we think the Atonement works, we are unlikely ever to feel the full freedom and meaning of forgiveness. As long as we believe that we earn forgiveness, we will still feel guilty, because we will sense intuitively that we do not have the power to make ourselves completely whole. The Lord's forgiveness is ultimately an act of grace. It comes as his gift, not as something we have a right to, even though we must repent as a condition of receiving it.

Consider the Atonement as a process in our lives rather than as an event. The process of atonement applies not just once but, potentially, each day of our lives. From this perspective, Adam and Eve did not simply return to Eden; rather, they moved onward from Eden through the telestial world. And because they accepted the gospel and then learned to cast Satan's influence from their lives, they kept moving with the blessings of the priesthood into the terrestrial world and finally to the celestial presence of God. In that arduous journey, our first parents learned from their own experience to distinguish good from evil. By the sorrow and sweat of earthly life, they learned the taste and, ultimately, the very meaning of the sweet and the good. They did not arrive at that understanding merely by partaking of the forbidden fruit. Their first taste of the tree of knowledge was but the beginning of a lifelong quest for meaning—not an event, but an extended process marked by having children, discovering misery, sin, goodness, joy, and the very meaning of eternal life.

When, after all that, Adam and Eve returned to the Lord's presence, we could describe their homecoming in the lines of T. S. Eliot:

We shall not cease from exploration And the end of all our exploring Will be to arrive where we started And know the place for the first time. [^2]

To illustrate, consider Eve's experience. Eve must have carried within her the aspiration of each living thing to become like its parent. As God's literal spirit daughter, Eve probably desired to become like him. Perhaps the serpent in the garden played to that natural desire when he told Eve that if she would eat of the tree of knowledge, she would "be as gods, knowing good and evil." (Moses 4:11.) The Lord had forbidden them to partake of this fruit. But, Elder John A. Widtsoe taught, that commandment was primarily a "warning," simply disclosing to Adam and Eve that the choice to seek knowledge would bring death and great sorrow. [^3] But they freely made the brave choice, perhaps sensing that that was the pathway not just to knowledge but to eternal life—which is to become like God.

The last line in the song "I Am a Child of God" originally read, "Teach me all that I must know to live with him someday." It was later changed to "Teach me all that I must do. . . ." [^4] Perhaps it might read, "Teach me all that I must be to live with him someday." Satan cunningly misled Eve when he said she would become as the Gods by simply knowing good and evil. Partaking of the tree of knowledge destroyed her innocence, but that was only the beginning of her quest to be as the Gods. She and Adam had to leave the security of the Garden and face the full fury of mortality. They needed to repent and obey God rather than wandering in Satan's misery-bound search for knowledge without obedience. Through the interaction of their obedience and God's mercy, they could then actually become like him, moving beyond just knowing "about" the good toward literally "being" good.

The interaction between our effort and God's grace is represented by the covenants of the Atonement, described in the sacrament prayer. Our part of that covenant is not that we may never make a mistake; it is, rather, that we are willing to take upon ourselves his name, willing to always remember him, and willing to keep his commandments. That willingness shows where our hearts really are. On that condition, he will always be with us to heal, to compensate, to strengthen us by the gifts of his Spirit—for those gifts are "given for the benefit of those who love me and keep all my commandments, and[those] that seeketh so to do." (D&C 46:9; emphasis added.) The Lord offers the gifts of the Spirit not only to those who do but also to those who, "willing" but struggling, seek to do God's will.

What must it have been like for Eve, the first woman, whose willingness to live a good life was constantly tested and battered by the growing pains of mortality? She had no precedent, no one who had already been through her experience. She couldn't call her mother on the phone and ask, "Mom, what did you do when your kids argued?" She and Adam had only each other—and the Spirit of the Lord. How they grew in that total interdependency! Early in their time together, Adam was defensive about his choice to eat the forbidden fruit. Under the Lord's firm questioning, he said, "The woman thou gavest me, and commandest that she should remain with me, she gave me of the fruit and I did eat." (Moses 4:18; emphasis added.) But after their shared experience brought them, together, into the depths of humility and the heights of marital commitment, we read, "And Adam and his wife mourned before the Lord, because of Cain and his brethren." (Moses 5:27; emphasis added.) Their love grew. They learned together the tastes of bitter and sweet and the joy of their redemption.

Arta Romney Ballif once wrote a poem in which she imagined Eve's experience as a mother and a wife—her questions, her cries for understanding, her quest to know God. [^5] Sister Ballif, who died earlier this year, was a sister to Marion G. Romney, the wife of Ariel Ballif, and the mother of Jae Ballif of the BYU faculty. Jae read this poem at his mother's funeral. Note the symbols—the fruit of both the garden and the body, the storm, the repetition of multiply and sorrow. Consider how the Atonement could help Eve with the anguish she describes here:

Lamentation And God said, "BE FRUITFUL, AND MULTIPLY—" Multiply, multiply — echoes multiply God said, "I WILL GREATLY MULTIPLY THY SORROW—" Thy sorrow, sorrow, sorrow— I have gotten a man from the Lord I have traded the fruit of the garden for fruit of my body For a laughing bundle of humanity. And now another one who looks like Adam We shall call this one "Abel." It is a lovely name, "Abel." Cain, Abel, the world is yours. God set the sun in the heavens to light your days To warm the flocks, to kernel the grain He illuminated your nights with stars He made the trees and the fruit thereof yielding seed He made every living thing, the wheat, the sheep, the cattle For your enjoyment And, behold, it is very good. . . . Adam? Adam Where art thou? Where are the boys? The sky darkens with clouds. Adam, is that you? Where is Abel? He is long caring for his flocks. The sky is black and the rain hammers. Are the ewes lambing In this storm? Why your troubled face, Adam? Are you ill? Why so pale, so agitated? The wind will pass The lambs will birth With Abel's help. Dead? What is dead? Merciful God! Hurry, bring warm water I'll bathe his wounds Bring clean clothes Bring herbs. I'll heal him. I am trying to understand. You said, "Abel is dead." But I am skilled with herbs Remember when he was seven The fever? Remember how— Herbs will not heal? Dead? And Cain? Where is Cain? Listen to that thunder. Cain cursed? What has happened to him? God said, "A fugitive and a vagabond?" But God can't do that. They are my sons, too. I gave them birth In the valley of pain. Adam, try to understand In the valley of pain I bore them fugitive? vagabond? This is his home This the soil he loved Where he toiled for golden wheat For tasseled corn. To the hill country? There are rocks in the hill country Cain can't work in the hill country The nights are cold Cold and lonely, and the wind gales. Quick, we must find him A basket of bread and his coat. I worry, thinking of him wandering With no place to lay his head. Cain cursed? A wanderer, a roamer? Who will bake his bread and mend his coat? Abel, my son dead? And Cain, my son, a fugitive? Two sons Adam, we had two sons Both — Oh, Adam— multiply sorrow Dear God, Why? Tell me again about the fruit Why? Please, tell me again Why?

This poem movingly depicts Eve's anguish, yet it does not tell us why she and Adam lost their sons. They may not have known why. They must have wondered if those losses were their own fault. Had they failed as parents? The poem imagines that in her very uncertainty, Eve felt estranged from God, cut off, not at all "at one" with him. And it is fair to assume that Adam's and Eve's questions and fears in losing Abel and Cain were multiplied on other dark days throughout their lives. Like Eve, sometimes we don't know—perhaps cannot know—how fully we are at fault for the bitterness we taste. When we taste the bitter, we, like Eve, can only keep trying, and wondering, and asking for understanding, perhaps in Joseph Smith's words: "O God, where art thou? And where is the pavilion that covereth thy hiding place?" (D&C 121:1.) Does the Atonement speak to such questions? I testify that it does.

Carlfred Broderick, a former stake president and well-known psychotherapist, relates the following incident. He was invited to participate in a Young Women program in his stake. The program theme was based on the Wizard of Oz story, hoping to teach young people that if they will follow the yellow brick road of the commandments, they will find their way safely to Oz. As the program ended, a leader asked President Broderick to say a few words. He told them that even if they keep the commandments, life will not always be a yellow brick road. He said he had just come from two wrenching hours of counseling with two faithful, devoted women in their stake. Despite their faithfulness, they found life crumbling around them. So he taught the young women and their parents what he had tried to teach the two women: the gospel of Jesus Christ was not given us to prevent our pain. The gospel was given us to heal our pain.

That is the promise of the scriptures: the Atonement not only can heal us but it can sanctify our trying experiences to our growth. Alma summarized the breadth and depth of this awesome healing power: "And he shall go forth, suffering pains and afflictions and temptations of every kind; and this that the word might be fulfilled which saith he will take upon him the pains and the sicknesses of his people. And he will take upon him death [and the] infirmities [of his people], that his bowels may be filled with mercy, according to the flesh, that he may know according to the flesh how to succor his people according to their infirmities." (Alma 7:11-12.) Note the words pain, sicknesses, infirmities, and then mercy and succor.

I know a deeply religious woman who could not pray for months after losing her seventeen-year-old son in a motorcycle accident. She said to her husband, "What can I say to the Lord?" She was asking the questions Eve asked. But her faithfulness was stronger than her anguish, until she, like Eve before her, found that the healing balm of the Atonement began to soothe and heal her wounded heart.

This healing, strengthening power is not a vague abstraction of distant hope. This power flows from the fully developed theology of the Atonement. Our most fundamental doctrine truly does speak to our most fundamental problems. Listen to the Lord's words from Isaiah, noting that his promises flow from his atonement: "O Israel, fear not: for I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy name; thou art mine. When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee; and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee: when thou walkest through the fire, thou shalt not be burned; neither shall the flame kindle upon thee." (Isaiah 43:1-2.)

The Lord can and will sanctify our experience for our growth and development. Remember the fourth and fifth verses of our hymn "How Firm a Foundation":

When through the deep waters I call thee to go, The rivers of sorrow shall not thee o'erflow, For I will be with thee, thy troubles to bless, And sanctify to thee thy deepest distress. When through fiery trials thy pathway shall lie, My grace, all sufficient, shall be thy supply. The flame shall not hurt thee. I only design Thy dross to consume and thy gold to refine. [^6]

As this song from the first LDS hymnbook, published in 1835, suggests, the doctrines of the Restoration are full of Atonement theology. But often we don't see the breadth and strength of our own theology. The doctrine is not just that adversity can help us learn and grow; rather, it is that Christ, because of what flows from the redemption, gives us the power to make weak things strong, to sift beauty from the ashes of our fires.

When it is our turn to ask Eve's questions, let us "always remember him," for he will never forget us. His sacrifice for us binds his heart to ours. His words from 1 Nephi 21:14-16 etch an indelible impression: "But, behold, Zion hath said: The Lord hath forsaken me, and my Lord hath forgotten me—but he will show that he hath not. For can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? Yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee, O house of Israel. Behold, I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands; thy walls [symbols of our barriers and needs] are continually before me." Note the symbolism of the palms of his hands. The heart of his doctrine and the heart of his love find their source in his having bought us with his blood.

Not long ago, after two frustrating years of infertility, our son and his wife were excitedly expecting their first baby. Then they were devastated to learn that their unborn baby had a serious congenital heart defect. When he was born, their little Devin weighed more than eight pounds, and he had a headful of silky, dark hair. He was, however, quite literally, born with a broken heart. I watched through the window of the ICU unit as the doctors hooked up the wires and tubes that became Devin's lifeline. I watched while his mother held him and his father and others placed their big, adult hands on his tiny newborn head to give him a name and a blessing.

Our Devin struggled mightily for three weeks, but when his struggle ended, we gathered under a large and lonely tree in the Lehi city cemetery. Family and friends and a few flowers surrounded his little coffin. The wind "galed" as my daughters played on their violins "I am a child of God" and "Teach me all that I must do"—and I thought, "All that I must be." We watched then and thereafter as Devin's parents followed in the footsteps of Adam and Eve. We watched as their unanswerable anguish turned gradually into a mellow bonding with their child beyond the veil. Now, even with the questions that remain, they know and feel and understand in ways that are otherwise undiscoverable. Their lives bear witness that the Savior takes upon him our infirmities and that without those infirmities, we, like Eve, "never should have known good and evil, and the joy of our redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedient." (Moses 5:11.)

Bruce: Eve's experience as a mother opens our understanding of the Atonement's developmental nature. She found that the Lord heals our separation to make us "at one" with him, not by returning us magically to Eden but by leading us through a process of learning and growing day by day toward spiritual maturity. The Lord also draws on our understanding of a woman's perspective when he teaches us that he feels toward us the way a mother feels for her child: "For can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb?" Just as a mother could never forget her child, he said, "Yet will I not forget thee." And just as a mother's body may be permanently marked with the signs of pregnancy and childbirth, he said, "I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands." (1 Nephi 21:15-16.) For both a mother and the Savior, those marks memorialize a wrenching sacrifice, the sacrifice of begetting life—for her, physical birth; for him, spiritual rebirth.

How does such a mother view her child's mistakes? Certainly not as the child does. I think of a frustrated little girl, crying and miserable because she always makes mistakes, loses her shoes, and leaves messes around the house. But her mother does not view her mistakes as hopeless disasters. She views them as growing pains. Her mother holds her, dries her tears, and tells her not to be discouraged. She will learn. She will grow. Everything will be all right. With mother's encouragement, she picks up all she can from the debris of her travail. And when she is exhausted, her mother picks up after her. Mother picks up what her daughter can't reach, what she can't find, what she can't see. Cleaning up everything can be so hard when you're little.

The Lord views our mistakes—our messes around the house—as a mother would. What seem to us like overwhelming failures are small growing pains to him. He will hold us. He will comfort us. And then, if we do our best, he will pick up after us.

A little girl I know was once so tired that she just lay down and fell asleep on the edge of a dangerously busy road. Prompted by inspiration, her mother saw her there, picked her up, and carried her to safety. I thought of her when hearing another woman describe her worry about Lehi's dream and the iron rod leading to the tree of life. She said, "My problem is not that I might leave the iron rod and wander off into the mists of darkness. My problem is that sometimes I just get so tired that I sit down in the middle of the path, unable to go on, though still clinging with my hand to the iron rod." She might have sung, "Sometimes I feel like a motherless child, a long way from home." But the Lord, like a mother, will pick up a tired child and take her by the hand toward home.

So we grow and learn, and he leads us along, saying, "Behold, ye are little children and ye cannot bear all things now; ye must grow in grace and in the knowledge of the truth. [But] fear not, little children, for you are mine. . . . And none of them that my Father hath given me shall be lost." (D&C 50:40-42.) That is how Eve and Adam gained a full knowledge of good and evil. And that is how they found the joy of their redemption—not just in one grand gesture that balanced the scales at the end of their lives, but gradually: they grew in grace and in their knowledge of the truth. This understanding of life's developmental nature tells us that even in looking for the meaning of Christ's atonement in our lives, we should focus on ordinary, accumulated experience more than on such bottom-line judgments as whether we are saints or sinners or whether society thinks of us as visible or invisible people.

The Russian author Leo Tolstoy teaches this difference between small-scale development and heroic moments on a grand stage. The real heroes of his novels are not the generals, the great aristocrats, or the dramatic figures. Rather, the characters he admires are the ordinary people who "lead undramatic lives, [but lives that] are rightly lived moment to moment and which unfold only as a background to" the stories of the visible heroes. [^7] In this vision of life's meaning, writes Tolstoy scholar Gary Morson, one of the best examples of the moral and spiritual life is "the moment-to-moment conscientiousness of a good mother." [^8] A good mother—like other good people—is always working, reaching, responding to others' needs. Of course she will make mistakes, many of them. She can't always be right in her judgments, can't always anticipate other people's responses. But over time, her "moment-to-moment conscientiousness" moves her along, through growing pains, through sunshine and shade, tears and troubles, until she, with the constant help of the Lord, becomes a moral virtuoso. We develop moral virtuosity the way we develop musical virtuosity—by daily, demanding practice.

Would such a mother then be aware of her goodness? Probably not. One of Tolstoy's stories, "Father Sergius," tells of "a proud man" who "trains himself to attain sainthood by grand gestures and noticeable acts of self-sacrifice." But "his quest fails, because no matter what he does to humble his pride, he is still proud of his very humility. When he at last meets a true saint, he discovers that she is unaware of her exceptionality. She is a mother who supports her daughter and the daughter's [very ill] husband," and she "reproaches herself for not going to church. She lives a life of daily kindnesses that are entirely undramatic, undiscerned, and inimitable." [^9] That reminds me of what I overheard Elder Neal A. Maxwell once say of President Spencer W. Kimball: "Part of what makes him so special is that he has no idea of how special he really is."

Tolstoy believed that women often seem to understand better than men do that the moral, spiritual life is most fully lived at the prosaic level of daily toil. He believed that the typical abstract interests of men—politics, sports, the military, and philosophizing—are really quite unimportant compared to "moment-to-moment conscientiousness." I know a few men who feel such a need to worry about the "big things"—like who will win the Super Bowl, the election, and the latest far-off civil war—that they happily leave to their wives the "little things," like seeing that the children are fed, educated, and exalted. In distinguishing between the abstract world of "the great" and the everyday world of "the prosaic," Tolstoy believed that the exquisite quality of the prosaic life well lived is best described in "women's language." For him, "almost everything important" and especially "anything that has positive moral value" occurs most naturally within the world of marriage, family, and daily labor that some people commonly regard as the realm of women. [^10] That is the realm of greatest moral value, not only for women but also for men. The Lord himself said that it is the realm of "my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life" of his children. (Moses 1:39.)

If the Atonement is concerned with the process of our spiritual and moral development, where is its meaning most likely to be found? Is it in long discussions of philosophical implications? Is it to be found in knowing every detail of the Savior's last hours? As valuable as such knowledge may be, the true knowledge and personal meaning of Christ's atoning sacrifice are to be found in the resolution of some person's secret sorrow, as in the story of Adam and Eve.

Consider this symbolic example. The first mortal to see the resurrected Jesus was Mary. Why had Mary and the other women gone to the tomb so early that hushed Easter morning? Did they go in search of grand theological fulfillment? No. They went to care for the body and change the linen. Some would call that "woman's work." And Mary found him there, in the midst of her workaday tasks of compassionate drudgery. We too will most likely find him there—not in abstract experience detached from mortal cares, not solely at the end of life before the grand judgment bar, but here, now, in the tears and needs of obscure and lonely sorrow.

I thank King Benjamin for clarifying this thought in our theology of the Atonement. In his final address, Benjamin spoke of God's goodness and his atonement and then he described the conditions on which we find salvation: "Repent of your sins and forsake them, and humble yourselves before God; and ask in sincerity of heart that he would forgive you; and . . . if ye have . . . tasted of his love, and have received a remission of your sins, which causeth such exceedingly great joy in your souls, . . . ye should . . . always retain in remembrance, the greatness of God, . . . and his goodness and long-suffering towards you, . . . and humble yourselves . . . , calling on the name of the Lord daily." (Mosiah 4:10-11.) Benjamin then taught that the daily cultivation of the attitude of a meek and lowly heart after our baptism is "for the sake of retaining a remission of your sins from day to day, that ye may walk guiltless before God." (Mosiah 4:26.) And "if ye do this ye shall always rejoice, and be filled with the love of God, and always retain a remission of your sins; and ye shall grow in the knowledge of . . . that which is just and true." (Mosiah 4:12.) This passage describes, in its highest sense, the moment-to-moment conscientiousness of a good mother—or father, or any child of God.

The atonement of Jesus Christ allows us to learn from our experience without being condemned by that experience. When we repent and come unto him daily in lowliness of heart, he will take upon himself all our infirmities. He himself, like a conscientious mother, will pick up after us and even at times pick us up from our collapses of fatigue along the path of the iron rod. As we move through each growth stage of life, we will experience the bitter, so that we may know to savor the sweet and prize the good. The conversion of bitter to sweet is like a catalytic process of energy creation. It leaves behind some toxically bitter wastes. After we clean up as much of that waste as we can, the Lord himself absorbs the residue, for he alone drank the bitter cup. He continually nourishes and heals us from all our losses and all our pain, whether caused by our acts or by our being acted upon. Each member of the Church is his spirit child, and he will not forget the child of his compassion, for he has graven us upon the palms of his hands. May we, like Eve, hear all these things and be glad.
