Susette Fletcher Green, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women in the Covenant of Grace ( 1994)

"With Healing in His Wings"

Healing What Really Hurts: He Will Ease Our Burdens

STEVEN C. WALKER ARDITH W. WALKER [^1]

Steve: When I taught a course entitled "The Problem of Pain," our then-eight-year-old daughter Rebecca, seeing that title, said, "I know what the problem of pain is: it hurts."

Ardith: The other problem is that there's so much of it. As the poet W. B. Yeats put it, "The world's more full of weeping than [we] can understand." [^2] When you're human, hurting comes with the territory.

Steve: One trick to handling pain is to realize that it's not necessarily your fault. Men tend to be good at knowing that; women often aren't.

Ardith: Sometimes the hurting is our own stupid fault, and we have to stop what's causing the hurting.

Steve: But mostly it isn't our fault, and we just have to get over the hurting. Attitudes don't cause cancer. Our children's failings don't mean we've failed them. Just because loved ones no longer love us does not necessarily mean we are unlovable. One profound moral of the book of Job is that a lot of our hurting is just not our fault.

Ardith: And even when it is, it's possible to get over the hurting. I like the way Helen Keller, who knew something of suffering, said it: "Although the world is full of suffering, it is also full of the overcoming of it." [^3]

Steve: So how do we manage that overcoming? Where, in the practical pains of our everyday lives, do we find comfort?

Ardith: We'd like to share some of our homemade remedies for hurting—some simple, field-tested ways of applying a little first-aid for the soul.

Expect It

Steve: Maybe the simplest help for dealing with hurting is to expect it.

Ardith: We don't want to put a damper on any fun you may be having, but if you're not hurting right now, you soon may be. No one is immune, so brace yourself for it.

Steve: The worst football injuries come not so much from the biggest collisions but from the unexpected hits, from getting blindsided.

Ardith: A botanist once said that by late summer you cannot find a single leaf that isn't somehow damaged—wind torn, insect bitten, sun rotted, bird scarred.

Steve: An entomologist friend of mine who studies grasshoppers claims the same is true of them—most of those tough little insects by August are missing limbs, all of them damaged somehow by life.

Ardith: Some of us may have more damage than others.

Steve: But none of us escapes unscarred.

Ardith: So expect it. I try to soak in the good times for energy to weather the hard times that will come. And then during the bad times, we have to realize things will get better.

Steve: Or maybe worse. The hurting comes, no matter how good we are. Remember when we were good, back when we first moved to Provo after graduate school, just getting our feet on the ground?

Ardith: I had saved two hundred dollars in my own little savings account toward a piano. Our bishop gave one last plea in sacrament meeting for money for the new chapel. I decided to invest one hundred dollars of that piano money with the Lord and gave it to the bishop, feeling I'd be rewarded.

Steve: During the next ten days the drapes we couldn't afford to get cleaned in the first place came back in shreds from sun rot.

Ardith: I lost a contact lens.

Steve: Our tithing check to the Boston Ward bounced, and the left rear tire on the car got a nail in it—twice. Can you remember what you said?

Ardith: "I guess the Lord wanted the whole two hundred dollars."

Endure It

Steve: A second way to deal with hurting is to endure it, not give in to it but be heroic in the face of it.

Ardith: C. S. Lewis thinks "the form of every virtue at the testing point" is courage. [^4] There's real power in just plain refusing to give in to the pain.

Steve: During my mission I met Sister Bean of Hartford, Connecticut. Bent double by rheumatoid arthritis, her hands so misshapen she could not feed herself, she simply kept on smiling. She was, I think, the most cheerful person I have ever known.

Ardith: Viktor Frankl, a Jew imprisoned in a concentration camp during World War II, lived on watery soup and dry bread and never knew when it would be his turn to go to the gas chambers.

Steve: Frankl was not only physically but emotionally abused; his captors sought to dehumanize him. They shaved all the hair from him, even his eyebrows.

Ardith: He refused to submit in spirit: "It becomes clear," he said, "that the sort of person the prisoner became was the result of an inner decision, and not the result of camp influences alone. . . . Any man can, even under such circumstances, decide what shall become of him—mentally and spiritually. He may retain his human dignity even in a concentration camp. . . . It is this spiritual freedom—which cannot be taken away—that makes life meaningful." [^5]

Steve: "If thou art called to pass through tribulation; if thou art in perils . . . if thou shouldst be cast into the pit, or into the hands of murderers, and the sentence of death passed upon thee; . . . if the very jaws of hell shall gape open the mouth wide after thee, know thou, my son, that all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good. The Son of Man hath descended below them all. Art thou greater than he?" (D&C 122:5-8.)

Ardith: As nineteenth-century clergyman Phillips Brooks said, "O, do not pray for easy lives. Pray to be stronger [people]! Do not ask for tasks equal to your powers. Pray for powers equal to your tasks!" [^6]

Steve: If it's brave we decide to be, we don't have to be brave forever—just for the next little while.

Ardith: "Courage," claims a Russian proverb, "is hanging on one minute longer."

Laugh With It

Steve: If you're not too hot on endurance and courage, a defter way to handle pain is to dodge it.

Ardith: Some pains that won't yield to the most courageous head-on facings can be distracted.

Steve: And the surest surefire way we've found of distracting ourselves from our sufferings—better than pruning roses or reading a Gerard Manley Hopkins poem, better even than smashing overheads in tennis—the best way to distract ourselves from suffering is to laugh.

Ardith: Our son Scott was almost twenty when he finally decided to go on a mission. We were ecstatic but kept our fingers crossed that he wouldn't change his mind.

Steve: The day he entered the Missionary Training Center, Scott was so depressed and ornery that we were sure he was about to change his mind.

Ardith: Everyone was supportive and kind at the MTC, but that didn't help. In the orientation meeting, Scott put his elbows on his knees and his face in his hands and reeked negativity.

Steve: In the middle of all that pain, Scott's and ours, and all that potential for worse pain, Ed Pinegar came out and spoke.

Ardith: Ed, who is shiny bald, asked a new missionary to stand up and said, "When I came here I looked just like this elder. Then they gave me a missionary haircut."

Steve: Eight jokes later, Scott laughed, leaned back in his chair, put his foot on his knee, and relaxed. The laughter took him out of his anguish into acceptance, moved him from a position of enduring pain to one of being willing to listen.

Ardith: We had my father, ill with Parkinson's disease and suffering from senility, in our home for eighteen months before he died.

Steve: The older I get, the more I think old folks' sufferings may be the saddest of sufferings.

Ardith: Daddy had been a lively church and civic leader in his day, and to see him senile was extremely difficult. We shed many tears over his condition and could have spent every day crying.

Steve: The only way we were able to keep Reed in our home was to laugh with him—and sometimes at him.

Ardith: He would forget our names and rarely called me Ardith. One day as he spoke to me he said, "Well, Mildred, Phyllis, Gwen, I mean Ar—Ar—Arthritis."

Steve: You must have been something of a pain for Reed. Another time, when we were cutting his toenails, Reed said, "Now don't be putting those toenails in the soup. Last time you did that it didn't help the soup any."

Ardith: But our favorite was one of the sermons he gave to the philodendron plant.

Steve: Reed stood before the plant and in his fullest preacher's voice said: "My dear brothers and sisters, there is only one thing you have to do to gain eternal life."

Ardith: I was at the kitchen sink, and I stood perfectly still, thinking that perhaps out of his confusion had come some profound spiritual insight. Daddy went on to say to a breathless audience of me and the philodendron:

Steve: "And that one thing, my dear brothers and sisters, is to keep all of God's commandments."

Ardith: According to Prevention magazine, "Laughter serves as a blocking agent. Like a bulletproof vest, it may help protect you against the ravages of . . . disease." In fact, one study reported that "finding something funny results in a significant increase in antibodies . . .

Steve: " . . . Pleasant moods . . . are associated with changes in levels of stress hormones. . . . Laughter was as effective as biofeedback in reducing stress." And laughing "requires no special training." [^7]

Ardith: Humor is tragedy plus time.

Steve: The sooner we can get to the humor, the less time in the tragedy.

Grow from It

Ardith: If you can't anticipate the suffering, can't endure it, can't distract it—

Steve: or even if you can—

Ardith: one of the best things to do with pain is to grow from it.

Steve: Life has a way of trading us wisdom for pain. The Norse god Odin worried about the frost giants waiting to devour his people. Desperate for a better defense against giants, he journeyed clear to the witch at the end of the world for wisdom. The wise old witch promised to trade the needed wisdom for his eye. So Odin handed over his left eye, and the witch said:

Ardith: "The wisdom you need against giants is: Keep both eyes open always."

Steve: Sometimes we can trade pain for wisdom. But the learning is not automatic. Experience may be not the best teacher for some of us but the worst.

Ardith: Anne Morrow Lindbergh looked back on the sorrows of her life and decided: "I do not believe that sheer suffering teaches. If suffering alone taught, then all the world would be wise, since everyone suffers. To suffering must be added mourning, understanding, patience, love, openness and the willingness to remain vulnerable." [^8]

Steve: What if what we thought was the worst part of life—the struggling and the hurting—were to turn out to be the best part?

Ardith: What if the best things God created were deliberately designed for struggle?

Steve: What if he invented relationships not so much for compatibility and companionship and contentment as for confrontation?

Ardith: What if God designed families not for security and nurturance but for what happens most regularly in families: struggling to get along?

Steve: In families we are tutored by daily irritations, struggle, and heartaches in "mourning, understanding, patience, love, openness and the willingness to remain vulnerable."

Share It

Steve: Sometimes you can ease the pain by getting something out of it.

Ardith: Sometimes you can distract it.

Steve: Sometimes you can be heroic.

Ardith: Sometimes you can avoid it.

Steve: Sometimes you can reduce the anguish by anticipating it.

Ardith: Sometimes—quite a lot of the time, when you're really hurting—none of those works.

Steve: The best way we've found?

Ardith: Share your hurts. Share your pain with someone.

Steve: I used to think the human body could not hurt more than it could stand, that when things got really painful there was an automatic shutoff system, so you just passed out.

Ardith: It was a terrible disappointment to Steve to discover that there's no such protection, that it's entirely possible to hurt more than you can endure.

Steve: With knee problems that had already given me considerably more pain than I wanted, I was dismayed to find myself in a doctor's office facing the prospect of dye being injected into the bone with a needle that looked as big as my finger. As I looked away from that needle, my eye caught a nurse standing in the doorway. She leaned her head on her hand in anguish for me. Somehow her hurting for me made it possible for me to bear the pain. Somehow she took some of my pain.

Ardith: I think we can do that for each other.

Steve: I think we can literally bear each others' burdens.

Ardith: Our daughter Emily—the youngest, sweet seventeen—was raped last summer.

Steve: She was jogging on the road above our house.

Ardith: A man wearing a stocking over his head handcuffed her hands behind her back and dragged her into the oak brush.

Steve: I guess I thought I knew what rape was about, realized it was a crime of violence, but I wasn't prepared for the bruises on her face and back and arms.

Ardith: I wasn't prepared either for the aftermath, the five-hour police debriefing and medical check, the "morning after" pill, the checking for AIDS.

Steve: I've had some trouble dealing with my feelings toward the rapist. I'm not used to feeling hatred, and I keep choking it down instead of working through it—however you do that. And it won't stay choked. I keep dreaming variations of a single dream: I get to the oak brush in time to stop the rape, but then I do very bad things to the rapist, hurtful things. The dream I like best is the one where I blast him with my father's twelve-gauge shotgun in the knees at close range. We were in California when Emily was attacked, and I keep imagining ways I could have stopped it had I been here. I keep thinking I shouldn't have moved to Edgemont and shouldn't have had any children in the first place and shouldn't have encouraged Emily to get out into God's good world.

Ardith: For a while every man in the world looked like a potential rapist. I couldn't look at a little girl because I kept thinking she might grow up to be raped—and a fifth of women in this country will be; many who read this have been. [^9]

Steve: In that dark time, my soul clouded with hate, haunted by an unremitting murderousness that took great pleasure in the fact that in the good old days of William the Conqueror, rape was punished by castration and blinding—don't even let them look—the thing that saved me was recognizing there are still good people in the world.

Ardith: And people have helped, have been heartwarmingly supportive. It's not natural for me to share my problems. My first instinct was that our family should go out of town the Sunday after the rape to avoid people asking or wondering or looking. But Emily wanted people in the ward to know about the rape in hopes of deterring future attacks. So she and I talked with the Young Women in our ward that next Sunday morning and then with the Relief Society . . .

Steve: . . . and I with my Gospel Doctrine class. It was like a burden lifted—it was a burden lifted. Those good people in our ward took some of the anguish off our shoulders and helped carry it. The tears that day on the faces of Anna Tueller and Carol Lee Hawkins made my own tears less bitter.

Ardith: Emily's entire class, one by one, hugged her, and so many flowers were sent that our living room smelled like love.

Steve: Mal Oveson, a feisty eighty-seven-year-old in our ward, encapsulated for me how amazingly people manage to help even when there's no way in the world to help: she walked down the hall at church with Emily and said (as I also so often so frustratingly feel), "I just don't know what to do." Then she took off her gold bracelet, inscribed "I love you," and slipped it into Emily's hand.

Ardith: You can't get much of that sort of direct emotional support without having your faith in humanity healed.

[Women in the Covenant of Grace, page 41 Steve: I'm a whole lot less bitter than I was—less angry at me, and at God, and even at rapists. I am determined to be henceforth more actively loving, to do some real things for others, to do unto as I have been so lovingly done by.

Ardith: So when you're hurting, particularly when you're hurting beyond what you can handle, share. Sometimes just thinking about a friend can help, as Shakespeare reminds us.

Steve:

When in disgrace with fortune and men's eyes I all alone beweep my outcast state, And trouble deaf heaven with my bootless cries, And look upon myself, and curse my fate, Wishing me like to one more strong in hope, Featured like him, like him with friends possessed, Desiring this man's art and that man's scope, With what I most enjoy contented least; Yet in these thoughts myself almost despising Haply I think on thee, and then my state, Like to the lark at break of day arising From sullen earth, sings hymns at heaven's gate: For thy sweet love remembered such wealth brings That then I scorn to change my state with kings. (Sonnet 29)

Ardith: Sharing helps. Not being used to sharing my problems, I was overwhelmed with how much sharing helps. If I hadn't shared my anguish about Emily's rape, I wouldn't have made it through.

Share It with the Lord

Steve: There's only one surefire, never-fails, always-comes-through way to ease our backaches and heartaches and soul aches—

Ardith: And that is by sharing our pain with the Lord.

Steve: Even a spouse can't always help. One of the most painful episodes in our marriage was the infertility drama. We were married six years before Scott was finally born.

Ardith: I handled it pretty well during the first two years of marriage, but during the third year I became a basket case.

Steve: Ardith was desperate to have a baby; I spent a lot of time reading in Genesis about how Rachel seized Jacob by his robe collar and shouted, "Give me children, or else I die." (Genesis 30:1.)

Ardith: I was constantly reading the symptoms of being pregnant. I spent hours looking in the mirror to see if the whites of my eyes were somewhat gray because that was one of the signs.

Steve: Ardith would get her hopes up and then cry for two days, and then get her hopes up again. Then cry again.

Ardith: One summer night as Steve said our prayer, he told God (as usual) that we would like to have a baby, "if it be thy will." When he finished praying, I got mad and told him not to say "if it be thy will" anymore because it just undid all the good of my prayers. I wanted to have a baby now, not wait around for God's will. A few days later I came upon Proverbs 3:5: "Trust in the Lord with all thine heart; and lean not unto thine own understanding." A peace came over me. Something in me changed. I lost that desperate, frustrated feeling. It was still three more years before we had Scott, but those three years were filled with peace.

Steve: And quiet. "For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature"—

Ardith: no matter how bad—

Steve: "shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord." (Romans 8:38-39.)

Ardith: "Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.

Steve: "Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls." (Matthew 11:28-29.)

Ardith: "Fear not, little children, for you are mine." (D&C 50:41.)

Steve: "Be of good cheer, and do not fear." (D&C 68:6.)

Ardith: "In the world ye shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer; I have overcome the world." (John 16:33.) I like the way Anne Frank put it: "I can feel the sufferings of millions and yet, if I look up to the heavens, I think that . . . this cruelty too will end, and that peace and tranquillity will return again." [^10]

Steve: I like the way a fifteenth-century English lyric puts it:

Ther bloweth a cold wynd to-day, to-day, The wynd bloweth cold to-day; Crist suffred his passioun for [our] salvacioun To kepe the colde wynd awey." [^11]

Ardith: I like the way the Lord—

Steve: He with whom we best share our suffering and our sorrow—

Ardith: I like the way the Lord put it: "Many are the afflictions of the righteous: but the Lord delivereth [you] out of them all." (Psalm 34:19.) "I will turn their mourning into joy, and will comfort them, and make them rejoice from their sorrow." (Jeremiah 31:13.)

Steve: "They that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength; they shall mount up with wings as eagles; they shall run, and not be weary; and they shall walk, and not faint." (Isaiah 40:31.)

Ardith: "Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil: for thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff they comfort me." (Psalm 23:4.)

Steve: "Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you.

Ardith: "Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid." (John 14:27.)

Steve: "I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly." (John 10:10.)

Ardith: There's a lot of hurt in life, but the more life, the better.

Steve: Maybe even the more hurt the better, provided we can share our suffering with each other and with the Lord.

Ardith: God's peace, the peace that passeth understanding, is as likely to come to us in our hurts as in our happiness.

Steve: Likelier.

Ardith: Maybe that's the process.

Steve: Maybe that's the plan.
