Susette Fletcher Green, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women in the Covenant of Grace ( 1994)

Perspectives on Divorce

Divorce is a unique personal experience, so it is with some risk that we share our individual perspectives. We hope our thoughts will help some of you.

Peace after Divorce

Elaine Shaw Sorensen [^1]

I have put aside traditional self-help lessons on how to live happily ever after divorce. I, like all of you, divorced or not, do not live happily ever after, but I have begun to find peace.

My problems in dealing with divorce include an aversion to the word itself. I have been divorced almost eight years and still find great difficulty in saying the word divorce. Instead, I usually say, "I am alone," or avoid comment. This is the first time that I have publicly and directly addressed the issue of my divorce. The word is still difficult for me to face.

My divorce languished legally for nearly two years before a two-day trial. Just as I hoped it was over, the decision was appealed to the Utah State Court of Appeals and then on to the Utah State Supreme Court. The entire litigation process lasted almost eight years. It was heard by two domestic commissioners and nine judges, two of whom were women. I have often wondered what might have happened if four or five judges had been women, or even if the proportion of men to women had been reversed, and nine women had heard our case. I have wondered if a larger perspective from women might have changed the focus from property to personal welfare, from hearings to healing. As the years passed, similarity between the legal "facts" and "arguments" and our lived reality diminished, numbing my perception of the outcome. The final settlement seemed fair enough. It is hard to remember who "won."

When the divorce began, I was vulnerable and exhausted, almost extinguished, as I was forced to face the end of the most significant part of my life. Seeking employment, I went back to a nursing friend for whom I had previously worked. She had been good to me, and she knew a little about my situation. She had experienced her own divorce two years earlier. This time my interview with her was more serious than before. I wasn't looking for a part-time job to help pay for summer vacation. I now needed a career.

I was wounded, weepy, and philosophical—consumed by fears and burdens in trying to hold my children together emotionally and spiritually and simply trying to survive. Uncharacteristically aloof to my tears, my friend said something like, "Elaine, what you need is money." I was shocked. Her statement seemed irrelevant and brutal. At that point, money meant little to me in comparison to my overwhelming emotional and spiritual hurts.

She continued, "I can see you are not getting the message." She then drew a dollar sign on a sticky note and pasted it to my chest. I left her, thinking that for the first time since I had known her she really did not understand. I soon revised my opinion, however, as I discovered the harsh reality of supporting a family on significantly decreased resources while also facing the major costs of divorce recovery: legal fees, school tuition, a car, selling a house and buying a house, child care, and a hundred other things.

Another surprising shock of divorce was the adversarial nature of the legal system itself. I am a nurse, so the sensitive care of sick or hurting people had been my professional obligation. I had anticipated that the judicial system would treat me and my family with similar careful concern. I was wrong. I was stunned to find the process to be absolutely—and requisitely—adversarial. My hopes of achieving any semblance of conciliation, resolution, or equanimity were out of step with the legal process. Being thrown into a costly public arena left me reeling with the sudden need for another difficult adjustment for survival. The requirement of the system for me to prepare and represent myself as an adversary against husband and father, rather than as advocate for the relief and healing of my family, impeded my early hopes for peace.

There are a few other things that those of us who are divorced wish were more widely understood. First, divorce is neither the beginning nor the end. It is only one chapter in the story. Divorce usually follows some very long, painful passages within a marriage, of which others are often unaware. Divorce often follows a long, draining history of hurt or betrayal. The divorcing person then must enter a threatening, new, life-changing scene at a time when he or she is already depleted, vulnerable, and suffering. The people who knocked at my door with offerings of help at the time I faced divorce came very late in the trauma chapter of my life story. I am grateful to such friends, but I wish that I had reached out to them earlier.

Second, healing and peace after divorce take time. Divorce is the loss of a dream, survival from trauma. Much time must pass before emotional, spiritual, physical, and social healing is possible. Be patient with us who divorce.

On the other hand, time alone will not heal. It is what you do with that time. For a divorcing person, most of that healing is done alone, but another part is done at the side of good friends. You need friends who will listen, people whose simple presence nurtures. Some friends do not need to do or say anything—they nourish by simply being there. Two friends walked with me for an hour every morning during the first year of separation. My memory is that I talked for the entire hour. We walked, I talked, and my friends listened. That was one of the greatest gifts of my life.

Finding peace after divorce requires life changes and some new areas of family focus. I was amazed at the resilience of my children and at their hunger for our recovery as a family. We started new, healing traditions. We had regular sleepovers in my bedroom, with one of us in the bed and the rest on the floor, rotating on different nights. Once forbidden territory became a campground for renewal. We now have regular prayer and family home evening. Such activities say, "We're still together and we are okay. We can grow through this together."

In divorce you need to face the reality of the situation, without denial, without trying to change or hold back the truth. I don't think children need to know everything about the process of divorce, but what they are told always needs to be true. Their questions need to be answered.

Understanding and using resources appropriately can be critical, especially in divorce. The confidence and support of a bishop or stake president are important for spiritual counsel, of a lawyer for legal counsel, of a therapist for emotional help, of an accountant for financial guidance, of friends and family for love. But it is equally important not to confuse the roles of such valuable relationships. The bishop is not the accountant; the lawyer is not the therapist. Under emotional stress, a divorcing person will often mistakenly want all needs met by each resource.

Don't be surprised when other realities continue alongside divorce. Children still get chicken pox, the car breaks down, the family reunion is still scheduled. Sometimes divorce seems an unfair complication to such events. The world should stop during a divorce. Nothing that taxes mind or spirit should be allowed to occur in a life coping with divorce. But life continues, with floods and snowstorms, with flat tires on the way to work, and with the school carnival needing cookies. Your divorce does not cause such events, make them worse or better, include or excuse you. Such things just happen.

Forgiveness is always an issue on both sides of marriage and divorce. But not distinguishing between what is and what is not forgiveness prevents healing. Tolerance of abuse is not forgiveness. If you need distance for safety, then get it. Excusing and rationalizing are not forgiveness. Sometimes the hardest thing you do is face up to the reality of assault and then forgive. Only then will forgiveness be a freeing release rather than unrealistic hope for change. We need to honor the truth of our own experiences and feelings, whether they be fear, betrayal, or relief.

Peace and healing require continued efforts toward growth. Occasionally, the divorced person confronts bias or disappointment from those who do not understand. Fortunately, I have found amazing acceptance from the people in my life. I probably get most hurt by distant media reports of the characteristics of our deteriorating society, listing increases in crime, in immorality, and in single-parent families. To be listed parallel with all of the ills of the world is difficult. I take it personally when I find myself among the top problems in America.

I am also bothered by conversations about women who work or women who do not work, though my situation is accepted as exceptional and therefore "justified." I don't like to feel I am living a life that needs to be explained, excused, or justified. For one thing, if I am in an exceptional situation, I feel pressure to perform exceptionally. In other words, my children must behave better than my neighbors' children who live with two parents, my house has to be cleaner, my yard must look tidier. At work, I have to be smarter, quicker, and more productive. When there are only twenty-four hours in my day, it becomes a trap to think that because I feel different, I must always perform beyond the norm. I must try not to do that to myself—and we ought to not do that to each other.

When I told my family I was writing about peace after divorce, they laughed and said, "Tell them there isn't any!" I'm not telling you that. There is peace. Peace after divorce comes in the process of living. It happens after learning hard lessons. It occurs over time alongside family, friends, and professionals who care. It happens privately but also with many others who share the experience and understand. Peace emerges from pain and accompanies healing. It comes from confronting and accepting truth, from being willing to live and love and forgive and move forward. Divorce is still hard to say, but it has not closed the gate on my own path to life, love, and peace.

When a Marriage Is Not Celestial

Nedra Hardy [^2]

I don't recall meeting another divorced person, inside or outside of the Church, who professes to believe in divorce. Neither do I believe in divorce, but I am divorced.

I marched in the parade of starry-eyed brides at the Salt Lake Temple thirty-one years ago next month. I embarked on my eternal marriage with all my idealism in place. Divorce was an unknown. No one in my family had ever been divorced. I did know some people who had been divorced, but the possibility of divorce for me then was as remote as a man going to the moon.

My lofty ideals took a beating from the beginning, but I knew that adjustments were part of every marriage. Readjusting to rolling the toilet paper the other way was easy; financial matters were a little more difficult. My husband spent what money we had and more; my approach was to try to balance the checkbook and establish a budget. We were never to have a financial meeting of the minds. After my husband graduated from law school and I was a full-time mother, I withdrew from all financial matters to preserve our family and my sanity, tried to spend conservatively, and trusted that obligations would be handled judiciously.

As the years went by, my husband's alcoholism became the challenge to overcome. I was not equipped to handle that. For one thing, as active Latter-day Saints we didn't believe in using alcohol. For many years I lived alone with my efforts to adjust. To whom could I turn for help in dealing with the respected Sunday School teacher, high councilor, and pro bono legal counsel to everyone, who had become an alcoholic? He threatened me to keep me from talking to anyone. Even his own children thought he just worked all night quite frequently. On those nights I spent a great deal of time praying for some solution.

Finally my stake president, suspecting problems with his high councilor and tennis partner, confronted me with his suspicions and stepped in to help me over the hurdles. He was on call at all hours of the day and night but freely admitted that he had no idea how to effect the changes we needed. We were dealing with the agency of another person. The possibility of divorce crept in.

After years of living with the alcoholism, I also discovered that my husband had been living a double life. A fellow Church member who was an FBI agent had uncovered hidden files and records revealing that my husband had kept and secreted a very large settlement check relating to the death of this member's son. The devoted husband, father, and Church leader never missed his Sunday meetings. During the rest of the week, however, he lived in a world of diverted settlement checks, unpaid business and personal taxes, and a life filled with drinking, womanizing, and who knows what else.

My husband was indicted for mail fraud involving the theft of his clients' funds, but plea bargaining saved him from serving time in prison. As a part of this bargain, we were to sell our home to partially repay the victims of theft. During this time I spent many wakeful nights visualizing my children all dropping out of school and our living on the streets. Meanwhile, a small house in our community was put on the market "by owner." The house was too small for the six of our nine children who were still living at home, and there was no way I could possibly finance a house, but I went to look at it. During the next six weeks, I gradually fit together pieces of an impossible puzzle, working completely independently from my husband. With some financial backing from my mother, I negotiated a contract with the owner of the house, and we had a roof over our heads—nothing short of a miracle.

The judge allowed my husband to remain with his family to care for them. His purpose, however, was not so much to care for his family as to put us back into place as blindfolded puppets to reestablish his front of respectability. We were all expected to stand beside him in devotion without questioning him or admitting to the existence of the elements of his life outside the confines of our home. He threatened, ridiculed, and belittled us, and he demanded our love and devotion. Those of us who want things to be peaceful and stand ready to absorb guilt are easily controlled by these methods.

Now was my day of decision. I had counted on the jail sentence to give me space to reassess and determine direction. With no separation, divorce seemed to be the only salvation for me and my nine children. Can the forsaking of an eternal commitment save a family? I could not exist in this life of duplicity. He promised to change and reassured me that we would regain our financial position within a few years. I panicked. Was reform possible? Or would he sweep everything under the carpet to go on as we had been? I prayed—on my knees and on my feet, while I walked, while I worked.

I had taken a secretarial job at Northwestern University at its campus on the shores of Lake Michigan. I used my lunch hours to walk along the lake and contemplate. What would a broken family do to my children? What were present circumstances doing to my children? How could I support my children alone and send them to college? The stigma of divorce hung over me. One day as I was walking and sorting and praying, I had the strange feeling of being lifted from the ground and knew at that moment that I had to file for divorce. I also knew that what lay ahead was going to be the most difficult time of my life.

When I informed my husband of my intent, he countered with a plan of his own. He would make the divorce as difficult and as drawn out as possible. (He knew the legal means.) He would file for custody of the children. He would withdraw all financial support immediately as he would need his money for himself, and he would not move from the house I had bought until a judge ordered him to do so.

I filed for divorce and was forced to look to the Church for assistance in supporting my family. I began facing my concerns for my family. I wanted to put all of eternity into order. One of the most difficult things for me to do was to take each day as it came. Whatever could be handled this week I worked with; whatever could wait I put aside. I continually had to remind myself that I couldn't handle everything at once.

My husband held true to his word, introducing me to the world of legal wrangling. One of our first court actions resulted in his being removed from my house; having him under a different roof made all that followed a great deal easier.

Everything I did became the subject of court action: a junior high concert he didn't know about until the day it occurred (parental rights); an overnight retreat when I left my children in the care of my twenty-two-year-old daughter (child neglect). School conferences that he had never before attended became the subject of court sessions. I had to base all of my actions and decisions on whether they were worth going to court for. My first priority was my children; I wanted them separated from this as much as possible, and I would not give up custody.

I was willing to fight for my home, but there were no other material possessions that were worth a fight. At the same time, it was very difficult to sit back and allow myself to be manipulated and taken advantage of. My husband would make unreasonable demands regarding the children. (They were his power over me.) If I did not bend to his will, he would file a motion in court to get a judge to order me to do as he wished. If the demand was not worth a day in court and attorney's fees, I would bend. He constantly forced me to redraw the battle lines. The divorce proceedings were very long and difficult. After the first judge ordered my husband out of the house and ordered his book collection sold to pay attorney's fees, he filed for a change of venue, and we started from the beginning. I received a constant stream of letters from him reprimanding, blaming, instructing, and threatening me.

In a desperate effort to bring everything to an end, one November I agreed to an out-of-court settlement. I would have custody of the children and my home. He would have liberal visitation and vacation privileges with the children and would give no financial support. One element of the agreement was that the children should all spend Thanksgiving with him.

Our Thanksgiving, steeped in tradition, had always begun with playing a morning football game. Being far from any extended family, we had always shared our holidays with several families of close friends, giving us a core group of twenty-one children within the same age range. My children wanted to play football, and the game wouldn't be complete without them. Couldn't they have breakfast with their father, leave to play football for an hour or two, and then go back for the rest of the day? They called to ask his permission. Not only did they not receive his permission, but the next day I received a copy of his motion to the court to quash our entire settlement and custody agreement, which I had "violated" by allowing them to ask.

Our three years of court hearings were filled with continual frustration. When emotions boiled high in the courtroom, my Catholic attorney would often lean to me and suggest something like "Remember, Jesus forgave everyone." I was grateful for his attitude. He did all he could in my interest, and I could trust him to be completely ethical and avoid any underhanded tactics. I had been the subject of too many of those, and I had no desire to reciprocate.

At the end of the trial and the finalization of the divorce, I had custody of my children, my home, and even an order for fifty dollars a month in child support. I had been warned about postdecree motions, so I was not completely surprised by them. Just because my divorce was legally final, my former husband did not stop taking me to court with motions to have me found in contempt for every perceived infringement of his parental privileges. As long as I have children under eighteen, I will inevitably be doing something that will take me back to the courtroom, such as forgetting to inform him at the onset of my daughter's bout with Bell's palsy.

In the beginning, the disintegration of so much of what I had expected of life left me emotionally drained and wondering where and how to begin the readjustment to a new life. Yet help came from unexpected sources, and small pleasures sustained me. When my husband was indicted for his theft, both newspapers and television carried accounts. For two days after the news broke, I did nothing but answer my telephone. Friends from every phase of my life, not knowing what to say, called to let me know they were there. I have never needed friends so much, and their outpouring was voluminous.

These friends have never left me. They've gone to the temple with me, fasted and prayed, and even filled the courtroom. Sometimes they just listened while I ran off at the mouth. My friends have been my constant reminder and the personification of the love of my heavenly parents—parents who will allow us to suffer but will not leave us alone.

My children were an incredible help in getting through the worst of times. We were able to lean on each other. The day after the news stories, my eight-year-old daughter came home from school in tears, wondering if she would ever feel normal again, or if she would always hurt. Her ten-year-old sister compared that pain to the pain they had felt when their grandfather died. "Remember," she said, "the hurt doesn't go away, but it gets better." Even their mundane needs were helpful—the laundry and meals had to go on and required no painful decisions.

I made every effort to keep life on an even keel. Despite our move, we had remained in the same school district, where the children were known for themselves rather than for their father's reputation. When I returned to work outside the home, I had to reorganize my life and discard many activities and obligations. One of the things I made every effort to hold onto for myself was my book club, which gave me a book to read each month and the association of friends at the meeting. It was at the book club where I first really laughed again—a cleansing laugh from my very insides. My sewing machine had always been very therapeutic for me. I got to it as often as I could, even if it was late into the night. It soothed my soul and enhanced our wardrobes.

Today I look back at twenty-four years of marriage, three years and more than fifty court hearings of divorce proceedings, and four years of still more court hearings after my divorce. Although I have three years to go before my youngest child turns eighteen and my husband's legal holds over me have ended, I have not for a moment doubted the prompting I had to file for divorce. It has allowed me to be again the person who had been suppressed in the effort to make a hopeless situation into an eternal marriage.

A marriage is a commitment between two people that is designed to last for eternity. One person cannot carry that commitment to fruition alone. When it is not being upheld by both parties, it ceases to be eternal. It requires dedication on both sides to make it valid. A hopeless marriage need not be forever; an abusive situation need not be tolerated. You can still have worth as a person with an unsuccessful marriage. My marriage ceased being eternal years before we entered the divorce courts.

I have a new life that is both challenging and fulfilling. I feel good about being single. Finances are tight, but aren't everyone's? My relationship with and my love for my children have intensified as we have grown together through our struggle for survival, and we are now able to talk about those parts of our lives that were forbidden subjects for so many years. They all see and correspond with their father regularly. They like him to be happy, and they refrain from making demands that will bring court sessions for mother and scathing letters to all. I have learned, and they are learning, that letters do not have to be read.

I think that the greatest lesson I have learned is that I can only be responsible for myself. The principle of agency allows us to preserve or destroy ourselves. We cannot ultimately be responsible for anyone else's salvation, nor can we blame or credit anyone else for our own.

Tuna on Brown Bread

Suzanne Little Dastrup [^3]

I have been divorced for seventeen years, and I am happy. I would also be happy if I found Prince Charming. But if I don't, I'll still be happy. I didn't understand that fact for a long time. I was divorced after six years of marriage. I had a year of undergraduate work behind me and three young children. Shortly after the divorce, I vividly remember, I was rocking Ben, my youngest, and reading an article in the paper that said children of divorce are destined to be socially and emotionally wounded. I wept in despair. I no longer do that. David is twenty-three, Kim twenty-one, and Ben eighteen: all three are doing well. Statistics are not destiny. There are married people that are unhappy and married people that are happy. The same goes for educated people, for old people, for the handicapped or ill—and for divorced families. Happiness is not guaranteed in any situation or at any age.

My divorce catapulted me into the process that all of us have to go through eventually—the process of discovering that our happiness does not depend on our circumstances or things around us or people we live with; it depends on something internal. We don't know that we've relied on something external for our happiness, until someone or something takes it away. If we're drowning in despair or depression or anger, then our sense of peace has come from some external place. Often our happiness depends on worldly things, on having a successful spouse, successful children, on being liked or admired, or fitting in in some way. When these externals are jerked away one way or another—when we lose our health, lose our money, lose our spouse, lose our kids—then we have to find peace internally.

For some of you, that peace may seem so distant that you feel you will never reach it. I too felt that way. I had bitter days; I may again. I'm just not having them now. Having peace within doesn't mean you will never hurt again. It means that you are understanding yourself and liking yourself. We seem to feel this clarity during some stages of life more than others. Without a doubt, however, our personal relationship with the Savior will be an unfailing source of peace.

Divorce is not something you pass through and then it's over. Divorce begins long before the court decree of divorce and lasts a long time after that: it's a process. Just when you think it's past history, a daughter gets married and you're standing in a reception line with your former spouse and his or her new spouse. And you realize that it is still not over.

A very important part of the process is grieving. First you may experience denial: you're going to get back into the relationship, you're going to wait it out, it's going to heal, you'll be back together. You may deny that you're going to be a divorced person. Some people jump quickly into another relationship, thinking, "Well, person A is gone, so I'll just replace person A with person B, and everything will be fine." Research shows that remarriages occurring after at least one year of being divorced or widowed have a much higher success rate than those occurring during the first year. We need time to grieve and rediscover our true selves. That rediscovery requires us to face our aloneness, which is difficult but necessary.

One stage that might follow denial in the process of grieving is anger, including feelings of rage, revenge, bitterness, and hostility. Those feelings may be directed toward the absent spouse, or toward God, parents, church, or the myths of happily-ever-after many of us have been taught. This bitterness may make you hate yourself and even your children. Though this stage is seemingly not very productive, it is normal, as long as you don't get stuck there. Temporary anger serves to finish off any lingering hope about the past relationship.

You may move next to a stage of depression, with feelings of guilt, failure, self-hate, and hopelessness. Usually either anger or depression becomes your most prevalent emotion, depending upon your personality. Depression may actually be anger or other feelings turned inward. If you're better at being expressive, probably you're most inclined to anger. If you're not so good at expressing your feelings, then you could get stuck in the depression stage. Sometimes you bounce back and forth between denial and depression, anger and denial, and anger and depression. As you are swamped first by one feeling and then another, you may feel that your life is forever ruined—but those feelings do end, I promise you. Those feelings are part of a healing process that all people have to go through any time they experience a significant loss or transition in their lives.

After some months of these grieving and healing emotions, a numbness, characterized by low energy, occurs. And after a period of numbness, you reach the acceptance stage, and healing is complete. Often the hardest part about healing, or regaining your equilibrium, is that everybody in the family starts on a different timetable or heals in different ways. For instance, you may be finally past depression and anger and into numbness (or ambivalence), before you've even filed for divorce or separated. Then you file for divorce and have to start back at square one with your children's denial. They're trying to reunite the parents, line you up with their teacher at school, or fix it some other way. Or perhaps they're in the anger stage and you're in the depression stage. Or one of your children will be angry while another is in denial. This emotional smorgasbord makes the first year incredibly complicated.

We used to believe that children of divorce were emotionally, psychologically, and socially damaged. We don't believe that anymore. I am not in any way promoting divorce; however, people do divorce, so it's important to understand that it is neither the actual divorce nor the father's or mother's absence that is devastating for family members. Rather, it is the functioning of the remaining family members that creates either turmoil or success.

Basically we have to watch out for four types of problems in the single-parent home. The first is role or task overload. With one parent gone, the other parent assumes the work of two people. That parent becomes everything from mechanic to breadwinner to cook to homework helper to family home evening preparer to confidant to head dishwasher. That's a whole lot of work! If you are to survive as a single parent, you must learn to lower your expectations about things that aren't so important and not feel depressed and guilty about what you don't get done. You need to pat yourself on the back for what you're completing, concentrating on the most important things. Those important things should include your relationships, especially with your children. Relationships are what we get to take with us. If the living room's cluttered, then it's cluttered. If somebody comes to visit, have them help you clean it up!

One way to avoid role overload is to delegate better. Ask for help. Teach people what you need. I know that is difficult, but think back to the neighborhoods or wards where you lived before you were a single parent. Think about the divorced or single people who lived there. Were you aware of their financial or social needs? Could the widowed mother have used your husband to help build a pinewood derby roadster with her Cub Scout son? Would your best casserole have been appreciated after a long day's work? I had been blind to their needs. I didn't understand the overload until I experienced it. Instead of resenting people for not seeing it, we need to teach them.

Another problem area to be aware of is the destructive effects of lingering anger or emotional poisoning. It's difficult but necessary to let go of bitterness and hostility. I understand that there are reasons to be bitter. But if you hold onto those feelings throughout the next five, ten, or twenty years of parenting, you and your children will pay a terrible price. The atmosphere of the home, throughout most of the child's developmental years, would be one of resentment. Children deserve to feel peace and love rather than resentment and distrust. No excuse for hanging on to bitterness could justify the loss of a Christlike spirit in the home. Prayer, support, or therapy may help you heal.

A third difficulty for most single parents is money. Finances pose a seemingly endless problem, and the stress can seem unbearable. There are no quick solutions for the problems that financial stress creates. I remember coming home from a soccer game shortly after I was divorced and hearing my oldest son object, "Mom! You didn't stop and get a Slurpee!" Well, that was a tradition after a soccer game: we stop and get Slurpees. But I'd had it; I was in acute role overload and financial stress. I remember yelling, "What do you mean? How dare you ask me for a Slurpee! Do you think money grows on trees? Do you think this job of mine is easy?" My six-year-old piped up from the backseat, "Whoa! My mom's flipped out!" It would have been much better (and on other days I did the better thing) to explain, "Look, I know we used to stop for Slurpees, but we can't because we don't have the money. We can go home and try to make one, or we'll make some different kind of treat. We have to start a new tradition now." Sometimes we're in so much pain that it's hard for us to teach our children or to take them into our confidence. Nonetheless, they will feel much more secure if we try to explain.

The fourth problem for single parents is isolation and self-doubt. It's tempting to isolate yourself in this Noah's ark society of ours where everybody's coupled off. You stay home because you don't fit in, or because you can't afford to go somewhere, or because you're exhausted. But isolation breeds depression, self-doubt, and self-criticism. I remember a day, probably five years after I was divorced, walking home from a Church interview—my bishop's annual check-up interview. I could tell that he was watching the clock. "Well, how are you doing, Sister Dastrup? It's so good to see you! I just wanted to check in, see if you're doing okay!" I said, "I guess I'm okay," and he said, "I know the Lord loves you! I feel his Spirit when you're in my office. The Lord is mindful of you!" And I said, "Yeah, yeah, whatever." It had been five years, and I was still single, I was still poor, and I was still in school. I remember walking home from that interview full of despair, feeling that neither my bishop nor the Lord was really mindful of me.

But as I walked home, a memory came back to me of another day, a hot summer day when I was home with the kids. They were outside playing in the sprinkler. When I'm home, I try to do some mommy things—quality versus quantity things. I fixed a good wholesome lunch—tuna fish on whole wheat sandwiches and milk and carrot sticks—and I called the children in. They came slipping and sliding in the back door, saw this great lunch that I had fixed, and all three chorused their appreciation: "Yuck! This is stupid! I hate this! Mom! Everybody gets Wonder Bread, and you've got that brown bread." "I hate tuna fish; milk is dumb. How come we can't have Kool-aid? Jenny's mom just gave her kids Kool-aid and Oreo's, and they're having a picnic." "You're the meanest mom in the whole neighborhood. If you really loved us, you wouldn't make us eat this dumb lunch!"

What are my choices, I thought, trying to maintain my composure. I could smack them all for their ungratefulness and shout, "You'd better appreciate this, because I AM a good mom!" Or, I could send them all to their rooms and eat everybody's lunch myself. Or I could line them all up on the couch and then pull out the encyclopedia, volume "N" for Nutrition. Now remember, they're ages six, five, and two. Should I make them learn about nutrition, so that I could prove to them that I'm a good mom? No, I thought, none of these responses is going to work. Instead, I knelt down to be at eye level with them at the kitchen table and said, "Trust me, guys. I'm giving you this whole wheat bread and milk and carrot sticks, and this tuna fish, because I do love you. You may not get it right now, and you may not trust what I'm saying, but someday you'll understand. I'm giving you this lunch because I love you so very much, and this lunch will make you strong!"

Remember, I was still daydreaming, walking home from the bishop's office, when suddenly it struck me: That's exactly what happens when I kneel to pray. I am asking for Oreos, and the Lord is saying, "Trust me. I'm giving you all this experience because I love you so much!" And I've noticed that he keeps dishing out the tuna fish. Maybe a few side orders of Oreos and Kool-aid, but mostly it's tuna fish on brown bread. I know I have learned more than I ever would have on a diet of cookies and Kool-aid. So at this point in my life I have enough maturity to say, "Okay, I get it! Thank you! I have grown so much! Help me to trust that process here on earth. Teach me to take joy in the growth of each day."
