Susette Fletcher Green, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women in the Covenant of Grace ( 1994)

On the Errand of Angels

Let Your Light So Shine

ALEXANDER B. MORRISON [^1]

In the greatest sermon ever spoken, he who is the Light of the world affirmed the responsibility of his followers to show by their actions whose servants they are. "Let your light so shine before men," Jesus proclaimed, "that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven." (Matthew 5:16.) I would like to discuss in pragmatic terms aspects of that supernal task as it applies to the lives of women and children around the world.

One thing seems clear to me: If the status of women and children is to be improved worldwide, as justice and decency demand it must be, women themselves will have to play increasingly significant roles in effecting the necessary changes. In doing so, women will have to stand up and speak out, gently but firmly, against evil and brutality, injustice and oppression. They must be joined by their brothers in a mighty army of righteous men and women united in a common cause. In uniting with their brothers, women must be considered neither inferior nor superior to men but simply their equals. Of course, men and women are different. We must place equal value on their differences and rejoice in them.

We cannot succeed in these efforts unless we keep out of our homes the filth and dross of the world. We will be required to walk in faith and integrity, in love and charity, in courage and hope. Education—both of the intellect and of the heart and spirit—must become our daily joy. There will be neither time nor room for self-pity or despondency. The natural feelings of sisterhood that bind women together will require constant strengthening and nurturing.

A favorite choice of women's choruses in the Church is the lovely "As Sisters in Zion," [^2] a composition that portrays faithfully the need to "bear . . . one another's burdens, and so fulfil the law of Christ." (Galatians 6:2.) This enduringly appealing work was written by a woman of remarkable faith and accomplishment, Emily Woodmansee. Sister Woodmansee first heard the gospel message in her native England when she was only twelve years old. She was baptized at age sixteen, came to America as a young woman, and in 1856 crossed the plains to Zion under conditions of great adversity as a member of the Willie Handcart Company. She was deserted by her first husband under stark and tragic circumstances and married Joseph Woodmansee in 1864. It was said of this remarkable woman that she possessed a rare combination of talents—"a poetic as well as a practical mind." [^3]

The second verse of "As Sisters in Zion" reads:

The errand of angels is given to women; And this is a gift that, as sisters, we claim: To do whatsoever is gentle and human, To cheer and to bless in humanity's name.

These felicitous phrases cogently describe the role and destiny of women. Let us consider in some detail various aspects of "the errand of angels" with which God has entrusted his daughters. In doing so, I shall draw upon examples primarily from Third World nations, where a high proportion of the world's women live.

Women from Third World countries are joining the Church in increasing numbers. If current trends continue, members in the United States, Canada, and Europe will be a minority by the year 2000, representing approximately 40 percent of the total Church membership. The plight of our sisters in Third World nations is of great concern to the leaders of the Church and should be to all members everywhere. We are all part of the family of God, who "hath made of one blood all nations . . . for to dwell on all the face of the earth." (Acts 17:26.)

It has been said that females "are one-half of the world's population, perform two-thirds of the world's work, receive one-tenth of its income and own less than one-hundredth of its property." [^4] There can be little doubt that for the vast majority of women, the "errand of angels" is a very difficult task indeed, played out in poverty and adversity, in sorrow and deprivation. The following stories illustrate that point.

"It's 5:00 A.M. and a monsoon rain is falling over the Ershad Nagar slum. Here, at the edge of Dhaka, Bangladesh's capital, more than 50,000 people make their homes in one-room shacks crowded along narrow, garbage-strewn paths.

"Inside a 6-by-8-foot dwelling, a young widow, Ayesha Kharoum, cooks rice and lentils over a clay stove. Water drips from a makeshift roof, woven of thatch and scraps of plastic. A single light bulb [a luxury for the Ershad Nagar slum] casts a dim yellow glow over two children sleeping on a floor mat.

"Outside, the slum's maze of lanes are fast becoming rivers of sewage. Water seeps into Ayesha's home," waking her two children, a girl age ten and a boy age seven. "Ankle deep in the filthy water," she feeds her children their breakfast.

"At 8:00 A.M. Ayesha wades to a neighborhood training center to embroider blouses. With two timeouts for child care, she continues sewing until 11:00 that night. By working 12 to 15 hours a day, seven days a week, Ayesha earns almost $30 a month. It is twice the usual wage for female garment workers, and it enables Ayesha to send her children to school.

"'As a child I dreamed of learning to read and write,' says Ayesha. 'I didn't get this blessing, but I am giving it to my children.'" [^5] How impressive is the quiet strength of this good woman who truly lets her light shine! What a tremendous blessing the Relief Society literacy program will prove to be in the lives of so many of our sisters around the world.

In mountainous central Sri Lanka, "women are employed on large tea plantations as pluckers. They work long hours on the steep hillsides, plucking the ripe individual tea leaves from shoulder-high bushes. At the day's end, they carry their harvest to a factory in eighty-pound baskets that have remained strapped to their backs throughout the day."

Their wages for their grueling work? About 4.70 rupees—or 45 cents—per day. One tea plucker, at the end of her day in the fields, was interviewed as she began her second day of work around the home. Thirty-five years old, she was "a thin woman and appeared devoid of energy." She had worked in the fields since she was ten years old. She said she had not seen much improvement in her life. Her entire life had been spent caring for and sustaining her family.

"'I had nine children, but I lost the ninth just a year ago. The eighth child is three years old. I have five sons and three daughters. I never went to school. I was just twelve when I was married. I had not seen my husband before. My marriage was arranged by my parents. I had my first child at the age of thirteen.

"'When I was a small child, I was quite all right. . . . But now I find life extremely difficult.'" [^6]

Indeed, for many women in the world, life is extremely difficult. The old saying that a woman's work is never done is well illustrated by the life of a typical rural African woman. Her days are long, the work unending. She is in the fields before sunrise, and her day does not end until nearly seventeen hours later. After her work in the field is completed, she must gather firewood, pound and grind corn, collect water, cook for the family, and clean the home.

I met such a typical African woman several years ago "in the bush" of northern CÃ´te d'Ivoire. It was early June, and I was in West Africa as part of a World Health Organization team investigating an outbreak of African trypanosomiasis—sleeping sickness. We stopped near a village perched on the banks of the Bandama River. Because it was just at the end of the dry season, the river was shallow and easily forded on foot. We walked down to the river, where the tsetse flies that spread sleeping sickness rested on the riverine foliage. There, crossing the river, coming from the jungle on the far side, was an African woman, up to her knees in the water. She had a baby on her back, another on her hip, two preschool youngsters who paddled alongside, and was heavily pregnant with a fifth child. A chipped enamel basket piled high with bananas was balanced on her head, and in her free hand she carried a rusty machete. She was hot and dusty, her face beaded with sweat. But she smiled and shook my hand before gathering her children to climb the path that wound up the hill to her village—one of the host of unsung heroines amongst my African sisters.

My thoughts turn to another African woman, pounding the hulls from rice on a hot and humid summer's day in West Africa. She, too, was tired and dusty, glistening with perspiration. The muscles in her arms rippled as she rhythmically pounded the raw rice, using a heavy wooden mortar held in both hands and a pestle hewn out of a tree trunk. Around her were the timeless verities of African village life—mud huts with palm-thatched roofs and no windows, children playing in the dirt, the men of the village sitting in the shade, ruminating over the local gossip and the state of the crops.

Many experts agree that women hold the key to ending Africa's hunger. They work more than 63 percent of the small farms and process essentially all the food that small farmers grow. They also carry the water—often over distances of a mile or more—and much of the firewood needed daily. Many rural African women spend up to five or six hours daily carrying water.

Two scenes are forever etched in my memory. One is of two Ethiopian women bent forward grotesquely at the waist, struggling down a village street. Secured by a tumpline around each woman's forehead and balanced on the small of her back was an earthenware water vessel that must have weighed fifty pounds empty. No beasts of burden could have been more heavily laden. The other scene at first glance seemed to be a huge bundle of tree trunks and branches with two dirty brown legs sticking out of the bottom. On closer examination, I found the legs belonged to a frail and apparently aged African woman who was busily performing the never-ending job of collecting and bringing home firewood. African women typically spend at least an hour daily, and often much more, gathering firewood. What a blessing a truly effective and cheap solar cooker would be!

In addition to their domestic responsibilities, women in Africa do up to three-quarters of all agricultural work. They carry out most of the unmechanized parts of farming—harvesting, weeding, processing, and storing crops—as well as essentially all of the domestic work involved with cooking food and caring for children. In Kenya, where 38 percent of the farms are run by women, those women manage to harvest the same amount per hectare (2.47 acres) as men, despite men's greater access to loans, technical advice, fertilizers, hybrid seeds, and pesticides. And when women are given the same level of assistance, they have been found to be more efficient and to produce bigger harvests than men. [^7]

Most of the petty traders in Africa are women. They run the roadside markets and gather in the village square to sell foods and other products, much of which they have either grown themselves or harvested from the forest. They are natural entrepreneurs. One such person is Ester Ocloo, a Ghanaian who was the first woman to receive the prestigious Africa Prize for Leadership for the Sustainable End of Hunger. What a shining light she is!

In 1943, Ester borrowed ten shillings from her aunt to buy oranges to make marmalade which she then sold at the market. Her enterprise has since grown to one hundred companies, both large and small. Most of the workers are women from rural areas. Shortly after Ghanaian independence from Britain, she saved enough money to obtain training in England in food processing and preservation. She then taught those skills to others and organized them into food-manufacturing associations. She exemplifies the entrepreneurial skills of African women, from one end of the continent to the other. [^8]

Third World women not only work very hard but they also face difficult health and education problems. Women occupy the bottom rung of society in most developing countries. They eat least and last, always serving the men and children first, often having little or nothing left for themselves. In common with impoverished mothers everywhere, they do without for themselves in order to give as much as they can to their children. Consequently, women in developing countries are much more likely to be malnourished than are men. In Southeast Asia and Africa, 65 percent of pregnant women suffer from nutritional anemia, for example. That condition lowers their resistance to infectious diseases, reduces their capacity to work and to learn, and results in a greater risk of death in pregnancy and childbirth. The result is that women in developing countries do not live nearly as long as their sisters in the United States, Canada, or other developed Western countries. In severely impoverished African countries such as Mozambique, Somalia, or Mali, life expectancy of females is only about fifty years, compared to nearly eighty years for women in the United States or Canada. Life expectancy in Ghana is only fifty-seven years and that in Zimbabwe is sixty-two years. [^9]

Women in developing countries are routinely denied basic education and the opportunity to learn job skills that could lead to economic self-sufficiency. They long for knowledge that will help them to better look after their families, to grow more food, to prevent illness in their children. As one Sudanese woman explained: "I must learn new skills or I will be left behind and my family will suffer. My children must not remain ignorant like me." [^10]

Fewer than one in five women is literate in many parts of Africa. In Mozambique 79 percent are illiterate; in Sierra Leone, 89 percent; in Mali, 76 percent; in Ghana, 49 percent; and in Zimbabwe, 40 percent. [^11]

Many fewer girls than boys attend secondary school in most African countries—only 5 percent of the girls in Mozambique attend, for example, and that number drops to 4 percent in Mali. [^12] Often, girls' mothers need them at home to care for the younger children while the mothers work in the fields or engage in petty trading.

It is no small thing that Relief Society has championed the cause of literacy for women everywhere. [^13] Indeed, I am convinced that teaching women to read and write is part of that "errand of angels" that I mentioned earlier. Substantial evidence indicates that the health and well-being of Third World families is more closely related to the educational status of the mothers than to the economic status of the family. Furthermore, how can a woman learn the gospel if she cannot read the sacred scriptures?

The adversity under which so many women struggle is heightened under conditions that reduce them to the status of refugees. At the end of 1991, according to the U.S. Committee for Refugees, nearly seventeen million uprooted persons needed protection and assistance around the world. That number has increased during 1992, as the horrifying events in the Balkans have continued to shock and sicken people everywhere. Many of these uprooted people are women and children. The United Nations high commissioner for refugees has officially designated women and girls as an especially vulnerable segment of refugee populations. Rape, abduction, torture, forced prostitution, and murder are all common forms of violence against female refugees. Such actions, in addition to being criminal acts, are a deep affront to human dignity and abhorrent in the sight of God.

In all countries, the lives of women are inextricably connected—both by nature and by nurture—with those of their children. In all lands, mothers worry and weep over the health of their little ones. Those sorrows are accentuated, quantitatively, if not qualitatively, in developing countries where so many children suffer untimely illness or death. As would be expected, infant mortality rates are ten to twenty times higher in African countries than in the United States or Canada.

Major causes of death in preschool children in a refugee camp hospital in Ethiopia during the first ten months of 1989 were similar to those found throughout the continent under nonrefugee conditions. Death comes most frequently to African children as "the result of uncontrolled diarrhea stemming from unsafe water, intestinal diseases and parasites, and lack of proper medical care." [^14] At least one million African children die each year from diarrhea. Large numbers of children die from such infectious diseases as pneumonia or measles under conditions of poor sanitation, malnutrition, overcrowding, and low vaccination rates. The common infectious diseases of childhood, which almost never kill well-nourished Western children, can and do kill large numbers of malnourished children in the Third World. In 1985 in a refugee camp in eastern Sudan, for example, between one-third and one-half of the children had measurable signs of malnutrition and as many as one in three children suffering from measles died from the disease. Malaria kills an estimated one million African children under the age of twelve each year. The members of society most susceptible to infectious diseases are infants and preschool children, pregnant women, and the elderly, many of whom are already weakened by preexisting nutritional and health problems. [^15]

The link between malnutrition and disease amongst Third World children is complex. Malnutrition can increase the risk and severity of diarrhea, and diarrhea in turn lowers the absorption of nutrients from the gastrointestinal tract, increases the loss of nutrients from the body, and reduces food intake. A vicious cycle is set up that often leads to dehydration and death unless it is interrupted by proper medical treatment, such as oral rehydration therapy—administering a simple mixture of sugar, salts, and safe water. This mixture can be given by mouth and is safe and cheap to administer. Sadly, many Third World infants do not receive even this simple, lifesaving treatment.

Mothers play a special role in determining the health of their children. In Bangladesh, if the mother is living, approximately 90 percent of children survive to one year of age. If the mother dies, however, infant survival drops so precipitously and quickly that by four months after birth only 40 percent of such children are still alive. Smaller numbers of children continue to die during the remaining months of the first year of life. Death of the mother doubles the rate of mortality in her sons and more than triples it in her daughters. [^16]

It would, of course, be wrong to suppose that only Third World children are in peril or that only Third World mothers weep for their sons and daughters. When we speak of "the errand of angels," we must look to the plight of women and children in this country as well. A chilling series of articles in the 10 August 1992 edition of Fortune magazine outlined in grim detail the dangers facing American children. One of the authors, Louis S. Richman, pointed out that "if the well-being of its children is the proper measure of the health of a civilization, the United States is in grave danger." Mr. Richman noted that "the bipartisan National Commission on Children wrote in 'Beyond Rhetoric,' its 1991 report, that addressing the unmet needs of American youngsters 'is a national imperative as compelling as an armed attack or a natural disaster.'" [^17]

The long, lamentable catalogue of perils afflicting the children in this country include the following:

Â· The infant mortality rate in the United States is higher than that of nineteen other industrialized nations.

Â· The proportion of nonwhite one-year-olds immunized in the United States against polio, measles, and other preventable diseases lags behind that of fifty-five other nations.

Â· The parents of nearly 2,750 children separate or divorce each day. More than half of all white children and three-fourths of African American children under eighteen will spend part of their childhood in a single-parent household.

Â· Every day more than three children die of injuries inflicted by abusive parents.

Â· There are 1.3 million latchkey children between five and fourteen years of age who come home to an empty house each day.

Â· A typical fourteen-year-old watches three hours of television daily but does only one hour of homework.

Â· On average, 2,200 kids drop out of school each school day.

Â· Every day more than 500 children between the ages of ten and fourteen begin using illegal drugs, and more than 1,000 start drinking alcohol.

Â· Nearly half of all middle-schoolers abuse drugs or alcohol, engage in unprotected sex, or live in poverty.

Â· More than 1,400 teenage girls a day, two-thirds of them unmarried, become mothers.

Â· Among fifteen- to nineteen-year-olds, homicide by firearms is the third leading cause of death for whites and the leading cause of death for blacks.

Â· Some 41 percent of boys and 24 percent of girls are able to get a gun on a whim. [^18]

Much of this frightening decline in the well-being of America's children has occurred in the last thirty years. In the three decades since 1960, we have seen a 560 percent increase in violent crime in America, a 419 percent increase in illegitimate births, a quadrupling in divorce rates, a tripling in the proportion of children living with single mothers, a tripling in the teenage suicide rate, and a drop of nearly eighty points in SAT scores, according to the authors of a 1992 report. [^19]

To what can we attribute this lamentable turn of events? In a recent perceptive article in the Wall Street Journal, William J. Bennett, United States Secretary of Education from 1985 to 1988, hit the nail on the head when he wrote: "Our society now places less value than before on what we owe to others as a matter of moral obligation; less value on sacrifice as a moral good; less value on social conformity and respectability; and less value on correctness and restraint in matters of physical pleasure and sexuality. . . . The social regression of the past 30 years is due in large part to the enfeebled state of our social institutions and their failure to carry out their critical and time-honored tasks." [^20]

The social institutions to which Bennett refers include the nation's homes, schools, and communities. Surely, if we value the future, the deplorable results of misplaced personal, family, and societal values cannot be allowed to remain unreversed.

No one would argue with the assertion that there is too much injustice and oppression in the world, too much misery and suffering, too many tears, too little compassion and caring, too little purity of heart. No race, gender, or society is immune to travail and trouble; they are the common burdens of humankind. Yet it is clear that, worldwide, women and children are at a comparative disadvantage. They suffer much more than their share; they receive much less than they deserve. He to whom "all are alike," both male and female, who had a special love for children, who makes no distinction in terms of worthiness between the races, kindreds, tongues, and peoples of humankind, who loves equally his sons and his daughters, must weep at the lack of true humanity manifested by so many.

Let me repeat what I said at the outset: If the status of women and children is to be improved worldwide, as justice and decency demand it must be, women themselves will have to play increasingly significant roles in effecting the necessary changes. In doing so, women will have to stand up and speak out, gently but firmly, against evil and brutality, injustice and oppression. They must be joined by their brothers in a mighty army of righteous men and women united in a common cause.

The work will not be easy nor the way short. There is much to do, much dreaming and planning, service and sacrifice, prayer and labor. Yet the world is full of glorious examples of women who have altered the path of history. One was Florence Nightingale, the founder of the modern nursing profession. Born in 1820 in Florence, Italy, where her well-to-do British parents lived temporarily, she grew to womanhood in England. A child of privilege, she could easily have spent her life in the pursuit of pleasure, as did many of her contemporaries.

But Florence felt deeply that God had a mission for her to accomplish. Against the wishes of her family, she trained in Germany as a practical nurse and became the superintendent of nurses at a London hospital. Nursing at that time had no prestige and did not attract women of good character and breeding. In 1854, when war broke out in the Crimea between Britain and France on the one side and Russia on the other, Florence took a party of nurses to work in the military hospitals for wounded British soldiers.

When she arrived at the hospital in Scutari, Turkey, Florence found appalling conditions of filth, degradation, and gross overcrowding. The walls were thick with dirt; the floors, rotten. Vermin scurried everywhere. There were no basins, no towels or soap, insufficient bedding and bandages, and no hot food. Florence's first requisition was for two hundred scrub brushes.

Blessed with an iron will and unflinching courage, Florence fought the hostility of the medical establishment and the army bureaucracy to obtain supplies needed for proper nursing of desperately wounded soldiers. She reorganized the kitchens and laundries. Prodigious efforts were made to clean the wards and bring to their inhabitants some of the necessities of civilized life. The wounded began to receive nourishing, well-cooked food and the comfort of clean linen. Wounds were dressed regularly, and the men were bathed and given clean clothing.

Florence drove herself hard. She worked eighteen-hour days, making her rounds through the wards late at night, a lamp in her hand, giving comfort and solace to thousands. The soldiers called her the "Lady with the Lamp." They kissed her shadow as it passed and, in an army noted for blasphemy, scrupulously watched their language in her presence. In a few months the mortality rate amongst the wounded fell from more than 50 percent to just over 2 percent.

Florence became a national hero in her native Britain. But she cared little for personal glory, refusing public transport home and every kind of public honor. She was more interested in obtaining improved living conditions for the soldiers. Important and wide-ranging reforms resulted from her efforts.

In 1860 she organized the Nightingale School for Nurses at St. Thomas' Hospital in London, the first of its kind in the world. The justly honored position held by the nursing profession today throughout the world has resulted in no small measure from Florence Nightingale's extraordinary life of unstinting service. I believe she would have agreed with King Benjamin, who knew that "when ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are only in the service of your God." (Mosiah 2:17.) The lesson of Florence Nightingale's life is clear: one person with vision and indomitable will can accomplish much. [^21] Indeed, she can change the world!

The Lord does not expect his daughters all to become clones of Florence Nightingale, leaving family and friends to care for the afflicted of the world. Modern "sisters in Zion," however, have a Christian obligation to do as the Lord instructed the First Presidency: to "succor the weak, lift up the hands which hang down, and strengthen the feeble knees." (D&C 81:5.) This work begins at home and then extends out, as circumstances permit and warrant, to impoverished souls in local communities and elsewhere. The payment of a generous fast offering, as simple and undramatic as that is, remains an effective way to help others.

A First Presidency letter, dated 13 December 1991, also notes, "We receive inquiries from those wanting to make additional contributions to Church humanitarian work that assists people in dire need throughout the world. We feel moved by such compassion and wish to provide an avenue through which this can be done. Therefore, those desiring to assist can write Humanitarian Service on the Other line of the standard donation slip, enter in the desired amount, and give the slip and their contribution to their bishop or branch president who will immediately forward it to the Church. They may also elect to send such contributions directly to Humanitarian Service at Church headquarters." These funds are earmarked for use in the Church's worldwide humanitarian effort. [^22]

Ours is a time when values are inverted, when good is called evil and evil good, when the devil pacifies many and lulls them away into carnal security, whispering that there is no hell. (See 2 Nephi 28:21-22.) In the midst of this darkness, I for one remain optimistic about the future. The reason is simple. The gospel of Christ is again upon the earth in its fulness. God's church has been reestablished, for the last time, never again to be taken from the world. Inspired prophets lead and direct the work, which continues to roll forth to cover the whole earth as the waters cover the mighty deep. My serenity is akin to that of Cyprian, bishop of Carthage, and a Christian martyr of the third century. To his friend Donatus, Cyprian wrote: "This seems a cheerful world, Donatus, when I view it from this fair garden under the shadow of these vines. But if I climbed some great mountain and looked out over the wide lands, you know very well what I would see—brigands on the high roads, pirates on the seas, in the amphitheaters men murdered to please applauding crowds; under all roofs misery and selfishness. It is really a bad world, yet in the midst of it I have found a quiet and holy people. They have discovered a joy which is a thousand times better than any pleasure of this sinful life. They are despised and persecuted, but they care not. . . . These people, Donatus, are the Christians and I am one of them." [^23]

With my serenity about the future come deep feelings of gratitude. How grateful I am for the glorious gospel of Christ and for his church—The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints—which provide the guidelines and point the way to what must be done to make this world a better place for all of God's children.

I finish where I began, with Christ's admonition to let your light shine forth to the glory of God. May women everywhere rise above the adversity that is too often their lot to the full measure of the divinity within them. May they lift up their lamps and illuminate every corner of our globe. And may their lights coalesce with those of their brethren to form a mighty beacon that will penetrate and sweep away the gross "darkness [which] covereth the earth." (D&C 112:23.)
