Susette Fletcher Green, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women in the Covenant of Grace ( 1994)

Invincible Summer: Finding Grace Within

MARTHA N. BECK [^1]

Have you ever seen someone with a terminal illness, or delinquent children, or a failed marriage, and thought, "There but for the grace of God go I"? That phrase was probably my first encounter with the concept of God's grace. And except for a few hymns that we seldom sing and a few passages of scripture that we rarely read, that is where grace probably enters most frequently into Latter-day Saint thought and language patterns. That sentence—"There but for the grace of God go I"—also sums up much of the common cultural baggage that clouds the concept of grace. Think about the implications of that statement: "There, but for grace, go I." It conveys a powerful message that the primary function of God's grace is to preserve human beings from suffering and misfortune. It suggests that grace is essentially equivalent to luck: God's grace saves us from the miserable fate that we might encounter without its protection.

That is a concept of grace that shapes almost all people's thinking as their faith first develops. Nearly all of us have believed at one time or another that grace is a simple equation: if I obey God's commandments, then God will protect me from misfortune and suffering. That very comforting philosophy gives many individuals a foundation of emotional security on which to build their lives. The problem is that the more one learns and sees, the more God appears to be capricious in the administration of grace.

Let me give you an example. A couple of years ago I heard a story in a church meeting about a woman whose doctors said she was going to have a handicapped child. They urged abortion. The woman held out faithful, refused the abortion, received priesthood blessings, prayed, fasted, and delivered a perfectly normal, healthy baby. I believe the story, and I know God can intervene in the lives of his children. The problem I had with it, however, was that the same thing had happened to me—almost. I also was told by doctors that I would have a handicapped child and was encouraged to abort that child. I also held out faithful, received priesthood blessings, prayed, fasted, and delivered a beautiful baby, who was and is handicapped exactly as the doctors predicted.

I would bet that dozens of women reading this have similar stories to tell. Women who have waited faithfully for miracles that never happened: ships that never came in, cavalry that never rode over the hill, help that arrived just after the nick of time. Women who have then longed to understand the reasons for their losses and found in reply only complexity and confusion. Women who have prayed for a knowledge of God's will and have not seen angels or visions or burning bushes but only their own tears in their own eyes.

The fact is that miraculous redemption from suffering happens a good deal less often than suffering that is not redeemed. If that weren't true, we would have no need to go to doctors, fasten our seat belts, or weep for damaged or lost relationships. But we don't often tell stories over the pulpit about such ordinary things as predictable suffering, because we tell our public stories to inspire each other, to inspire confidence in a God who will keep us from hurting or from making the wrong choices, if we just adhere to his commandments.

Why do we oversimplify like that? Well, part of it is simple psychology: it is very comforting to see the world as straightforward and God's grace as a sure defense against pain. And another important reason is found not so much in psychology as in sociology, the study of social traditions and behaviors. As you probably know, most of the early Mormons came from the lineage of Western European Protestants, among whom the Calvinists provide perhaps the most extreme example of grace defined as an equation. John Calvin and his followers were a religious group who believed that some people were simply chosen, rather arbitrarily, to go to heaven. Others were chosen, equally arbitrarily, to go the other way. Nothing one did could change one's eternal fate. Nevertheless, the Calvinists believed that they could tell who was chosen for heaven because God would grace his favorites with good fortune. By the nineteenth century, Calvinists, as a group, had become almost obsessed with appearing to be favored by fortune, since that determined whether or not they were seen as righteous. If their business did well, if their house was beautifully decorated, if their children were good-looking and well behaved, then everyone in the congregation would know that God approved of them.

Sound familiar? It did to me when I read about the Calvinists. I had seen the same type of reckoning being made by some people in my own hometown. A good many Calvinists were converted to Mormonism in the late nineteenth century and journeyed over the plains, carrying as unintended baggage many of the cultural ideas of Calvinism. They brought the view of grace expressed in the phrase "There but for the grace of God go I": "I am prosperous, healthy, wealthy, and wise, because of God's grace. I have a perfect family with no rebellious teenagers, comfortable finances, a sound marriage, because I am graced by God. And logically, of course, if you do have rebellious teenagers, no income, or a rocky marriage—or no marriage at all—well, God just doesn't like you as much as he likes me." This is a capricious god, the god of Calvinism, who still lingers on to be worshipped in many aspects of our culture. Ironically, that god has nothing to do with the God of Latter-day Saint theology. In fact, he is a cultural and psychological creation in direct opposition to Mormon doctrine.

So what does LDS doctrine have to say about God's grace? What is it, and how can we receive it? I do not claim to be an authority on doctrine, and I speak from my own experience and my own reading of the scriptures. I fumble and fuss over these issues just as you do and probably with less success.

My perspective on grace is straightforward: if it's good, I want it. But to get something, I must first understand what that thing is; and to understand what God's grace is, I must first understand the God who administers it. All of LDS scripture teaches that the God of grace is Jesus Christ. All grace, then, must be seen as a manifestation of the nature and mission of Christ. And what is that nature, that mission? That question returns us to the great story—unique to LDS doctrine—of how Christ became the savior of this world.

According to that doctrine, we all lived with God before we came to earth. The plan of salvation was set up in a great council in heaven in which we all participated. The plan was that we should go to earth and live as mortals for a brief span of time in order to progress toward our divine nature. We all agreed to that much. But there was some disagreement about the details of how such progress should occur. First of all, Lucifer, son of the morning, stepped forward and offered his plan. In Lucifer's version, good and evil would exist on the earth, but Lucifer would ensure that all of us would do good: there would be no choice to do otherwise. Christ sustained the Father's scenario, in which we would be placed on earth in ignorance and allowed to choose whether we would follow good or evil. In brief, Lucifer's plan gets us all safely back home, and Christ's plan, which is not safe at all, virtually assures that many of us will never get back home. And what did we do? We condemned Lucifer's plan and accepted Christ's.

My question is, Why would we do such a thing? Why would we condemn Satan's plan? Why did we reject it, not just as an ineffective or second-rate scheme but as evil itself? I have often heard that the problem with Satan's plan was that he sought glory for himself, whereas Jesus offered his glory to God the Father. That is true, but it wasn't the allocation of credit that we rejected; it was Satan's entire plan. We rejected his image of a world where we would have no volition to sin or suffer in favor of a world where sin and suffering are inevitable.

Christ's mission is to put this second plan into operation. And I believe that grace is one of the aspects of his power by which human beings experience his presence and his will. This definition of grace is fundamentally different from the popular, or Calvinist, notions. Although most Judeo-Christian cultures assume that the function of grace is to remove uncertainty and keep us from straying from God, Mormon theology, it seems to me, indicates that the function of grace is to ensure uncertainty and to protect at all costs our freedom to stray from God if we so choose.

Now back to my question: Why did we vote for our Father's plan? It virtually guarantees tremendous human suffering, because if people are ignorant and are also free to make choices, some of their choices will inevitably be wrong. When that happens, both they and others will sometimes suffer horrendous consequences. To make a choice in ignorance is a terrifying gamble, yet that is exactly what we opted to do in the premortal existence.

Personally, it's hard for me to believe I voted the way our doctrine says I did, because I hate hard choices. One such choice I could not avoid was whether or not to bring a handicapped child into the world. I remember the frustration I felt when I was being pressured to abort that baby. I thought that I deserved some clear, divine guidance at that point in my life. I wanted God to give me one clear option and somehow make me certain that there was no other way. Instead, when I prayed and opened the scriptures, I felt myself being drawn to 2 Nephi 10:23, which reads: "Therefore, cheer up your hearts, and remember that ye are free to act for yourselves—to choose the way of everlasting death or the way of eternal life."

I was shocked and offended by this directive. Cheer up my heart? Because of my freedom to make my own decision, without help and without certainty? That freedom—to choose life or death—felt awful to me. Why should I have to make the choice? Why should I have to risk "everlasting death"? I wanted someone to tell me what was right!

I think we all feel that way at various times. In the face of really difficult decisions, it is often easier to turn over to some outside force one's right to choose rather than take responsibility for frightening consequences. When I was making my decision about my child, I went to speak to one of my professors at Harvard, a very well-known and influential sociologist and someone I respect very much. I asked her for an extension on a paper and explained the problems I was having with my pregnancy. She knew that I was LDS, and she asked me if my church was pressuring me to refuse an abortion. I told my professor the truth, which was that the people I knew in the Church had very explicitly told me that this was my own decision and that they sympathized with my pain but would not pressure me one way or the other. Thinking I had cast the Church in a flattering, open-minded light, I was surprised at her response. She said, "Oh, that's awful! They've dumped all of the responsibility on you." Well, you just can't win for losing with some people.

Naturally, I had not identified our doctrine of agency in such negative terms, but of course it's true: Agency comes with a sometimes oppressive load of responsibility. Freedom and responsibility are, in fact, two sides of the same coin. You cannot have one without the other. As a sociologist who studies women's history, I have seen that women's economic and social position has always greatly restricted a woman's freedom to choose the course of her own life. But restricted freedom is also a kind of protection. And early in its course, the woman's movement did not recognize that many women do not want to relinquish that protection. Faced with difficult decisions, many women—and men—prefer to turn over responsibility to some outside power and thereby abdicate responsibility for the choice.

According to a story I have been told is true (it may be apocryphal, but I still believe it!), Brigham Young once encountered a woman with that kind of psychology. She went to him in tears. "Brother Brigham, my husband told me to go to hell." And he said, "Well, sister, don't go!" [^2] Now the reason that's funny is that the solution to the woman's dilemma was so obvious. She did not need a prophet's okay to disobey her husband and refuse to go to hell—or to defy his authority over her if it took the form of insult. Although her husband might have been, in the hierarchy of LDS authority, responsible for some of her choices, her husband was not responsible for her salvation. Yet Brigham Young's joke has some basis in reality. Some women actually choose, at some level, to accept their husband's authority to direct their lives in all things, even to do wrong.

The results of this kind of abdication of choice, of turning over to other people our freedom to choose, can be far more terrifying than this trivial, humorous example. The history of the world is strewn with the bloody stories of whole groups of people who have turned the governance of their lives over to other people's decisions, whether or not those decisions resonated with the feelings in their hearts. At this point in history, the peoples of the former Soviet Union have taken the opposite track. They are actively engaged in the very process for which we came to this earth. They are willingly suffering the vagaries of a difficult fate to gain the liberty to make their own choices.

Karl Marx, one of the creators of communism, was a sociologist. In Marx's ideal society, property was to be held in common and people were to willingly contribute and cooperate in building a society for the good of all. All people were to be equal, fulfilled, and healthy. All were supposed to contribute to the community, in whatever way best suited their abilities, and take in return what they needed for life. The only problem with that idyllic plan when it was implemented in various nations was that the liberty to make free choices was taken from the people and placed in the hands of the intelligentsia. A trivial distinction, right? Why not let the best and the brightest, the leadership, make choices for the ignorant? It seems logical, but we have all seen how it works out in practice. Many people who have lived under such a system find the coercion of their will so intolerable that they have been willing to die in the struggle for freedom of choice—and please note that their leaders have also been willing to kill to maintain what was supposed to be a benevolent power.

Communism now appears to be failing all over the world for many reasons, but the central reason is its core denial of agency, its siding with Satan's plan to reach a good end by corrupt and coercive means that deny the agency of individual citizens. To ensure control, tyrannical governments remove as many areas of choice from their people as possible.

The same dynamics develop in all social systems invested in controlling the behavior of others, from the Ku Klux Klan to the KGB, from fraternal organizations to dysfunctional families. Patterns of control may exist in any institution, any group or society. Certain rules become very important to the governing parties of such social groups. First of all, blind obedience to authority becomes the highest of virtues, overriding all other virtues. Questioning authority is seen as treasonous and defined as evil. Criticism of the governing elite is strictly forbidden. (Think of the Soviet Union or Hitler's Germany.) In fact, criticism itself comes to receive more severe punishment than any immoral or senseless act that may be criticized. And finally, any information that might undermine the legitimacy of the powerful is strictly withheld from the public, and lies are told to preserve the image of the leadership. All of those elements are strategies to coerce people into surrendering their agency, their freedom to make choices, and to convince them that they should unquestioningly accept the choices made by others. In these systems, voluntarily doing things that go against the individual's deepest feelings is seen as a great virtue—in fact, the greatest virtue, if it is done in obedience to authority.

I have three small children. That means the examples that leap to mind these days are not from Shakespeare or Dante but from Walt Disney. I have already seen Aladdin several times. The Disney version of this classic tale portrays a genie who is basically a very good-hearted soul. This genie really wants to be good but is bound by a magical curse to obey the owner of the lamp in which he resides, no matter what that owner asks of him. As long as Aladdin owns the lamp, the genie does the work of good because he obeys a basically good and honest person. But at one point the evil character, villainous Jafar, obtains the lamp. And the genie, though longing to serve Aladdin, must serve evil because his primary directive is blind obedience. He cannot break that directive.

In an authoritarian system, obedience is the supreme virtue. Thus the Nazis at the Nuremberg trials claimed to be innocent of any crime, although they had tortured and killed millions of people. In following orders, they saw themselves as having no right and no capability to choose; to them, their obedience was a virtue no matter what they did because of it. Heinrich Himmler, the leader in the Third Reich who established the concentration camps in which he directed the systematic genocide of Jews, speaking to the SS, said, "Most of you know what it means to see a hundred corpses lying together, five hundred or a thousand. We had the duty to kill this people. By and large, however, we can say that we have performed this most difficult of tasks out of love for our people and we have suffered no harm from it in our inner-self, in our soul, in our character." [^3] It was reported that this man sat at his trial and listened unabashed to stories of the most horrendous atrocities committed against innocent people, and yet he blushed furiously when he once forgot to stand up when the judge came in. He was ashamed because he had forgotten to follow the rules of the court, yet not ashamed of the suffering he had inflicted on the people he had murdered.

This mentality seemed so outlandish that for a time psychologists all over the world thought it must be a strange mutation of the German character or society. Americans, in particular, were positive that members of a society based on free thought and individual enterprise could never fall prey to such an abdication of choice. So, shortly after the war, to prove that hypothesis and to study the fearful cultural aberration that had led to the rise of Hitler in Germany, Stanley Milgram, a psychologist, devised an experiment to examine several cultures in order to find out how Germans differed from other cultural types. [^4] He arranged for ordinary student volunteers to quiz a stranger, seated opposite them at a table on the other side of a pane of glass. The student, who sat in front of a panel of buttons and a gauge, was given a sheet of questions to ask the person seated opposite. The psychologist remained in the room to give the instructions. If the stranger answered incorrectly, the volunteer was instructed to adjust the gauge and press a button to administer an electric shock. The buttons and gauge were arranged and labeled to show the wattage, which increased from mildly shocking to painful to near-lethal at the highest possible setting.

Even though no electricity was actually transmitted to the stranger on the other side of the glass, this experiment would now be considered highly unethical. It is nevertheless interesting—as so many unethical things can be! The supposed volunteer was, in fact, an actor collaborating with the psychologist. The actor pretended to be in pain while the psychologist encouraged the student volunteer to increase the voltage when the actor persisted in answering questions incorrectly. The psychologist said over and over, "The experiment requires that you go on."

What Milgram expected to find—his working hypothesis—was that almost all people would comply to a certain level, probably the point when the person being shocked expressed mild discomfort, and then object, "I'm not going to do this anymore. I have no obligation to be part of this!" But that is not what happened. Many of the volunteers continued to administer shocks even when the other person appeared to be screaming in pain from near-lethal doses of electricity. The reason seems to have been that the volunteers had abdicated to the psychologist their right to choose. There was no huge financial penalty, no physical force, no threat of punishment. The mere presence of an authority figure to whom they had given responsibility for their actions was enough to get these very normal Americans to torture other human beings. Milgram's terrifying conclusion was that almost all people—some more than others, but virtually all to some degree—are willing to relinquish their right to choose in certain situations. Evidently we are all susceptible to the temptation to follow Satan's plan, to give up our agency.

That is especially true in situations where an imposing authority is giving commands, but it also occurs in situations where no authority figure is present. Another experiment conducted in the 1940s by psychologist Solomon Asch and his collaborators examined the effect of social pressure on behavior. [^5] Six people, one the "naive subject" (volunteer) and five collaborators, were asked to perform a very simple task. They were shown a line and asked to identify which of three lines matched it in length. The naive subject was allowed to overhear the responses of the collaborating subjects. The collaborators purposely matched up the wrong lines, just to see what the naive subject would do. (Aren't psychologists sadistic sometimes?) Asch's landmark 1951 paper published a staggering result: most people, when confronted with the decision of a group that opposed their own perceptions, not only would agree with the majority but would actually begin to perceive the wrong line as being the correct one, against the very clear evidence of their own senses. Later, on written questionnaires administered in private, they would continue to answer that the line chosen by their peers was the correct match.

A variation of the experiment involved exchanging the collaborating subjects with true volunteers one by one, so that the starting ratio of five collaborators to one naive subject gradually shifted to all volunteers. By the end of the experiment, no one in the group was a collaborator with the psychologists; yet in many cases all the subjects were still maintaining two very different lines were a perfect match. There was no compulsion at all, no apparent reason for them to falsify their true perceptions. Evidently the power of social shame, embarrassment, desire not to be seen as different, or doubt of our own perceptions in the face of a consensual view of truth different from our own, can sway us to abdicate our right to choose as powerfully as can the presence of an authority figure.

Asch and other social psychologists who verified his work have noted that women are especially vulnerable to this type of pressure. That is so not because women are stupid or have less moral fiber than men but because women typically are socially imbedded beings. We identify ourselves by our relationships and our place in the community. No one knows whether this trait is inborn or socialized, but gender research consistently shows that women are very sensitive to other people's feelings, typically more so than men. Women seem to depend on the social environment to validate their choices. Often we feel we can't make a choice that would put us in opposition to the majority or make us seem odd. We may abandon our own perceptions and feelings because we are afraid to feel, believe, or know something that conflicts with the opinions of others. We may do things we don't want to do and then lie about our feelings of reluctance because we don't want to hurt others' feelings, incur disrespect, or, worst of all, make someone angry.

In my own life I have been dominated by fear of anger or disapproval. I dread conflict, I want to be thought well of, I worry about stepping on people's toes, I even want to impress people. As a result, I've made many choices to please others when my heart told me to do otherwise. I found out how much this trait was affecting me a few years ago after I made a New Year's resolution. I was trying very hard to live the best life I could, but I didn't feel I was doing a particularly good job. So, I decided to go back to basics. My resolution was that I would not lie all year, not once.

At first I was proud of myself because I found out that essentially I am an honest person. I don't try to shortchange at the grocery store, or shade the truth to manipulate people, or cheat on my taxes. But I found that the more scrupulously honest I became, the more clearly I began to see where I was dishonest. Cultivating an affection for truth highlighted my lies for me, and I found that they were usually in the area of trying to make relationships smooth. I often denied my own genuine feelings and responses when I thought they would offend someone—cause anger, conflict, or stress in a relationship. Far from improving my relationships, however, lying about my feelings harmed them.

I believe that is what Christ means when he says, "Whosoever is angry . . . [is] in danger. . . . Therefore if thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there rememberest that thy brother hath ought against thee . . . first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift." (Matthew 5:22-24.) I don't think that directive means to pretend you feel no anger. It means to acknowledge it, discuss it with the other person, resolve the causes of it, and move on. Christ deals with his anger by telling us clearly, "I'm angry." The Topical Guide directly references only three instances of God expressing anger, but when I read through the scriptures looking for God's anger, I could find it on almost every page. Perhaps because we believe that anger is antithetical to love we overlook God's expressions of anger when in truth this God who loves us expresses his anger to us very consistently. He says to us, "Please stop that. I get very angry and I will have to withdraw if you continue to do things that disrupt the fabric of our relationship." I found that I often said I didn't feel angry when in fact I did. I came to see that my dishonesty actually increased the anger I carried around with me, and it became a barrier to my having open, honest, healthy relationships. As I became more honest about expressing painful feelings, in the calmest way possible, I found my life changing in frightening but wonderful ways. My inner life became more peaceful. I was thrilled.

As I gained more confidence in my newfound honesty, I one day realized I had to come to terms with a particularly difficult relationship, one in which my choices were motivated mostly by a desire to avoid conflict. I was virtually certain, however, that this person would respond to my real feelings and beliefs with anger—and I am terrified of people being mad at me. I stewed and fussed and tried to put my resolve to be honest out of my mind. I told myself it was a trivial matter, not worth the trouble it would cause, but it wouldn't go away. Finally, I knelt down and pleaded, "Heavenly Father, I'm trying hard to be good here. And I know that to be closer to Thee, I need to make choices that are going to make this other person really angry at me. I don't want to deal with that, Father. Will you take care of this for me? I've worked hard. I don't want the responsibility or the consequences of this choice. Please take the choice away from me." A few times in my life, my prayers have been answered in words, and this was one of them. I heard a clear, calm voice say something that was totally unexpected. The voice said: "I don't just want you to be with me; I want you to be like me."

It was then that I began to understand the way grace operates. I made the choices that I felt were right, the person I feared did respond with extreme anger, and it did hurt. But I found that growing in my heart was a feeling I had sensed only vaguely before: a sense that my affiliation with Christ was the work of my own agency and that by choosing to follow the truth as I understood it, I had somehow opened my soul to receive comfort and joy that I had never before experienced.

That incident along with many others convinced me that it is by accepting both the freedom and the responsibility to make our own choices that we begin to align ourselves with the power of God—his power and the power he has invested in us as his children. I believe that the full, courageous acceptance of our agency is the step that allows us to take possession of our own hearts and to invite the gifts of grace. Those gifts cannot come to us unless we are consciously and freely electing to follow the truth, because God will never subordinate our recognition of what is right to his own. That is true even though God knows more than we do and knows what is best for us. In our Father's plan, the choices we make may not be as important as our making them freely in accordance with the best estimate of truth that we can achieve at that moment in our lives. I believe, then, that the choice to follow the truth as we see it is the avenue through which we reach toward grace and through which grace is transmitted to us.

The phrase "invincible summer" alludes to the writings of Albert Camus, a French existentialist philosopher. The existentialist thinkers in early twentieth-century Europe struggled to free themselves from the control of false ideologies, false churches, false political parties. In the thick of his own struggle, Camus wrote, "In the depths of winter, I finally learned that within me there lay an invincible summer." [^6] Another writer, psychiatrist Viktor Frankl, defined what that invincible summer was for the existentialists: the capacity to choose to hold onto the truth about one's responses, one's beliefs, one's feelings, despite every social and psychological attempt to persuade, seduce, or coerce the mind. Frankl was one of the prisoners of war whom the Nazis so dutifully tortured and violated. In the concentration camps, he grew to believe that there was only one thing that his tormentors could never take from him: his ability to choose to recognize and respond to his own perceptions of truth and goodness. The Nazis, on the other hand, had relinquished their capacity for defining truth to their military and political superiors. Frankl believed that he was therefore essentially free while his captors were in fact prisoners. [^7]

Doctrine and Covenants 93:24 states: "Truth is knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come." Do you see the distinction that is being made? Truth is not "things as they are" but "knowledge" of those eternal verities. We have no access to "things as they are" except through the filter of our perceptions, so our knowledge constitutes our truth. In this mortal sphere, everybody's knowledge is different, because everybody's perceptions are different. That is why we are told, "All truth is independent in that sphere in which God has placed it, to act for itself." (D&C 93:30.) To me that passage means that your knowledge of your reality is your own, and your obligation is to act for yourself and not to be acted upon. Indeed, you cannot do otherwise, for the act of surrendering your perceptions is in itself a choice, though not always a conscious one.

I believe that our divinely mandated freedom of choice, or ability to act from our own perceptions, is the universal grace afforded to every individual by Christ's plan of salvation. And because I believe in God, I go a step further than the existentialist philosophers. I believe that accepting responsibility for our own choices and making them in accordance with what we most deeply feel to be true can bring us more than intellectual authenticity. It will bring us joy, progression, happiness, and ultimately salvation. If we adopt that strategy and persist in it, we cannot help but grow in our understanding, so that we correct with later choices the mistakes we made in earlier ones.

My understanding of grace leaves me with more than contemplation: it leads me ineluctably to action. Every morning when I wake up, I am immediately bombarded by a host of choices. So are you. As one who has studied the history of women's roles, I can assure you that never before has any group of people been subjected to a more bewildering variety of choices than are the women of today. Women, urged by both authority and peer pressure toward one choice or another, are often eager to find something or someone to tell them what to do, because that much freedom to choose is a terrifying responsibility.

How do we make those choices? Each of us faces different pressures, different life circumstances, different problems. I have studied LDS women through intensive interviewing for the last seven years or so, and I believe that as a group we are so bombarded by choices that we often search desperately for someone to give us the right answers. I have known many women to seek for the right rule to tell them how to behave. I know women who go to the bishop's office routinely on Sundays to get advice on each new problem that has arisen during the week. I've known women who endlessly wonder and speculate about what will look right to others. Their overriding concern is to determine what will make others think of them as good, loving, righteous people. But everybody's perceptions are different, and you can never, by any act of yours, create anyone's perceptions of you. "Truth is independent . . . to act for itself." It cannot be acted upon.

So I have come to believe that at a time of such tremendously conflicted choices, the surest answers come from the sense of truth, the recognition of joy, that lies in the core of every individual's personality. Camus called it invincible summer. I call it the light of Christ. That touchstone of truth is the purest manifestation of my own identity and of yours. For each of us it is different, responding to the vagaries of our individual personalities and circumstances; and for each of us it is the same, calling us toward joy and wholeness with a cry that is both sweet and frightening. Our ability to perceive the light of Christ is the function of grace, and I believe that if we respond to it in a way that honors it, the other attributes of grace—peace of mind, happiness, health—come to us in ways that are sometimes frankly miraculous.

It is to this light, sisters, that we owe our obedience. And this obedience may take unexpected forms. Christ meekly obeyed when he stood before Pilate and spoke nothing in response to his accusers, when he carried his own cross to Golgotha, when he suffered willingly in Gethsemane. But Christ was meek and obedient not only at the end of his life but throughout his entire ministry. In meek obedience to God, Christ violated some of the most treasured rules of his church and community. In meek obedience to God he took a scourge of cords and drove the money changers from the temple with the strength of his arm and the strength of his anger. In meek obedience to God, he denounced the hypocrisy of the Pharisees. It was for his meek obedience that he was crucified. We cannot be obedient to God without engaging in conflict at some level. We should never be abusive or seek conflict, but conflict will come to us if we obey what is in our hearts rather than just doing what people tell us to do.

Do you seek that light in your heart? Do you honor your ability to know this truth? Do you feel it? Do you taste it? Do you smell it? Do you hear it? I use all forms of sensory perception to describe what it is like, but really it is something we perceive in ways that are spiritual, not physical. The light of Christ is the part of you that knows the truth—the simple truth about what you see, what you know, what you really believe.

Here's a way to know that feeling: ask yourself if you believe the things that I am telling you. Do the things I am saying make sense? Do all of them make sense? Of course not. Which of them feel right, feel true? Why do they feel true? I am constantly amazed that when I go to speak somewhere, and I'm introduced by someone of great personal power and institutional authority, and everyone knows that I have three degrees of glory from Harvard University, and I wear my best clothes—and, after all, I do have the microphone—people often seem to believe what I say without question! Isn't that bizarre? Of course I'm saying what I believe out of my best thought and experience, but anything I say might be absolutely wrong. My experience is not your experience. Does what I say make sense? Does all of it make sense? Which parts of it make sense to you? Which parts don't? What resonates with the light of truth in you? What informs that light, what makes it grow? What makes it recoil? Feel those things; respond to them. To do so is the burden of Christ's plan of salvation. That is what we must do to access the gifts of grace. Don't do or believe what others tell you. Listen. Consider. Reason together. Pray. But believe and do only what the best efforts of your heart and mind together tell you makes sense. Listen for Christ's voice, which ultimately is the same as your own deepest voice.

Trust yourself. It is the need to learn to trust yourself that brought you to this life. To have a chance to make your own choices, you came to a place where you are constantly vulnerable to being confused, to feeling lost, to being hurt by the wrongful choices of others. Don't suffer all this for nothing. Don't look for any person or social entity to give you the last word on what you should do. And don't expect God to give you all the answers. He will not coerce you by making your choices for you, when the whole plan of salvation is designed for you to have the opportunity to make them yourself. His grace showers down upon you, leaving you in ignorance, letting you err, allowing you to sin and repent, to be hurt and to heal. And he loves you, loves you measurelessly, through it all.

Even now you may be in the midst of a winter, perhaps an existential winter, a winter of confusion, of bombardment by the demands of peers or authority, a winter of despair. You may perceive no end to the short days, the long nights, or the terrible, discouraging cold. Know that in you there is an invincible summer. You can find that summer through accepting the capacity and the responsibility to make choices. For some of those choices, you will be castigated, vilified, and hurt. But that will matter less and less as you draw closer to the truth about yourself, about your own life, which is Christ's truth. Drawing close to that truth invites his presence, and that is a gift that will warm you here until you can live in the summer of his grace forever.

---
Notas:
[^1] STONE For all the days of the church's life, the saints had been battered from home to home, a whole continent twitching, bucking them on. "Our temple," they said, "should be heavy, dense. To weight us to the land." They cut and dragged solid granite from mountains to the east— four yoke of straining oxen and four days for every block. Workers sank foundations sixteen feet and for decades shaped and finished pedestals, buttresses, six great towers. As walls rose around their covenants, the saints were welcomed in to the still, firm silence at the heart of stone. Their children, we go up to temples and back to their source— granite mountains, eggstone cliffs, great arches of sandstone. Relearning their devotion, we kneel on pocks and cracks as silence pools around us and grit sticks to our knees. Anchor and altar, stone gives us space to pray for the hard cool wisdom that rises through the bones, wisdom born of cataclysm and pressure and eons of peace. 2. ROSE The saints left hardwood forests with their tangled abundance of roots, left prairies of deep soil, to come to a desert of sand and clay and a random alkaline crust. Someone believed this country would support the rose. An Englishwoman, perhaps, tied five or ten or twelve bushes, their roots wrapped in burlap, to a prairie schooner's side. Day after day on her trek the visionary gardener hauled buckets to the roses, soaking the burlap, moistening the roots. To survive, the saints learned to nourish the land with the mountains' melted snow. And in a protected corner this gardener dug a hole, filled it with clear water and pieces of raw fish to feed a rose. Photos from the moon show the earth rising, a blue flower swirling as it floats up through the dark, as fragile as the first rose on the Mormon desert floor. 3. BREAD Winter Wheat October fields open dark, newly sown, readied for the weight of heavy winter snows— again and yet again, generation. Melting water sinks straight down, bursts waiting kernels till the whole field is wet spring grass. Meal Children in a field of heavy wheat bending, rattling the stalks, pull up handfuls of the golden grass. Into their palms they rub each crest for its small bright pellets. Blowing off the chaff, they bite hard kernels, chew and chew the mass into a sticky gum. But the same kernels harvested, milled into flour, leavened, mixed with oil, salt, rise to become warm bread, crusty, that breaks open to a white, clean heart. Bread to be savored bite by bite, dipped into a stew of vegetables and lamb, served at an oak table in the shine of lamplight. Communion In a ward chapel, or a screened cabin by a lake, on desert logs pulled into a rough circle, we saints gather wherever we are. After prayer the tokens come on silver trays. Each of us is served, serves the next neighbor. Think of the taste of that crust, that morsel. Think of wheat in a fresh field waving in the rain. Think of your own hunger. Think of the flesh torn from the bread, that we might not destroy each other. Of Christ come to teach us how we might have life.
