Susette Fletcher Green, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women in the Covenant of Grace ( 1994)

Rummaging in the Attic: Missionary Memos

CLAIRE HAWKINS [^1]

Not long ago I returned from a welfare services and proselyting mission in Guatemala. I loved my mission. I have never experienced a period of my life so densely packed with adventure, life, and spirit. I have never felt Christ's presence more immediately or witnessed his guidance more often than I did during those eighteen months. Yet I have spent considerable time lately wondering whether I was an effective missionary.

I was rummaging through some old family files and came across the autobiography of my great-grandmother Maydell Palmer. I vaguely remembered that she had served a mission for the Church in the Northern States Mission at the beginning of the century. I opened the book and found the chapter heading, "My Mission." I believed, as I opened those pages, that her words would capture the essence of being a sister missionary in 1915. Perhaps they would shed some light on my self-doubts. In her account I observed that her love for the Savior seemed infinite. Her life was dedicated to the welfare of humankind, and her whole existence focused upon establishing God's kingdom on this earth; however, she expressed very honestly her frustration over the programs and regulations that restricted her as a sister missionary in 1915.

Let me share with you some relevant passages: "There are three things missionaries must not do. They must not give the gospel to the colored people. And the lady missionaries must not call for repentance when they teach. This is the prerogative of the elders. I was shocked and repelled by such restrictions. My first day of tracting I spoke of the gospel to a kindly looking colored lady who did look a little surprised when she opened her door to see a white woman there who gave her a religious tract to read. My heart ached when I realized the gospel was not for her. I cry out today 'Oh Lord, how long will thou suffer our prejudice to continue?'

"The other restriction was even more distasteful. If the lady missionaries were not to preach the necessity for repentance, why were they called on missions to teach the gospel? Repentance is the second step in that gospel.

"My third hard lesson was that when the elders took the [sister] missionaries on an evening visit they were not to attempt to explain, but just to listen. The elders must do the talking even if the hostess asked that the sisters explain the teaching. It was a difficult lesson to learn. I who had been teaching the gospel to young people for years must now keep still while a new elder with no experience, in poor English, and in ignorance of that principle stumbled through his explanation."

In another passage from her autobiography, my great-grandmother complained about another of her restricted roles: "There was one activity where the lady missionaries were not curtailed and that was to go up into homes where mothers were ill and needed help in the housework or needed a baby sitter to help or to clean her house. Lady missionaries came in very handy on such occasions." She then comments, "I understand that is all changed now as it should have been years ago."

I was comforted to know that my great-grandmother struggled in her mission too. Yet in spite of her struggles, she was able to analyze her experience and discover what it was that caused her discontent. Certainly the principles and ordinances of the gospel of Jesus Christ did not cause her grief. No, that was her utter joy. Rather, what plagued her were the cultural restrictions that limited her role as a representative of the gospel of Jesus Christ: what she, as a woman, could and could not say and do, to whom she could or could not proclaim the gospel and in what way, and the seemingly mandatory maid service reserved to the sisters.

What pained my grandmother in her era is less of an issue now. The gospel can be shared with any man or woman regardless of race or color. We now have many strong black members and missionaries who serve in wards and branches throughout the world. Who can preach the gospel as a missionary today? Any worthy woman or man who is a member of the Church. And I am also pleased to report that sister missionaries these days can talk circles around the elders if they wish.

The policies of Great-Grandma Maydell's mission were established long before she entered the mission field; they were rules that, however unjust, she needed to obey to assure unity and uniformity within the mission. Such unity is called teamwork and is necessary because we live in a community. Our joint effort as part of a community is good. But the collaboration that bonds us to others sometimes also demands that we sacrifice a little individuality—that we compromise. And many times that compromise is very painful. My great-grandma wanted to proselyte. She wanted desperately to preach the gospel to that black woman, to teach with the elders, and not to be confined to baby-sitting and housework. Ironically, she felt confined to doing what I longed to do more of in my mission: welfare service.

The Church sends welfare missionaries to help local Church leaders assess local needs, and following their suggestions, we begin teaching and learning together. We teach literacy, money management, nutrition, social skills, and hygiene. Best of all, rather than doing the teaching, we teach others to teach. When a woman begins to learn to read, a whole new world opens up to her. She can then read the scriptures and follow the lessons in Relief Society. Her self-esteem skyrockets, and she feels intelligent and useful. As a result of a few reading lessons, a woman can turn into a dynamite mother, Church leader, and contributor to the community. When we teach a mother how to treat her child for diarrhea and how to prevent its recurrence, all of a sudden she no longer has to worry about her child's life from one second to the next. She doesn't have to spend her last centavos on expensive medication and her precious hours in line on the front porch of a doctor's office. Her concerns can turn to others. She can help them as she has helped herself, and the once-desperate little Mormon community can rise together in skill, and knowledge, and unity.

As a welfare missionary sent to a mission that emphasized proselyting, I longed for more assignments to give welfare service. One such opportunity came when my companion and I were asked to assist the wife of an investigator. She had almost died of typhoid fever and whooping cough five months before. When we first met her, she was so emaciated that she could not even sit without her bones digging into the wooden slats of the chair. She was, literally, a walking skeleton. Worst of all, she had lost all hope. With every visit, we watched her move closer to death. It was not just her frail figure that was filled with death; it was her eyes. Little by little, as we helped the family with basic errands and household chores—grocery shopping, picking up the government checks in the city, baby-sitting—we began to teach her the gospel. Her husband was ready for baptism and wanted to be ordained to the Aaronic Priesthood so he could baptize his wife and children. He cared for the four children while we taught her, and eventually we convinced her to go to church.

The meetinghouse, however, was a thirty-minute walk from her home, and she was physically incapable of walking that distance. Each week we scavenged for centavos to pay for a taxi on Sunday to take her and her children to church while her husband biked. We brought pillows, blankets, exercise mats, and anything else soft we could find for her to sit on so that she could withstand the long hours of church. Her deterioration was so great that her husband's care for her wasn't always sufficient. Often, our help was the only break he had from the demands of her sickness. She was still quite discouraged about her health the day of her baptism. But when her husband pulled her up from the waters and the bishopric laid their hands upon her head and said, "Receive the Holy Ghost," she began to live again. She was still the same weak, feverish, thin woman, but her eyes were alive.

Two weeks later, she found the energy to dress her own children and walk to church herself. She now walks to church every week and sits on the hard pews along with the rest of the ward members. Somehow, on the day of her baptism, Heavenly Father allowed her to be born again. And since that day, a divine life force that is not her own carries her body through each week and fills her countenance with light. If we had not helped meet her basic needs first, we would not have been able to teach her. But that was one of the few times I was allowed to serve as a welfare missionary. More and more my calling was diverted from welfare service to strictly proselyting.

Please don't misunderstand me. I am grateful for the opportunity I had to actively preach the gospel—to proselyte. God loves his children. All of them. And he desires that all receive his love and enter into covenant with him. Meeting his children is what makes a mission marvelous. And somehow the Lord works his way into our self-absorbed, young missionary hearts and lets us see and love his Father's children as he does. All in all, that's quite a miracle.

My companions and I had the opportunity to teach many different types of people: soldiers, communist guerrillas, prominent doctors, simple Indian peasants, orphans, prisoners, and prostitutes. We began to love many of them as if they were part of our own family. Some were baptized, and some were not. But those who were baptized and who struggled to honor the sacred covenants they had made began to change miraculously.

I loved to share the discussions, which carefully explain the plan of salvation, the significance of Christ's atonement in our lives, and the reality of eternal families. I loved entering into a one-room home, sitting cross-legged on the bed with four little children on my lap, and telling a humble family in all honesty that they are children of prophets, that their lineage is blessed and they have been preserved for a great and last day, that their ancestors wrote a book of scriptures specifically for them so that they might come to know Christ in his fullness—that he loves them. I loved watching them grow and prepare for the day of their baptism, for the day they would make covenants with God. They became my friends, my family, and I would give my life for them.

Can the knowledge of the gospel and the gift of the Holy Ghost change someone's life? They can and they do. I have seen it happen again and again. The gospel is wonderful. Our Heavenly Father's children are amazing. And it is one of the most marvelous experiences in this life to be a missionary of Jesus Christ and watch these two components meet.

The day of their baptisms we rejoiced together. But that is where a painful paradox began for me and where I first began to question my effectiveness as a missionary, because that same day I cried bitterly and silently inside. Baptism by itself does not bring a soul to Christ. Baptism is only the "gateway." Once we are baptized, the gates are opened. But we often forget that beyond those gates lies a long road we must travel. We all know that the road is hard. The new members are fragile. They feel the Spirit of our Father, realize that they need to change their lives, and with astounding amounts of hope and faith enter into a sacred covenant. It is amazing what people will do, and the degree of sincerity with which they do it, when they are touched by the Spirit. Still, they are fragile.

When they accept the gospel, they also accept the community that accompanies God's latter-day church. In Latin America, religion extends beyond the Sunday church walls. It determines most social activity within the community. Celebrations are based on baptisms, communions, weddings, and saints' days whether the community is Protestant or Catholic. Thus religion determines, for the most part, friends. When a family chooses to be baptized, whether they are aware of it or not, they are severing themselves from their previous ties. They are walking away from their lives in the community. They are utterly alone and need the support of a new community to fill this vast and sudden vacuum in their lives.

Initially the regular missionary visits provide a secure sense of place and community. After baptism, however, the new member is visited less frequently by the missionaries. The missionaries are needed to help other families progress towards baptism. Missionaries visit perhaps once a week to make sure everything is okay. After about two to three months, mission policy in my area dictated that missionary visits should be phased out as the wards and branches integrated these new members through stake missionaries and visiting and home teachers. That is the model.

Reality, unfortunately, proved a little different. I served in four Guatemalan wards during my mission. During that time, only one bishop and one counselor visited either the new or old members in their homes. Visiting and service are the key to keeping the people in the Church: simple human interaction and friendship. But, amazingly enough, very, very few stepped out of their homes and into the doorways of their neighbors. Why? Is it a matter of training leaders and teaching the importance of visiting others? In part, yes. But there is a more fundamental reason why no one visits. People in those countries are living on the edge of existence. At the beginning of a day, a sister member collects water and firewood, cooks beans, takes corn to the mill to be ground to make tortillas, and two hours later cooks breakfast. Then begins the process of making lunch, washing the clothes by hand, and hanging them to dry. If she is a city dweller, much of the process is the same, yet she will also tend the little candy and soap store at the front of her house to supplement her husband's meager wages. Many Guatemalan families work all day long every day of the week to assure food on the table. They do not have the luxury of time in which they can visit one another. They are so crippled by their own economic state that they cannot reach out to others.

New members fall away, and old, inactive members remain inactive. Should we blame the missionaries? Should we blame the members? No. Placing blame is not a solution. Whomever we blame, there is still a problem—we are losing souls. We are losing souls because their basic needs are not being met.

In frustration, as I watched many of my struggling, faithful families fall through the cracks, I wanted to reach out and save them. I wanted to alleviate the burdens of the members by tending their children, washing their clothes, anything, so they had time to become the new community for these converts. But my mission assignment had been diverted from primarily welfare to solely proselyting. My revised calling was something I had to accept. As my great-grandmother Maydell had discovered and taught me, we can't restructure the whole mission program worldwide in one afternoon. Policy and program changes evolve over years of feedback, trial and error, earnest prayer, and painful compromises. But sometimes avenues to change individual lives are already there and we miss their significance. The welfare program is tailored to the individual needs of members. This underrated and unappreciated program takes individual members and teaches them spiritual, physical, emotional, and social well-being. It is a program that helps the members help themselves in ways that transform their souls.

Think back to the most meaningful and spiritual moments in your own life. Weren't they somehow tied into human interaction? Maybe someone listened and expressed confidence in you. Maybe someone helped you think through a problem as you bottled peaches together. In my mission, the members who grew to be spiritually and socially strong in the Church were baptized because of similar interactions. We ate the food they ate, husked and dried corn on their patios with them, taught them how to read, and flew kites with their children. We shared their day-to-day trials and joys. Isn't that what the gospel is all about? To make others burdens lighter? My great-grandmother Maydell wanted to be out proselyting, but I wonder if her untallied acts of service didn't bring about more conversions than she knew.

I am a firm believer in the power of service—the converting power, the retaining power of charity. Charity is the pure love of Christ. He is the converting power. He changes lives as we communicate his love through service in his name. Change does not come from big institutions; it comes from the heart. One by one as we can begin to serve others, we will establish Zion across the nations.

---
Notas:
[^1] STONE For all the days of the church's life, the saints had been battered from home to home, a whole continent twitching, bucking them on. "Our temple," they said, "should be heavy, dense. To weight us to the land." They cut and dragged solid granite from mountains to the east— four yoke of straining oxen and four days for every block. Workers sank foundations sixteen feet and for decades shaped and finished pedestals, buttresses, six great towers. As walls rose around their covenants, the saints were welcomed in to the still, firm silence at the heart of stone. Their children, we go up to temples and back to their source— granite mountains, eggstone cliffs, great arches of sandstone. Relearning their devotion, we kneel on pocks and cracks as silence pools around us and grit sticks to our knees. Anchor and altar, stone gives us space to pray for the hard cool wisdom that rises through the bones, wisdom born of cataclysm and pressure and eons of peace. 2. ROSE The saints left hardwood forests with their tangled abundance of roots, left prairies of deep soil, to come to a desert of sand and clay and a random alkaline crust. Someone believed this country would support the rose. An Englishwoman, perhaps, tied five or ten or twelve bushes, their roots wrapped in burlap, to a prairie schooner's side. Day after day on her trek the visionary gardener hauled buckets to the roses, soaking the burlap, moistening the roots. To survive, the saints learned to nourish the land with the mountains' melted snow. And in a protected corner this gardener dug a hole, filled it with clear water and pieces of raw fish to feed a rose. Photos from the moon show the earth rising, a blue flower swirling as it floats up through the dark, as fragile as the first rose on the Mormon desert floor. 3. BREAD Winter Wheat October fields open dark, newly sown, readied for the weight of heavy winter snows— again and yet again, generation. Melting water sinks straight down, bursts waiting kernels till the whole field is wet spring grass. Meal Children in a field of heavy wheat bending, rattling the stalks, pull up handfuls of the golden grass. Into their palms they rub each crest for its small bright pellets. Blowing off the chaff, they bite hard kernels, chew and chew the mass into a sticky gum. But the same kernels harvested, milled into flour, leavened, mixed with oil, salt, rise to become warm bread, crusty, that breaks open to a white, clean heart. Bread to be savored bite by bite, dipped into a stew of vegetables and lamb, served at an oak table in the shine of lamplight. Communion In a ward chapel, or a screened cabin by a lake, on desert logs pulled into a rough circle, we saints gather wherever we are. After prayer the tokens come on silver trays. Each of us is served, serves the next neighbor. Think of the taste of that crust, that morsel. Think of wheat in a fresh field waving in the rain. Think of your own hunger. Think of the flesh torn from the bread, that we might not destroy each other. Of Christ come to teach us how we might have life.
