Susette Fletcher Green, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women in the Covenant of Grace ( 1994)

Moonlight and Roses

NEIDY MESSER [^1]

After school my son washes cars, dazzling new reds, silver-blue metallics, sticker price taped to the windows, and each one he wishes he owned. He comes home at dusk, driving his dad's dented pickup hungry, tired, and silent at us for all we can't give him. Today he carries a slender, white box, lifts the lid gently and shows us a dozen yellow roses, a gift for his girlfriend. How many washed cars for each perfect rose? Then I remember roses some nameless boy gave me years before my son's first breath, roses I pressed between pages of a book and forgot about until now. On tonight's news, refugees huddle along hillsides of a far country as soldiers carry boxes filled with food, milk for the children. And women, hundreds, toss their babies into the air, hoping soldiers will throw them rations. Tonight some will eat, some will fill their children's bellies with dried army dinners, some babies will fall asleep on the open ground, dribbled milk on their unwashed faces. Later, after my son cleans up and rushes out, the white box under his arm, I picture refugee women, standing on tent-cluttered hillsides blushed by moonlight, their faces tilted upward, holding roses in their roughened hands as if something depended on it.

---
Notas:
[^1] STONE For all the days of the church's life, the saints had been battered from home to home, a whole continent twitching, bucking them on. "Our temple," they said, "should be heavy, dense. To weight us to the land." They cut and dragged solid granite from mountains to the east— four yoke of straining oxen and four days for every block. Workers sank foundations sixteen feet and for decades shaped and finished pedestals, buttresses, six great towers. As walls rose around their covenants, the saints were welcomed in to the still, firm silence at the heart of stone. Their children, we go up to temples and back to their source— granite mountains, eggstone cliffs, great arches of sandstone. Relearning their devotion, we kneel on pocks and cracks as silence pools around us and grit sticks to our knees. Anchor and altar, stone gives us space to pray for the hard cool wisdom that rises through the bones, wisdom born of cataclysm and pressure and eons of peace. 2. ROSE The saints left hardwood forests with their tangled abundance of roots, left prairies of deep soil, to come to a desert of sand and clay and a random alkaline crust. Someone believed this country would support the rose. An Englishwoman, perhaps, tied five or ten or twelve bushes, their roots wrapped in burlap, to a prairie schooner's side. Day after day on her trek the visionary gardener hauled buckets to the roses, soaking the burlap, moistening the roots. To survive, the saints learned to nourish the land with the mountains' melted snow. And in a protected corner this gardener dug a hole, filled it with clear water and pieces of raw fish to feed a rose. Photos from the moon show the earth rising, a blue flower swirling as it floats up through the dark, as fragile as the first rose on the Mormon desert floor. 3. BREAD Winter Wheat October fields open dark, newly sown, readied for the weight of heavy winter snows— again and yet again, generation. Melting water sinks straight down, bursts waiting kernels till the whole field is wet spring grass. Meal Children in a field of heavy wheat bending, rattling the stalks, pull up handfuls of the golden grass. Into their palms they rub each crest for its small bright pellets. Blowing off the chaff, they bite hard kernels, chew and chew the mass into a sticky gum. But the same kernels harvested, milled into flour, leavened, mixed with oil, salt, rise to become warm bread, crusty, that breaks open to a white, clean heart. Bread to be savored bite by bite, dipped into a stew of vegetables and lamb, served at an oak table in the shine of lamplight. Communion In a ward chapel, or a screened cabin by a lake, on desert logs pulled into a rough circle, we saints gather wherever we are. After prayer the tokens come on silver trays. Each of us is served, serves the next neighbor. Think of the taste of that crust, that morsel. Think of wheat in a fresh field waving in the rain. Think of your own hunger. Think of the flesh torn from the bread, that we might not destroy each other. Of Christ come to teach us how we might have life.
