Susette Fletcher Green, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women in the Covenant of Grace ( 1994)

Children's Voices: Who Is Listening?

Children's Voices: Who Is Listening?

SHARON P. McCULLY [^1]

In Seattle not long ago, I heard the president of the American Bar Association address a gathering of, primarily, juvenile court judges. "An article I read last summer puts the case plainly," he said. "'If the well-being of its children is the proper measure of the health of a civilization, the United States is in grave danger.'" I thought of my own five-year-old daughter and the questions she asks me regularly. She worries a lot about whether everything is okay—about whether she is safe, or if she should be afraid. He went on, "I wonder, how many adult Americans over the years have said to a concerned child: 'Don't worry; it'll be all right.'

"Well, today, how can we say, 'Don't worry,' when about 415 American children will run away from home during the next three hours?

"How can we say, 'It'll be all right,' when 76 American children are abused and neglected every hour of every day?

"How can we say, 'Don't worry,' when three American children will die in poverty tomorrow morning and every morning?

"How can we say, 'It'll be all right,' when 135,000 students in this country go to school every day—carrying guns? And 70 percent of them say they carry guns in order to protect themselves!

"How can we say, 'It'll be all right,' when 900 teachers are threatened, and nearly forty are actually assaulted, every hour of every school day?

"How can we say, 'Don't worry,' when during the course of a typical day, forty children are either killed or injured by gunshot wounds?

"We still might say to a concerned child, 'Don't worry, it'll be all right,' but we adults had better be worried, because it's not going to be all right, unless we work for a safer, healthier, and more productive world for our children." [^2]

But these are not my children, you may object. They are not my responsibility. I have enough worries of my own. If these are not your children, should you care? Marian Wright Edelman, who heads the Children's Defense Fund, a national organization dedicated to the well-being of children, tells her own children, "Paradoxically, the more I worried about and wanted for you, the more I worried about the children of parents who have so much less. When one of you got a high fever, painful earache, asthma attack, or sports injury, how reassuring it was to pick up the phone and call our pediatrician and take you right in. How enraged I am to think that other parents cannot ease their children's suffering and their own fears because they happen to be born on the wrong side of the tracks, the wrong color, or to lack a job with health insurance or the means to get health care." [^3] So many of the problems I see every day in juvenile courts are directly related to economic status, poverty, illness, and still, unfortunately, to race and ethnicity. These are problems tearing at the fiber of so many families. We have to be concerned for their children.

To her sons, who are of mixed African-American and Jewish heritage, Edelman says, "As you have grown toward adulthood, you have become increasingly aware that your educationally and financially privileged lives are not typical of other children in this world, nation, or even our own city. We live in one of the wealthiest neighborhoods of Washington, D.C., while thousands of children ten minutes away are living in a war zone that imprisons them in fear and near-Third World poverty. First World privilege and Third World deprivation and rage are struggling to coexist not only in our nation's capital but all over an America that has the capacity but not the moral commitment or political will to protect all of its young.

"You must walk the streets with other people's children and attend schools with other people's children. You breathe polluted air and eat polluted food like millions of other children and are threatened by pesticides and chemicals and toxic wastes and a depleted ozone layer like everybody's children. Drunken drivers and crack addicts on the streets are a menace to every American child. So are violent television shows and movies and incessant advertising and cultural signals that hawk profligate consumption and excessive violence and tell you slick is real. It is too easy and unrealistic to say these forces can be tuned out just by individual parental vigilance.

"So as a parent I wanted to make sure you had all your physical needs met and a lot of love. But as a parent I could not ignore other people's children or pain that spills over to public space and threatens the safety and quality of life and pocketbook and future of every American." [^4]

Even though these may not be your children who are troubled and in trouble every hour of every day, this is your world and your country, your city and your community, your street, your neighborhood, and your ward. These children are your concern.

Let me tell you about the children I saw just this morning. First there was a seventeen-year-old boy who is being held in a detention center in Las Vegas. He will be returned to Utah on my order for shooting a 7-Eleven clerk in the face for eighteen dollars and some odd cents. Should you be concerned? What about the seventeen-year-old girl I signed into detention this morning charged with aggravated robbery, which means she was using a gun or other weapon? She was helping her boyfriend commit a robbery primarily so they wouldn't have to pay for the pizza they had ordered. What about the girl I sent to detention this morning, who at thirteen has lived on the streets for months and needs serious mental health treatment? She first came to our court two years ago for minor shoplifting. She has continued to run away, break the law, and place herself in serious danger on the streets for more than two years now. Or what about the eleven-year-old boy I saw earlier this week who was charged with the rape of a six-year-old girl? What about the ten-, eleven-, and twelve-year-old boys who were recently before me for breaking into, vandalizing, and stealing from more than seventy cars in one neighborhood in one night? What about the boys I had before me last week who did a reverse drive-by shooting? What is a reverse drive-by shooting? Instead of shooting from a moving car, these boys shot at a car that drove by while they were sitting on the lawn in front of their house. Two of these boys had never been to juvenile court before and are now there for attempted criminal homicide.

If these are not your children, should you care about what happens to them? It's relatively easy to care about and even act as advocates for the children who are victims of abuse, neglect, and deprivation in our society. They are lovable, sympathetic young people who clearly need and want help. It is a lot harder for us to feel nurturing and protective about the children I just described to you, the children I see as a juvenile court judge every day. But let me tell you that almost all of those children were the ones who three or four years ago were the abused, neglected, and deprived children. It was easier to love and to care about them then, but they are still the same children. They still need our care and concern. Without it, they will be lost. With it, they may be able to change the direction of their lives.

You may think, None of my children will ever be like this. Or, the children I know are not criminals; they don't do these things. But the shocking truth is that even in the state of Utah, one of every three children will come to the juvenile court at some time before turning eighteen. The odds say that it may be one of your children, or at least someone you know. It is not only possible but probable that you will experience some of these problems in your own families, and if not in your own families, then on your street, or in your ward, or in your town or city. As you already know, your children are going to school with these children. Your children are walking the streets with them, talking with them, playing with them. They exist within the same community, so it's very important for us to advocate for these delinquent children as well as for the ones who are neglected and abused. More often than not, they are one and the same. They are often still experiencing abuse and neglect; they are simply reacting in different, more dangerous ways.

Let me tell you about what kind of advocacy exists for these children within the legal system. First, let me say that the court system is not the best place to solve problems, because by the time these children get to my courtroom, their problems and patterns of behavior are already deeply ingrained. In these cases, the old saying about an ounce of prevention is true. Prevention is far preferable to the cure, because by the time we get to the cure, many people have already been hurt. Nevertheless, although court services may not be the best place, for many it may be the only place someone tries to intervene in the direction these children's lives seem to be taking. The courts are the last resort, and they must respond. Thankfully, we do still see a lot of success with children who reach the courts. They are not beyond hope or help.

The United States Supreme Court and juvenile court judges around the country uniformly agree that no child should appear in juvenile court without a legal advocate. If a child is charged with a crime, that child should not have to come to court without a lawyer. Nonetheless, most children still come to juvenile court, admit to felony offenses, and are punished for those offenses without lawyers. That happens primarily because many parents, and also the counties who have to pay for court-appointed legal counsel, do not believe that children need lawyers. They are wrong. It is very important for each child in a courtroom to have a lawyer. These lawyers are not appointed to help the guilty get away with committing a crime. They are there to make sure the charges are accurate and to explain the legal process to the family and child. Whatever is determined in court becomes a permanent part of that child's record. Consequences for future employment, court involvement as an adult, and even religious participation are long-range and serious. Our resources, public and private, need to be sufficient to assure that good lawyers are available to every child in juvenile court.

In addition to those charged with criminal violations, children who are victims of abuse, neglect, or dependency also need a legal advocate in court. Federal and state law require that the court appoint a guardian ad litem to represent the interests of the child in every case of abuse or neglect. Again, although that's what the law says, too often lack of resources prevents a guardian ad litem from being appointed. In most states, guardians ad litem are lawyers, who often are assisted by lay volunteers who have been specially trained to advocate for children. That is one way you as concerned individuals may assist victimized children in the legal system: Volunteer to be a court-appointed special advocate or a volunteer guardian ad litem. Most states use one of those systems and will use your services to assist children through the court system, both in juvenile and criminal court. Call the juvenile court in your city or county for information.

Another program that is understaffed is foster care. There are now only about half as many foster parents in the country as there were ten years ago. Meanwhile, the number of children entering the foster care system has continued to grow. A lot of people stomp their feet and demand that the state provide better foster care services to children, and yet the foster care services that can be provided are directly related to the quality of foster parents who are willing to take children into their homes. It's often very hard for parents to deal with children needing foster care. They have a whole host of special problems and difficult behaviors. They are sometimes not very loveable. Despite the great need for foster homes, most of us and most of our neighbors are not foster parents. Stomping our collective foot and saying the states must do a better job of providing foster care is pointless. A state can provide foster care only through those people who are willing to be foster parents. If you believe you want to try, contact your local child welfare or human services agency.

Besides building a reservoir of foster parents, it is equally important for us to support and empower natural parents. Often people who are child advocates believe that the legal system ought to provide the best possible parents to every child. Now, if you think about it, on a given day any of us may not be the best possible parents. We wouldn't want to lose our children because of our off-day mistakes or even our more serious failings at parenting. Ideally, the legal system is intended to help a child's natural parents be the best possible parents for their own children, not to shuffle children around to find a better match or a better set of parents. Parents have the right to raise their own children. Even more important, children have the right to be raised by their natural parents.

Admittedly, many people I see in court are terrible parents. But the answer isn't always to take their children away and place them for adoption. Let me tell you about some of the children who come before me in court. I had a whole family in last Monday. The children who were being tried were the last four of a very large family that, in my ten years at the juvenile court, I have just about raised. We're getting there; these are the last four. The father, who died a year ago, was responsible for some serious abuse and neglect in this family. The mother simply cannot keep a house that is adequate for children to live in. Hers is not like what you'd see if you visited my dirty house this afternoon, or your house on any bad day; this is a house where mice wouldn't live. And she just cannot, even with all the assistance in the world, seem to do anything about it. She also cannot seem to set limits for or discipline her children. She just can't manage to give any structure to their family life. She lacks the personal ability and resources to do it. Her children are thriving in foster care. They're growing, learning, succeeding. These children are quite happy in foster care, and they're never going to go home to live with their mother. She doesn't want them to, and they don't want to. We will continue to raise them in the public system.

So why don't we terminate the mother's parental rights and let the children be adopted? You should ask every one of those children why we don't. She's their mom. They don't want to be adopted by someone else. And I can guarantee you that if we terminated her parental rights and told them she wasn't their mom anymore, they would all leave their foster homes and go straight home to mom. Many studies show that approximately 90 percent of all children in foster care—abused, neglected, chemically dependent, and delinquent—do eventually return home. So if they're going to go home, then our jobs ought to be to make their homes the best possible places they can be, instead of trying to replace them with other homes. That's a hard thing for some child advocates to accept. We must all understand: Rather than replace inadequate parents with foster care, we really need to help all parents, including not very good ones, make their natural homes safe, healthy places to be.

So what can we do? I spent an hour on the telephone today with a friend who is a juvenile court judge in Indianapolis. We were both bemoaning our lot, specifically our frustrations that things don't seem to be getting any better. In fact, especially for children, things seem to be getting worse. People ask us when we give speeches, "Well, what can we do? What can be done?" We don't really have the answers, except that each one of you individually may make a difference in one child's life. If each of us makes a difference for just one child, hundreds of children will be helped. How can we make a difference? A good model to follow is that of the ideal LDS ward. Somebody visits us in our homes at least once a month. Somebody checks on us to make sure we're okay, and if we're not okay, they offer assistance to us. Do you know how many kids never have that kind of neighborly assistance from anybody? If we treated more of our neighbors the way we treat ward members, we could make a difference. And when I say neighbors, I may mean neighbors farther away than the two streets next to yours. But if we all adopted one street or even one house in our cities and treated them as we do our visiting teaching assignments, we would make a difference. And we can support community organizations with similar aims. Look for Big Brother, Big Sister, foster grandparents, or other mentoring organizations. Your local juvenile courts should be able to refer you to such organizations.

Where else could we help? Consider being shelter parents or foster parents. It is a hard thing to do, but giving foster care is an incredible service to these children. Volunteer to assist a guardian ad litem or a court-appointed special advocate. Volunteer to be a tracker, which means you're going to help some child get out of bed and to school every morning, to check to make sure he or she stayed there, and then maybe to help that child get home. There are a lot of elementary and middle-school-aged children who don't have a parent to do that. Volunteer to be a mentor. Take a child with you to a Jazz game—or a Bulls' game, or Lakers', or whatever team or sport you support. Take a child in your neighborhood who would never get to go any other way. Help a child or two with their schoolwork; help them with their Cub Scout projects. Could you help a boy build one of those wooden race cars? Just look for those opportunities because, honestly, the more of those opportunities you take, the fewer of those children I'll see. That would make my life a lot easier, but more important, it would make at least one child's life a lot happier. Remember, every one—even just one—is important:

"As the old man walked the beach at dawn, he noticed a young man ahead of him carefully picking up starfish from the sand and placing them back into the sea. Finally, catching up to the youth, the old man asked him why he was doing this.

"'Because the stranded starfish will die if they are left in the morning sun,' he replied.

"'But the beach goes on for miles and there are millions of starfish everywhere!' scoffed the old man. 'How can your efforts possibly make any difference?'

"For a moment the young man contemplated the starfish in his hand before he tossed it gently into the waves.

"'It makes a difference to this one,' he said." [^5]

---
Notas:
[^1] Teachers can praise. "Peter, that was an excellent solution to that problem." "Janice, you turned in a perfect paper." "Kurt, that was another perceptive comment."
[^2] Teachers can criticize. "Laura, that handwriting was pretty sloppy." "Cut out the nonsense, Jim. You know better than that." "You are not thinking very clearly."
[^3] Teachers can help or remediate. "Why don't you try it this way, Nancy?" "How do you think the situation would improve if you tried it this way, Tom?" "Barry, your long-division problems will be easier to solve if you line your numbers up more carefully."
[^4] Teachers can also respond with nonjudgmental, neutral comments. "Uh huh." "All right." "Go on." "Okay."
