Susette Fletcher Green, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women in the Covenant of Grace ( 1994)

Side by Side, Desk by Desk: Gender Equity in the Schools

EILEEN D. BUNDERSON [^1]

Doctrine and Covenants 88 reminds us to seek words of wisdom "out of the best books," and to learn, "even by study, . . . things both in heaven and in the earth, and under the earth; . . . and a knowledge also of countries and of last kingdoms." These instructions are given to all who are "laborers in this last kingdom," the last dispensation. (Vv. 118, 79, 74.) The Prophet Joseph himself was a voracious, eclectic learner who believed in educated discipleship for all members. He invited Eliza R. Snow to Kirtland to teach a "select school for young ladies." He started the School of the Prophets, which soon divided into "the Elder's School for Theological training and the Kirtland School for temporal education," including courses on arithmetic, grammar, and geography. [^2]

Most adults in the United States and in many other areas of the world began their educations in a schoolroom. It may have been a public school, a private school, or a home school, but each of us likely started early and dutifully worked our way toward graduation. Consequently, we reminisce over football games and proms. We attend high school reunions. We understand and commiserate when our children complain of "unreasonable" homework and "mystery food" at school lunch. Underlying our conversations is the unspoken assumption that we have all shared a common experience: we have "been to school."

As we muddled through and mastered our math, science, history, reading, and social studies, we labored under another assumption: because we were all sitting in the same classrooms, studying from the same books, and listening to the same lessons, we all had equal access to the knowledge and skill of our teachers and administrators as we moved through the educational process. Actually, a great many studies conducted in classrooms throughout the world spell out in repetitive detail that the educational experience may be quite different for the boys in the class than for the girls sitting next to them.

Consider the following: A group of parents were asked to view the infants in the newborn nursery. As the parents gazed through the window, a nurse presented each baby in turn and asked the parents to note whether they thought the infant was male or female. The infants were clothed in identical hospital sleepers. As the mother of six children, I admit that I have had difficulty identifying the sex of my own newborns without a good look at the plumbing. Nevertheless, the parents in the experiment proved to be remarkably astute. They were guessing correctly approximately 90 percent of the time. The researchers were puzzled, because they related more to my difficulties in identifying gender, even of my own children, than to the results of this intuitive group of parents. They tried another group of parents and tallied the same percentage of accurate guesses. This time, however, when the nurse presented the children to the parents at the window, the researchers noticed an interesting pattern. As the nurse presented Baby A, she held up the baby for all to see, and the parents made their choice. When the nurse presented Baby B, she cuddled it tenderly in her arms. Baby after baby was presented in either "A" or "B" fashion. The parents quickly caught on that the proud presentation of infants A suggested males and the gentle presentation of infants B, females.

Differential treatment of males and females starts very early in life. In another study young mothers were asked to entertain a two-year-old named "John" in a simulated day-nursery situation. When "John" cried, "mother" usually handed him a truck, encouraged him to read a story with her, or tried to turn his attention to something fun and interesting. These same mothers, asked to entertain two-year-old "Mary," were more likely to pick her up, sing to her, cuddle and soothe her when she cried. The mother's actions were geared to what she thought was appropriate to the sex of the child. [^3]

By the time children enter school (whether preschool, kindergarten, or first grade), their gender identity is firmly in place. Even "enlightened" parents, who would never purposefully give their child a toy gun, watch in astonishment as their five-year-old son picks up a broomstick and rat-a-tat-tats at the cat. Little girls with working mothers and "house fathers" will go to the dollhouse in the free-play corner of the kindergarten room and promptly put the mother doll in the kitchen.

How does the reality of gender differences and gender roles affect the educational process for children? In a gender symposium at Utah Valley Community College in 1992, educational psychologist David Sadker asserted that the most critical asset in the modern schoolroom is not the new computer, the modern textbooks, or the eye-catching bulletin boards. The single most important contributor to the quality of education received by each individual student is the amount of attention that child gets from the teacher. A careful analysis of classroom interactions reveals some unexpected variations in how and to whom teachers give attention. A teacher can interact with students in four basic ways:

Many studies have tabulated classroom interactions. [^4] Researchers have consistently found that boys receive most of the praise, most of the criticism, and most of the help and/or remediation. Girls receive most of the "Uh huh's." What effect does this have on the educational experience of boys and girls?

Teachers tend to ask boys more questions. If you have ever taught a class of active children, you may be saying, "Yes, but that's how I manage my class. When the boy over in the corner starts to act up, I catch his attention and bring him back by asking him a question." What is the effect of that question, that manifestation of teacher attention, on that child?

The important factor is the attention. Oddly enough, it doesn't particularly matter whether that attention is positive or negative. The child has been noticed. The teacher has demonstrated that he or she recognizes the personhood and presence of the child in the classroom.

In addition to asking boys more questions, teachers tend to ask them different types of questions. Note the following exchange:

Teacher: "Nathan, what is the longest river in the United States?"

Nathan: "The Mississippi."

Teacher: "No, Nathan, it isn't the Mississippi. Think! Remember Lewis and Clark?"

Nathan: "Oh, yeah. The Missouri River."

Teacher: "Very good, Nathan! Jane, what is the widest river in the world?"

Jane: "The Nile."

Teacher: "Mary?"

Mary: "The Amazon."

Teacher: "All right. Let's move on to mountain ranges."

What subtle interactions are going on here? When Nathan answered incorrectly, the teacher pressed him to "Think!" and supplied a clue, "Remember Lewis and Clark?" She didn't let him off the hook, so to speak, by calling on another student as she did when Jane answered incorrectly. Putting Nathan on the spot, pressing him to think, may not be something a student enjoys, but it conveys the teacher's respect for his intelligence even when his first answer is wrong and, more important, it encourages him to solve problems and earn that "Very good!" response. Mary's correct answer got a mere nod, "All right. Let's move on." Though the exchange was definitely a gender-based interaction, teachers are seldom conscious of either the behavior or the inequities such gender-based interactions create.

Let me add a few more research facts not illustrated in this last example. Teachers are more likely with boys to (1) ask higher order questions (how or why instead of who or what); (2) ask follow-up questions that encourage deeper understanding ("Why do you think the cure for anthrax was so important for the people of Pasteur's time?"); (3) wait longer for boys to remember or to formulate an answer. Does the time a teacher waits for an answer from a student make a difference? It certainly does! The student gets a chance to think and organize his thoughts. He realizes the teacher has confidence that he really can come up with an answer—and he is more likely to do so.

A related problem, especially prevalent in such subject areas as science and math, appears in the following contrasted interactions:

Sam: "Teacher, why doesn't my osmosis experiment work?"

Teacher: "Look at your experimental diagram. Let's follow it through together. Can you reconstruct your apparatus so it matches the diagram more closely?"

Sally: "Teacher, my osmosis experiment won't work. What's the matter with it?"

Teacher: "It's a simple error. I see what you've done wrong. Scoot over and I'll fix it."

This teacher's interaction with Sally illustrates a phenomenon called "learned helplessness." Students, especially girls, learn very quickly that you needn't figure the problem out for yourself if you can get someone else to do it for you. Besides, you really didn't think you could do it for yourself, anyway. If you could, the teacher would surely expect you to puzzle out the answer for yourself. Our culture encourages learned helplessness in subtle ways. The teacher is willing to be tough with a Nathan or a Sam, to press them to puzzle out solutions to their problems or questions. We are habitually gentler with girls, because—according to our cultural stereotypes—the delicate, emotional female lacks the mental stamina to try again and again to solve the problem herself. The teacher is demonstrating "chivalry" and protectiveness by relieving her of unnecessary and painful mental effort. Unfortunately, the teacher is also robbing her of the opportunity to experience the mental growth required to solve the problem on her own.

Other cultural factors contribute to differences in classroom performance. A group of students had just finished taking a test. As they were leaving the classroom, the teacher stood by the door and asked them how they thought they'd done on the test. In chorus, the girls moaned, "Oooh! It was so hard! We know we failed!" The boys laughed it off. "It was easy, a real snap!" When the tests were corrected and returned, there were no differences in average scores of girls and boys. Although a self-deprecating attitude regarding one's accomplishments is part of our culture, especially for females, girls tend to be more anxious about taking tests, more uneasy about the results, and much more negatively affected by poor scores. Boys manage to rationalize poor test scores by attributing the result to bad luck, a poorly written test, a teacher "who hates him," or (if pressed) an admission of not having studied. Girls are more likely to internalize the test results and interpret the poor score as a confirmation that they don't have the ability or brains to do better.

Teachers underestimate the power of their comments to confirm those feelings. Mrs. Braithwaite handed back a physics test to her eleventh-grade class. She was very understanding when discussing the grades of students who had not done very well. She handed the top paper in the class to Jennifer. "Congratulations, Jennifer. You did very well on this test." "Oh, Mrs. Braithwaite, it's just because you're such a good teacher. I could never have passed without your help." "Why thank you, Jennifer. It's very nice of you to say that." What's wrong with this polite exchange? Person to person: nothing; teacher to student: a lot. Jennifer's confidence in her own abilities is undermined. It didn't occur to Mrs. Braithwaite that she should have said to Jennifer, "You did very well because you knew and understood the mechanics of Boyle's law." Such a comment would enable Jennifer to take responsibility, and credit, for mastering difficult material. Could that happen to a boy? Yes, but boys are less likely to respond to praise by being self-deprecating or complimenting a teacher in return.

Other cultural and social expectations for girls and boys carry over into the classroom. For example, teachers are much more likely to accept a comment or question called out by a boy who has failed to raise his hand. When a girl calls out a comment, she is more likely to be told to please raise her hand first. Studies show that teachers are more likely to stand closer to boys and to call on boys more often, although most teachers will say, in truth, that that is just classroom survival management. They are more likely to remember boys' names, more likely to look a boy in the eye while he is answering or commenting, and more likely to ask follow-up questions.

The quantity and quality of the teacher's attention is a crucial resource in the educational process. [^5] The volumes of research carried out during the past twenty years have fairly conclusively established that student-teacher interactions are not the same for girls as they are for boys. Boys are given more than their share of this ever more limited resource and, as a result, their classroom years produce different kinds of learning experiences. For girls, the experience can foster confusion, a lack of direction, and a loss of self-esteem. [^6] It is difficult for girls to maintain an upbeat, confident opinion of their intellectual prowess and personal worth. Although girls are routinely expected to excel in some areas, these are more likely to be neatness, organization, social expertise, and deportment. [^7] Ironically, they excel in the areas that allow them to be ignored.

Studies continue to show that the self-esteem of girls begins a steady and sometimes rapid decline as they enter their teenage years. [^8] What other evidence do we have that the learning environment in our schools may not be as friendly a place for girls as it is for boys?

Utah students routinely take the Stanford Achievement Test of Basic Skills in the fifth, eighth, and eleventh grades. Scores are reported as a percentile rank; for instance, a score of 65 percent indicates that the student scored higher than 65 percent of all other students nationwide who took the same test. In Utah Valley, fifth-grade boys and girls scored basically the same in areas such as reading, language, study skills, science, math, and social studies. As students move into junior high and high school, however, patterns change. On a test administered in October 1992, eleventh-grade boys in Utah Valley high schools outscored the girls by 17 percentile points in social studies, 17 percentile points in science, and 16 percentile points in math. In some schools, boys also outscored girls in reading and language arts, areas in which girls are traditionally thought to shine.

Curiously, girls received higher course grades in classes they shared with boys, although they scored lower on the SAT tests. A group of high school teachers was asked to offer explanations of why boys consistently score higher on standardized tests and yet girls receive higher grades in class. When one teacher volunteered that girls were much better behaved in class, another teacher expressed surprise: "I thought behavior was reported in the separate citizenship grade!" A third teacher noted that the girls were more conscientious about handing in their homework assignments. A fourth wondered, "If the girls are doing more of the homework we assign than the boys are and still are getting lower test scores on the standardized tests, what does that say about the relevance of our homework assignments?" All these comments reinforce the assumption that girls excel in behavior and deportment. No one addressed the hard problem of the disparity in test scores. No one went beyond surface issues to wonder how the system may be failing to challenge and educate girls.

Nevertheless, all the responsibility cannot be placed with the schools. Gender identities are formed early and are constantly being reinforced at home, in peer groups, in social and religious groups, and in the media. Gender identity defines what it means to be male or female in our world; only part of that definition results from student/teacher/peer interactions in our schools.

How can we help the schools challenge and better educate our daughters? We can't afford to compromise the education of 50 percent of our young people. How can we, as parents, grandparents, relatives, associates, and teachers of young women, extend educational opportunities to all students? Fortunately, the educational process need not place boys and girls on opposite ends of a seesaw. Raising the quality of the educational process for girls does not necessarily lower its quality for boys. We can ensure an equitable education for all.

So what do we do? We become involved. We can watch for the subtle inequities that work against girls. We can introduce young children, both boys and girls, to such toys as Legos and Erector sets, which develop spatial skills essential to learning science and math. We can encourage both boys and girls to use and love computers. We can consult with the school counselor who says about our daughter, "I've recommended that Julie not take math because I feel she shouldn't have to work that hard." We can tell the counselor (and Julie) that for every math class she takes after eighth grade her average salary, if and when she should need or desire to enter the work force, will go up by an average of three thousand dollars per year. You can remind the science teacher that your daughter is a whiz with equipment and you expect that she will participate fully and well in the laboratory work. You can suggest to the social studies teacher that there is more to history than wars and rumors of wars. Girls enjoy learning about the daily lives and contributions of great (and not-so-great) women. Suggest that the schools read about women, provide significant female role models, and validate the experiences and lives of women.

Sensitize people to the issues created by the inequities in the test scores. Perhaps the teachers are not aware that the average percentile scores are available by gender. Do you know what the scores are for your school? Discuss with your child's teacher the gender distributions of scores for his or her class. How is your child doing? What can you do to help?

Provide good books in your home and read them yourself as well as with others in the family. Read the newspaper and discuss more than just the sports page and the horror stories about wars, earthquakes, taxes, or gangs. Listen to your children when they report their day at school. "I never get called on, even when I know the answer." "I don't know why I even try in science. The scholarship nominees were all boys." "I hate math! I'm so stupid." "I can't read Jane Eyre. That's a girl's book!" "Our class gets to do Ireland in the social studies fair next month. Will you help me find a project?" Get involved in the educational process of both your daughters and your sons.

Most teachers are eager to do whatever they can to improve their teaching curriculum and style to benefit their students. Gender-equitable behavior can be learned. More and more schools are inviting teachers and interested parents to training workshops and symposia dealing with equity problems in the classroom. As a parent-teacher organization leader, you might initiate such activities. Watch your own interaction patterns in the many settings where you teach youth: Sunday School, Primary, Young Women, school volunteers, and cooperative preschool. Informed teachers, working with informed parents, can improve the educational experience for everyone.

The future of our homes, our families, our community, and our Church depends on how well we educate all of our children. Brigham Young instructed: "Cultivate children's] mental powers from childhood up. When they are old enough, place within their reach the advantages and benefits of a scientific education. Let them study the formation of the earth, the organization of the human system, and other sciences; such a system of mental culture and discipline in early years is of incalculable benefit to its possessor in mature years. Take . . . the young ladies now before me, as well as the young men, . . . and do not confine their studies to theory only, but let them put in practice what they learn from books. . . . It is the duty of the Latter-day Saints, according to the revelations, to give their children the best education that can be procured, both from the books of the world and the revelations of the Lord." [^9]

Men and women are equal in the eyes of God, and his sons and daughters are equally deserving of the best educational opportunities we can provide for them. "And I, God, said unto mine Only Begotten, which was with me from the beginning: Let us make man in our image, after our likeness; and it was so. And I, God, said: Let them have dominion . . . over all the earth." (Moses 2:26.) God was speaking to them, male and female, as he gave to them the directive to exercise knowledgeable and faithful dominion. In the face of mounting evidence of subtle and not so subtle inequities in the education of our young men and women, we need to "give [our] children the best education that can be procured." We need to hear Alissa say, "Mom! I got a 94 on my chemistry test. Science is really interesting!" or Julie exclaim, "Dad! I learned in my math class how to tell by triangulation how tall our pine tree is. Let me show you! Let's go measure it!" With knowledge and determination, we can move toward the goal of a quality education for all our children.

---
Notas:
[^1] Teachers can praise. "Peter, that was an excellent solution to that problem." "Janice, you turned in a perfect paper." "Kurt, that was another perceptive comment."
[^2] Teachers can criticize. "Laura, that handwriting was pretty sloppy." "Cut out the nonsense, Jim. You know better than that." "You are not thinking very clearly."
[^3] Teachers can help or remediate. "Why don't you try it this way, Nancy?" "How do you think the situation would improve if you tried it this way, Tom?" "Barry, your long-division problems will be easier to solve if you line your numbers up more carefully."
[^4] Teachers can also respond with nonjudgmental, neutral comments. "Uh huh." "All right." "Go on." "Okay."
