Susette Fletcher Green, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women in the Covenant of Grace ( 1994)

Within the Walls of Our Own Homes: The Father's Involvement in Child Care

ALAN J. HAWKINS [^1] KATHRYN POND SARGENT [^2]

The process of nurturing life is the most profoundly transforming experience in the range of human possibilities. Because women have this experience and men generally don't, we live and think and love across a great gap of understanding. [^3]

Fatherhood is one of the hot topics of the 1990s. On the down side, we read a lot about "deadbeat dads," fathers who neglect their family responsibilities. On the up side, considerable evidence promotes the importance of full-fledged fathers in children's lives, and many fathers are choosing to be more involved with child-rearing. [^4] Little, however, is said about the reverse relationship: the importance of children in fathers' lives. We believe that a father's involvement with his children is essential to his own psychological development and that, equally important, his participation in child care profoundly affects the quality of the marital relationship.

Adult Development: The Task of Generativity

As their children grow up, parents watch a process of systematic change as a child, if all goes well, develops into an increasingly functional, adaptive, and mature individual. We tend to think that the processes of systematic development stop when a person reaches adulthood because the external process of physical growth is largely complete. Yet as adults we experience important changes throughout our lives. Psychologist Erik Erikson describes a set of three essential "developmental tasks" that individuals should accomplish during life to become morally and emotionally mature adults. [^5] His theory about healthy adult development helps us understand the importance of men's involvement in children's lives for men's sake.

Erikson divides the life span into three general developmental stages in normal, healthy mental and social growth. Specific developmental tasks characterize each stage of growth. The first general stage is childhood. The primary developmental task of childhood is gaining a sense of hope about the world, a feeling that the world is a safe place where our needs can be met. In other words, to develop normally, children must feel secure and learn to trust. Obviously, early caregivers play a primary role in helping children develop this sense of security and hope.

Erikson's second general stage of human development is adolescence. The sense of hope and security they gained in childhood allows adolescents to focus their emotional energies on a second major developmental task: achieving faith in themselves and in their abilities. Adolescents strive to answer such transcendent questions as Who am I? Am I a good person? Am I competent? What will I do when I grow up? This necessarily self-centered period of development is a normal part of striving for identity. Even though it can be exasperating to parents and teachers, this challenging developmental phase generally leads to changes that are healthy and necessary.

Unlike many theories of human development, Erikson's model does not end with adolescence. He believed that adulthood is also a period of major growth with a critical developmental task to accomplish: learning to care for others and, more specifically, learning to nurture the next generation, our children. According to Erikson, the vital, overarching developmental task of adulthood—which he labels generativity—requires a person to emerge from the self-centered stage of adolescence and to achieve an identity that includes a concern for the well-being of others, particularly children. Achieving generativity means to invest in, to commit to, and to care deeply for others—to become fully human. The family is not the only context in which to learn generativity, but it is the most common and for many the most effective one.

Erikson points out that the three basic developmental tasks—hope, faith in self, and caring or generativity—correspond with the three religious values of faith, hope, and charity, spoken of in the New Testament. "And now abideth faith, hope, charity, these three; but the greatest of these is charity." (1 Corinthians 13:13.) Generativity, then, may be best understood as charity, the ability to love and care for others on a level commensurate with "the pure love of Christ." The capacity to love in ways that are committed, unselfish, and without condition doesn't just happen. This capacity to love beyond self-interest develops as a person takes on the tasks of generativity in the adult stage of human development.

Mormon, who defined charity as "the pure love of Christ," added that "whoso is found possessed of it at the last day, it shall be well with him." (Moroni 7:47.) We take that to mean that achieving generativity is necessary for our salvation. It is also crucial to our moral and psychological well-being in adulthood. According to Erikson, men and women who fail to learn to care for the next generation regress "from generativity to an obsessive need for pseudo intimacy . . . often with a pervading sense of stagnation and interpersonal impoverishment. Individuals who do not develop generativity often begin to indulge themselves as if they were their one and only child." [^6] Erikson had observed that parents who failed to expand their identity and sense of self to value their children's well-being as much as their own actually regressed psychologically into adolescence or childhood, becoming self-indulgent and self-absorbed.

Adults who involve themselves deeply in the process of nurturing children usually develop generativity, but because fathers are significantly less involved than mothers in caring for dependent children, men face greater struggles to achieve generativity than women. That is especially true if a man's primary activity—his profession—is not an effective context for learning to care for and nurture others in a generative way. And if mothers are achieving generativity but fathers are not, that can seriously strain the marital relationship. The beginnings of these strains frequently can be found during the transition to parenthood.

Transition to Parenthood

The birth of a child initiates a crucial transition in the life cycle of most people. Research shows that in the early stages of marriage, before the first child is born, couples' lives tend to be fairly synchronous; that is, husbands and wives are involved in similar activities, mainly work and school. In addition, their family functions tend to overlap or even to be carried out side by side. Young husbands and wives begin to build a world together by sharing laundry, cooking, and cleaning. This stage of marriage is a wonderful time of life. As a result of sharing so many activities and overlapping responsibilities, wives and husbands in this honeymoon phase are often in similar developmental phases. The transition to parenthood, however, may alter husbands' and wives' developmental directions in ways that eventually result in significant developmental differences.

Even though many couples intend to share parental responsibilities, studies reveal that after the first baby is born, men and women often begin to divide family role responsibilities along more traditional lines. [^7] Surprisingly, even the increased number of women in the labor force has not significantly changed the traditional allocation of family roles at the transition to parenthood. [^8] Mothers employed outside the home usually take a leave of absence to adjust to the new baby. During her time at home, a mother learns to care for her dependent child. That intense investment of time and psychological energy in an infant is a powerful force that bonds mother and child. The baby's needs and a mother's early commitment to nurturing push a mother towards generativity.

What happens to fathers as this powerful psychological bond is being formed between mother and child? Usually mom's income has been lost, at least temporarily. Consequently, a tremendous feeling of financial responsibility often weighs on men as they confront the pressures of providing for a family that now includes a dependent child. Work or school or both take on new urgency; now a steady, healthy income is necessary for the survival of the family. Thus, while mom is shifting time and energy to the new baby, dad is increasing his temporal and psychological investment in work and/or school.

What about the time when dad is at home? Can't he use this time to nurture the new baby? As parents of newborns will attest, besides crying, new babies do only three things: eat, sleep, and soil their diapers. Breast-feeding, although wonderful for baby and mother, limits a father's opportunity to feed, cuddle, and nurture a contented baby. And changing all the diapers may not be the best way to promote a psychological bond between father and child. In addition, the time when dads are usually home (after 5 P.M.) tends to be a child's most fussy time. What happens when the child fusses and dad's efforts to comfort the child are unsuccessful? Often mom takes over and "magically" calms the child. Of course, mom has no magical maternal powers; she acquired her skills gradually through daily care of the child. In fact, women who remember the transition to motherhood may recall their anxiety during the first few days of caring for a newborn. By trial and error, they become more confident and competent. Because the baby only nurses, fusses, messes, and sleeps, dads have little to do early in the child's life. As a result, dads may view themselves as relatively inadequate caregivers compared to moms and shy away from daily caregiving. Ironically, the tasks that a new father could do, such as changing diapers, bathing the baby, cooking, and household work, are often done by a visiting grandmother who lovingly steps in to help her daughter adjust to a first baby.

A common portrait of the transition to parenthood, then, is of mothers leaving the workplace (at least temporarily) and focusing on their new babies. Meanwhile, fathers focus on the workplace and are edged out of the new household routine. This division of tasks, although a practical response to the new situation, tends to send men and women in different developmental directions.

The transition to parenthood, we believe, represents a critical crossroads for the developmental paths of adult men and women. Beginning with nine months of pregnancy followed by the steady, intense demands of caring for a newborn, a mother is quickly and deeply challenged to develop a strong generative commitment to her dependent infant. For fathers, however, the transition to parenthood is usually quite different. Whereas women are expected to actively participate in their infant's daily care, men are not. Their involvement is still viewed as a nicety, not a necessity, thus impeding their ability to achieve generativity. As Daniels and Weingarten, the authors of Sooner or Later: The Timing of Parenthood in Adult Lives, explain, "Mothers are expected to become parents instantly, but fathers are not. The translation of paternal identity into parental generativity, as we have seen it, has been optional." [^9]

Thus, the transition to parenthood in the developmental sense of enlarging one's identity to include a child differs greatly for fathers and mothers. Some women find motherhood easier than others, but almost all women accept this mandatory role. Because fathers generally don't have primary responsibility for child care, parenthood in the fuller sense of generativity may occur later, or never, for a man. "The striking feature of men's parenthood experience is the variation in the timing of . . . the turn to hands-on fathering," observe Daniels and Weingarten. "Biologically, men become fathers and women become mothers at the moment of their first child's birth. But only through daily care, and in sustained emotional engagement in their children's lives, do fathers and mothers become parents in the generative sense." [^10]

Even as their children grow older, dads tend to be playmates or baby-sitters who act as substitute caregivers until mom gets home. As a result of this lack of ultimate parental responsibility, the transition to parenthood tends to find women on their way towards the important developmental task of generativity while men lag behind or even regress to a more egocentric stage of life. For example, new fathers often complain that their wives no longer pay attention to them. Although a new mother is, indeed, less focused on her spouse, the husband's complaint may signal not merely his discomfort with their newly diverging roles but also be an early sign of his regression to becoming more focused on himself than others. His wife, struggling with the demands of the new baby and accustomed to his sharing tasks with her, may be puzzled by her spouse's sudden insensitivity to her exhaustion and need for his support.

In theory, role specialization seems to be a logical response to the realities of contemporary family life. Babies need mothers to nourish them when they are first born. Mothers need time to recover from pregnancy and childbirth. Economic pressures are real. Men earn more per hour than women do. While a husband devotes his time and effort to providing for the family, his wife can devote her time and effort to nurturing the new baby. Although that arrangement may be economically rational, it often constricts men's opportunities for personal growth in the adult task of developing generativity.

Furthermore, most married couples count on more from each other than just economic and physical survival. They want psychological satisfaction and intimacy. But if women have progressed further along the developmental path of generativity than men, marital relationships may be at risk. Couples with developmentally different partners are likely to experience more barriers to building close relationships than couples who have matured to similar points in the life cycle. If a wife is moving towards generativity while her husband is not, they may come to see the world in qualitatively different ways. Different perspectives soon lead to different priorities and interests. In short, because the transition to parenthood tends to push women, but not men, toward the achievement of generativity, husbands and wives often end up feeling psychologically separated from each other. Under such circumstances, marital intimacy may be elusive. Simply developing better communication skills is not the solution. Instead, fathers need to become more involved in the generative work of nurturing children.

What Can We Do?

Because the transition to parenthood is such a pivotal time, how can a couple deal with the forces that push men and women in different directions at that critical juncture? The syndicated comic strip "Cathy" offers one possible solution. Andrea and Luke, the parents of twins, are arguing about who should stay home with the babies.

Andrea says: "I can't leave my babies to work full-time, Luke!"

Luke replies: "I had to leave my babies to work full-time the day after they were born, Andrea!"

Andrea: "But I'm their mother. I can't leave them!"

Luke: "And I'm their father. I'm tired of leaving them!"

Soon they're both shouting, "Why should I spend my life at a stupid job while someone else raises my family?"

In the last frame Andrea relents, "Oh, go ahead and make the call." Luke dials the phone and says, "Would you please send over two people to take care of our careers while we stay home and pursue our children." It's a great thought—hiring somebody to tend the careers so that both parents can care for their children full time. Realistically, however, what can be done to allow and encourage men to be more fully involved in the care of their children? The following suggestions may be helpful.

Planning for early involvement. The father's participation early in child care establishes a pattern for involvement. As wonderful and valuable as the assistance of grandmothers and grandmothers-in-law can be, a father's involvement in the early weeks is vital. Dad's involvement becomes a necessity rather than an option if mom relies on him instead of her own mother. Dad should be at home so that he can learn to care for the child at the same time and in the same way that mom does—feeling scared to death the first time he picks up the baby but learning that he can do it. Syndicated columnist Bob Greene described his feelings at the birth of his daughter: "People talk about the emotions that come when a baby is born: exuberance, relief, giddiness, pure ecstasy. . . . But the dominant emotion inside me was a more basic one. I was scared; scared of what I knew was sure to come, and more scared about what I didn't know. I am of a generation that has made self-indulgence a kind of secular religion. I looked down at that baby, and suddenly I felt that a whole part of my life had just ended, been cut off, and I was beginning something for which I had no preparation." [^11] These feelings of disequilibrium mark the transition to a new stage of life for both women and men—a stage of connectedness and personal growth. By devoting himself to his child's care, a father can develop a wonderful psychological bond with his child.

That early involvement is difficult to achieve. Finances as well as family traditions stand in the way. Only 1 percent of corporations in the United States offer paternal leave. Virtually none offer paid paternal leave. Under the new Family and Medical Leave Act, U.S. businesses with fifty or more employees must allow their employees to take up to twelve weeks' unpaid leave to care for their families. [^12] Although this law helps some fathers, it is still unpaid leave. So if paternal leave can be taken, parents must plan, anticipate, and save for the time after the baby is born.

A delayed career start is another way to foster the father's early participation in child care. Some fathers choose to stay home a year or two while mom finishes her education or gets some experience in a profession. That kind of early involvement pays high dividends down the road. Once dad is back at work full-time, he knows how to relate to his children when he is home, and his children are used to his parenting style as well as mom's.

Even if those suggestions are not feasible at the birth of a first child, the birth of a second child can be a valuable change-point for fathers. In fact, some family researchers humorously suggest that it takes only one child to make a mother, but two to make a father. [^13] The birth of a second child can sometimes pull dad into greater involvement with the first child because mom is necessarily focused on the new baby. Thus, instead of experiencing the birth of a sibling as a loss, a first child can experience it as gaining another primary parent—dad.

Also, although birth is an important time to establish connections, it is not the only time. A good friend of ours intermittently phases out of the work force and focuses on his family. Of course, he has a job that allows him to do that, and he works very hard and earns a substantial salary. Also the family lives frugally, so he can take time off. For example, he once arranged an educational leave from his company to go to graduate school. Most people don't think of graduate school as a vacation. But he left his sixty-hour-a-week job and thirty-hour-a-week bishopric responsibilities to study for only forty hours a week, reserving the rest of the time for his family. After his leave he returned to work, but later when his wife was overwhelmed with the approaching birth of their sixth child, he arranged a six-month unpaid paternity leave from his company. [^14] (Of course, six months won't be an option for everyone, but a month or two may be an option for some.) During the months that he stayed home, this hardworking provider really got to know his children and became part of what was happening at home. Those six months significantly changed his life and improved his relationship with his children and his wife.

Preparental agreements. The vast majority of young men in our culture approach the transition to parenthood wanting to be involved fathers. [^15] Indeed, if the "Cosby Show" father, Cliff Huxtable, is the prototype, fatherhood is in style. When the reality of parenthood hits, however, men often fall short of their own high expectations. One possible solution to this problem is for expectant parents to anticipate and discuss the issues involved in the transition and then write up a "preparental agreement." For example, couples could delineate the tasks involved in a typical parental day—bathing, dressing, feeding, taking the child to the sitter, packing the diaper bag, etc.—and decide how these tasks will be divided. Obviously, the agreement should be flexible, friendly, and open-ended because not all tasks involved in child care can be anticipated. The intent of a written agreement should be to open the lines of communication about father involvement, not close them. A contract can help a couple brainstorm and map out how a new father can be involved in more nurturing ways when the baby is born.

In addition to conferring about child-care tasks, prospective parents should also articulate and discuss the potential stresses that will occur at the transition to parenthood. Couples can examine increased financial pressures and dad's lack of time and opportunity to be with the baby. The couple might then discuss how to combat those specific stresses. A couple might, for example, plan to use occasionally either formula or pumped breast milk to allow dad opportunities to feed the baby. Another idea might be to use vacation time and money on new-baby leave instead. Saving enough money so that dad can take some time off work when the baby is born would probably mean a wonderful memory as well as a push toward generativity. Even small adjustments can benefit the relationship. Alternating who takes the baby's middle-of-the-night shift, for instance, can extend the shared-tasks phase of marriage. That may seem obvious to you, but you would be surprised how rare such communication is and how helpful just talking about problems can be, even if the "solutions" are far from ideal. [^16] If dialogue about a father's involvement starts before the baby's birth, it is much easier to continue discussing such issues later on; however, dialogue is better late than never. Second child or sixth, it's never too late for a father to discover what he's been missing. The path of generativity is demanding but infinitely worthwhile.

Responsibility versus helping. Research shows that the amount of time fathers have sole responsibility for their children's care is critical to pulling men into the nurturing role. Sometimes dad may "help" with the children, but if he can hand the child off to mom for comforting or changing, he may not be changing psychologically. Taking sole responsibility—"I'm in charge here, and if something goes wrong I have to solve it"—is the attitude that leads to generativity. Prolonged, sustained interaction must occur and be coupled with "the-buck-stops-here" responsibility for a child's welfare from food to clean clothes to schoolwork.

As fathers increase their involvement, they tend to take on the more pleasant tasks: bathing the baby or taking the children outside to play. Although that kind of involvement from dad offers relief to mom, it tends to leave her with the more tedious responsibilities. Furthermore, when dad "helps" mom, he tends to view himself as the substitute caregiver or baby-sitter, rather than a primary parent. Dads often say, "I'm babysitting the kids tonight" or "I'm tending the kids for my wife today." Generative parents do not babysit or tend their children; instead, generative parenting is a frame of mind or a way of being. Sometimes fathers are lax because they know that mom will pick up the slack. For example, a popular book about couples' struggles with sharing domestic labor, The Second Shift: Working Parents and the Revolution at Home, describes a father who let his kids eat ice cream and cookies for dinner when he was home because he knew his wife would feed them balanced meals the rest of the week. [^17] In contrast, when dads have sole responsibility for their children for long periods they are forced to think harder about their children's needs. That kind of experience for fathers is generative. A wife who goes on retreats or to women's conferences with her friends gives her husband a gift as well: the time he needs to be alone with his children. She is not effecting a temporary escape from the responsibilities of child care that unfairly burdens her spouse. Instead, she should view her retreat as an opportunity for her husband—her children's father—to enter his children's daily lives and to become a more generative, nurturing human being.

Gatekeeping. Ironically, wives often block husbands from becoming more involved in the lives of their children. Researchers call this phenomenon "gatekeeping." Because moms as primary caregivers control dads' entry into the family sphere, they are gatekeepers. They determine how much and in what ways dads get involved. Paradoxically, even a mom who longs to have dad participate more in the home often unconsciously hinders him from doing so. Why does this happen? A father's involvement can sometimes be very challenging. Dad is too rambunctious with the young children; he doesn't put the right clothes on the baby; he even stacks the dishes wrong in the dishwasher! While it probably doesn't matter whether the baby goes to church in overalls or the cute, frilly dress Aunt Maude sent, dad's failure to do things the "right" way, namely mom's way, often frustrates mom. Thus, rather than have dad do it wrong, mom does the task herself. Or, some women avoid this conflict by, for instance, laying out the clothes and then asking dad to dress the baby. What message does this send? "Dad is a good helper but he can't do things on his own." Perpetuating the "helping" role prevents the psychological investment, or sense of responsibility, that develops generativity.

Dad's involvement can be even more deeply challenging. When a father becomes competent at caring for the children, sometimes a mother feels psychologically threatened. Even for working women, the role of mother is central to a woman's core identity. It is a powerful psychological reward to know that you are the only one who can comfort your child. But wives have to be willing to share such rewards with their husbands. Children do not have a finite amount of love. If they begin to love dad more, they will not love mom less. Instead, children's boundaries will expand and their capacity for love will increase as they gain another primary parent.

Reframing the Issue

Research consistently confirms that wives do more than twice as much domestic work as their husbands, even when they are employed full-time outside the home. [^18] Although that division of labor may be unfair to mothers, in the long run the situation is detrimental to fathers as well. Without investing time and effort, they will be at a serious disadvantage in their struggle to be involved, nurturant fathers and to develop the rich, personal relationships that facilitate maturation into generativity. Failing to share the tasks of generativity also harms marital relationships, as we have already noted, because wives are soon at a different developmental level than husbands. That situation impedes psychological intimacy.

Although unfairness is indeed irksome, reframing a father's underinvolvement as a developmental issue rather than a struggle for "domestic democracy" is crucial. Arguing from a domestic-democracy perspective encourages power struggles and emphasizes differences rather than our common goals as men and women in relationships. This domestic-democracy perspective casts women in the role of critics who point out injustices for which their husbands are responsible. In contrast, a developmental perspective accentuates the necessary connections between men and women. Wives can assume a mentoring role as their husbands go through the challenging process of achieving generativity, a process mothers are usually forced to learn first and at a faster pace.

In addition, encouraging a father's increased involvement in child care from a developmental perspective makes more sense because it focuses on what is really at stake: what fathers gain, rather than the leisure they sacrifice, by greater participation in the daily work of the home. Strong maternal instincts and societal expectations push women toward generativity. Since men are not pushed into caregiving in the same way, they may need to be drawn into greater participation by being shown the benefits of intimate involvement in child care.

The challenge, then, is to enhance men's development by expanding their involvement as fathers. The result will benefit children, mothers, and fathers. In addition, we're convinced that marital relationships will be stronger if couples are on the same developmental track on the way towards generativity as they care for and nurture the next generation. Most family scholars acknowledge that adult men's under-involvement in children's lives is an important social problem, one that affects the quality of life for women and children. We maintain that it hurts men also. Accordingly, in the words of Malachi, we believe it is time to "turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers." (Malachi 4:6.)

---
Notas:
[^1] Teachers can praise. "Peter, that was an excellent solution to that problem." "Janice, you turned in a perfect paper." "Kurt, that was another perceptive comment."
[^2] Teachers can criticize. "Laura, that handwriting was pretty sloppy." "Cut out the nonsense, Jim. You know better than that." "You are not thinking very clearly."
[^3] Teachers can help or remediate. "Why don't you try it this way, Nancy?" "How do you think the situation would improve if you tried it this way, Tom?" "Barry, your long-division problems will be easier to solve if you line your numbers up more carefully."
[^4] Teachers can also respond with nonjudgmental, neutral comments. "Uh huh." "All right." "Go on." "Okay."
