Susette Fletcher Green, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women in the Covenant of Grace ( 1994)

Precious Children: Responding to a Disclosure of Abuse

RUTH B. WRIGHT [^1]

Late one night as my husband and I were snuggled on the couch watching television, we saw what we thought was a short advertisement. A small girl in a darkened bedroom was crying in her bed. She glanced nervously at the clock on her night table. It read 12:30. The next scene seemed to be the same. The little girl was still crying in her bed, and the camera once again focused on the clock. It now read 1:30. Suddenly a door opened, a light went on in the room, and the camera focused on this little girl's face, which was filled with terror. She clutched her covers, pulling them tightly to her body, and then turned over, whimpering. In a chilling instant we knew that this child was a victim of repeated abuse.

That thirty-second spot changed me. It was jarring, startling, horrible. I could not sleep all that night. I tossed and turned and finally got up and prayed for all children who suffer from abuse of any kind. We know there are many. Child abuse is increasing in frequency and intensity throughout the world, even in the Church. The Lord knows and has counseled, "But whoso shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me, it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea." (Matthew 18:6.)

President Thomas S. Monson has said, "If only all children had loving parents, safe homes, and caring friends, what a wonderful world would be theirs. Unfortunately, not all children are so bounteously blessed. Some children witness their fathers savagely beating their mothers, while others are on the receiving end of such abuse. What cowardice, what depravity, what shame! Local hospitals everywhere receive these little ones, bruised and battered, accompanied by bald-faced lies that the child 'ran into the door' or 'fell down the stairs.' Liars, bullies who abuse children, they will one day reap the whirlwind of their foul deeds. The quiet, the hurt, the offended child victim of abuse, and at times incest, must receive help."

President Monson then cites a letter from a district court judge notifying him of "'an alarming increase of reported physical, psychological, and sexual abuse of children.'" He states emphatically, "The Church does not condone such heinous and vile conduct. Rather, we condemn in the harshest of terms such treatment of God's precious children. Let the child be rescued, nurtured, loved, and healed. Let the offender be brought to justice, to accountability, for his actions and receive professional treatment to curtail such wicked and devilish conduct. When you and I know of such conduct and fail to take action to eradicate it, we become part of the problem. We share part of the guilt. We experience part of the punishment." [^2]

President Howard W. Hunter, in a letter to Church leaders that accompanied information to educate them about abuse, said, "Those who abuse children or other family members violate the laws of God and man. Every effort should be made to protect individuals from abuse and to help those guilty of abusive behavior to repent." [^3] In April 1989 general conference, President Ezra Taft Benson's closing message was to the children of the Church. After helping them understand that they were children of God with great potential, he added, "Now, I want to say something to you children who do not feel safe and who are frightened or hurt and do not know what to do. Sometimes you may feel all alone. You need to know that even when it seems that no one else cares, your Heavenly Father does. He will always love you. He wants you to be protected and safe. If you are not, please talk to someone who can help you—a parent, a teacher, your bishop, or a friend. They will help you." [^4]

If a child told you of his or her abuse, how could you help? First, we need to understand that disclosure is the beginning of the healing process. The child must identify the abuse. We must be prepared to respond to such a disclosure in a positive way, to reinforce the child's courage and encourage talking. How you react to a child's disclosure is a very important part of the child's ability to trust another person and feel safe. I was told of a child who approached her Primary teacher many years ago with such a disclosure. Instead of finding comfort, she was told, "Your father is a wonderful man. He wouldn't do that." This child never again sought help, continued for years to suffer the abuse, and finally came to terms with her pain only in her early forties.

Perhaps by mentally rehearsing some responses, we can prepare ourselves to help rather than harm. Remember the child is frightened, confused, uncomfortable about the experience, and uncertain what to do. Act, don't react. Keep your own feelings under control. Be calm and nonjudgmental. Do not express emotions such as shock, embarrassment, anger, or disgust. Do not criticize or belittle the child's family. Children are most often abused by someone they know and trust—a father, an uncle, a neighbor. Their feelings toward that person will remain mixed—protective as well as fearful. They will not understand your feelings of outrage and anger.

Respect the child's privacy. Find a private place to talk, and don't share the disclosure with others. Know that the child has come to you in confidence. You need to keep that confidence, but take care not to make promises you can't keep. You may need to talk to someone you trust to help you evaluate your options. Unless you are willing to let the abuse continue or happen to some other child, you need to report it. Children seldom lie about being assaulted or sexually abused.

Support the child's decision to tell the story. Make it clear that telling you was the right thing to do. Remember, a person who molests a child fears exposure and might have threatened the child with loss of love or with physical harm. A small child may have been told, "If you tell anyone, your mom and dad won't love you anymore," or "People will be disgusted, and no one will ever play with you again." Express your love and confidence with words and gestures. Give positive messages: "Thank you for telling me this," or "You've made the right decision." Avoid challenges starting with "Why?" such as, "Why didn't you tell me that before?" or "Why did you let that happen?" Decide ahead of time what you might say so that you will be calm when handling the problem. "Thank you for telling me. You are not at fault, and I will try to help you."

It is vitally important to explain to the child that she or he is not responsible and has done no wrong. The child may have feelings of guilt and assume blame for what has happened. In cases of physical assault, many times children will have been told that they deserved to be beaten or battered for misbehaving. Children may not even realize they are victims of abuse. They almost always feel responsible for what has happened to them.

Your assistance and support can help a child through a difficult time. Make sure the child feels that you believe what you have heard. Communicate with the child. Respond to the child's questions and feelings in a calm, matter-of-fact manner. Do not push the child to share more than he or she is willing to share. The child needs warmth and acceptance, not curiosity or interrogation. Your sympathy, understanding, support, and optimism will encourage any necessary additional disclosures and discussion.

One of the worst things you can do is to express anger at the child for having violated previous warnings or instructions. A grandmother was preparing a bath for her three-year-old granddaughter whom she was tending. She was disturbed that the little girl kept touching her genital area and said, "Oh, don't touch yourself there." The child answered, "But Bill hurt me there," and the grandmother responded, "Don't talk like that! That's not a nice thing to say. Bill wouldn't hurt you!" Once the child was in the bathtub, the grandmother saw obvious evidence that she had been abused. She took her to the hospital, where they were asked what had happened. The little girl wouldn't repeat the story. The time for disclosure had passed. How might the grandmother have handled this differently? She could have responded, "I'm glad you told me about this. You are not responsible for what happened. Let's see what Grandma can do to help you." Without asking unnecessary questions or prying into the details of the abuse, she could have offered support.

Remember when responding to a child's disclosure that you should not promise that the abuse will not happen again unless you can make sure that it will not. If you promise to prevent future abuse and it does happen again, then the child's trust will be broken a second time. Finally, you should report the abuse to your local social services agency.

The pamphlet Preventing and Responding to Child Abuse, prepared by the Church and available through Church distribution centers, instructs: "If you are not sure whether a child needs help, call the social services agency in your community that deals with child abuse. Its staff will determine whether a child has been abused. Remember, a prompt report is better than a late report, and a late report is better than no report at all. Reporting allows professionals to assist the child and his parents or family, minimizing unnecessary emotional and physical injury." [^5]

In conclusion, above all please remember that the Lord loves that precious child who has come to you, and he is aware of the problems of child abuse. As you carefully listen and respond, assure the child that Heavenly Father and our Savior Jesus Christ love and care. You might say, "Our Heavenly Father and Jesus love you and care about you. You are not to blame for what has happened to you. You are an important person. You are a child of God." When the Savior was on the earth, he called the children to him and blessed them. We need to go to him in earnest prayer for guidance. I believe he wants all children to feel safe and at peace. We follow his example when we respond to their cries for help.

---
Notas:
[^1] Teachers can praise. "Peter, that was an excellent solution to that problem." "Janice, you turned in a perfect paper." "Kurt, that was another perceptive comment."
[^2] Teachers can criticize. "Laura, that handwriting was pretty sloppy." "Cut out the nonsense, Jim. You know better than that." "You are not thinking very clearly."
[^3] Teachers can help or remediate. "Why don't you try it this way, Nancy?" "How do you think the situation would improve if you tried it this way, Tom?" "Barry, your long-division problems will be easier to solve if you line your numbers up more carefully."
[^4] Teachers can also respond with nonjudgmental, neutral comments. "Uh huh." "All right." "Go on." "Okay."
