Susette Fletcher Green, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women in the Covenant of Grace ( 1994)

When You Can't Really Fix It: The Courage to Listen and Love

D. CRAIG CONDER [^1] MARJORIE DRAPER CONDER [^2]

Introduction by Virginia H. Pearce, first counselor in the Young Women General Presidency

About eighteen years ago, my husband, Jim, came home from work one night deeply distressed. He had been in practice as a doctor of internal medicine for only a few months, yet he already had several parents in his practice who were literally destroying their own health as they worried and suffered over the behavior of their children. That very day a good man—a conscientious, loving father—had come into the office complaining of severe insomnia. He had hardly slept in the last two weeks. As they talked, trying to determine causes and treatment, he told my husband about his son, a moody and sensitive young man whom he described as having fought against life from the time he was born. Two weeks earlier, this man and his wife had been sitting at the kitchen table when they heard a loud explosion in the basement. They rushed down to find that this son had shot himself. Jim paused to look at our four adorable, innocent, and fairly manageable little girls. The oldest was seven. Who could guess what lay ahead for them—for us? My husband, his voice full of foreboding and fear, asked, "What have we done?" And when I thought of the capacity and the possibilities for pain, the certainty of sorrow, when we bring a child into the world, I too wondered at our great rashness. What had we done?

That conversation so many years ago was my first glimpse of the principle of "opposition in all things" applied to parenthood. When children are young, mothers are usually successful at relieving pain and frustration. They fix them with hugs, cookies, or at most, a visit to the kindergarten teacher to see if she can manipulate the situation a little. As our children grow, fixing the hurts becomes more and more difficult. Their troubles get bigger, and the possibilities for self-destructive behavior and subsequent pain become greater. When eternal consequences are at stake, this process becomes almost unbearable for a mother to watch. At the peak of the pain and the frustration, some of us disengage or abdicate. We say, "I can't stand this any more; I can't afford to care. I'm backing out of this. Don't tell me anything; don't let me see it. I can't do anything right anyway." Others, at the other end of the pendulum, take the opposite tack: "I will make this work. I'll fix this. I'll talk to this person, and I'll talk to that person. The bishop will fix this. Somebody's got to fix this!" Many of us, faced with insoluble, painful parenting problems, swing from one end to the other: from "fix-it" to abandonment and back again, perhaps over and over.

There is, however, a balancing place on that pendulum between the two extremes, although it is hard to get our souls to stay put when life continues in rapid motion. Such words and phrases as "support," "long-suffering," "patience," "faith," "unconditional love," "prayer," "promptings of the Spirit," "listening," "confidence," "respect," and "agency" describe a place of loving engagement between the two extremes of fixing or abandoning a child with a complex problem. Let me give you a small example, a minor stress compared to Marjorie and Craig Conder's experience and to some of the trials in your lives. Several years ago, our oldest daughter, then in seventh grade, came home with a tearful litany of discouragement. She sobbed out all the sad distortions of junior high life: "I don't have any friends. No one likes me. I don't even know why I'm crying." As we sat on the sofa and her description of her failings and frustrations went on and on, I remember how hard it was for me just to sit and hold her and allow her to keep crying. My mind raced along thinking, How can I fix this? You're wrong, you are cute! You do too have friends! I wanted to pile up evidence to prove that she had no right to be sad. My mind moved on—maybe I could invite one of her friends over, maybe two. They could have a sleepover this Friday. But as I mentally anticipated her resistance, I felt myself swinging the other way. I thought, "Okay, you've cried enough. Quit now; it's over." Those feelings of impatience were a type of abandonment. Translated, they were, "I don't want to feel this way anymore, so you can't be upset anymore. At one point, I heard the noise in the other room of my younger children arriving home, and I remember feeling relieved and thinking, In a minute somebody's going to call me and then I can get up and leave and this will be over. But no one called and I stayed with my distraught teenager, saying nothing but floating back and forth between those two poles of feeling. Gradually, my need to intervene faded.

I vividly recall how long it took just to listen, to hold her and let her spill it all out. Initially it was painful, but when it was over, she stood up, blew her nose, and went on with her life. My confidence in her took a leap forward. And as the weeks went by—some sunny, some sad—I gained new respect for her ability to last it out, if nothing else, and I saw clearly that she was growing into a person who would be able to manage her own life successfully. And after all, I thought, I guess that's what's going to happen eventually. I'm not always going to be here.

My final example comes from a heated discussion we were having one night with a sixteen-year-old daughter over her failure to follow our advice. Not only was our advice excellent and wise but it was, in fact, advice she had solicited—and then ignored. Believing that we had suggested a better solution than she had chosen and feeling frustrated that we couldn't force her, her dad said, "Okay, we get the message; we're out of your life. Just don't ask us again." That's abandonment, isn't it? Just don't ask us for help again! But with an understanding beyond her years, she said, "No, you're not getting it. I want to be able to come to you and talk to you about what I think. And I want to know what you think, but that isn't an agreement that I'm going to do everything your way."

It's tough being a parent. It's tough striking a balance even in the little hurts and less consequential choices. And when life brings trials we did not imagine or deserve, and as Craig and Marjorie describe, situations we simply cannot begin to fix, it takes not only patience but prayerful, relentless courage to listen and love.

* * * * *

Craig: I am the eldest of six children in an active Latter-day Saint family. Both my parents are rock-solid Church members. Growing up, I went to all my meetings and was even knowledgeable and precocious enough to correct my teachers when I thought they were wrong. I went to seminary, graduated from high school, attended Brigham Young University for a year, and then served a mission in Japan. In short, I was a typical LDS young man. After my two-year mission, I went back to BYU for another year and married in the temple a young woman I had known in high school. Cyndie and I had dated in high school and before my mission. I enjoyed her company and hoped she would be there when I got back, but I didn't want to force any promises that would have to last two years. When I did get back, she was still there, and we still enjoyed each other's company. Since I was now a returned missionary, I felt I could now admit to loving someone. We got married about a year after I got home from my mission.

Marjorie: At that point in our lives I was probably feeling fairly self-righteous and smug. My family wasn't perfect, but we were on track, according to plan. Also, my son Craig and I were close. We often talked for hours on end. In fact, my husband would sometimes come out and say, "Aren't you people ever going to bed?" And the answer was usually no. Life was very good. But a big change was about to unfold.

Craig: Getting married seemed to be the beginning of the end. I knew going into the marriage that Cyndie was diabetic, but I wasn't prepared for the extent or the suddenness of her health problems. And I didn't know that her problems would be compounded by bulimic behavior that started in the weeks before we got married and ultimately was a disaster for a person whose health required a steady control of her blood glucose. Less than a month after we were married, she had to be hospitalized, and over the next few months we went in twice more.

We'd been married about nine months when we found out that Cyndie was pregnant. At first I was really excited. We hadn't planned on having children until I graduated from college, but I liked the idea of being a dad. Plenty of young couples struggle through and make it, and I figured that we could too. But it was not to be. Cyndie's body couldn't adjust to the hormonal changes of pregnancy. Even in the hospital she continued to vomit, and her glucose levels fluctuated dangerously. She got sicker and sicker, and it soon became obvious that our only real alternative was abortion. Considering our backgrounds, abortion was a very distasteful option. But as I saw it, I could either lose my baby, or I could lose my wife and my baby. The choice was pretty obvious. I still believe that if we hadn't decided to have the abortion, Cyndie would have died within three weeks.

I also believe now that Cyndie never really recovered, either physically or emotionally, from pregnancy and from the abortion. Her body had been terribly weakened, and the slightest sickness escalated into a trip to the emergency room. It also seemed that she began to use the hospital as an escape. Her physical and psychological problems became so intertwined that I could not tell how much of these sicknesses was physical and how much was psychological. During the next three years, we averaged a trip a month to the emergency room.

I was a student when all our troubles began, and we didn't have any insurance to begin with. Even after I graduated and had insurance, it wouldn't cover preexisting conditions. When I talked to the hospital financial adviser about the twelve thousand dollars we owed, he said the hospital would be willing to work with me—I could take up to three months to pay if I needed to. Three months! Eventually, when we owed about twenty thousand dollars, I was forced to take out a Chapter 13 bankruptcy. I eventually paid back a lot of the debt, but I needed the bankruptcy as a stop.

During that time Cyndie and I became more and more distant. We never really had a chance to bond properly to each other as husband and wife. Instead of a wife, I felt that I had a sick child. I can say honestly that I tried to make the marriage work and to help her get better. I was not a perfect husband, but my mistakes were made out of ignorance. I tried as hard as I could, but it wasn't enough.

Cyndie began to sleep during the day and stay awake at night. I felt, and I still feel, that this was to avoid facing me. After two fairly serious suicide attempts, she finally left me to live with her parents in New Mexico. On our fourth anniversary, we decided it would be better for both of us if we got a divorce. The divorce became final about five months later, and about three months after that she died of complications of bulimia and diabetes.

Until the last part of my marriage, I'd stayed fairly active in the Church. Sunday had always been a good day to recharge my batteries and help me face the rest of week. Near the end of my marriage, I required the week to recover from Sunday. When Cyndie and I had moved into a new ward, we told the bishop about our situation, about Cyndie's health and the abortion, and that we might need some help. He tried to reassure us, saying, "Well, don't worry. Just know that all things are in the Lord's hands, and that you can be forgiven." Now, like anybody else, I have a lot to be forgiven for. But I didn't, and I still don't, think that the decision to have that abortion was something to be forgiven for. It was necessary.

In that ward, I attended church, usually by myself, and listened to too many inspirational stories. Speakers often talked about somebody in a difficult situation with a difficult decision to make. Sometimes the decision was righteous, and good consequences always followed. Sometimes the person made unrighteous decisions, and bad consequences followed. There were never any stories about people who struggled to make righteous decisions, and their lives still fell apart. I sometimes felt like standing up on the back row in sacrament meeting and shouting at the speaker that he didn't know what he was talking about. Instead I came home week after week so uptight that I finally decided the extra grief in my life was not worth it, and I quit going to church. I also quit paying tithing, unsure how landing in bankruptcy court qualified as the windows of heaven. The emotion I felt most of the time was betrayal. I'd really tried to do everything right, and my whole world had come crashing down around me. The day of Cyndie's funeral was the low point in my life, even lower than the day of the abortion. I had really loved the "old" Cyndie. As time went on, I felt the woman I loved slipping away from me. I couldn't understand why, or what I could do to prevent it. During the last several months of her life, I had only very minimal contact with her. When she died, I felt that any opportunity to resolve things and reach some closure was now gone forever.

Through all this trauma and disillusionment, my family, and especially my parents, were usually helpful. They were very frustrated that one of their children was struggling with so much grief and they couldn't make it better. My deepening cynicism must have been painful for them. I felt no qualms about challenging them, asking them questions that I knew they couldn't answer. The few times they did try to talk religious doctrine with me made matters worse. I always found holes in their arguments, and I did not hesitate to point them out. To their credit, my parents finally backed off. I usually played basketball with my brothers at their house on Saturdays, so I continued to see them often. We talked, but we did not discuss religion, which was really for the best at that time.

Marjorie: We knew Cyndie was diabetic when Craig married her. That did not seem to be an impossible problem. What we didn't know was that she was also bulimic: I don't think I'd even heard the word in 1982. Diabetes and bulimia are a very bad combination. As Cyndie got sicker and the problems mounted, I felt a widening gulf between Craig and me. We had always talked about everything and anything: now I had to watch every word I said. Like Craig, I would say that the day of Cyndie's funeral was the worst day of my life. No other day comes close. It was the oddest, most surreal funeral I have ever attended. There was no closure, no peace, no hope. We walked from the mortuary a short distance to the graveside for a service. Our family literally held Craig up on that short walk. At the graveside, he physically collapsed. No one had offered him a chair. I looked across that open grave to ward members on the other side and saw no judgment in their eyes, only questions. They knew that they were not seeing an ordinary event. Craig's physical collapse at that moment also symbolized to me his emotional, financial, and, especially, his spiritual collapse. I did not think he would ever be all right again. What a great tragedy, a great waste, and an unjust burden that had brought us to this! As did Craig, I felt forsaken.

My husband, Darrell, and I were going through some other problems during this time. We had two children on missions, which was fairly daunting financially. The car broke down, the refrigerator broke down, the washer broke down, and so on. We also had serious health problems to deal with in both our extended families. Our whole world seemed to be falling apart. I too began wondering about the windows of heaven. I had paid tithing as far back as I ever had any money, and I had paid it with a good attitude. I never thought the windows of heaven necessarily dispensed cash, though I've heard stories of that happening. But I thought, comfort, peace, knowledge, something . . . I was trying in every way I had ever heard to get spiritual knowledge and enlightenment, but the heavens seemed as brass. I felt that I could peel my prayers off the ceiling. I felt nothing was being heard.

It seemed the harder I prayed and tried, the worse things got. One day I read in Malachi the tithing promise—the windows of heaven. I continued to the next verse, "And I will rebuke the devourer for your sakes, and he shall not destroy the fruits of your ground; neither shall your vine cast her fruit before the time in the field, saith the Lord of hosts." (Malachi 3:11.) Well, I thought, I don't have any fields, and I don't have any vines. My crop is children, and the devourer is literally destroying one of them. What I did next is pretty audacious, but I was desperate. I opened my scriptures right to that page, laid them down on my bed, knelt down, and pointed out that verse to the Lord. "I have obeyed this commandment probably as perfectly as I've obeyed any commandment in my entire life," I said. "I'm not asking for cash; I'm asking that the devourer be rebuked."

Nothing changed immediately, but I felt heard for the first time in a long time. A few things in our life seemed to improve, but the thing we were most concerned with, Craig, did not visibly change. If we'd had to go forever without a washing machine, life would have been bearable. But the pain of watching what appeared to be the unjust destruction of a beloved child was more than I could handle. Craig deliberately challenged our faith, baiting us with questions that he knew we couldn't answer. We didn't have the final theological answers. All we had was our faith and our feelings. Perhaps he just wanted to hear us say, "We don't know."

Craig: Over the next two years, I seldom attended church, but I did mellow. I felt I had arrived at a flat, green plateau after a tough, rocky climb. I could finally relax. I buried myself in my work and didn't worry about church. I was living with friends and kept in touch with my family. That was my life: "All very nice, but not very good," as a Barry Manilow song puts it. I needed that plateau time—and the perspective it gave me—in order to heal. As the months went by, my calm turned to boredom. Nothing was really happening in my life. I was twenty-six years old and hoped only that by the time I retired in forty years I would have done something besides bury my face in a computer terminal. I didn't want to become a hermit. I began looking around and thinking about life.

About this time, the bishopric changed. The new bishop invited me in to talk to him. I had nothing against talking. After I'd given him a two-hour version of my story, he sat back, shook his head, and said, "One of my counselors is a therapist. Would you mind if I talked to him about this? I won't mention your name." I responded, "Mention my name. I'm not hiding this." I began meeting weekly with the bishop's counselor as my therapist. He pointed out to me that I had no right to feel betrayed, because bad things happen to everyone. Just because you're doing good things doesn't mean that good things happen to you; just because you're doing bad things doesn't mean that bad things happen to you. I was ready to listen.

My parents, who had taken a beating from me, still cared about me. I began to feel that I was coming in for a landing. That landing took me about two years. During those two years, I began dating a friend I had known thirteen years before. Karen and I are now married, and I am active again, serving as ward clerk. Bringing Karen into my life helped me, but I did not come back to the Church and become active again for her. My relationship with her undoubtedly gave me more reason to look at the Church, but my decision to come back was my own.

Marjorie: My husband, Darrell, and I consistently and specifically prayed for Craig. We kept his name on temple prayer rolls. Many times I would wake up in the morning and, just lying in bed, feel that I should fast for Craig that day. I could not go back and trace what was going on in his life on those days, but those feelings were there at times and I acted on them. I could see that talking did not help. In fact, Craig let me know that he needed space, and I gave it to him. I started being quiet, but I didn't think I should be quiet all the time, so I prayed to know when to be silent and when to speak. I prayed for courage and for guidance so that when I did speak I would know what to say. I received many more messages to be silent than to speak. I was walking a line, feeling the Spirit but still uncertain and even afraid. Walking by faith when I cared so much was hard.

The day after Cyndie's funeral happened to be Easter Sunday. As I sat trying to sort out all this pain, in a very tender spiritual experience I understood the Atonement in a new way. In a way that I cannot explain, I knew that someday Craig would be all right. Patience has never been one of my stronger virtues, but I accepted that message. I even thought, Maybe by the time he's forty or fifty, he'll be okay. But the road back looked so far, and I knew I couldn't fix this hurt. In fact, I felt I had been told that I couldn't fix it, that God would somehow heal Craig. I came to know that I probably could not even be a visible player in repairing the situation. Whatever I did had to be behind the scenes. I could pray for him, fast for him, and pray for others—even for the "chance encounter" or word that would touch his soul.

Several times during these years, Darrell had asked Craig to help him give blessings to various people, and Craig had declined. He didn't feel right about participating. Some time after that Easter day, Darrell himself was very sick and wanted a blessing. Our youngest son was too new an elder to know what to do alone. I approached Craig, who hemmed and hawed. I knew he wouldn't participate unless he felt right about it, but I also knew the great love and respect he had for his dad. If he could possibly push himself off the line, I knew he would do so. After some thought, he decided to help his younger brother give his dad a blessing. To me that decision was like the dove Noah sent out from the ark that returned with an olive leaf in its mouth. I couldn't see dry land yet, but I felt hope.

When Craig was talking with the counselor in the bishopric, and again when Karen came into his life, he seemed calmer, happier. I loved Karen then and I love her now for the happiness and calmness I see in Craig when he is with her. I came to trust that God knew what Craig needed to hear and when he would be receptive to hearing it. To this day, I don't know all the help Craig received, and perhaps he doesn't either.

Craig and Karen came over to tell us the day they became engaged. Of course, I hoped for a temple marriage, but I didn't want to offend him by asking. Craig knew what I wanted to know, but "Well, we're getting married" was all he said and then told us the date. Of course, I had to ask, "Where?" When he told me the Salt Lake Temple, it was for me closure and joy.

Craig and I realize that our story has a happy ending and that the happy ending came within two years of the absolutely worst day of both of our lives. Yet neither of us feels that we can say, "Go thou and do likewise," and guarantee a happy ending. Life has so many variables. So much is in God's hands. But even if Craig hadn't found happiness, this experience taught us as parents to walk that fine line between feeling personally responsible to fix whatever goes wrong and throwing up our hands and abandoning the situation. It was a lesson I would not have asked for, but one worth learning.

---
Notas:
[^1] Teachers can praise. "Peter, that was an excellent solution to that problem." "Janice, you turned in a perfect paper." "Kurt, that was another perceptive comment."
[^2] Teachers can criticize. "Laura, that handwriting was pretty sloppy." "Cut out the nonsense, Jim. You know better than that." "You are not thinking very clearly."
