Susette Fletcher Green, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women in the Covenant of Grace ( 1994)

Firstborn

MARGIE G. HOLMES [^1]

I write this essay because of Brian, his life and his death. Brian was our firstborn child. My husband and I received our master's degrees in June and our baby in August. I vividly remember our driving home from the hospital very slowly and carefully, Blair at the wheel, Brian cradled in my arms. We were filled with the desire to protect this child from harm and raise him well. In Colorado, Blair and I were far enough from extended family members to feel as if we were venturing alone into the unknown. I had grown up the oldest daughter in a family of ten children, so I was surprised at how overwhelming the responsibility of a completely dependent child was to me. Still, I was confident that my strong desire to be a good parent and our love would be enough to sustain his healthy development.

Brian grew to be a beautiful child—affectionate, sensitive, social, and intelligent. He was somewhat small of stature, and his muscle development was a little slow. As a result, his music, writing, and art were full of feeling but were not as technically proficient as he would have liked. He was also very independent—or should I say, headstrong—but he came by that naturally. Avoiding power struggles was one of our challenges in parenting, and we did so with varying degrees of success.

By the time he reached high school, Brian was doing excellent academic work and had a small circle of good friends. At the beginning of his junior year, however, all of that changed. He kept his old friends but acquired others, many of whose influence I worried about. His manner of dress, his study habits, and his sleep patterns changed as well. We knew he had some involvement with alcohol, tobacco, drugs, and the occult. To this day we're not sure how deep that involvement was or to what degree he suffered from depression or other emotional illnesses that went undiagnosed and untreated. Mostly he was angry, and nothing we did to try to help him seemed to work. Our lives were full of conflict, and our family was torn apart.

A month after his eighteenth birthday, Brian died in his sleep after drinking into the night with friends and taking some sleeping pills that an acquaintance had given him. I don't know if Brian intended to die and knew what amounts in combination would kill him or if he wasn't thinking very clearly and made a fatal mistake. There is evidence to support either conclusion, and the uncertainty surrounding his behavior and his death made coming to terms with the situation very difficult.

My reaction to his death involved a complex interplay of feelings. At first there was a kind of numbness, shock, bewilderment, and disbelief. There was a sense of unreality, of watching myself go through the motions of making funeral arrangements, dealing with the police, letting friends and family know what had happened, and noting, "Oh, look, I'm living through this." The numbness was interspersed with intense feelings of anguish. My chest and stomach would fill with a dark purple, tight pain, and I would sob and groan, especially in the shower where the warm water on my body helped release emotion. I also felt a great deal of shame, an overwhelming sense of failure at not providing Brian with what he needed to survive. On the day of the funeral, however, the music, prayers, and gentle words of friends filled me with peace, calmness, and comfort, and I felt sustained by the Spirit of the Lord.

As time went on and the reality of Brian's death became clearer, feelings of longing became very strong. I would have given anything to see Brian again, to touch him, to talk to him. I was filled with regrets about our conflicts and our inability to get the help he needed. I could remember clearly every mistake I had made with him, but I couldn't give myself credit for the years of devotion I had lavished on him—the stories read, the costumes made, the chauffeuring, the hugs, the praise, the birthday parties. I carried a lot of guilt, and although I wasn't angry at the woman who gave him the pills or the acquaintances who encouraged his destructive choices, I couldn't forgive myself or my husband for what we saw as our failures. We had a tremendous drive to make sense of all of this, to understand it, to find out what had happened and why. Placing blame and feeling guilt were a part of trying to make sense of a senseless act.

I also experienced a loss of ambition. The professional identity that I had clung to so fiercely to prevent being devoured by my roles as wife and mother became much less important. My work was helpful as a respite from grieving, but for several years my efforts were channeled primarily into restoring my sense of myself as a decent human being. Mostly that meant allowing myself time with good friends who loved me and time to read and think.

Another emotion that surprised me was a deadening of feeling toward my five other children. I had read with disbelief accounts of parents in earlier centuries whose attachment to surviving children was blunted by repeated losses of young children to disease. Now I understood how that could be. So much of my energy was tied up in mourning Brian's loss, even wanting to join him, that enjoying my other children was difficult. Ironically, the events that taught me with great clarity the worth of a soul, even a troubled, difficult soul, were blunting my feelings toward other precious souls. For a long time, I felt I had a foot in both worlds, this one and the next. Eventually that phase ended, however, and I was left with the exquisite awareness of the goodness of my children, an appreciation for the very ordinary things that they did, and the ability to love them for who they are rather than for what I had hoped they would be. That is Brian's legacy to his younger siblings: wiser, more patient and appreciative parents. Small things that had annoyed us before seemed very insignificant now. A missed piano lesson, an imperfect household chore, a B instead of an A grade—what did they matter? Our children were alive and learning and growing. They were good citizens and would grow up to marry, have children, hold down a job. Mundane things that we had assumed happened to everyone now seemed like great blessings. Enhanced gratitude for ordinary things is another aspect of Brian's legacy.

As the months and years passed, I felt a lot of concern for Brian's well-being. It's hard being a mother when there's nothing you can do for your child and you can't even get a letter to let you know how he's doing. I wondered if he was suffering, if he had been healed, if he was experiencing joy, if he was in the company of those who loved him. I worried about his spiritual well-being. I alternated between thinking, on the one hand, that he was suffering for his sins, that he was in Satan's clutches and would never be free, and on the other hand, that he wouldn't be punished for his choices because he had suffered enough in this life to pay for them, and that I and others were largely responsible for his problems anyway. My grieving was prolonged by my desires to take upon myself any suffering owed by my son, so that he wouldn't have to endure it.

I was reexamining my own relationship to God as well. When I allowed myself to be aware of it, I felt I had been abandoned in my time of greatest need. I'd followed the rules to the best of my ability, but it just hadn't worked out the way I'd been led to expect. Deep down I'd really thought that Mormons were special. If we tried hard enough to do what was right, terrible things wouldn't happen to us. What I learned was that none of us can do it all right. All of us sin and fall short of the glory of God—even Mormons who try very hard. And why should I be special? When Ethiopian children were starving to death and Jews by the millions had died in the gas chambers, why did I think I should be spared suffering? God loves the Muslim woman pregnant through rape just as much as he loves me. I developed a kinship with suffering people everywhere. The prisoner serving time for dealing drugs has a mother who weeps for him, too. The homeless, the mentally ill, the criminal are not from a different race. They're someone's sons and daughters. They are my brothers and my sisters, and we are all wounded by life. We are all in need of God's grace, his love, and his mercy.

Eventually I came to understand that Christ's atonement applies to me, to my son, to my husband—not just to other good people. I did everything I knew how, and it wasn't enough. Nothing we do will ever be enough. That's why we have our Savior. What a relief that has been to me. I don't have to do it by myself. I can love others because I am so grateful for the love that has been extended to me and I want to return it. I can hold the hands of my fellow sufferers. Most of the time I can't fix anything. But I can love, I can accept, I can understand, I can withhold judgment, I can cry with my friends. I can offer my heart, which truly is broken and softened, and my spirit, which truly is contrite. I don't worry about my image any more. When I failed at the most important task of my life and found myself acceptable before God and loved by my friends, it freed me to be more authentically who I am.

I don't worry much about Brian now. I trust that our heavenly parents love Brian much more than even I am capable of loving him. Surely they will provide him with the experiences he needs to become the righteous, magnificent son of God that is his potential. Surely he has been healed by experiencing the pure love of Christ upon leaving this life. If he is in prison, surely he has been taught by those who love him, and he will be able to choose the light, if he has not already done so. For me, this life is not so much a test as a school where we learn the good from the evil by our own experience. The suffering we endure here serves to turn our hearts to God and to one another, to prepare us for further growth in the life to come where Jesus Christ waits with open arms to embrace us, heal us, and lead us to the next stage of our growth.

---
Notas:
[^1] Teachers can praise. "Peter, that was an excellent solution to that problem." "Janice, you turned in a perfect paper." "Kurt, that was another perceptive comment."
