Susette Fletcher Green, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women in the Covenant of Grace ( 1994)

In Good Company

Obsessive Scavenger

MARILYN VAN KEIZERSWAARD [^1]

For my birthday my sister gave me a card that read, "I found the absolutely perfect birthday gift for you. I mean, it was one-of-a-kind. It was you! Then, I turned my back for just a second, and someone else snatched it up! Geez, those garage sales can be vicious." For Bosses' Day last year, the clerks in my unit gave me a gift certificate to the secondhand store up the street. I was ecstatic! In 1991, our family went on summer vacation to Montana. We don't know a soul in Montana, but I had read an article in Architectural Digest about a designer who goes back to her home state to buy items for clients in those wonderful antique and secondhand stores. Well, I had to see for myself. For Christmas a few years ago, my husband surprised me with a Jeep Cherokee. The first thing I said when I saw it was, "This will be great for yard sales."

I am, I confess, an obsessive scavenger. I take great pleasure in poking into thrift shops and rummaging through attics and basements. I find a yard sale irresistible. I've skidded to a halt at the mere glimpse of a wardrobe standing at the back of a driveway, a possible fulfillment of that little wish list I always carry in the back of my mind. I leap from my car, repeating rapidly, please don't be sold, please don't be sold, please don't be sold. I walk straight to it, my eyes searching for a sold sign. There is nothing. "How much?" I ask. "$150," she says.

The adrenaline is flowing fast. I keep my wits about me. "Will you take $125?" "Sure," she says. She tells me that it used to be painted pink and she stripped it. I am grateful. I would have paid $300.

In Manti, my family stopped at a small antique store, at my request, of course. We all moseyed in. My oldest daughter, Lisa, and I went one direction, and the other two kids followed their dad on another path. My eyes were scanning numerous shelves of glassware and dishes. I reached up and pulled down a yellow, purled creamer. I carefully turned it over to read the bottom and, more important, to find the price: $4. Warmly I brought it to my chest and held onto it tightly. We finished our looking and met up with the other half of the family.

"I see you found something," Neil, my husband, said, a teasing glint in his eye. Lisa said, "It was love at first sight."

My friend Gail and I stopped in at Deseret Industries one afternoon to scope out any possible treasures. In the furniture department we each laid claim to a chair. I found charm in a slipper chair, a small, upholstered chair with no arms and a large ruffle around the bottom. It was covered in a dark, royal-blue velvet with a big slit in the seat. The cotton guts were spewing out. I could picture it in the corner of my bedroom. The price was $1. Gail's chair was a wood-framed armchair with a worn leather-like seat and back. It was $2. A clerk walked by and announced that today all furniture was half price. We immediately divided by two in our minds. We put our chairs next to each other and debated on the purchase. Can we get them home? Will we really fix them up, or will they just sit in the basement? Will there be much sewing in order to re-cover them? Will we do it? We laughed at ourselves for debating about $1.50's worth of chairs. We could give them away or throw them away at that price.

Now the slipper chair, with a new, crisp chintz cover, sits with dignity in my bedroom. It is a one-of-a-kind piece with a story—and those are the pieces I value the most in the decorating of my home. I've put something of myself into them. They make my home different, unusual, unique.

The lure of decorating with orphaned furniture and discarded items is the challenge of making something out of nothing. It's my passion. Scavenging unlocks a creative excitement, a friendly sort of frenzy. It forces me to look at objects, to be inventive and resourceful. It keeps me open to the unexpected. And when I find myself bored with an item or desiring a change, I recycle it: I take the unwanted piece to a consignment store, or I trade it in for credit at my favorite secondhand store.

I have found that I am consistently attracted to certain treasures. They are like magnets. I now have many minicollections: bowls, colorful plates, creamers and pitchers, baskets, rugs, and Levi's 501 button-up jeans. Why jeans? Because they pay. Let me give you an example. This is a list of items I bought one Saturday last April:

4 pairs Levi's, $3.50

AT&T cordless phone, $5.00

2 pairs women's shoes, $1.50

1 new curling iron, $.75

2 pairs kids' Levi's, $4.00

1 pair boy's Docker's, $1.00

1 brand-new boy's Polo dress shirt, $1.00

1 pair Cole Haan ankle boots for girls, $5.00

1 pair Forenza pants, $2.00

1 Bundt pan, $1.00

1 yellow bowl, $1.00

1 dishtowel, $.50

I spent $26.25, but then I turned in the Levi's for cash at one of those places that says, "Will pay cash for Levi's," and received a check for $26.50 for my wares. I actually made $.25 that day.

I do not require the shine of the all-new. I am warmed by the gently worn and still affordable. Joe Ruggiero says in his book, Found Objects: "There is something of the scavenger, the historian, the child, the archaeologist, the functionalist, the resourceful treasure hunter, the collector, the recycler, the poet, and the artist in us all—and finding an object and reusing it in our homes is a way to give expression to these facets of our personalities." [^2]

I am an obsessive scavenger. I delight in poking into thrift shops and rummaging through attics and basements. I find a yard sale irresistible.

---
Notas:
[^1] Teachers can praise. "Peter, that was an excellent solution to that problem." "Janice, you turned in a perfect paper." "Kurt, that was another perceptive comment."
[^2] Teachers can criticize. "Laura, that handwriting was pretty sloppy." "Cut out the nonsense, Jim. You know better than that." "You are not thinking very clearly."
