Susette Fletcher Green, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women in the Covenant of Grace ( 1994)

You Tell Me Your Dreams, and I'll Tell You Mine: Bridging the Gap

EMMA LOU THAYNE [^1]

Cookies in the Airport

Cookies. Pepperidge Farm Milanos. Just a few. Perfect for between flights. Buy a bag to put down with your belongings on the seat between you and the man also waiting down the row. Pick up your mystery novel, get absorbed, pass the forty-five-minute layover with no anxieties.

Fine. But then . . . what? That man. What's he doing? Reaching for your bag of cookies? Opening it? Taking a cookie out! Surely not. You look his way, try to be nonchalant, wonder what in the world . . . ?

So you reach into the bag, take one yourself, looking intently at your book. Let him know just whose bag of cookies that is. But then . . . surely not again. He's taking another cookie. Two! Eating them as if he'd done nothing wrong. The nerve, the very nerve. And he looks like such a nice man, smiling the whole time, not at you, but at the newspaper he's reading. Or pretending to. Like you with your book, now far from your focus but a great prop.

He reaches for the bag, takes two more cookies. You do the same, neither looking at the other but seeing it all. Again him. Again you. Finally, the end. He reaches in, rustles his hand around in the bottom of the bag, and takes the last cookie! Oh come on! Do you accuse him? Give him a vampire look? Tip the empty bag over in his face? Make him somehow aware? At least let him know that you know?

He's standing up now, picking up his carry-on, and smiling. Smiling right at you, nodding as if he were the most pleasant man in the airport. Really? Not a word, not an apology?

You stand to gather your coat, your purse, your own carry-on. You fumble for your ticket as you head for the line-up to the flight. He's now gone off to another gate. May his destination be jail!

You keep fumbling, watching him go. Then . . . oh, come on. Not really. In your purse, a bag of cookies. [^2]

What little bit of talk could have cleared up whose cookies were being eaten? How much just plain interest instead of indignation could have suggested a simple question, some reaching across the chasm of misunderstanding? Might that exchange, any exchange, have turned the encounter into something worthwhile? Instead, two people went their ways the less for being reluctant, afraid, too proud or shy to find the truth.

Meantime, in the real world, in the Church, too often we know each other and our intentions by what we read in the papers or see on television or hear about in isolation from each other. The media generally tell the truth but often tell it with a slant. What "hearings" we have with each other are too often via preconceived assumptions, as with the cookies, focused on who really owns which.

What can such dividing bring about but divisiveness? We become victims of our own distancing. But bridging the distances can be difficult even among those who care about the same people and concerns. About a year ago, a meeting was going overtime inside the room at 47 East South Temple where the First Presidency and the Twelve meet. Our monthly meeting of the Deseret News board of directors always started at three sharp in that same room with President Thomas Monson and Elder James Faust presiding, with Bishop Victor Brown, Elder Neal Maxwell, BYU presidents Dallin Oaks and then Jeff Holland, advertising executive and former newsman Glen Snarr, bank president Bob Bischoff, and me.

For sixteen years I'd dangled or slumped to occupy the too-large leather armchair between the publisher and the editor of the newspaper and across from Bob Bischoff. He and I had laughed about being "token" on the board, he the one nonmember, I the lone woman. Those had been eventful years of budgets and bottom lines, advertising and circulation reports, attention to editorial and page makeup, news holes, news, and the price of newsprint, all recorded by Arthur Haycock, secretary to maybe five presidents of the Church, and then Lynn Cannegieter, secretary to President Monson. We had toured newsrooms and presses, watched writers move from the clatter of rooms full of typewriters to the muted ticking of computers as stories and artwork appeared on screens to be paginated, printed, and tossed on porches like fields of energy with information packaged for perusal.

I had loved and respected the whole process, and the people who made it happen. Yes, and also those men in the twelve chairs surrounding the table under the paintings of Joseph Smith and President Benson, who preside in our meetings as surely as if they were holding forth in person. Doors at either end opened into offices of, during my time, President Kimball and then President Benson, and at the other end, President Monson. At our assigned places, always the same, Russ Gallegos, comptroller, had positioned our black ring binders with tabbed agendas, minutes, reports, and checks we discreetly pocketed—or for me, pursed—before the prayer we took turns offering.

In those nearly seventeen years, we'd had more than two hundred meetings together in that room, plus as many other meetings in offices in that building or at the paper, plus dinners and lunches with and without spouses, Christmas cards and parties, summer cookouts, and the weddings and funerals of each other's loved ones. We'd shared pulpits and publishings, jokes and concerns. We were friends. And we were engaged in a common cause.

Now on our regular Wednesday at 3:00 P.M., those of us not General Authorities waited on the huge blue Oriental rug under the light of brass and mother-of-pearl sconces of the inner entry as those who daily occupied that pillared building finished their business inside. When the great brown door opened, we of the newspaper board automatically formed a line to go in. Out streamed two of the Church presidency, all the apostles, the heads of Relief Society, Young Women, and Primary, and the president of BYU, cordial as at a wedding, shaking hands as they passed. Only a few had the grab-and-move-along-as-fast-as-possible handshake acquired in too many confrontations with thronging.

I knew well all but the newest apostle, Elder Richard G. Scott. I'd been schoolmates with many; my husband, with others. I'd served on other boards, played tennis, been on civic and university committees, exchanged letters, and formulated plans, eaten with, laughed with, and been easy in each other's company over many more than those seventeen years on the Deseret News board. They now asked about my latest poem or a move of one of our children and said to say hello to Mel. I asked them about a wife with phlebitis or commented on a recent talk or book or act of goodwill, so many beyond our immediate family of concerns. Our exchange was first-name, warm, real.

That night I thought and have since, What good men and women, called to give their all to run this gigantic organization of a church. How I would hate to have their job, especially being subject to the kind of scrutiny that would beleaguer a microbe under a microscope. I felt the burden of their callings and the potential for misunderstanding between their deliberations and even the doings of the next meeting in the room they had just left—let alone between them and the millions who see them only on television or in the Church News, the millions whose stories they can never be privy to in the making of their worldwide decisions any more than those millions can know those decision makers and the backgrounds and personalities that have shaped them. How can the hundreds, thousands, now millions like me interpret and internalize every word and move in terms of our own unique findings and flounderings, securities and struggles, all of it as personal as the connection by media is distant?

Add to this the bludgeonings of opinion, misinformation, out-of-context assumptions, time pressures, overcommitment for most of us and certainly for them—and how do we expect to hear, let alone understand, each other's stories? And it is that hearing that can make all the difference.

I grew up in a church as personal and approachable as that lineup outside the door in the Church Administration Building. I believe still in the private exchange. I believe, too, that we need each other, those on either end of a handshake and genuine "How are you?"

I know that those men and women in authority offer different kinds of goodness for us to respond to, just as the others of us in our various callings and commitments would like to offer in return. And I know that we're wanting the same things for people of good faith and willingness to work for good causes. I know this because I could turn to other gatherings and receive the same cordiality and sincere concern as among those in the Church Administration Building, including those gracious women who work there daily to free the men for other things. Each of us is different, each of us trying our level best to paddle well and stay afloat in our seas of dailiness and demands and wanting to do better.

Why then the divisiveness? Why the labeling, the "us" and the "them," the questioning, the suspicion of each other's motives, the defining in and out of the gospel mainstream by judgments and surface evaluations? Across the board, alliances regarding the labels are formed and charges are made. When will we be able just to recognize that we do need each other? We need not agree with everyone's point of view, but we need to respect each person's right to have it without being suspected of being on the road to apostasy or dismissed as being too conservative. We need to hear each other's stories and to understand, not fear or ostracize or condemn each other. Are we delivered or doomed by our history of persecution? If the Church was a haven back in Joseph Smith's time, why not now? For all of us believers at the various stages of our questing as well as following?

Twenty years ago as part of the general board of the YWMIA, Joleen Meredith and I wrote a hymn, "Where Can I Turn for Peace?" [^3] As part of the 1985 hymnbook, it has been sung in many languages, several times by the Tabernacle Choir, and in various arrangements both recorded and live. Perhaps its wide acceptance has been because all of us feel sometimes under siege, asking,

Where can I turn for peace? Where is my solace When other sources cease to make me whole? When with a wounded heart, anger, or malice, I draw myself apart, Searching my soul? Where, when my aching grows, Where when I languish, Where, in my need to know, where can I run? Where is the quiet hand to calm my anguish? Who, who can understand? He, only One. He answers privately, Reaches my reaching In my Gethsemane, Savior and Friend. Gentle the peace he finds for my beseeching. Constant he is and kind, Love without end.

No, those in authority whose hands I shook and whose warmth I felt that day coming out of their meeting cannot be there for each of us to turn to. But like Christ, they can offer solace through listening to honest concerns of faithful members. In that comforting exchange we can send love to each other. In our prayers we can do the same. We must not push each other away at the very time when we need each other most. We must listen and talk and try to understand rather than judge and label.

More than anything, we must trust each other. Trust that our dreams can be told and that they likely will, in the big picture, be surprisingly alike.

In two recent conferences of LDS women from the East and the Midwest, I felt, instead of a sense of oppression, a sense of hope—hope for the power of prayer and the reality of answers to it. One woman suggested we circle on our calendars the last day of every month and set it aside for special prayers for women in Somalia, men in the UN armed forces, children in the streets, babies born and unborn, and for those in authority in our LDS faith to feel our longing to shake their hands and wish them well and offer the very best we have to the causes and dreams we share. This we can do, through the divine connections we know are as real as any handshake in any coming together anywhere.

Meanwhile, when the storms crash about me, I know that the ultimate turning for peace is inward. Like a lightning rod in a thunderstorm, I can stay grounded in what I know is true and let the threat of being harmed become instead the power through which I operate. I can trust in the love beyond end to supply the grounding, even as I return light for light, like a sparkler in the dark, saying, You are, I am, and we are eligible for any reaching our reaching might persuade.

Bless us all to see that light in each other and to let it bring us peace, not conflict, dreams, not nightmares, and hope, not despair, because we are willing to hear and see and care about each other, no matter what rooms we occupy or dreams we dare to dream. After all, it was Joseph's daring to ask and then to dream that started our meeting together in the first place.

---
Notas:
[^1] Teachers can praise. "Peter, that was an excellent solution to that problem." "Janice, you turned in a perfect paper." "Kurt, that was another perceptive comment."
[^2] Teachers can criticize. "Laura, that handwriting was pretty sloppy." "Cut out the nonsense, Jim. You know better than that." "You are not thinking very clearly."
[^3] Teachers can help or remediate. "Why don't you try it this way, Nancy?" "How do you think the situation would improve if you tried it this way, Tom?" "Barry, your long-division problems will be easier to solve if you line your numbers up more carefully."
