Susette Fletcher Green, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women in the Covenant of Grace ( 1994)

Armies of Light: A Report on Troop Morale

CHERYL B. PRESTON [^1]

In the world's "most profound, comprehensive, and systematic examination of war," [^2] Carl von Clausewitz, a nineteenth-century military philosopher, observes: "There is no higher and simpler law of strategy than that of keeping one's forces concentrated. No force should ever be detached from the main body. . . . Incredible though it sounds, it is a fact that armies have been divided and separated countless times." [^3] Divide-and-conquer is an age-old tool of military strategy; it is also the tool of the enemies of righteousness. President Gordon B. Hinckley warned, "We live in a society that feeds on criticism. . . . The enemy of truth would divide us and cultivate within us attitudes of criticism which, if permitted to prevail, will only deter us in the pursuit of our great divinely given goal." [^4]

Given such warnings, I have watched with concern an unnecessary divisiveness among sisters in the gospel. I am not searching for sameness in thought or action, but I long for greater harmony, cooperation, cohesive support, and mutual respect for our widely diverse thoughts and actions. As a teacher at Brigham Young University, I am in a position to read about, listen to, and watch women, especially Latter-day Saint women. Like war correspondent Lowell Thomas, who followed Colonel T. E. Lawrence during the Arabian Revolution, [^5] I can report on the condition of the troops.

Harmony among all members of the Church, women and men, is, of course, of critical importance. I focus here on unity among sisters because enormous cultural upheavals and the widening of opportunities and alternatives for women have fueled profound questions, first, about determining our own choices, and second, about accepting each other's varied choices. [^6]

Time of Focus on Women

We are at a critical juncture for women. As future generations chronicle our time, they will identify it by its focus on women. In the last few years, the world of scholarship has been inundated with material written by and about women in every field of study. [^7] Much of the writing about women is a celebration of women's thinking and experience, a previously undervalued contribution now recognized in all human endeavors. For instance, psychoanalytic sociologist Nancy Chodorow suggests that women's tendencies to be empathetic, relationship oriented, nonhierarchical, and consensus building will have a dramatic effect on the workplace. Carol Gilligan, professor of education at Harvard, identifies through psychological studies a feminine approach to moral reasoning. Christine A. Littleton, professor of law at UCLA, promotes equal legal recognition of "culturally female" choices, such as child rearing, rather than measuring women's worth against a male status quo. [^8] What a wonderful time this is to be a woman, when the study of women and women's ways is itself so rich!

Being watched evokes responsibility—and accountability. In the limelight, we have a chance to demonstrate that women's contribution to public life, as well as private life, will make the world a better place. How we treat each other in these unique times will matter.

Unfortunately, in this era of great opportunity, we are not always cohesive as women. There are fissures and cracks in the body of sisterhood. Through the cracks hiss themes that divide and alienate us. Consider some of these themes. Current popular magazines and newspapers contain a host of articles on "mommy wars," the inability of some women who work outside the home and some women who work inside the home to join forces in cooperative efforts. Titles such as "Working or Nonworking, Moms on the Defensive" from The Cleveland Plain Dealer or "Mommy Vs. Mommy" in Newsweek indicate that unrest is widespread. [^9] A July 1993 Wall Street Journal article reports an interesting swing of the pendulum: the stay-at-home mom is becoming a status symbol, similar, says the article, to a BMW, an economic luxury very few can afford. Those who are not "M.C." (maternally correct) are excluded from the clubs of fashionably wealthy at-home moms. [^10]

Current news articles also discuss the "queen bee syndrome," in which women who get a toehold on certain opportunities push back other women as though there is enough room only for one. [^11] A queen bee can also be the woman who "chooses female friends who are a little less attractive. She complains about women drivers while considering herself the next [Mario] Andretti. She treats male co-workers with respect while sharpening her claws on female colleagues." [^12]

Some women seek to dissociate themselves from females generally. They see other women as part of a "pink ghetto" of less significant people. [^13] Sociologists have also identified a "Not-Me Syndrome" including, for instance, elderly "women uncomfortable with their own aging [who] try to distance themselves from the notion" of aging by criticizing and belittling other old people. [^14]

Reasons for the Conflict

Why are we frequently harder on those with whom we have the most in common, those who should be our natural allies? Maybe it is because we consider ourselves "experts," better able to judge female behavior than male. Maybe we project our own insecurities and negative self-images on other women. Maybe the jealousies born of comparisons and competition sometimes plague us as women. We live in a world that cannot seem to acknowledge "different" without thinking "better" or "worse." Yet making others feel "unimportant, unspecial, wrong" is Satan's method of achieving counterfeit self-esteem. [^15] Maybe it is part of Satan's plan to separate us from those with whom our alliance would be most critical. In C. S. Lewis's The Screwtape Letters, the tempters try to convince the Christian to "direct [his] malice to his immediate neighbors whom he meets every day and to thrust his benevolence out to the remote circumference, to people he does not know." [^16] Then he can believe himself benevolent without ever having to practice benevolence. It is the real day-to-day cases that test us, not the theoretical and abstract ones.

I too am guilty. I remember, ten years ago, being so defensive about being a working mother (and so exhausted) that I allowed myself to construct attitudes, under the guise of self-defense, that unwittingly devalued my sisters who chose not to work outside the home. I realized that my feelings of hurt and exclusion prevented me from seeing that they too might be hurting and struggling to feel valued. One day a new sister moved into my neighborhood. She offered to help with my children's needs when I had to work late. I first heard in this offer not her tender concern for my well-being but a judgment that she would just have to take over for me because I was a bad mother. I have come, over time, to love her dearly and to know that she is filled with compassion, not judgment.

I have also come to admire my neighbor's considerable talent as a homemaker and companion to children—her own, mine, and others. The current focus on the voices of women is an opportunity for us to redefine greatness. We can celebrate and reinforce the value of those women—the achievers, champions, and geniuses—whose accomplishments are not reflected by official titles, degrees, trophies, or paychecks.

Laurel Thatcher Ulrich's A Midwife's Tale celebrates the life of a late eighteenth-century homemaker and midwife, Martha Ballard. Is it the distance in time that makes Martha Ballard's life of interest and value? What about the twentieth-century homemaker, school volunteer, and Cub Scout den mother? What about the Pulitzer-prize-winning scholar herself, who took nine years to obtain her doctorate, at a pace that allowed her time for commitment to family and the Church as well as to history? [^17] We should celebrate each other's chosen paths to and areas of excellence.

Examples from BYU Law Students

Instead of women championing women, I see defensive attitudes wedge themselves between sisters with much in common, much to share, and much need for each other's support. My particular path in life has heavily involved me with the women students at BYU's law school. Last semester, several of those women came to me in pain about what they perceived to be the negative judgments of other women.

One of those women has been exceptionally successful in law school. She has been offered a prestigious and high-paying job in a legal market so tight many have no jobs at all. She told a group of other women in her class that she had chosen to decline employment to stay home after law school with the baby she was expecting. Some of her classmates responded with disapproval and dismay. They suggested that she was letting them down and wasting herself.

Another student has struggled for years with the intense personal anguish of infertility. Recently, she asked me how she might respond to two well-meaning women in her Relief Society who had made the assumption that she had "chosen" to pursue a career in law instead of having children.

A third student spoke of her deep love and respect for her mother. Then she confessed that her mother's apparent admiration of her daughter's success in law school had become a source of discord and confusion. The mother, at age fifty, had begun to question the worth of her own life, to ask whether raising a family paled against her own daughter's academic achievements. The mother wondered whether encouraging her daughter's efforts would ultimately diminish her own value. My confused student was afraid that a recent dramatic drop in her grades might be a subconscious effort to please her mother by reducing the threat that her success seemed to pose.

Dehumanizing with Labels

Unlike those examples, most of the woman-to-woman combat I observe is fought at a distance, not among immediate friends and family. We find it easier to attack a faceless enemy. Rather than focusing on how we are similar as sisters, some focus only on the ways we are different. We put other women in broad categories of disapproval; and once we reduce a human being to a label, it is simple to criticize and condemn. [^18]

Like divide-and-conquer theory, the strategy of dehumanization is time-honored and well practiced. In war, soldiers must be taught to kill. Modern military leaders know that killing is made easier when the soldier can avoid thinking of the enemy as a human being. Soldiers are told again and again that the enemy "is not really a full human being like themselves; it is permissible and praiseworthy to kill him." [^19] In training, they persuade "gunners [to] fire at grid references they cannot see; submarine crews [to] fire torpedoes at 'ships' (and not, somehow, at the people in the ships); pilots [to] launch their missile at 'targets.'" [^20] Once we objectify our sisters as "things"—philosophies, activities, habits, or choices—we can sneak our condemnations past the place in our heart where our training in Christian love resides.

I have only one sister by birth. We are very close, notwithstanding great distance in miles and a thirteen-year gap in ages. I know her particular strengths and her weaknesses; I know the beauty of her soul and her occasional missteps; I know her complexities and her contradictions. Even so, I recognize that our heavenly parents know and love her in dimensions far beyond my ability to comprehend.

I occasionally find people who have met us both at different times. Some have not immediately recognized the connection, even though the minute we open our mouths my sister and I are virtually indistinguishable. What if such a stranger were to say to me, "I met a woman in Portland, Oregon, who looks something like you, but she was just a house frau, a cookie-baker type"? (Believe it or not, "house frau" and "cookie baker" are, I'm told, popular slang for deriding full-time homemakers and mothers.) How would I feel about this summary of the significance of my sister's existence? How dare someone reduce her to a one-dimensional label, even if it may reflect some portion of her activities.

I have recently heard a number of labels pinned on other women. Think of the face of your own sister and replace her name with one of these labels, which dismiss her as

just a spinster just a divorcee just a feminist just a libber just a house frau just a doormat just an old maid just a dried-up prune just a blue-hair just a weirdo.

To this list could be added an array of ethnic terms and unflattering adjectives.

While you are holding the image in your mind of your biological sister belittled under such a label, think again about who is your sister. In reality I have at least 3.4 million sisters who are the members of Relief Society around the world. Am I less alarmed when one of these sisters becomes the target of an effort to reduce her to a one-dimensional caricature rather than a multifaceted, brilliantly shining daughter of God? Perhaps the divisiveness of labels is part of what the prophet Nephi had in mind when he defined a righteous generation as being without "any manner of -ites." (4 Nephi 1:17.)

Our leaders in the war against evil have warned us repeatedly of the dangers of infighting. Elder Loren C. Dunn, for instance, asks us to "allow the qualities of mutual respect, mingled with charity and forgiveness, to influence our actions with one another; to be able to disagree without becoming disagreeable." [^21] Infighting saps our energy and distracts us from our common goals.

Direction from the Commander-in-Chief

Our code as Christian soldiers, our handbook of instructions, is the scriptures. They reverberate with pleas for solidarity and refraining from judgment. They urge us to seek the unity that underlies a Zion society. (4 Nephi 1:17; Moses 7:18.) They remind, "Every [sisterhood] divided against itself is brought to desolation; and a house divided against a house falleth." (Luke 11:17; see also Mark 3:24-25; Matthew 12:25.) As sisters in the gospel, we have promised to bear one another's burdens, not increase them. (Mosiah 18:8; Galatians 6:2.) Moreover, we have been told by "Christ, the royal Master, / [who] Leads against the foe" [^22] that, if we are not one, we are not his. (D&C 38:27.)

Women's particular criticism of other women is addressed in the scriptures. Jesus found it necessary to gently reprimand Martha for her efforts to require her sister Mary to conform to Martha's vision of proper behavior. (Luke 10:40-43.) Perhaps the message of the story of Mary and Martha was particularly aimed to our day. Martha's contribution in being "careful and troubled about many [good and important] things" is valuable. But it is "needful" also to allow Mary the "good part" she has chosen, which does not diminish Martha's contribution.

Forming a Lasting Alliance

As a law student in the 1970s, I had no women teachers; as a young lawyer in training, I had no women mentors. Now, I have been given a second chance. I learn more than I ever teach from the women who sit in my classrooms and who seek with me to find answers to the complexities of both life and law. Their insights and aspirations inspire me. I happened upon this declaration of personal commitment written this spring by one of my sister-students, Alison W. Brady: "Women are moral agents capable of choosing to recognize their similarities and affiliations with one another. I choose to do that. No other worldly association can benefit as much by my acknowledgment and preference to ally myself with it. I consider it a cherished obligation to stand with women of the world to eradicate injustice and promote righteousness."

The strength we need to resist evil and to find joy in these troubled times can be had only in unity with good and righteous women everywhere—our sisters—standing hand in hand encircling the world. Imagine the beauty and the power of a harmonious chorus of women's voices, in every language, and from every corner of the universe, singing boldly the third verse of the hymn "Onward, Christian Soldiers":

Like a mighty army Moves the Church of God; [Sisters], we are treading Where the Saints have trod. We are not divided; All one body we: One in hope and doctrine, One in charity. Onward, Christian soldiers! Marching as to war, With the cross of Jesus Going on before. [^23]

---
Notas:
[^1] Teachers can praise. "Peter, that was an excellent solution to that problem." "Janice, you turned in a perfect paper." "Kurt, that was another perceptive comment."
[^2] Teachers can criticize. "Laura, that handwriting was pretty sloppy." "Cut out the nonsense, Jim. You know better than that." "You are not thinking very clearly."
[^3] Teachers can help or remediate. "Why don't you try it this way, Nancy?" "How do you think the situation would improve if you tried it this way, Tom?" "Barry, your long-division problems will be easier to solve if you line your numbers up more carefully."
[^4] Teachers can also respond with nonjudgmental, neutral comments. "Uh huh." "All right." "Go on." "Okay."
