Susette Fletcher Green, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women in the Covenant of Grace ( 1994)

Punctuation of the Divine

LINDA HOFFMAN KIMBALL [^1]

As a writer I get a chuckle out of this song that Garrison Keillor, the radio celebrity, sings:

Come along boys and have a glass a cider I'll tell you what it's like to be a freelance writer . . . Writing is easy and the money is great But it's hard to know how to punctuate . . . Comma ti yi yippie yippie yay yippie yay Comma ti yi yippie semicolon. [^2]

I can't say I share his experience with the pay scale, but I do agree with him that learning to punctuate is tricky. When you work with words, it is sometimes hard to know when, for best effect, something should be a question or a statement or a declaration or a phrase. I think grappling with parts of speech and punctuation provides some interesting metaphors for our relationship with God.

Take the exclamation point, for example. We need a few of these in our lives. We need some givens—some core, unembellished, irrefutable YESes to anchor our beings. We need to recognize them and be thankful for them and celebrate them.

One of my favorite passages of scripture is in the book of Exodus, in which Moses talks to God in the burning bush. Moses asks what name God goes by so that he can know how to introduce God and explain this experience to the children of Israel waiting at the base of Mount Sinai. Exodus 3:14 gives God's response: "I AM THAT I AM." The point is clear. God just is. God describes himself as a verb, a state of being. He is not preoccupied with defining himself. Succinct, to the point, vital and vibrant—God is the ultimate given.

The restored gospel provides other exclamation points for me.These are things that I treasure as revealed truths, seared into my own heart by the Holy Spirit. These are the reference points by which I judge everything else.These exclamation points are the things that, in Mormon parlance, I have a testimony of. Some aspects—like life beyond this, or the power of prayer, or the confirmation that a specific calling is God's idea and not just the bishop's—are brilliant, beautiful sparks flashing from and orbiting around these precious exclamation points. Though I wish I were surer about some things, apparently I have enough to go on for the moment. I would prefer more, but I have been granted what I have been granted and more will come as the Lord sees fit.

I am increasingly comfortable with this minimalist view. Partly this comfort comes from remembering the great and first commandment—to love the Lord with my whole being—and its companion pledge—to love my neighbor as myself. Partly this comfort comes from studying the eleventh chapter of Third Nephi, in which Christ gives over and over and over again a profoundly simple explanation of the gospel. And partly this comfort comes from learning the difference between exclamation points and other punctuation marks.

Take the period, for example—the full stop. I do not like them very much. During the course of my twenty-two years in the Church, I have heard a number of things presented as statements of fact, neat and complete with a full stop at the end. I weigh those things against my personal givens—my exclamation points. Sometimes I accept such sentences, and they help me in my life, in my relationships, in my communion with God. "Visiting teaching bonds sisters." "The Sabbath should be a separate kind of day." "Offer thanks for the food you eat." These are just a few sentences that I find really work.

There are others that I scratch my head about but go along with. Some examples of this type might be "Little children should be present during sacrament meeting," "Men should bounce babies when blessing them," or "Knowing how to brandish a glue gun is a vital homemaking skill."

There are other statements, made usually by well-meaning people who take complex issues, analyze them, sum them up, codify them, and lay them to rest. Period. Such statements are not limited to matters of faith. It is part and parcel of life in our Western civilization to want to define and resolve things. We as a society are uncomfortable with too much open-endedness. A Time magazine article about statistics gives a good example of this mind-set: "Mitch Snyder, the late activist for the homeless, once admitted that his figures on people without shelter were essentially meaningless. 'We have tried to satisfy your gnawing curiosity for a number,' he told a congressional hearing, 'because we are Americans with Western little minds that have to quantify everything in sight, whether we can or not.'" [^3]

But when it comes to my spiritual life, putting periods where they don't belong can be dangerous to my spiritual health and well-being. I am wary of them. An example of that would be the proliferation years ago of explanations of why blacks could not hold the priesthood. I never heard an explanation that didn't make my heart ache or make me feel diminished as a sister. The only answer that fit at all was "We don't know." And HALLELUJAH! God hit the delete key, got rid of that period, got rid of that whole sentence, and set us to the work of widening our margins and getting ready for more.

Ours is a gospel that teaches believers to seek for further light and knowledge. That means that some sentences that seem to have periods on the end really need ellipses. Dot Dot Dot . . . Stay tuned! More to come! To be continued!

This ellipses aspect of the gospel is evidence of something alive, growing, dynamic. It is the hallmark of that marvelous concept of "continuing revelation." I am reminded of the time when I made bread dough with Rapid Rise yeast, snapped a plastic lid on the bowl, and put it in the refrigerator. A few hours later I opened the fridge and saw a huge, billowing, beige goo that had muscled its way up and over the Tupperware, casting the puny lid aside, and edging its way toward a terrified bunch of broccoli. Where there is life, nothing as ineffectual as a plastic lid—or a poorly placed period—can stop the flow.

Joseph Smith used a more poetic description: "What power shall stay the heavens? As well might [people] stretch forth [their] puny arm to stop the Missouri river in its decreed course, or to turn it up stream, as to hinder the Almighty from pouring down knowledge from heaven upon the heads of the Latter-day Saints." (D&C 121:33.)

There is much I don't understand about Joseph Smith, but I believe he understood the life, the robustness, the fluid dynamics of God's gracious outpouring to seekers of truth. Think of what we now understand better because as a boy he asked a question in a grove of trees; because his wife—fed up with a nasty clean-up job after tobacco-spitting men—prodded him to ask more; because with a friend he asked for insight into what heaven is like. I believe Joseph Smith was a champion of questions and ellipses and exclamation points. I believe that in those early years there was such a flood coming in that there was neither the desire nor the time to put a period down. It isn't surprising to me that the Book of Mormon punctuation was put in after the fact.

In our lives now we ask God questions. They come in all shapes and sizes from "Where did I put my keys?" to "What is the meaning of life?"

Some are not really questions that have answers but realities that defy analysis. For example, why is it that only by admitting my weaknesses I can become strong? Why is it that by letting go I gain control? How is it that when I take on his yoke, my burden is light? These all fall into the category I like to call "The Spiritual 'Huh?'"

As I mentioned, our Western approach to life gets a little twitchy with this kind of thing. Oriental philosophy thrives on it. As we know, anything that is true—regardless of where it is found—is part of our gospel. I hear truth humming in this proverb from the Tao Te Ching by Chinese philosopher Lao Tsu:

Under heaven nothing is more soft and yielding than water. Yet for attacking the solid and strong, nothing is better. It has no equal. The weak can overcome the strong. The supple can overcome the stiff. . . . He who takes upon himself the humiliation of the people is fit to rule them. . . . The truth often sounds paradoxical. [^4]

In my own life I have plenty of questions. Sometimes my assessment of where they fit on the "lost keys to the meaning of life" scale does not mesh with God's assessment. Take, for example, the odd interweaving of our dog with my husband's career plans.

Last summer our big, goofy, wonderful eighteen-month-old puppy got sick. Very sick. After three months of watching this poor pooch dwindle despite considerable efforts by specialist veterinarians and considerable expense on our part, we had to have him put down. We were all heartsick. I felt as if some major organ had been removed from me. The autopsy revealed the dog had an inoperable brain tumor. The breeder, who was also saddened by the news, promised us another puppy, although she said she would not likely have a litter for another year.

Meanwhile, my husband, Chris, decided to shift careers. Last fall he began interviewing for teaching jobs at various places around the country. Weighing all the pros and cons was exhausting. God seemed not to have a preference, and we were left to sort things out without any particular divine nudge. I pleaded for some direction.

During the final month of interviewing, I began to get what most people would call "baby hungry," although in my case it was "dog hungry." It even seemed something worth mentioning in my prayers. I told friends I had the odd sensation that when we finally made a decision about my husband's professional life, the breeder would call and say her dog was pregnant. There was something cosmic—something in the vibes—about a dog for us, and it had something to do with the job.

While Chris was at his last interview, the breeder called. She had an eight-month-old puppy whose owners could no longer give it the attention it needed. Were we interested in owning him?

We didn't need to think twice. We went out the next day and brought home our beautiful, obedient, housebroken puppy, whom we named Worthy.

We still didn't know which job to take. Nothing seemed resolved in that department. I asked myself, Why doesn't God answer my weighty prayers about something as important as our professional future, my children's social, educational, and spiritual environment, my own network of friends and loved ones? With all of these questions bombarding him all my waking hours, why does he brush them aside and send us a dog?

I believe it was God's way of giving me a Bart Simpson kind of message: Don't have a cow . . . have a puppy!

I asked God about this one night at my bedside, and we had a most delightful conversation. I had the sense that God was saying, "What I really want to know is what kind of questions you will ask about this career shift. I want to see what things you think are important to consider as you face this decision. I want to see how you sort out things, weigh all the options, choose your priorities. And, Linda, you are doing just fine. You will be OK."

I felt good humor from the Lord. I felt acceptance. I felt embraced by a love I can't express adequately.

God knew the hole left inside me when our first dog died. He gave me this new dog as a gift to a grieving heart and as an evidence that he knows me intimately, knows my circumstances, and knows my questions. What he most wants me to know is that I am known and I am loved.

I also believe that he who knows when sparrows fall, heard the unbarked prayers of a dog and placed Worthy with us for protection and affection and for that creature's best welfare. (I have a dot, dot, dot after that one.)

Eventually we did come to a decision about where to go. We will be moving to Boston in a few months. I still haven't felt a burning confirmation that this was "the right" choice, but after my little bedside exchange, I'm not really expecting one. All things considered, the future looks bright indeed.

I want to tell you about another time involving my questions to the Lord, a time in the past that looked very gloomy. Some years ago a string of horrible things happened. My dear former boyfriend committed suicide. A Church leader I knew well was excommunicated for adultery. A very close family friend died in a plane crash, leaving a wife and two young children.

I was shaken to the core. Sentences that I had taken as facts crumbled into dust: Church leaders lead righteous lives. Life is good. Living a godly life can protect you.

Even my exclamation points disappeared in a fog. I wondered whether anything I had ever trusted was real. Though I kept doing the "iron rod" things—like going to Church, doing my visiting teaching, and showing all the external signs of faith—internally I was gutted. Nothing seemed real or true or trustworthy anymore.

It was also at this time that a relative started sending me articles about why the Book of Mormon couldn't possibly be divinely inspired. I remember kneeling night after night—in case there really was a God—following that admonition we always hear, "I would exhort you that ye would ask God . . . if these things be true . . . " You know the one.

One night in particular I knelt and prayed again for the bzillionth time, "Is the Book of Mormon true?" As I got up to brush my teeth, something communicated to me these precise words: "You're asking the wrong question. What you need to ask is 'where does the Lord want you?'" No sooner had the question been formed than the answer was clear: "God wants me here in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints."

To me that was evidence not only that there was a God out there but that this God knew me! He knew me so well that he, being my Editor as well as my Creator, not only heard my question but rephrased it for me. He knew my questions and my worries and my fears, and he accepted me, valued me, approved of me—and wanted me in this Church. He didn't answer my intellectual questions—there are still a lot of things I don't understand—but he gave me what I needed to move ahead out of that abyss of grief and confusion. He gave me faith to move despite unanswered questions.

I am impressed by God's creativity in communicating to me. Sometimes when I think I am doing things the right way—praying the proper prayers, asking the expected questions, reading the predictable sources—God will surprise me with insight from unexpected sources—a dog, a rephrased prayer, a spiritual impression from a Chinese philosopher or a cartoon character. God is so much more resourceful, so very expansive, so much bigger than I generally give him credit for.

One night when I was distraught about some other unresolved issue in my life, I picked up the Bible in the translation familiar to me from my childhood. I read a passage in Psalms and knew God was speaking directly to me. It sums up for me the mood I need to have in order to cope. This is Psalm 131: "O Lord, my heart is not lifted up, my eyes are not raised too high; I do not occupy myself with things too great and too marvelous for me. But I have calmed and quieted my soul, like a child quieted at its mother's breast; like a child that is quiet is my soul." [^5]

I have fun exploring the symbolism of parts of speech and punctuation in my dealings with God. Of course, God is far beyond the limits of language, clauses, or tenses. I thank him for enveloping me in a nurturing love that quiets my sometimes troubled soul. I praise him for knowing me well enough to customize my answers—even my questions. I celebrate a living God who knows me intimately and who is not finished with me or with his work yet. I rejoice in the divine love evident in every answer, every question, every silence, every nuance of communion with my God.

---
Notas:
[^1] Teachers can praise. "Peter, that was an excellent solution to that problem." "Janice, you turned in a perfect paper." "Kurt, that was another perceptive comment."
[^2] Teachers can criticize. "Laura, that handwriting was pretty sloppy." "Cut out the nonsense, Jim. You know better than that." "You are not thinking very clearly."
[^3] Teachers can help or remediate. "Why don't you try it this way, Nancy?" "How do you think the situation would improve if you tried it this way, Tom?" "Barry, your long-division problems will be easier to solve if you line your numbers up more carefully."
[^4] Teachers can also respond with nonjudgmental, neutral comments. "Uh huh." "All right." "Go on." "Okay."
