Susette Fletcher Green, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women in the Covenant of Grace ( 1994)

Redeeming Reality

Redeeming Reality: Images of Women's Lives

SHARON LEE ESPLIN SWENSON [^1]

I believe there are connections on many levels between photographs and feelings. Something happens to us when we take photographs, when photographs are taken of us, and when we look at photographs. My comments have a scholarly dimension based on several concepts currently important in the academic criticism of film and photography, [^2] but my comments are also very personal, involving photographic images of me and my family. I'm using myself as an example, you see, hoping that you will feel an irresistible temptation to pull out your own family photo album and look at yourselves in a new way.

Does that sound dangerous? Well, reality is dangerous, but we're talking about redeeming reality, redeeming it from its inevitable fall into distortion and despair, redeeming it into revelation. What I'm talking about is becoming seers in its broader meaning of "see-er," one who sees. By profession, I'm a seer. I really love to look. It's been my blessing to find the ideal job. I get paid to look at movies and photographs all day and then talk about them.

Seeing a photograph—looking at a photograph—seems like an automatic action. It's something that occurs instinctively, naturally, physiologically: I look at you, you look at me. But seeing is really a social act, one mediated and shaped by our culture. Our eyes register the image, but what our brain registers is the meaning of the image. It assigns function, significance, even symbolism to the physical image that our eye scans physiologically.

What is that meaning? It is identity. We construct our own identities, those of other people, and that of the world we inhabit by creating meaning for images as we identify and label them. This interaction is two-sided. Let me give you an example. I'm standing in front of you speaking. Although you assign meaning to what you see, I constructed this image that you're seeing. I thought about what I'd wear, how I wanted to look, how to do my hair, how much make-up to put on. I always wear nylons at BYU and never wear sandals, because I want to have the credibility that comes from a formal, take-charge, in-control image. It took a lot of time and energy to put myself together. I want to impress you. I want to be believed. (I'm revealing my vulnerability and insecurity on this issue because even though I know it's silly, a part of me actually believes I can create my identity by how I look. I can control what you think of me and even who I am by what physical image I present.)

So I drove this carefully, even artfully, constructed image of myself to BYU today, and one of my colleagues just told me I'd overdone my mascara. Well, of course I panicked. Was it true? Was I coming across as a circus clown instead of an impressive, professional professor? And mascara! My most vulnerable point!

You need to understand that mascara is important to me, very important. When I was learning what I should look like, I pored over pictures of women. (I still do.) I looked at pictures of women in magazines, in movies, on television, on book covers, and on the back of Kotex boxes. Every beautiful woman, every smart woman in every one of those images had eyelashes. But the awful truth I learned as a teenager was that my eyelashes are so pale that they look as if I was in some other line when they were handed out. So today I suppressed my moment of panic. I did not race to the restroom and scrub my face. I tilted my head a little to the left, batted those overdone eyelashes, cooed, "Oh, really?" and sailed off down the hall. I would rather trust the eyelash image I have in my head than the image in my colleague's head. And that's what you're seeing now: the constructed image of myself as a professional woman. With eyelashes.

Photographs show us our surfaces, how other people perhaps see us, but they can also show us ourselves if we learn to see. Photographs are links between the physical and spiritual worlds even though they seem to be renderings of physical experience—as nonspiritual as you can get. A light-sensitive, flexible medium (the film) must be exposed to a source of light within a machine that controls the exact amount of exposure. It's a mechanical and chemical process. What could be more physical? But photography is a metaphor for identity because that's the exact process required for us to grow spiritually. A light-sensitive, flexible medium (that's us) must be exposed to a source of light (the Spirit), under circumstances that create meaning (the gospel and our earthly experiences).

To me, these parallels are very profound. The vision required to look at photographs summons meaning into existence, in the same way that God's saying, "Let there be light," summoned into existence the illumination by which all the rest of creation became aware of itself. The creation of meaning, the creation of identity, can be godlike in the same way.

Now, let me explain some principles related to film theory that are important to understanding and reading photographs. First, photographs have the potential of making us see reality afresh. Siegfried Kracauer, a scholar of German films of the thirties, described the power of visual images to redeem physical reality. [^3] Most of us have probably had the experience of looking at a photograph and suddenly being struck by something that is a common part of our world but that we have never really noticed before—the extraordinary beauty of ordinary leaves on an ordinary tree, which we see for the first time in close-up. A photograph has the potential of making us see a physical reality that is lost to us in our day-to-day life.

I'm convinced that even the most ordinary photographs are important. Sometimes when we look at snapshots, we discount the ones that do not record singular, important occasions such as baptisms, weddings, or anniversaries. More often, we simply didn't get the camera out for events we are likely to forget without a photo of them. The dailiness of life is dismissed as too ordinary. Laurel Thatcher Ulrich won the Pulitzer Prize for history for her book A Midwife's Tale, which is based on the journal of a New England woman named Martha Ballard in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. It was a diary that many other historians had overlooked or minimized because it was so ordinary, with such short entries about such very common events. "It is in the very dailiness, the exhaustive, repetitious dailiness, that the real power of Martha Ballard's book lies," Ulrich commented. [^4] I suggest that Laurel's own life as the mother of five children, as a religious woman, as a housekeeper, a gardener, and a quilter uniquely prepared her, in a way that male historians had not been prepared, to perceive Martha Ballard's reality and interpret it for an audience two hundred years later. Laurel redeemed Martha Ballard from obscurity by making us see the meaning of her everyday physical life. Photographs have the potential of making us see our own reality afresh.

Second, semiotics, or the science of signs, has made us aware that we see by interpreting signs that are part of encoded meaning, systems, or codes. Semioticians argue that no element or aspect exists independently from all others; rather, each aspect and its meaning exist only in relation to something else. Our reality, in other words, is a complex social act that is created by experience, image, and the meaning we assign to both. The relevance of this concept to reading photographs is obvious. Photographic images are always related to a reality that preexisted and to our own feelings about it. My feelings about my eyelashes, for instance, cannot be understood separately from photographs of women with long, beautifully darkened and beautifully curving eyelashes. But I don't have that team of photographers and make-up people to sustain the eyelash reality I want, which probably accounts for my colleague's comment on my mascara.

A third relevant concept from film theory is that of "the gaze." Film theoreticians argue that the camera has a controlling gaze or point of view. It records whatever it is focused on, which means that it calls that chosen set of images into being in a specific way, emphasizing certain powerful relationships, while ignoring all else. This gives the camera immense force. But in addition to the physical objects it records, it simultaneously calls into being certain meanings, or subjective realities. Decades of Hollywood films have portrayed women as pretty and passive objects to be perceived or gazed at by active men. Film critics argue that one effect of years of film watching has been to objectify norms of female identity. Both women and men see men as acting subjects in a scene, women as objects inviting the viewer's appraisal. In other words, we as women think of ourselves more as objects when we see a photograph or image of ourselves than men think when they see photographs or images of themselves.

Fourth, in addition to recording reality, giving more privilege to some realities than to others, and creating meanings for those realities, photographs can actually replace reality. The social critic Susan Sontag talks about how photographs function as metaphors or substitutes for our experiences. [^5] When we go on a trip, we're so busy taking photos and capturing images that we don't have the experience itself. On a vacation, have you ever been distracted from contemplating the view by the request to "Hold it there. Let me take a picture! Smile!" And after a while you want to ask the shutterbug to take a leap over the edge of the nearest historic landmark because you want to have the experience of the place, not take photographs of it.

Let me give you an example even closer to home. It's time for the family portrait. The children are being bratty, your husband isn't helping, the photographer is losing patience, and while you're trying to comb somebody's hair for the third time, you hiss under your breath, "I'll snatch you bald-headed if you move one more time!" Then you turn around, curve your arm lovingly around this child, and smile angelically for the camera. Now what's reality—your feelings at the moment or that image on film? The answer, of course, is both.

Fifth, interaction with a photograph has a spiritual quality to it because of the multiplicity of meaning that a photograph contains. Even though they are flat, two-dimensional surfaces, they contain history, a record of events and emotions. They activate memory. Looking at any family photograph or snapshot of yourself creates an interaction between the person you are now and the person you were then. A photograph moves you through time and space. I want to argue that this interaction is a spiritual one. When we understand reality from a different perspective, there is always an opportunity for the Holy Ghost to speak to us. I want to insist on the aspect of spirituality. The Spirit speaks to us through the dailiness of our lives, not just the Mount Sinais of them. Often the most ordinary photographs have the most to tell. Yet we frame the pictures of reunions, weddings, or graduations and file away the photos of the four-year-old with a milk moustache or the six-year-old playing with the kitten on the back lawn because they're so ordinary, so daily. When we see with our spiritual eyes, we can see reality more accurately and assign meanings of greater significance.

To summarize the academic part of this paper, then, there are five principles of film criticism that are useful in helping us view photographs. First, photographs can create reality afresh for us. Second, we see by decoding a system of signs and meanings that come from our past experience. Third, the gaze of the camera helps create that system of signs by what it focuses on, or privileges, and by what it excludes. Fourth, photographs can actually replace reality, with image becoming more important than reality. Fifth, there is a spiritual aspect of interacting with a photograph because it can be an invitation for revelation.

Let's consider for a moment the process of having a photograph taken of ourselves. I try in every way I can think of to arrange reality, and then I collaborate with the camera to arrange reality still further. But if you're like me, you always see only the flaws. Do I see my perfect mascara, my professional and elegant suit, my sophisticated yet feminine earrings? I do not. I see my double chin, the bags under my eyes, and those insidious gray hairs threading their way through my carefully constructed chignon.

Only once did I succeed in creating a flawless image. Five years ago, soon after I was hired at BYU, the Public Communications office took my photograph for a story. Well, it's going to be my obituary photograph thirty years from now. A student of mine who specialized in make-up did my face so I had cheekbones. I sat up tall, and the photographer said, "Now, turn your body this way. Twist your head this way. Now tilt your chin up." And my double chin disappeared! That was a miracle. This was the photograph that I want everybody to believe I was forever! In fact, my shameless fascination with that photograph may have been the genesis of my remarks today.

But that was the only time I managed to pull it off. Imogene Cunningham, a wonderful portrait photographer, was speaking from experience when she said, "No one really likes to have a picture of themselves. Anyone else. But we don't look good enough." I know exactly what she meant. For how many of us is the first look at a photograph a reflex of dangerous materialism? "If I just had better make-up!" "If I bought a new dress . . . ?" "After I lose five pounds . . ."

That perfect photograph of me was not me. In fact, it wasn't even a replication of the way I feel inside. It was an arrangement of an image. It showed me what I desperately wanted to be. But the real me is more complex. True, one layer is the image of that beautifully arranged woman; but another layer is the reality of the double chin, the bags under the eyes, and the gray hair. Yet another layer is someone who needs—and sometimes has—the gift of charity to the extent that she can accept and love both the vain and glossy image and the desperately insecure and self-critical woman. The Spirit tells me that's the right way to look at ourselves. We should look with the eyes of love.

Photographs of ourselves and others are wonderful tools for insight, if we look with the eyes of love. We can move beyond our past experiences, learn a new semiotics, change our gaze to a loving one, recreate, reinterpret, and redeem our reality. Photographs freeze a moment in time for us. They hold up a reality for us to look at. If we look at them with the eyes of love, we can redeem our inner reality from the outer image.

For example, I cherish a photograph of my daughter Caitlin, age eleven, holding her kitten, and standing next to my father on our front lawn. I took this photograph, admired it, and tucked it into the shoebox where we store mementoes. The kitten grew up, became a cat, and died. Caitlin also grew up and, at age fifteen, became so angry with me that she was threatening to leave home. When I thought she might actually start packing, I sneaked that photograph out of the shoebox in her room because I wanted something to remember her by. (If you have adolescent daughters, you know what I'm talking about.) It was important to me to have this image of my beautiful daughter at age eleven, standing with her grandfather, worried only about lifting up her kitten's face so the camera could get it. It comforted me when I had a daughter who hated me most of the time, and whom, to be honest, I hated part of the time, too. (It was certainly poor planning for God to schedule her adolescence and my midlife crisis at the same time.)

It was important during that time to look at photos of the eleven-year-old Caitlin and at Caitlin as a baby, a beautiful gift that God gave me and my husband, Paul, and Caitlin at age four, holding her baby brother. I could see her smiling at the world, smiling at me, and suddenly Caitlin was back with me. The daughter I loved was real to me. And I could think to myself, She'll be back. And guess what? Now she's almost sixteen, she didn't leave home, we've both survived, and we even have whole sequences of days when we get along and like each other. The eyes of love saw a truer image than our contemporary reality.

I dug deeper into my own photograph album and found a snapshot of a very skinny boy standing on the seat of a tricycle in a swim suit, every rib showing, holding up his arms with his fists clenched to show off his (nonexistent) weight-lifting muscles. Beside him stands a little blonde girl in a hula skirt. That is my brother Fred, age eight, and me, age nine, dressed up for a neighborhood circus in Cedar City, Utah. Fred was the strong man, I the exotic Hawaiian. I was only thirteen months older, but I felt like his mother, responsible, protective, utterly loving.

And then I remember how angry I was a few years later when I thought, "Why does he get all the breaks? He got to drive the car before I did, even though I'm a better driver and more responsible, just because he was a guy." Then I remember how frustrated my brother felt because all his schoolteachers had taught me the year before and expected him to excel at academics the way I did. And I felt equally unhappy as his appendage because he became the fabulous baseball and basketball player, and everybody said, "Oh, you're Freddy's sister." This mutually resentful stage of our lives lasted for about ten years.

But now Fred is six foot eight. He has a very impressive beard, and nobody talks to either one of us about sports or academics too much. When I defended my dissertation a few weeks ago, I was totally burned out, exhausted, and fed up with academics; but Fred was excited enough for both of us. He radiated pride and delight. When the committee told me I had passed and I staggered out of the examination room, Fred was bouncing up and down, all six-foot-eight of him, grinning from ear to ear, and asking, "Can I call Mom and Dad and tell them? Can I?"

Now, that's quite a bit of experience and emotion to be generated by a snapshot of a skinny little eight-year-old in a swim suit, posing like a circus strong man. But it was all there in the photograph for me when I looked at it.

Now let's consider that little blonde girl in the hula skirt. I can't really see her. I never looked like that. I was never that pretty. No matter what kind of skirt I was wearing, I was never that cute. I was a clumsy, awkward, "don't-know-what-to-do" girl who spent her whole adolescence wishing she were radically different. So who is this very pretty little blonde girl in the photograph? Well, according to the camera, that's how I looked. Why can I look at my brother and see all of our relationship—love, frustration, pride, pulling together—and then look at that little blonde and not recognize her at all? When I look with the eyes of love, I redeem a reality that I spent most of my life denying because I saw myself so differently, because I put so much energy into wishing I were different, denying what I really looked like.

Photography can allow us to reenter moments that are part of our past. We can be there again with all the sights and smells. A photograph of my grandmother standing next to her Peace rosebush in front of her red-brick house in Orderville lets me step back into summer with her, taste the V-8 juice she kept cold in her refrigerator, hear the tick of the clock on the mantle, smell the cedar shavings from my grandfather's workshop, finger Grandmother's old-fashioned, flowered apron, and love her. All this happens to me when I look at the photograph. I see with the eyes of love. I become a seer. I know her love for me. Those memories of time past become real to me when I see an image of my grandmother, now dead these thirty years.

Truly seeing photographs can help us see ourselves and our experiences in their redeemed reality. We can rethink our past selves and our present identities. We see multiple perspectives, understand more than one meaning. There is a depth, a dimensionality in our daily lives that its very dailiness hides from us. Such moments of revelation, of transcendence may come in prayer, in song, in caressing the hand of a loved one. Images, rather than being artificial arrangements of reality, can become truer visions of what the world is and of who we are. Redeemed from the blindness that normally covers our eyes, we become seers.

---
Notas:
[^1] Teachers can praise. "Peter, that was an excellent solution to that problem." "Janice, you turned in a perfect paper." "Kurt, that was another perceptive comment."
[^2] Teachers can criticize. "Laura, that handwriting was pretty sloppy." "Cut out the nonsense, Jim. You know better than that." "You are not thinking very clearly."
[^3] Teachers can help or remediate. "Why don't you try it this way, Nancy?" "How do you think the situation would improve if you tried it this way, Tom?" "Barry, your long-division problems will be easier to solve if you line your numbers up more carefully."
[^4] Teachers can also respond with nonjudgmental, neutral comments. "Uh huh." "All right." "Go on." "Okay."
