Susette Fletcher Green, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women in the Covenant of Grace ( 1994)

Recording Women's Lives

JESSIE L. EMBRY [^1]

Women have always recorded their life experiences but in a variety of ways. Some kept journals. Laurel Thatcher Ulrich showed how valuable these can be in her Midwife's Tale, which is based on the diary of Martha Ballard, a midwife in eighteenth-century New England. [^2] Other women expressed hopes and dreams in poetry. We sing the stories of Eliza R. Snow in "O My Father" and of Emmeline B. Wells in "Our Mountain Home So Dear." Others used autobiographies and letters, such as Ida Hunt Udall's family letters or her compassionate story of her life on the underground during the polygamy raids. Her autobiography and letters are included in Maria Ellsworth's Mormon Odyssey. [^3]

But some women will never write their stories, and their experiences will be lost both to their posterity and to others. Fortunately, tape recorders can capture narratives without all the pain of struggling over words. A woman can tell her life story to an interested person and a machine and preserve it for the future.

What makes a good interview? For a moment imagine that you are being interviewed. What are you going to tell the interviewer sitting across from you?

I have been conducting oral history interviews since 1973, and I have interviewed a variety of women. My most successful exchanges have been with those who have been open and willing to share. These narrators were not afraid to tell what they felt, to reveal themselves as they really are. When I worked for the James Moyle Oral History Program at the Church's Historical Department, I was given the delightful assignment of interviewing Camilla Eyring Kimball. Although I had already talked to her brother about his experiences in a polygamous family, I was worried about asking the prophet's wife, "Tell me about growing up in a polygamous family." But I didn't have to do that. As we discussed the purpose of the interviews, Sister Kimball said to me, "I came from a polygamous family. I think we should recount that story." Those of you who have read her autobiography know of her honesty. She recalls, for example, that she was so unhappy when she found out that her father had married her mother's sister that when she was to set the table for dinner she gave Aunt Emma the oldest silverware. [^4]

Sometimes honesty can be painful. I interviewed Esther Jarvis Young and Pearl Jarvis Augustus, for example, about their experiences in a polygamous family. The family was splintered with the death of the second wife and then the father. Pearl was "farmed out" to various families as, essentially, a maid. Although she had felt the first family was treated better, she had overcome her feelings of resentment years afterward when I interviewed her. She had learned to love her half-brothers and half-sisters.

Esther was one of those half-sisters. She recognized some of the inequities in her father's family and felt sorry for them. She had also been married and divorced several times and felt her former husbands had turned her children against her. I talked to Esther for about an hour, and she cried the entire time. But when I left, she gave me roses and thanked me for coming. It had been therapeutic for her to express her feelings.

I have also interviewed minority members of the Church, and they have been very honest. Natalie Palmer-Taylor, an African American, talked about a painful incident of discrimination that she experienced when she moved to Utah. She forthrightly declared that she did not think it was possible for her to be very close to white Latter-day Saints because her cultural experiences were so different. [^5] Others told of the pain they felt when they were not accepted, and yet at the same time they spoke of experiences they had shared with white Latter-day Saints.

In their honesty, these minority members suggested ways that Mormons can improve their relationships with people whose backgrounds are different from their own. Helen Kennedy, a black Latter-day Saint from Ogden, Utah, wanted Mormons to be less "cliquish. I don't like them to just do everything for LDS people." [^6] Donna Fifita, a Sioux married to a Tongan, felt she had to prove to other Mormons she was not "an Indian that would be inactive, an alcoholic, or whatever stereotype they had towards Native Americans." [^7] Imelda Lom, a Latina, wanted North American Mormons to stop feeling superior to members from other countries. [^8]

I have, of course, conducted interviews in which the narrators were less than honest. Although I have found far fewer problems in polygamous families than some would like to imagine, I am skeptical when an interviewed person says everything was perfect. I have never seen a monogamous family that was completely flawless! I also am concerned if a minority Latter-day Saint tells only positive experiences or only negative interactions with whites. We all have both. The best interviews result from a probing of the complexities of real life, not from either a too rosy or too cloudy picture.

Most of the interviews I have conducted have been on a specific topic. Sometimes the narrators simply answer the questions in dry, unimaginative ways. Those interviews provide good research material for papers or articles or books. But they are not fun interviews to conduct or to read. The best interviews are with people who tell stories. For example, I have interviewed women who "fought" the war from the home front during World War II. I know that Americans were encouraged to buy war bonds, but what makes the interviews valuable are stories like Gloria Robison's, who was a child living in Wyoming during the war. She recalled rationing, school clothes "made over from my aunt's old clothing," and losing all the men teachers in high school to the war. She also recalled selling her horse to help her class win a schoolwide bond drive competition. "I had a horse named Sally. I had raised her from a colt, and she was my pride and joy. I wanted my class to win the war bond drive so badly that I sold her to a neighbor who lived next door for enough to buy one war bond. That would be about $18.75. Then the rest of my stay at home I had to see the neighbor kids riding around on her. They wouldn't let me near her. That was really a sad thing." Years later she wondered if that sacrifice was really necessary. [^9]

In telling stories, don't be afraid to let your emotions show. Although it may be embarrassing sometimes to cry and very difficult to express such emotions in writing, those are the very stories that add life to the interview. In an article about the stories told by his mother, folklorist William A. Wilson explained, "Reduced to cold print, the stories may not seem particularly artful. But if you could have been there during the tellings, if you could have seen my mother's gestures and facial expressions, if you could have heard her voice rise into excited exclamation, drop now to a hushed whisper, move to a dry chuckle, break into tears . . . you would have understood their power to excite my fancy, engage my sympathies, and move me with joy or terror." [^10] For many of the reasons that Wilson describes, we always preserve both the tape and the transcript. Those who want the "facts" can quickly read the typescript; those who want the "emotion" must slowly absorb the experience through the tape.

Wilson relates one story that his mother sobbed in telling. She was remembering when her grandfather's favorite horses, Cap and Seal, were accidentally given poison oats meant for the squirrels. When her uncle Jim brought word to her grandfather that the horses were dead, she remembered, "All of us started to cry." Someone soon noticed that Grandpa had gone. They worried. But then "Mama kind of had an idea. She went out to the old outside toilet, and he was sitting in there crying." [^11] Wilson's mother loved her grandfather so much that she still ached for him years later, remembering his sorrow that day.

As you tell specific stories and let your emotions show through, your unique personality will radiate throughout the interview. To illustrate, let me share some short excerpts from Shirley Moore's interview. Shirley is a Native American who lives in Orem. Her daughter Angela was in my oral history class and interviewed her mother. I love listening to Shirley's oral history because it reveals her character. It's her interview. She was not afraid to say what she thought!

When Angela asked her mother about living in Orem, Shirley explained, "I really liked it a lot for a while. But I'm not liking it so much any more. Am I allowed to be really honest? I found out that I have a prejudice, and it's against Utah Mormons. I mean that in the true sense of the word. It's not that I dislike all Utah Mormons. I certainly don't. I think I prejudge because most of them I see taking things for granted. I get the impression that they feel like if you're not a Mormon in Utah, it's like you're not a real Mormon."

Shirley added, "I do like living here though because I feel like our kids have opportunities to do all sorts of things that they couldn't do back home." She recalled her experiences growing up on the Parker Indian reservation. She was "torn between being a Wild Indian and a good Mormon girl." She didn't want that for her children. "I think, 'Back home what is there to do? Well, it's let's get drunk or go in the bushes.' There are other things for them to do in Parker, but it's just there's not that much variety. I think that if we were in Parker, our kids would be like me. I think they would lean towards being wild little Indians." [^12]

I especially enjoyed Shirley's definition of heaven. When Angela asked her mother if she wanted to add anything to the interview, Shirley declared: "This is my idea of the celestial kingdom. We're going to wear long white T-shirts because they are so comfortable. We're going to eat pepperoni pizza from Pizza Hut, seafood won tons from Bamboo Hut, almond honey yogurt from the Cougareat, and maybe some of the fruit bars from the hospital cafeteria snack bar. That's going to be celestial food. We will listen to harp music because it really is beautiful, but no organ music. We'll also listen to Four Tops and Smoky Robinson. We probably won't listen to the Supremes but maybe a little Marvin Gaye. We're not going to play Monopoly or Scrabble or any competitive games. We might play a little volleyball, but it'll be just for fun." She continued: "I hope you realize I haven't been entirely serious. But I haven't really taken this assignment lightly either. If you care to, I want you to know the real me, not someone trying to make an impression by being profound. Heavens, I couldn't be profound if I tried."

Shirley concluded with a touching testimony and expressed her love for her family. And then she added: "And yes, I would like to get to the celestial kingdom, even if it may not be as I described." [^13]

If family members talk to you about your life stories, I hope you will remember these keys: Be yourself, share your emotions, tell stories, and be honest. Then your posterity will not put you on a pedestal and have to reach for the impossible heights they thought you had set. And historians like me will bless you.

---
Notas:
[^1] Teachers can praise. "Peter, that was an excellent solution to that problem." "Janice, you turned in a perfect paper." "Kurt, that was another perceptive comment."
[^2] Teachers can criticize. "Laura, that handwriting was pretty sloppy." "Cut out the nonsense, Jim. You know better than that." "You are not thinking very clearly."
[^3] Teachers can help or remediate. "Why don't you try it this way, Nancy?" "How do you think the situation would improve if you tried it this way, Tom?" "Barry, your long-division problems will be easier to solve if you line your numbers up more carefully."
[^4] Teachers can also respond with nonjudgmental, neutral comments. "Uh huh." "All right." "Go on." "Okay."
