Susette Fletcher Green, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women in the Covenant of Grace ( 1994)

Elizabeth Dennistoun Kane: "Publicans, Sinners, and Mormons"

MARY KAREN BOWEN SOLOMON [^1] DONNA JENKINS BOWEN [^2]

Introduction by Maureen Ursenbach Beecher, professor of English and senior research historian in the Joseph Fielding Smith Institute for Church History at Brigham Young University

For years historians have mined the diaries and journals of pioneers for their treasures of historical evidence: who was with the Prophet Joseph when; how the Saints crossed the plains; what led up to the Mormon war; how Brigham Young responded to the coming of the railroad. Raw data from the personal accounts of the participants in the Mormon movement have always been the mother lode of its history.

Especially richly veined have been the diaries and autobiographies of women. Their female voices, for all the strictures imposed on them in a male-oriented tradition, have touched the chords of human experience as men's more businesslike accounts never have. Writing themselves as subject, women present an immediate, intimate, lifesize version of the world they inhabit. No mere cataloging of historical tidbits, they are the many-dimensional reconstructions of life from the inside, and they deserve to be read as such.

Any moderately well-read student of Mormon history knows the name Thomas L. Kane, "friend of the Mormons." He facilitated the negotiations that allowed for the Mormon Battalion to send five hundred men across the continent at government expense; his published defense of the Saints created goodwill for them in government places; he mediated talks between the incoming Utah Expedition and the fleeing Saints so that the Utah War never really happened.

Little known, however, is the visit he made to Utah with his wife, Elizabeth, and their youngest children in 1872-73. Guests of Brigham Young, the Kanes rested in his St. George residence while Thomas recovered his health and gathered information on a biography of Young he hoped to write. He never wrote the book. Elizabeth, however, with less ambition but greater persistence, wrote letters to her father of such richness and interest that he collected the first batch of them and worked them into a manuscript with the ponderous nineteenth-century title Twelve Mormon Homes Visited in Succession on a Journey through Utah to Arizona. Elizabeth's book was published in 1874.

A second collection of Elizabeth's honest and compassionate descriptions of Mormon family life recently came into the possession of Brigham Young University Libraries though the good offices of Norman R. Bowen, who served as mission president in the area where the Church recently purchased Kane's chapel and burial site. That manuscript, now being prepared by Margery Ward and Everett Cooley, will soon be published by the University of Utah Press. President Bowen's widow, Donna, and daughter Mary Karen Solomon here present aspects of the journal accounts of Elizabeth Kane, which let us see not just what she observed of nineteenth-century Mormon life but what her observations reveal of the diarist herself. "Through her journals," concludes Mary Karen, "one comes to know this reflective yet active woman, this passionate and painstaking wife." And in knowing her, we come closer to understanding ourselves.

* * * * *

Mary Karen: Elizabeth Dennistoun Kane was a bright, ambitious woman, a perfectionist wife, and an unusual journal writer—perceptive, witty, occasionally acerbic, and spiritually centered. Those qualities may have jostled each other in contradiction—her strong sense of domestic duty seemed sometimes to struggle against her other interests and hobbies—but all bore witness to her independence of mind. A cultured and well-educated Philadelphia lady of the later nineteenth century, she wrote perceptively about herself, her religion, and her goals, as well as about new places and unusual people. Devoted to her husband, not blindly but alertly, she wrote about the nature and contradictions of her adventurous husband, Major General Thomas L. Kane, friend of the Mormons. His friendship with Brigham Young drew them southwest across the continent to St. George, Utah, to spend the winter of 1872-73 in that pioneering Mormon settlement. Elizabeth's St. George journal is a clear picture of Mormon history, sharp in human focus, a study of the people and problems, including polygamy, of newly settled St. George.

Elizabeth was a multitalented woman and a lifelong student. In her lifetime she developed considerable abilities as an early-day photographer, a physician, a northwestern Pennsylvania pioneer, and a revered "mother" of General Kane's battalion as well as of their own four children. This excerpt describing her worries about her teen-age daughter Harriet, nicknamed Harry, matches my own experience mothering my fifteen-year-old daughter: "A worse trouble is to know how to manage Harry whose temper is getting very bad. She is so contrary that I am really entirely at a loss to know what to do. She storms about nothing, insists that you say what you have not said, and frightens me lest she become like Aunt Alida in character as well as in looks. Poor pet, may God help me to bring her up rightly. She is at the same time anxious to be good, and ready to go into hysterics of penitence. But it is very seldom the 'godly sorrow that worketh repentance.'" (8 June 1861.) [^3] Teenagers haven't changed! Nor have mother's hearts.

A faithful and fervent Christian, Elizabeth was always clear about her values and sure of them. She was deeply committed in her relationships: first, with her God; second, with her husband; and third, with her social responsibilities. She was deeply concerned with women's issues. Thomas believed she had a calling to improve conditions for women, and despite her self-doubts, Elizabeth grew into agreement. "Tom speaks of my being the instrument of some great work—of lecturing to women, etc. I am sure he overrates my mental powers, as well as my physical, and therefore it is not only laziness which prompts my extreme disinclination to contemplate such a mission." (16 January 1858.) Neither an apologist for traditional views of women nor an activist, Elizabeth wanted first to learn and then to teach what an ideal Christian woman should be. She believed women were equal in natural and intellectual potential with their husbands, and she wanted to elevate them to an equal level in political, social, and educational reality—the misguided and downtrodden polygamous Mormon women as well.

Elizabeth Dennistoun Wood was born in Bootle, a suburb of Liverpool, England, on 12 May 1826. At the age of six, she began a lifelong enchantment with her American cousin, Thomas Leiper Kane, when he visited her family home as a young man of twenty. He brought her a French doll, which she forever treasured. Two years later, her family moved to New York, drawing closer the ties with her intriguing cousin. When Elizabeth was ten, her mother died; at twelve, she remarked to her sister that she intended to marry cousin Thomas Kane; and in 1853, when she was almost seventeen, she did. Tom was Elizabeth's only love; in 1861 when she found out that Tom had had an earlier love, she described "poor dear S—" with a mixture of generosity and jealousy. First the generosity: "A young lady who was very lovely, so amiable and charming that I have never heard her mentioned save in terms of praise, and who possessed such a genius for music that she made her piano express all the feelings of her heart, loved him very dearly. Her father was opposed to Tom, I suppose, and Judge Kane wished Tom not to marry her because there was insanity in her family. They gave each other up, and both married, and now she is dead." (13 November 1861.)

A little later in the same passage she mentioned, with perhaps a touch of jealousy over the cultivated flowers and music, that Thomas, who was then away on a military campaign, was pleased that Elizabeth's "taper" was still burning for him. She vowed, "If it please my dear love then my taper shall still shine for him (if God gives him again to my arms!) I will still try to give him pleasant associations of me with wild flowers (poor dear S— shall keep the cultivated ones, and the music) and I will earn his whole heart. And when I go home to my Father, I will not be ashamed to be friends with her who also loved him, for I will do him good and not evil all the days of my life!"

After their marriage, Elizabeth and Thomas lived in Philadelphia, where Thomas's father, Judge John K. Kane, was a prominent U. S. federal court judge, influential in national politics. Thomas soon had two promising careers, first, as a federal court clerk to his father and second, as an up-and-coming attorney. The Kanes's future, both financial and emotional, looked bright indeed.

A passage from 20 September 1857 shows Elizabeth's concerns and challenges over her "home duties." Among the duties was training the maids to be a source of help rather than one of frustration. She meditated over these concerns with typical spirituality: "I read our usual service for [family devotionals], it was however so dull and rainy a day that we could take no walk and as none of us felt well, we passed a very quiet uninteresting morning. I read Tom my diary of the week. He spoke of Elisha having clean frocks oftener. I promised to watch up Tom's tendency to 'put things through,' and we are mutually to oversee the other's dressing.

"Also we are thankful for the lessons of the last fortnight and pray that we may profit by keeping them ever in mind, day by day.

"First, and chiefly, to teach us to live as we should. Next to show me what is false kindness to Tom. Then to teach us charity. Then to show us what a mistake I might have made in falling entirely into outdoor work and overlooking home duties. I must be careful not to become absorbed in photography to the detriment of nearer things. I must keep Tom's clothes mended and in neat order, our rooms neat and clean, and my own clothes. The children's clothes must be neatly folded, and kept in their own bureau, and Jane Nelly must keep their nursery neat." Elizabeth wanted to keep her home and her family's clothes in perfect order, but her writing, reading, and photography sometimes enticed her away.

Her young country maids, Jane Nelly and Jane Pickett, needed thorough organization and instruction from her. She finally concluded that she needed to give up one maid, even though the one she let go was the tidier of the two: "I must give up Jane Pickett. I hope mother can take her. I would prefer keeping her to Jane Nelly for she is pretty dirty and slovenly." (30 December 1857.)

Though Thomas's career was flourishing, his convictions and conscience soon outweighed his material ambitions. Within the first three years of their marriage, he had given up both career paths. He first sacrificed his career as an attorney because of indignation over the fugitive slave ruling; then in 1856 he resigned his court clerkship to go to the aid of his oppressed western pioneer friends, the Mormons. A clash between Mormon and government forces seemed imminent. Both the federal government and the press misunderstood Mormon intentions and conditions in Utah Territory; the Mormons, on their part, had less than no confidence in the United States government. A history of recent unredressed persecutions in Ohio, Missouri, and Illinois intensified the Utahns' distrust of the federal government. With their backs against the walls of their new Great Basin homes, the Mormons seemed committed to defending themselves despite the odds. Thomas believed that he alone could mediate to avert open warfare and casualties; he alone had the trust of both adversaries.

Thomas's position was ambiguous. Although the Kane family records indicate that President Buchanan had strongly, though unofficially, encouraged Thomas to go to Salt Lake City, government commission and payment were only vaguely promised. Concerned for his Mormon friends, Thomas did not wait for an official commission but left quickly with only a presidential letter of introduction. His twenty-year-old wife, their toddler daughter, Harriet, and new baby son, Elisha Kent Kane, remained behind, dependent upon his parents.

Elizabeth was troubled by Thomas's mission for several reasons. Her journal entry for 18 November 1870 reveals that "13 years ago today [when Thomas decided to go to Utah] I thought my heart was broken." Her journal entries clarify her concerns. She was a new wife; she missed Thomas; and she worried especially about his delicate health and predisposition towards pneumonia. The journey was dangerous even for a strong and healthy man. Receiving few letters or messages from him intensified her anxiety, and Elizabeth conscientiously recorded her thoughts and actions in her journal; she and Thomas had both decided to keep journals—for each other's eyes only—during their separation.

She relied on God to protect Thomas. Elizabeth's strong faith, ironically enough, caused its own problems. A devout Presbyterian, Elizabeth wanted Thomas to join her faith. Religious unity was important to her, and she thought they were achieving it, writing on 26 December 1857 that "God has mercifully brought out of [recent trials] one great blessing already, in uniting Tom and me in the bonds of a common faith. Tom thinks he may be of service to Him by bringing about a peace between Utah and the United States, and went to Washington to see the president about it. May God give him wisdom to do right!"

But the prolonged separation necessarily tested such unity. Elizabeth was suspicious of Mormon influence upon her husband's religious attitudes. She felt Thomas showed entirely disproportionate interest in the Mormon religion when he was still irresolute about what she recognized as Christianity. She wrote to him on Easter Sunday 1858, "My darling, people call you a Mormon, as in the old time they called our Master a publican and sinner." Her anxiety was justified. She wrote upon Thomas's return, 20 June 1858, "I was so happy and so unhappy. . . . Tom told me the first moment we were alone, like my dear honest darling, that the hope that had dawned upon him of being a Christian was gone." Elizabeth considered Mormons heretical polygamists, not Christians; Thomas's increased sympathy for them may well have caused Elizabeth to think he had lost his "Christianity."

After learning about Thomas's "loss of faith," she wrote of her great distress that he had been traveling "without his staff," without the Christian faith she recognized as his support and protection. Soon afterwards, however, on 11 July 1858 she wrote movingly of the power of faith, as evidenced in Tom's stories of the Mormons' seemingly miraculous powers. Thomas had seen instances, scores of them, of invalids restored to health and strength through Mormon priesthood blessings. Fifteen years later in her own St. George journal, Elizabeth carefully recorded several such incidents.

A third concern, painful and immediate during the months Thomas was gone, was Elizabeth's financial position. She and her children were dependent upon her husband's family, and despite their kindness, she chafed for independence and her own home. She disliked the household tasks she felt obligated to perform dutifully. On 28 January 1858, soon after Thomas's departure (5 January 1858), she asked Judge Kane, Tom's father, for advice on an "occupation" to increase her independence. She was disheartened when he suggested studying mathematics. Wryly she noted that her feelings about mathematics resembled her attitude toward the Mormons—the more she studied them, the less she liked them.

Despite the duties burdening her spirit and the concerns that oppressed her, Elizabeth was determined to use the time apart from Thomas to overcome her "imperfections." The plan she developed to use that lonely time constructively illustrates her character and idealism. She recorded the following goals:

"1. My first duty is to watch over his children; therefore the more time intelligently given to them, the better.

"2. try to be cheerful and to grow strong, to be a help and a comfort . . .

"3. In trying to cultivate my mind, let me keep from overdoing anything and thereby injuring either my bodily or spiritual health.

"4. perform unhesitatingly all duties due to Tom's parents and family;

"5. As a help to cheerfulness, attend to my duties of society.

"6. Remember to be as much as possible with [Tom's sister,] Bess." (10 January 1858.)

By anyone's standards, those are worthy goals, marked by an absence of self-pity and indulgence. It is interesting that Elizabeth commented on the importance of time spent intelligently with the children, in contrast to time spent watching over them dutifully.

Her third goal, cultivating her mind, was an important one, though she resolved to keep her inquiring mind in check and not overdo her study. Her journal lists thirty-one books read in Thomas's absence; among them are Kingley's Saints' Tragedy and Andromeda, William H. Prescott's first and second volumes of The History of the Reign of Philip II, Stanley's Sinai and Palestine, Bridge's Algebra (evidently taking her father-in-law's advice), Thomas Macaulay's History of England, Merg's Diseases of Children, and Orson Hyde's Mormonism.

Elizabeth also devoted as much time as she could spare from the children and her duties to photography, a favorite hobby. But though she occupied herself with interests as well as duties, she found it difficult to distract herself from her fears for Thomas.

Elizabeth's devotion to Thomas is obvious from her writings. She resented his family and friends' beliefs, picked up by her in conversation, especially with Tom's mother and aunts, that he was "eccentric, unpractical and so forth, though a genius." (20 March 1870.) These misperceptions of her husband, she believed, were based upon some unfinished youthful projects and "passions" of his. "Though I cannot endure daws to pick at him, and it galls me so to hear it implied that 'poor Tom' doesn't attend regularly to his official duties, or hasn't kept a proper orthodox account of [his brother] Elisha's estate, or hasn't the Sunbury & Erie papers in a comprehensible form, or flirted—though that's not to the purpose—or didn't do some one of the things that people of no more intellect than Evan Thomas could and would do perfectly well." [^4] (26 January 1857.)

Too often Thomas's family, perhaps unconsciously, compared him unfavorably with Elisha Kent Kane, his older brother and a noted Arctic explorer, who died a national hero soon after their marriage. It is hard to compete with a dead national hero. Elizabeth considered some of the family's concerns to be "hum-drum," as did Thomas. And yet she also wanted them to be proud of Thomas. Even little criticisms nettled.

She noted to herself: "Dear Tom, I'll ask him when he comes back to get his hum-drum affairs in order to gratify his hum-drum wife. . . . I am trying to correct my fault. . . . I say to myself that I am not ambitious for Tom, and in one sense, I am not. I am far prouder of being Tom's chosen one than if I had been Elisha's—of whom all the world talked—because I know how much he is superior." (26 January 1857.)

Elizabeth felt that Thomas's ambition to prove himself Elisha's equal consumed his talents and energy and weakened his health. Another aspect of the problem was that Thomas himself adored Elisha. Elizabeth noted on 20 February 1868 that she was jealous of Tom's "poring over books on the Arctic Regions, fearing that he desires to go there, to prove the truth of all Elisha had discovered . . . and by a great sacrifice of his own life, to atone to Elisha's memory for having been forced to sorrow over him [Thomas and his youthful irresponsibilities] instead of being only proud of him." Elizabeth refers to vague family disapproval of something in Thomas's youth, perhaps his protective passion for the Mormons, which cost him both professionally and monetarily while Elisha's fame peaked.

The need of Thomas to prove himself in some heroic fashion continues as a source of worry and occasional discord. Ten years later, after Thomas attempted to be appointed as governor of Utah in April 1868, she commented, "Tom is not made to be happy but to dwell on cold and naked cliffs. He would make a Xavier or Loyola or Pascal, and I am utterly commonplace. . . . I told Tom he must rely on his own judgment and not on my feelings to decide his action. I will not have to endure seeing him die of discontent because I have chained him to my side here."

Later that year Elizabeth recorded, on 16 August 1868: "Sometimes he urges me to let him go away for two years, sure he would come back well off. I cannot bear to think of that—the children would be weaned from him—we ourselves would be older and independent of the misery of having him away." She explained that misery eloquently for her husband to read on his return: "Last night I yielded to the temptation of recalling how tenderly you always cared for me when my head ached, how you would take off my shoes for me, and when I was in bed, come and lay your darling head by mine and soothe me to sleep with loving words. But I found I began to cry, so I forced my thoughts off. I dare not think of your tenderness, nor dare I think how you too may be suffering for me, nor of the hardships you are undergoing. . . .

[O]h my husband, it is very hard to part from you when we are so weakened by our late trials. May God keep you in the hollow of His hand, and if it be His will restore us to each other."

Thomas returned from his 1858 Utah adventure hard-pressed financially and unemployed, yet he refused a tardy and half-hearted offer of remuneration from President Buchanan. Instead, he and Elizabeth took their two small children, Harriet, four, and Elisha Kent, two, to unsettled McKean and Elk counties in the Allegheny highlands of remote northwestern Pennsylvania. There he planned to develop and manage a land company organized by his father, Judge John Kane, and some of the judge's friends. Tom himself had purchased a large parcel of land in Pennsylvania in August 1857, four months before his Utah trip. Approximately two-thirds of their time there was spent in the woods attempting to subdue nature, and one-third in Philadelphia trying to attract railroads and industry to this rural mountain area. But that is another story, one that my mother, Donna Bowen, will take up.

As women who have the same concerns Elizabeth Kane had—our children, our husbands, living true to our religion, supporting and teaching our families, both with and without husbands' support, learning to love neighbors we don't particularly like (and even math)—there is much we can learn from Elizabeth Kane's life and writings. Through her journals, one comes to know this reflective yet active woman, this passionate and painstaking wife. Elizabeth, as painfully honest as she was intelligent, never shrank from a duty or was bested by a fear. She truly was a noble and courageous woman.

Donna: Elizabeth Dennistoun Wood Kane had received an excellent education for a young woman of her time; however, having been married at sixteen to a man almost twice her age, she spent her early married life attempting to meet the challenge of becoming a vital part of a highly motivated and achieving family.

Tom arrived in Philadelphia from his Utah trip in June 1858, grieving for the death of his beloved and revered father. Complicating the situation, his mother, to settle debts, was forced to sell Fern Rock, the family home where Elizabeth, Tom, and the children had been living. Their solution was to go for the summer to the Uplands, as they called McKean and Elk counties in northern Pennsylvania, intending to build a settlement.

They were at Uplands when the Civil War began, and Tom left to serve the Union in April 1861, shortly after the birth of their third child, Evan O'Neill Kane. He had raised a regiment of hunters and loggers known as the Bucktails, which became famous for valor and endurance with Lt. Colonel Thomas L. Kane as their leader. Meanwhile, Elizabeth and the children were offered a home in Philadelphia with Aunt Ann Gray Thomas.

"July 21, 1861. A week since I wrote. Tom telegraphed to me on the 18th 'Safe from my first round.' I am terribly anxious today. Aunt Ann undertook to procure yesterday's evening paper, but as usual the precious Thomases were coming to tea, and she hurried home without it. The man has not brought today's paper and tomorrow is Sunday when I can see none, and all this time we are expecting to hear of a great battle at Manasses Junction (Bull Run) in which Pat certainly and Tom possibly will be engaged.

"Later. Tom loves me, I do believe. I don't think I ever felt the truth of it so much as in this last visit when he let me know more of his life than I have done. Oh, Father in Heaven, who hast blessed me with his love, ugly as men see me, sinful as Thou knowest me, help me to make myself worthy of the place he has given me in his heart, and make me feel the responsibility it involves."

Tom saw a great deal of fighting and was wounded three times. On 21 December 1861 at Dranesville, his regiment led the advance, and he was shot in the jaw. From that time on, he wore a beard. At Harrisonburg, 6 June 1862, he was sent with 104 handpicked men to rescue the ambushed First New Jersey regiment. He encountered three regiments of Confederate soldiers and lost 52 men. The Confederates admitted a loss of 359. Tom was wounded again, shot in the leg, clubbed in the chest, and taken prisoner. Exchanged in August, he was made brigadier general for gallant services in the field and commanded the 2d brigade, 2d Division, Twelfth Army Corps at Chancellorsville. So ill he could not walk, he rode to Gettysburg with the news that the Confederate Army had broken the Union code, and he remained to use his troops to hold Culp's Hill. For that action at Gettysburg, he was "brevetted major-general for 'gallant and meritorious services.'" [^5]

Elizabeth worried incessantly. Information was hard to come by, she seldom heard from Tom, and his pay was so small that she and the children lived in poverty, despite help from others, mostly Aunt Ann. Contending with the difficulties of her life made Elizabeth more of a problem solver than a describer and observer of the beauties of nature. She wrote some of her early reminiscences of Kane for the newspaper Kane Leader, 4 July 1896. It is the "how" and the "where" that most interested her.

"My first knowledge of this region dates from the year 1856 when . . . my husband came up to inspect the property and wrote to me in glowing terms of the delightful exhilarating air, and the freshness of the forest. He arranged a summer visit for us, and I made my first trip to the mountains. . . . [A stagecoach] highway gave me my first acquaintance with corduroy roads and places where brooks had overflowed and the bridges had floated out and not been replaced. Mile after mile of unbroken forest was traversed." The only finished structure on their land was a stable or barn, and they lived there after the war while Tom built roads and surveyed for railroad lines and coal mines. He also spent a great deal of time in Philadelphia and Washington "politicking." Their fourth child, William Wood Kane, was born in November 1863. [^6]

Elizabeth wrote in the summer of 1864: "We jest to each other. Tom says that I show myself the daughter of a line of merchants, for I am a gambler who calls the game a mercantile adventure. I retort that he who risks nothing wins nothing, but Tom sighs for he would risk and win in greater games than these. . . . He feels that his health is failing and that the wife and children who are helpless without him depend on a man who is in such daily suffering as may soon end his life. He does not long for life. Were we but placed out of the reach of poverty, all he would desire would be: 'In some great cause, not in his own / To perish, wept for, / honored, known.'"

In June the sawmill burned. Prior to the war (1860-61) the Kanes had obtained lumber for a house at Flanders, thirty miles away. It had been expensive to haul. When Thomas returned to Kane, probably in 1863, ready to build his house, he found the materials he had stored for the house gone, the lime dissolved, the stone vanished, and the lumber burned. Elizabeth wrote, "Thus Tom had to commence his house by building a mill to saw his lumber." The loss of this mill so soon after its construction was a tragedy. Almost as painful to lose as the mill were the piles of beautifully finished hardwood lumber they had been accumulating to build their house. Elizabeth and Thomas scrounged, borrowed, and sold land to rebuild the sawmill.

"1865. Early in January 1865 Tom had to go to Philadelphia on business-financeering. Not many days after his departure a great snowstorm set in, which blocked up the narrow lanes that we called roads. No teams could come out to us from the settlements, for the snow lay eight feet deep on the abandoned clearings on windy Howard Hill. Travel on the railroad was suspended for ten days and for two weeks no freight was carried. Our settlement was almost starved. I doled out scanty rations of food to the teams and as to the human beings, I know that I was supplying ten families from my solitary flour barrel the day that our siege was raised. . . .

"The day following when Tom, faint and weary with his long journey 'lifted the latch and walked in,' the first object that met his eyes was my altered countenance as I lay with my own eyes closed by erysipelatous swelling in a high fever, and unable to see. . . . There was no doctor to be had. Tom telegraphed for his Brother John, who kindly left his practice and reached us in a very few days.

"My dear husband had come home sick himself and anticipating rest and my sympathy in the business discouragements he had met with. Instead of this he became my nurse (in my delirium).

"They had made a screen of sheets and old chintz curtains round my bed, partly to keep off the draughts and partly to secure a half privacy for my sickroom, as John had to sleep in one corner. There were no spare-rooms in the barn. . . .

"I was quite myself again, and able to enjoy hearing Tom read aloud, when one morning our ox-eyed Charley, replenishing the fire, slowly pronounced the words—'General, if you please, the house is on fire!'

"Tom often says he never felt such helpless misery, such desolation of spirit as when he gazed [from the burning roof] over the snowy waste. Below him [were] the frail little children and the wife to whom being turned out in that deep snow would be certain death. The drifts were more than waist deep. A wind was blowing and the thermometer stood 15 degrees below zero."

But they survived.

By 1872 Tom was in perilous health. He had never completely recovered from his war injuries. Brigham Young wrote to invite him and his family to come to Utah and winter with him in St. George. He promised his friend a complete restoration of health. Elizabeth demurred, but when Tom was adamant, she prepared for the trip. Elizabeth feared the influence of the Mormons on Tom. Accompanied by their two youngest children, eleven-year-old Evan and nine-year-old Willie, and a black servant, they took the railroad to Salt Lake City and a carriage from there to St. George.

During that carriage trip Elizabeth wrote: "I could see little of Nephi in the gathering darkness: it was evidently smaller than Provo. The carriages halted on entering town, and separated company. Ours was driven rapidly up a cross-street to a plain adobe house, standing by itself. Lights shone from every door and window; the father of the family stood waiting to help us out of the carriage, and the wives and children greeted us warmly as we crossed the threshold.

"We were first ushered into a large bedroom on the ground floor, where a superb pitch-pine fire was blazing; and two well-cushioned rocking-chairs were drawn forward for us, while half a dozen hospitable children took off my boys' wrappings, as the mother disembarrassed me of mine.

"Then we were left to rest, and begged to feel ourselves at home.

"Our present entertainers, the Steerforths, were English people. There were two wives, and a number of children, girls of all sizes down to the smallest elf that ever walked, and one sturdy open-faced boy, who speedily 'fellow-shipped' with my little lads, and carried them off, after supper, to the great kitchen to see their playmate, Lehi, the Indian boy.

"After supper!—To this day, when we have any special dainty at home, Evan and Will exclaim that it reminds them of the Steerforths', and describe the cozy dining-room, with the warm fire-light playing on the table-equipage, and the various good things that composed, in Yorkshire style, the hungry travelers' 'tea dinner.'

"One of the wives sat down to table, and one waited upon us, with the aid of the two elder girls. There was a young school-master there, too, who had made his home with the Steerforths since his parents died, and whose love for their quiet domestic life was duly praised by the Mistresses S. when he left the room. But I thought that the sweet face of 'our eldest'—'Noe,' I think they call her—might perhaps share the credit of the long ten-mile ride on Friday evening from his school in Nephi, and the starlight journey back which it cost the youthful pedagogue on Monday morning.

"My intercourse with the Steerforths made a strong impression on me. We stayed longer at their house than at any other on this tour, and it was difficult not to be influenced by their simple kindliness of heart and unaffected enthusiasm.

"Our conversation the evening of our arrival turned chiefly on our hostesses' experience of pioneer life. Mrs. Mary was the chief speaker, but Mrs. Sarah, a pale little lady, dark-haired and black-eyed, put in a quiet word of acquiescence, or suggested an anecdote now and then. She was from Yorkshire. Mrs. Mary was a Herefordshire woman, tall, rosy, brown-haired, and blue-eyed.

"I wonder whether the Mormon men evidence any marked peculiarity of taste in the selection of wives. Widowers with us are wont to profess that they discern a resemblance in the lady upon whom a second choice falls, to the dear departed. I asked a Mormon woman at Salt Lake how it was, and she answered that, in her opinion, men had no taste. 'In our case,' she said, 'there are five of us unusually tall, and two very short; but the rest (she did not say how many there were) are of an ordinary height, and we are all different in looks, disposition, and age.'

"In the Steerforth mÃ©nage, the wives were exceedingly unlike each other. The husband was of a Manx family, long resident in Yorkshire. He had joined the Mormons in early youth with his mother, and they had been disowned by his family, well-to-do English people.

"The Steerforths were among the first Mormons who came out to Utah. Only a select band of one hundred and forty-three men, headed by Brigham Young in person, had preceded them. These pioneers had planted posts along their route with rough boxes nailed to them containing information regarding the distances to work, water, and grass; and these guide-posts were slowly tracked out and followed by the long train of ox-wagons, freighted with the exiles from Nauvoo, women, children, and invalids. There were a few men who drove and acted as guards, but the teamsters were principally women and young boys." [^7]

Sunday morning. "After breakfast I attended a Mormon meeting for the first time. I wondered whether Mr. Steerforth would walk to church alone, or between his wives. But they both accompanied me, while their joint husband (!) formed one of a group who escorted T. So there was no test of preference." [^8]

"I got rid of more than one preconceived idea that morning; of none more completely than the prevailing error respecting the looks of a congregation of Mormon women. I was so placed that I had a good opportunity to look around, and began at once to seek for the 'hopeless, dissatisfied, worn' expression travelers' books had bidden me to read on their faces.

"But I found that they wore very much the same countenances as the American women of any large rustic and village congregation. . . .

"Happy or unhappy, I could not read histories on the upturned faces at Nephi." [^9]

The journal covering the trip to St. George, entitled Twelve Mormon Homes, was printed by Elizabeth's father after their return to Pennsylvania. It has since been reprinted by the University of Utah Press. The journal that covered the rest of their visit to Utah and the winter in St. George is now in the process of being printed by the University of Utah Press as a companion volume to Twelve Mormon Homes.

From the St. George journal: "Christmas Day in St. George."

"We are in the largest house in the place. Last night when we arrived, I supposed that it was a Hotel, but it is a private house belonging to the 'President of the Stake.' We have spacious and comfortable rooms on the first floor. On one side the windows look out [south] over a vineyard belonging to our host towards the gap in the mountains through which the Rio Virgin pierces after receiving the waters of the Santa Clara. The different houses of the town stand in the midst of vineyards, each occupying the greater part of a ten-acre block. . . .

"Our host [President Erastus Snow] called upon me just now with his wife [Artemiesia, wife number one]. We exchanged the usual commonplace remarks and they departed. In about five minutes more there was a knock at the parlor door.

"'Come in,' I said, and my host re-entered with another lady [apparently Minerva, wife number two], whom he presented with grave simplicity, and in precisely the same form of words, as his wife. I am not yet used to polygamy and am always taken by surprise.

"Perhaps it is because the Mormons do not say 'one of my wives' but 'my wife.' Still I imagine there is but one. I rallied, however, and we discoursed on the weather, our late journey, and the prospect of my liking St. George, while I asked myself whether Bishop Snow was remembering that I had used the same phrases in answering the same remarks a few minutes before.

"I had now seen 'Artemesia' and 'Minerva,' and after the Bishop had escorted 'Minerva' out, I reseated myself and began talking to the children, but in two minutes more, there he was back again, this time with another lady.

"She was presented with the same gravity, and we essayed the same remarks. Fortunately there was a new subject to introduce: Mrs. 'Elizabeth' [known locally as Aunt Libbie—wife number three] was my hostess, and she had kind inquiries to make relating to our comfort. She is a gentle-looking, pale woman with dark eyes and hair, and is the mother of many of the thirty-five young Snows. When the pair rose to depart, the Bishop apologized for the infirm health of 'his wife' which would prevent Mrs. 'Julia Josephine' [wife number four] from paying her respects to me!" [^10]

Elizabeth was delighted to see the improvement in Tom's health during their St. George sojourn. Early in 1873, however, he suffered a temporary setback. Elizabeth described the incident in a letter to her father included in her journal:

"Quite apart from my own longings, I am glad that T. is going to recover. The Mormons all feel as if the wonderful change in his health since he came here was caused by their prayers. He could hardly walk an eighth of a mile with the aid of his crutches when we arrived; yet just before this [most recent] illness seized him he enjoyed a mountain climb of two miles, returning scarcely more fatigued than I was. I did not tell you, hoping to give you a delightful surprise when you should see him walking without even a cane. Think! He had never done that since Harrisonburg in June of 1862.

"During this sharp sickness, it was a consolation to me to hear Elder S.[Staines] confess to the same feelings I had myself in praying. (Elder S. is the deformed gentleman whose earnest simplicity and sincerity have struck me, as much as his kindliness has done the children. He is the only Mormon man with whom I have more than a passing acquaintance.)

"I had felt that T's restoration to health was in answer to my prayers and that should he die now, this agony of pain seemed as if it would shake my faith. Poor Elder S. was even worse off than myself, because he believed that he had received the assurance of the Spirit that T. was to return home cured.

"His room is over ours, and I have always heard the tones of his voice praying for a long time at night, but when [Tom was passing through the crisis, I could distinguish the murmuring sound nearly all night. His distress was so great that he had to be banished from the sickroom, and I pitied his wretched looks without knowing the cause, whenever I met him creeping about the house, waiting for tidings. Now he is at peace again, and more joyously hopeful and confident than I can be, yet."

"March 1873. Well, old journal; glad am I to reopen you again before leaving St. George without any further sorrow to relate!

"[Tom] was strong enough to be driven two squares to the Tabernacle to attend a farewell dinner given by the female Relief Society. The feast was spread in the basement, with 270 men and women sitting down and as many children flitting about, waiting on the company and picking up crumbs. . . .

"Erring as they may be from what I think the truth, still I cannot forget what rest and peace of soul I have enjoyed among them, and when I go back to the theoretically orthodox society of the East, with its practical infidelity that asks 'Where is now thy God,' I shall look back with tender feelings to St. George; 'for I had gone with the multitude, I went with them to the House of God, with the voice of joy and praise; with the multitude that kept holy day.'

"The fact may not have the meaning for others that I attach to it, but I mean to remember that I felt that it was right and not wrong to worship with the Mormons as with Christians. It is such a comfort to be with people who are in earnest!" [^11]

Tom left his crutches in St. George, his cane in Salt Lake City, and returned to Kane, Pennsylvania, as their settlement had come to be known. There, after the panic of 1873, their financial affairs started to improve. Swedish settlers were brought in, the railroad completed, and coal lands became marketable.

In 1881 their daughter Harriet Amelia decided to attend the Women's Medical College in Philadelphia, where Elizabeth had studied shortly after her marriage. Elizabeth accompanied her, and they graduated together with M.D.'s in 1883, living in a home (1307 Walnut Street) inherited from the family. It was here that Tom died of pneumonia on 26 December 1883, at age sixty-one, and Elizabeth took him home to Kane to be buried in a plot between the two front entrances to the Presbyterian church he had built for his Aunt Ann Thomas.

Elizabeth sold the Walnut Street home and made her permanent home in Kane, where she prospered. She doctored the community and continued her charitable works. Their coal lands produced, the railroad became financially stable, and oil was discovered on her property.

Her father, to whom she had sent her journals, died in 1894, followed by her dear daughter and companion, Harriet Amelia, in 1896. That fall she finished her beautiful home, Anoatok, a superb mansion, still maintained and known as Kane Manor, and died there 25 May 1909, always gallant, gracious, and God-fearing.

---
Notas:
[^1] Teachers can praise. "Peter, that was an excellent solution to that problem." "Janice, you turned in a perfect paper." "Kurt, that was another perceptive comment."
[^2] Teachers can criticize. "Laura, that handwriting was pretty sloppy." "Cut out the nonsense, Jim. You know better than that." "You are not thinking very clearly."
[^3] Teachers can help or remediate. "Why don't you try it this way, Nancy?" "How do you think the situation would improve if you tried it this way, Tom?" "Barry, your long-division problems will be easier to solve if you line your numbers up more carefully."
[^4] Teachers can also respond with nonjudgmental, neutral comments. "Uh huh." "All right." "Go on." "Okay."
