Susette Fletcher Green, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women in the Covenant of Grace ( 1994)

Navigating the Rapids: Course Corrections

LEANNA SPJUT BALLARD [^1]

One of my very first memories is of being carried on my father's back through tall stands of evergreens, watching the late snow patches still hiding under a dark canopy of trees. My father is a geologist. His deep, abiding love of the land, shared with me from my earliest years, began my lasting passion for all that the outdoor world holds.

He took me along on field trips and excursions when I was very young. Because I was so close to the ground, it was easy to closely examine all the plants, the patterns in the rocks and soil, animal tracks, and the wide variety of insects crossing my small steps.

I vividly recall the shiny scales on the trout my grinning Grand-mother Spjut pulled out of Yellowstone Lake on our family's yearly trek up to Fishing Bridge. On the long drive up from Salt Lake City, my grandmother entertained me with stories of her girlhood in northern Sweden. She talked of skiing across a frozen lake in winter to reach her school. The lodgepole pine forests of Yellowstone reminded her of the tall, pine-filled woods of her youth.

Both she and my Grandfather Spjut grew up in Swedish families who went fishing so they would have something for dinner. Thus, they ardently pursued the rainbow trout in Yellowstone Lake for the whole week we stayed. They understood that "it pleaseth God that he hath given all these things unto man; for unto this end were they made to be used, with judgment, not to excess." (D&C 59:20.)

Later, I took my first summer job at Yellowstone Lake, leaving even before the commencement exercises of my East High School graduation in Salt Lake City. I was delighted to arrive at the lake I loved so well and to see ice still sending chilly fingers out into the lake waters and the snow still upon the ground. Working in Yellowstone allowed me to revisit the places I had come to love as a child and explore farther into backcountry new to me.

The outside, natural world—its intricate beauties, patterns, and endless variety—has always held a fascination and riveting, boundless interest for me. This sense of awe, wonder, and gratitude to my Heavenly Father and the Savior for creating this world is a gift in my life, something lasting and significant. Contemplating and enjoying the beauty of the earth fills me with strength that helps me through difficult times.

Alone at the shore of an isolated lake in the high Uintas, I've felt deep upwellings of joy and gratitude as I contemplate the glory of creation. "The earth rolls upon her wings, and the sun giveth his light by day, and the moon giveth her light by night, and the stars also give their light, as they roll upon their wings in their glory, in the midst of the power of God. Unto what shall I liken these kingdoms, that ye may understand? Behold, all these are kingdoms, and any man [or woman] who hath seen any or the least of these hath seen God moving in his majesty and power." (D&C 88:45-47.)

In 1973, I enrolled at Utah State University in its College of Natural Resources. I entered as a wildlife biology major, hoping to conduct research in pristine, unspoiled settings, study the wild animals, and work to protect them and their wild habitats.

I was soon disillusioned. In the early 1970s, the department had a utilitarian approach to wildlife, particularly game animals. My instructors seemed to think that wildlife was a crop to raise for hunters to harvest each fall. At that time, the Department of Wildlife Resources had only two nongame biologist positions in the entire state of Utah. I did not relish the idea of counting the teeth of dead deer at checking stations or approaching poachers, with a gun strapped to my hip, to enforce regulations or give out tickets as a conservation officer.

My first plant taxonomy class changed my direction. I delighted in the sublimity of the delicate patterns and colors of wildflowers. With Art Holmgren—a kindly and wildly enthusiastic Swedish botanist—as my mentor and adviser, I switched over to the College of Science and pursued a degree in biology and botany.

Many of my high school friends married within the first two years after high school. I too wanted to marry and have children eventually, but I felt strongly that I needed to prepare myself in case that didn't happen. I wanted to be prepared for a career that I would love and enjoy.

I gravitated to the few Latter-day Saint women in the natural science fields at USU. In 1976, I shared an old white house near the campus with three roommates and dear friends who had my same passion for the natural world. Holly graduated in forestry and went on to work with the Forest Service and National Park Service. Debby graduated first in outdoor recreation and then studied nursing, which led her to Kotzebue, Alaska, above the Arctic Circle, to manage a native clinic. Ann graduated in wildlife science and is now a wildlife biologist working for the Forest Service in Loman, Idaho. We spent time together on weekends exploring wild places in northern Utah, Idaho, and Wyoming.

The summer between my junior and senior years, I began my first natural science professional position at Hardware Ranch, an elk refuge in Blacksmith Fork Canyon. Working as a biology aide, I ran the visitors center and answered questions about the elk and other wildlife. When I returned to USU for fall quarter, a long-time friend from high school, Clark Ballard, drove up from Salt Lake City for a visit. Clark had recently returned from a mission to Argentina, and we spent our first day getting reacquainted by taking a bike ride out to Newton, a picturesque little Cache Valley community.

We dated through the Christmas holidays that year while I was home visiting my family in Salt Lake City. Clark drove me back to Logan for winter quarter. He was studying English literature at the University of Utah and wrote eloquent, poetic letters that became increasingly romantic and hinted at a long-term relationship. His letters and continued visits proved convincing, and we were engaged by the end of January, just after my twenty-second birthday.

Clark shares my interests in the outdoors. He enjoys backpacking, hiking, and camping. I knew that he would be a supportive husband and would applaud and encourage whatever projects I wished to pursue. During our six-month engagement, we went cross-country skiing, backpacking with friends, hiking, and bike riding.

Clark and I were married 15 July 1977 in the Salt Lake Temple, sealed for time and eternity by Clark's father, Elder M. Russell Ballard. After an outdoor reception with lots of flowers, Clark and I spent our honeymoon backpacking in Wyoming's vast Wind River Range.

We made our first home in Millville, Utah—a small, lovely town south of Logan. Clark transferred to USU to finish his undergraduate degree in English. The first project I was interested in pursuing after our marriage was having a baby. From a biological standpoint, the whole reproductive process of combining my genes with Clark's to produce a new individual, the idea of feeling a new life growing within my own body, and going through all the stages of pregnancy fascinated me.

Nature complied quickly—our first child, Matthew, arrived ten months after our wedding. I thrilled with the surge of maternal instincts and unconditional love I instantly felt for this new son. Almost immediately I began taking my baby out on walks and hikes. I particularly enjoyed watching our new baby grow and thrive on the breast milk that my own body produced. I also found breast-feeding to be so handy—we took Matthew on a week-long camping trip in the Sawtooth Mountains of Idaho when he was two months old, and it was convenient having all his nutritional needs so close at hand.

A second pregnancy took us by surprise when Matt was only seven months old. This child was a daughter, Sara. Unfortunately, she was born with a congenital anomaly called Trisomy 18. I had studied this genetic disorder in a college genetics course; it seemed ironic that with all the knowledge science has acquired about the reproductive process, cellular structure, and cell division, nothing could be done to change the fact that our sweet little daughter had an extra chromosome in every cell of her body.

We were told that 90 percent of all babies born with this condition lived less than a year. Sara was born in September, and I remember that with all the heartache and the tragedy to come, the fall was exceptionally beautiful. The autumn leaves were vivid, and they seemed to shine with light glowing from within. On one of the few walks Clark and I were able to take during that fall, I watched the brilliantly colored leaves falling to the ground, after entering into their senescent stage to die, and I knew that so too would our precious baby daughter soon slip away.

Sara died in January, when nature is quiet and still. That winter was a time of terrible grief and longing for my missing daughter.

There is something infinitely healing in the repeated refrains of nature—the assurance that dawn comes after night, and spring after the winter.

And so I found it to be with me. With spring came a renewal of life and hope, and after the terrible sorrows of that winter, I found myself again expecting, and our third child, a healthy baby boy, Nathan, was born the next fall. I clearly recall a moment of quiet but happy recognition that fall. I had just laid Nathan back down to sleep after nursing him and then gone out to our large garden. As I dug into the brown earth, I marveled at the large potatoes and the bounteous crop that had been produced from just the small bits of seed potatoes I had planted in the spring. I thought of my new, healthy baby sleeping inside and of the satisfaction of reaping nature's harvest from the garden I had planted months before. I realized then that joy had returned to my life.

Two years later, when I was in my fifth month of pregnancy with our fourth child, we went backpacking. That summer, I also began graduate classes in botany. Once Melissa was born, I found myself once again very involved with the care of a newborn, in addition to her brothers, Church callings, and our big garden. I kept busy with crafts, sewed dozens of T-shirts for my kids, quilted, and oil- and water-painted.

We continued to travel to wild, outdoor places on vacations, and I took every possible opportunity to share my love of nature with my children. I delight in watching them make their own discoveries about the natural world and in seeing the sense of wonder within them grow.

When I was pregnant with our fifth child, Trevor, I took another challenging graduate class, "Ecologic Anatomy and Morphology of Plants," which I really enjoyed. I felt a great desire to continue with studies in that area and yet, knowing the responsibilities that would come with my new baby, I wondered how I possibly could.

One night, as I sat up late reading articles on plant ecology, I found myself pondering my old dilemma once again—if I had the aptitude and enjoyed learning about these challenging concepts, shouldn't I continue with my studies? We are here in mortality to expand and enlarge our talents, and obviously insatiable curiosity and love for all of creation is one of mine. In fact, I've come to feel that my intense love for creation was probably well developed before I entered the mortal world. As a child, I had often pondered about how wonderful it would have been to have watched the creation of the world. If these interests and talents were formed in my premortal existence, shouldn't I continue to improve them in this life?

In great turmoil over this question, I slipped out of our bed where Clark lay snoozing peacefully, knelt, and prayed for guidance. I received one of the clearest answers to prayer I have ever received: "Look to Clark and to your children first, for that is where you will find your greatest joy and satisfaction. And if you so desire, opportunities will later be given to you to continue on with this learning." I felt peaceful again and accepted that answer.

Opportunities came more quickly than I had imagined. When our sixth and last child, Tommy, was just two years old, I was invited to co-direct a new outdoor environmental education program for middle-school-aged students. This program evolved into the Outdoor Adventures in Discovering Nature program. As I researched and contacted pos-sible instructors within the College of Natural Resources, I was offered the opportunity to make this program into a master's degree project, with a full scholarship. I accepted this offer enthusiastically, but as I began graduate coursework and continued working toward implementing the new program, I knew that I was stretching myself. Laundry, cooking, and Church callings were beginning to fall between the cracks. Clark began cooking often as I spent hours on the phone every night, lining up volunteer instructors and coordinating activities.

The Outdoor Adventures program was highly successful. Driving home after the second session, I felt I was floating. I had reached that stage of self-actualization that psychologist Abraham Maslow calls a "peak experience." Everything that I had learned over the years, including delegating in Relief Society presidencies and stake boards, as well as my course work in ecology, biology, and botany, had all come together to help create a new program that turned out to be more successful than any of us who worked on it had dreamed. I felt supremely blissful, that I had really found my niche. I loved working with children and sharing my love of nature with them. My fellow instructors became my dear friends, and I continued to take interesting classes.

A central theme of the Outdoor Adventures program was to develop a sense of stewardship for our natural resources. Unfortunately, as I became the director and chief organizer of this program, I spent less and less time on my own stewardship over the care of my children and spouse.

My energetic commitment to the project took a real toll on my family, even though I included at least one of my children in every session of the program. Clark was trying to work on his own doctoral degree through BYU, work as an elementary school principal, and serve on the stake high council. He was feeling very left out and alone.

I should have realized how serious a problem we had when Clark told me, "These past three years have been the worst ones of my life," and I thought, "But they have been the best three years of mine!" The success I had felt as an environmental educator felt so good that when I was offered another job, co-authoring and illustrating a natural history guide to Logan Canyon, I said "Yes!" Later, I accepted another project, illustrating the anatomical and morphological life stages of Dyer's Woad, a noxious weed in the mustard family that causes a lot of grief to the farmers and ranchers in Cache Valley. I justified those decisions by spending my earnings on fun vacations for our whole family and on a housekeeper, who did the housework that I had never enjoyed anyway.

Without my support of all his efforts, Clark felt increased stress and the need for a change. When he told me he would like to leave his demanding principalship and accept a position at the State Office of Education in Salt Lake City, I was incredulous. How could I leave my fledgling program when it was just catching fire? I still had a year of graduate course work to finish, and the Logan Canyon book wasn't anywhere near completion.

In what we now can see to be a foolish decision, Clark took the Salt Lake job and stayed with his parents during the work week while I stayed in Cache Valley with the children to continue with my master's degree, my book, and the botanical illustration project. With a great deal of regret, I let go of the Outdoor Adventures program, realizing that I couldn't sustain it plus act as a single parent while finishing my other projects. I felt I was abandoning one of my children: I had created it, and watched it grow and develop into something successful and greatly satisfying to me. The relationships I had formed with my fellow instructors were precious to me.

We spent a year mostly apart, with Clark commuting back to Cache Valley on the weekends while I frantically tried to get all my projects finished. During that transitional year, we made several house-hunting trips and chose to move to the town of Alpine because it reminded us of our dear Cache Valley.

The closer the time came to moving, the more precious my projects, friends, and colleagues became to me; I couldn't envision my life without them. Our children had been attending the wonderful Edith Bowen lab school on the USU campus and were enrolled in excellent on-campus art and music programs. I felt I could never replace what I was leaving behind.

The week after we moved, the children went to their new school, Clark went to work, and I was left in a strange house looking at hundreds of boxes, so many piled everywhere that I didn't know where to begin. The days that followed, unpacking box after box after box, were some of the loneliest and saddest of my life. I would stand, entombed in the box-filled kitchen, waves of sadness rolling over me as I considered all the friends, colleagues, and interesting projects I had lost. The children, too, struggled to carve out new niches for themselves in a new school and neighborhood.

One thing that kept me going was anticipating a long-awaited two-week trip to see Alaska with my college roommates. The trip had been in the planning stages for a year and a half. Ann and I flew to Seattle and took the ferry up to Ketchikan, where Holly lives. We flew into the Misty Fiords National Monument, a magical marine wilderness of lush greenery carpeted with dogwood and other northern wildflowers. The calls of loons and mountain goats filled the air. From there, we traveled on to Juneau and then across the Prince William Sound to the Kenai Peninsula, where Debbie lives.

On an all-day hike, the four of us passed by seven lakes, gorgeous wildflowers, grouse, loons, and a lot of fresh beaver sign. How good it was to talk with my former roommates about all the changes the years had brought—marriage, children, moves, changing careers.

On our way to the Salt Lake airport, Clark had asked me to think seriously about our relationship and where we were headed as a family. I did spend time thinking about my marriage and family while I was away. I realized that the pats on the back and accolades I had received in Cache Valley had become far too important to me. Though I claimed my family was my first priority, when I honestly compared how little time I was spending nurturing my marriage and relationships with my children to how much time I was spending meeting with other environmental educators and cohorts who shared my interests, I knew that approval from colleagues had become overly important for me.

I returned from Alaska determined to work harder at building a home for us in Alpine and to attend more to my husband's and children's needs. I also determined to let go of disappointment over what I had had to leave behind. I would remind myself that the wonderful experiences and friendships of Cache Valley remain with me as part of my life's journey but are not its destination.

During that transitional summer, Clark and I attended BYU Education Week evening classes together and learned some important truths in a class on seeking personal revelation. I began to feel that while I was deeply engaged with all my projects in Cache Valley, I had lost my ability to hear the Spirit whisper to me concerning the direction my life was taking. As our lives settled down and the children enjoyed coming home for lunch, every one of them asked, "You aren't going to start your Outdoor Adventure class here, are you? Will you get back to being the kind of mom that bakes things?" As a new mother I had enjoyed learning to make specialty breads. But homemade bread, cookies, and clean floors were not the real issue, of course. I realized anew the importance of a mother's willingness to simply be there for her children.

Ecologists use the term ecotone for zones such as lakeshores, ocean beaches, and forest meadows where two ecosystems overlap. Much of the "action" that ecologists enjoy observing takes place in these zones of overlap. Many ecologists call this action the "edge effect." In ecotones, diversity of plant and wildlife flourishes because organisms from two different ecosystems are brought together. The area of overlapping ecosystems tends to be more complex than any single ecosystem by itself. Humans are attracted to edges. Beaches and meadows are wonderful places to be.

When I look at myself, I see that I tend to gravitate to an ecotone lifestyle. I want to combine the botanist-ecologist-teacher-artist-writer parts of who I am with my most important roles of wife and mother. But complete overlap does not work for me. I have learned that I must be very selective in what additional projects I pursue while acting in my eternally significant roles.

No one single pattern or solution, however, fits all our situations. My friend Karen Fisher, for instance, has worked very hard as a single mom to raise her four children. For seven years she has supported her family by teaching full-time as an elementary teacher. As her children grow towards being successful, happy adults, Karen feels strongly that the Lord has blessed her to balance her full-time work as a teacher with her full-time role as a parent. She feels that when parents—mothers or fathers—pursue professional interests for self-fulfillment or escape from stressful parenting or less glamorous family duties, they must be very careful to regularly inquire and re-evaluate if their choices are in keeping with what the Lord wishes them to do at that point in their lives.

I have learned that this process of "course corrections"— weighing trade-offs and postponing personal desires for the needs of others—may need to be repeated often, so that the things most important are not sacrificed for short-term rewards.

In my case, I looked forward to being again a full-time wife and mother and guiding our family life back to a more stable and tranquil state, yet I still felt a terrible void from saying good-bye to all my projects. I phoned the Monte Bean Museum to find out what types of naturalist programs they offered. A team of three professors were putting together a new environmental education program for secondary school students. After they reviewed the materials I had developed for the Outdoor Adventures program, I was welcomed to the science research team, working (very part-time) to develop and write curriculum for the program.

But the happy turn of circumstances doesn't end there. Clark is also involved as part of that team. Working together, we are developing a program that we both believe in and feel enthusiastic about. We even travel together to different parts of the state, photographing and judging which sites will best serve this project.

I have learned another important lesson, one I hope I never forget. In preparing a lesson for my MIA Maids recently, I was struck by this scripture: "Search diligently, pray always, and be believing, and all things shall work together for your good." (D&C 90:24.) Shortly after this lesson, I was called into the Primary presidency. When I was set apart, the bishop blessed me with the ability to channel my gifts and knowledge to bless the lives of the children in our ward.

Every season of a woman's life holds differing limitations, compensations, and opportunities. Here at the edge of another season of life with all my children now in school, each year seems to pass more quickly, each season turns more swiftly. How important it is for me to learn how to choose the best use of each day remaining to me here, best befitting each season of life I pass through. It has been said that life is God's greatest gift to humankind, and what we do with our life is our gift to God. I'm striving to learn grace by grace as I navigate life's rapids how best to use my gifts in the stewardships I have been given.

---
Notas:
[^1] Teachers can praise. "Peter, that was an excellent solution to that problem." "Janice, you turned in a perfect paper." "Kurt, that was another perceptive comment."
