Susette Fletcher Green, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women in the Covenant of Grace ( 1994)

Grace and the Risk of Agency

Grace and Glory: Strength from Our Savior

CHIEKO N. OKAZAKI [^1]

In Psalm 84:11-12, we read: "For the Lord God is a sun and shield: the Lord will give grace and glory: no good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly. O Lord of hosts, blessed is the [man or woman] that trusteth in thee." I testify to the grace and goodness of the Savior. I have felt his Spirit and have pondered his grace and glory.

We all know what it means to be blessed of God when we trust in him and how the Lord is a sun and a shield—but the concepts of grace and glory may seem abstract, far away, perhaps even reserved for the next life. Nevertheless, I believe that we can experience grace and glory here and now. Let me illustrate my very simple definitions of each with a story.

When I became principal of my first elementary school, the outgoing principal, among other orientation information, said, "And watch out for Kevin. He's always disruptive—in class or on the playground. He constantly slips out of class. And he's responsible for most of the vandalism that goes on around here."

I said, "Oh, thank you very much." But I thought, "Whether this is true or not, here's a fifth grader who needs another chance."

I always got to school about six-thirty or seven, so that I had half an hour or an hour to work in my office. When the teachers started arriving about seven, I'd walk through the halls and classrooms, saying "Good morning" and taking time for a quick word if any of them had problems or questions. By the time the children started arriving, I was out on the playground to meet the buses and say hello to the children walking from their homes. Within a few days, I knew most of the children, but I made a point of meeting Kevin the first day, before anything had gone wrong, before he'd been in trouble with me even once. I saw in Kevin what he was capable of. I felt that, given respect, he would freely choose to use his boundless energy and influence over his peers to help. After two or three days, when he and I had had three or four brief conversations, I said, "Kevin, everybody says that you know this school like the back of your hand. You know where everything is. Is that right?"

"Yeah," he said, a little defiantly. "That's right."

"Well," I continued, "I'm new here, and I don't know the school as well as you do. Will you help me when I need it?"

His whole face shone. He wriggled with pride. I saw him grow three inches taller. "Sure, Mrs. O.," he said. "You can ask me anything."

So I did. A couple of weeks later while I was out greeting the children on Monday morning, I noticed that the playground fence had been damaged over the weekend. "Hi, Kevin," I said. "Look at our fence. Looks like something happened to it over the weekend. Did you see or hear anything?"

He planted his hands on his hips and shook his head disgustedly. "These kids!" he exclaimed. "They should know better than that. Don't worry, Mrs. O. I'll check this out." It was the last time we had damage to the fence.

Another time, the playground garbage cans had been carted to a far corner of the schoolyard. Again, I called on Kevin's expertise. "Kevin," I said, "what do you think became of our garbage cans?"

Again his response was proprietary disgust. "Some people!" he exclaimed. "Don't worry, Mrs. O. I'll take care of it." Within a few minutes, he'd organized a group of friends, and they were hauling the garbage cans back. And this time they stayed.

I knew what had happened to the fence and who had moved the garbage cans in the first place. I'd been a teacher for twenty years, so there wasn't much about kids that surprised me. But the point I want to make here is one about grace and glory.

I gave Kevin grace by believing in him, by giving him a second chance, a clean start, an unprejudiced beginning. It was something he hadn't earned, and the former principal probably would have argued that he never would earn it. My perception was that there was no way he could earn his way out of the prejudice he was laboring under. He didn't have any way of knowing, ahead of time, whether I was going to be merciful or prejudiced. His recognition of the grace produced glory—that look on his face as he drew himself up straighter, beaming with pride and delight.

This is the definition I'd like to explore. Grace is the state in which we live, surrounded by the love of God. But love is not warm, marshmallowy, indiscriminate affection. God's love is fully particular, embracing our individual beauties, strengths, and gifts. Receiving that grace leads us to give people a second chance, which means believing in them, seeing their strengths and potential for good, not simply wiping the slate clean. My conviction is that we are all different and that God loves and enjoys those differences. He knows us and loves what he knows. God's love is ennobling, sustaining, and personal. Glory comes when we recognize and acknowledge his love with gratitude and increased love of our own. We glorify God with our instinctive praise for his goodness when we recognize that what we have received is grace.

Let me explain in a little more detail how I think grace and glory work. God's love fills our lives every day with every breath we take. We all know that intellectually, but we don't always realize it with our hearts. Grace is a gift of love from our Father and our Savior, so tender, so loving, and so lovely that it pierces us with sweetness. At such moments, the masks that cover our everyday lives suddenly drop, and we see divine reality. If we have been shattered by sorrow and adversity, we suddenly realize that the Savior is there with us, buoying us up. If we are oppressed and wearied by many things, suddenly we realize that we are also surrounded and sustained and uplifted by the loving hands of Jesus Christ, who walks beside us and lends us his own strength. If we are overwhelmed by the feeling that we aren't very strong, very beautiful, very valuable, suddenly we realize that in God's eyes we are infinitely precious, that we are yearned over, cherished, and loved.

We realize, in fact, that we are part of a great pattern of love, that Jesus Christ willingly died for us—for you, for me. We realize that our Heavenly Father, whose love for us is boundless and eternal at the same moment that it is particular and individual, was willing to allow his Beloved Son, his Firstborn, to accept the mantle of redeemer and to accomplish the Atonement on our behalf. Think how you are moved and stirred by an act of generous love on the part of one of your children. Then think with what increased love, mingled with pride and grief, our heavenly parents accepted the willing offer of Jesus Christ. Think how that love must have drawn them even closer together. Yet in that love was the desire, even the will, to reach out and include us as well. We are brought into that family circle as an act of love and generosity and mercy. We are brought into that circle, in fact, as an act of grace. We will realize that grace fully, perhaps, in the next life, because we will be alive every moment in its radiance. But we will recognize it from the moments of piercing sweetness that we experience in this life.

If this is grace—the moment of recognizing and feeling God's love that already surrounds us—then what is glory? Again, my definition is simple. It is impossible to respond to a moment of grace with anything but an outpouring of gratitude and a welling up of love. When our rising love and joyful gratitude meet the shower of mercy and love from the Savior and from our heavenly parents, in that contact is the pure radiance and the brilliant light of glory.

The Doctrine and Covenants tells us: "The light which shineth, which giveth you light, is through him who enlighteneth your eyes, which is the same light that quickeneth your understandings; which light proceedeth forth from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space—The light which is in all things, which giveth life to all things, which is the law by which all things are governed, even the power of God." (D&C 88:11-13.)

I see that light issuing forth from our Father to fill every corner of the universe just as the light of the sun travels through the immensity of space to reach our earth. The light itself is invisible, unseen in the immensity of space, until it encounters something that it can shine upon. In the envelope around Earth, the interaction between our atmosphere and sunlight produces blue sky and golden light, warmth, and the energy that keeps the whole process of life in motion. Is the spiritual light that issues forth to fill the immensity of space any less real, any less tangible in its effects than sunlight? It falls as grace upon each of us, like a planet orbiting in the blackness of solitary space. Some of us, sadly, cannot perceive that light and recognize it for what it is. Many others receive it unthinkingly, uncomprehendingly. But when it is received with intelligent and thankful recognition, with a heart open to the direct and personal expression of love that such grace represents, then, at that moment, glory springs into being like a fountain of fireworks and rejoicing.

When Joseph Smith saw the Father and the Son, they were "two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description," standing in the radiance of "a pillar of light . . . above the brightness of the sun." (JS-H 1:17, 16.) There are more than eight million of us in the world today who have been stirred by the recounting of that story, who have thrilled to the love and mercy of the Father and the Son. But think of it from the divine perspective as well. How long had they waited for a beloved child to call upon them in faith? How long had they waited for a son with a heart prepared to receive them? No wonder they came in glory! Of course they are constantly surrounded by glory and dwell in glory. It is an attribute of their godhood. But we mortals perceive the glory when our hearts are prepared to see it.

I know that I have much to learn about both grace and glory and what both of those terms mean from God's perspective; but from my human perspective, grace comes in those moments when we see the divine love and acceptance that surrounds us, and glory comes when we respond to that vision with gratitude and love. At such moments, we know who we are because we know whose we are.

Do you remember Joseph Smith's vision of the celestial kingdom? In that vision, both grace and glory play a prominent role. He wrote: "And thus we saw the glory of the celestial, which excels in all things—where God, even the Father, reigns upon his throne forever and ever; before whose throne all things bow in humble reverence, and give him glory forever and ever. They who dwell in his presence are the church of the Firstborn; and they see as they are seen, and know as they are known, having received of his fulness and of his grace; and he makes them equal in power, and in might, and in dominion." (D&C 76:92-95.)

I want to explore two ideas related to grace and glory. First, faith helps us perceive grace. Second, grace is a free act of love.

The Role of Faith

First, consider how faith helps us perceive grace. Isn't faith the purpose of mortality? Didn't we come here to the earth to walk by faith so that we might learn to see through the masks and myths of this world to the eternal reality that underlies it? That reality is that we live in a personal world created by love and agency. We are free to choose, every day and every hour, either to increase or decrease the amount of love and the amount of agency in our world. The reality is that the most solid and reliable fact in the universe is not the laws of physics or the might of armies but the personal relationship we have in our hearts with our Savior, Jesus Christ. And we can see that reality, which is the love of Christ, only through the eyes of faith.

Let me share with you a story to illustrate the strength that comes from faith and the reality of spiritual things. Malcolm Muggeridge, a prize-winning British journalist, writes of Mother Teresa's charity work among the poorest of the poor in the Calcutta slums: "Statistically speaking, what she achieves is little, or even negligible. But then Christianity is not a statistical view of life. That there should be more joy in heaven over one sinner who repents than over all the hosts of the just, is an anti-statistical proposition. Likewise with the work of the Missionaries of Charity. Mother Teresa is fond of saying that welfare is for a purpose—an admirable and a necessary one—[but that] Christian love is for a person. The one is about numbers, the other about [Christ]." [^2] In other words, one is about works, and the other is about grace.

More than twenty years ago, Muggeridge filmed a documentary for the BBC about Mother Teresa's work. After much fervent persuasion, Mother Teresa finally agreed to the project and wrote: "Now let us do something beautiful for God." [^3] Muggeridge arrived just the day before a general strike to find the courtyard of Mother Teresa's large, nondescript headquarters "just a bare stone space between walls with the sun beating down and, outside, the screech of the trams, the shouts, the interminable passing of bare or sandalled feet, of a Calcutta street." Even the chapel windows looked out on the street, and the noises from the street washed in steadily, a constant reminder to the sisters, even at prayer, of the poor outside. Yet the spiritual reality was quite different. Mother Teresa's courtyard, Muggeridge wrote, had "something delectable about it." [^4]

A fifty-minute documentary usually takes two or three months to film, but they had only five days. There was no chance to reshoot any footage with problems. The Calcutta sun was broiling, and the cameraman worried that the film would be damaged. The physical reality was grim. But the spiritual reality was quite different. Muggeridge wrote: "It is not just my opinion but that of all concerned, that [the filming] proceeded with quite exceptional smoothness and speed. Our next move always seemed to be obvious; there were none of the usual breakdowns and crises. Above all, there were no bickering or quarrelling, which, in the circumstances of film-making, is almost unavoidable." [^5]

Mother Teresa decided where they would go, when they would go, and what they would shoot, changing her mind at the last minute at one point. This remarkable ease in filming was "a kind of miracle" for these professionals and technicians, but Muggeridge also records an actual miracle. Part of the film was to be shot in the House of the Dying. This old temple, formerly dedicated to the goddess Kali, holds people from the streets of Calcutta who are too ill to be cured; the Sisters of Charity take them where they can receive simple care and, as Mother Teresa puts it, "die within sight of a loving face." [^6]

Filming here posed immense technical challenges for Muggeridge and his crew; the only windows were small and high up on the walls. The lighting was so dim that Ken, the cameraman, was "adamant that filming was quite impossible. . . . We had only one small light with us, and to get the place adequately lighted in the time at our disposal was quite impossible. It was decided that, nonetheless, Ken should have a go, but by way of insurance he took, as well, some film in an outside courtyard where some of the inmates were sitting in the sun. In the processed film, the part taken inside was bathed in a particularly beautiful soft light, whereas the part taken outside was rather dim and confused. . . . [E]veryone who has seen the film [agrees] . . . that the light in the Home for the Dying is quite exceptionally lovely. . . . How to account for this? Ken has all along insisted that, technically speaking, the result is impossible. To prove the point, on his next filming expedition—to the Middle East—he used some of the same stock in a similarly poor light, with completely negative results. He offers no explanation, but just shrugs and agrees that it happened." [^7]

Muggeridge's explanation is much simpler: "I am personally persuaded that Ken recorded the first authentic photographic miracle. . . . [It was,] in fact, the Kindly Light [Cardinal John Henry] Newman refers to in his well-known exquisite hymn ["Lead Kindly Light"]. . . . Mother Teresa's Home for the Dying is overflowing with love. . . . This love is luminous . . . an outward and visible luminosity manifesting God's inward and invisible omnipresent love." [^8]

Mother Teresa is a pure and powerful witness to the Savior's grace, which she perceives as the love of God and which she manifests in her life as a blessing to others. These good people could see what the Doctrine and Covenants teaches us—that the light of Christ can fill the immensity of space and enlighten everyone who comes into the world. (D&C 88:12; 84:46.) I think Mother Teresa embodies the Spirit of Christ, and I think that we, too, can embody it. Every act of kindness, every generous gesture, every merciful word increases the amount of love in our world. Each of those acts recognizes the grace that surrounds our lives like a halo; and every spark of recognition ignites that halo into a blaze of glory. Faith allows us to pierce through the physical masks that tell us the world is harsh and even horrible to find the spiritual reality of love, grace, and glory underneath.

Grace Is Free

I was an elementary school teacher and principal for most of my adult life. One of the high points of every fall was Halloween. I've always enjoyed Halloween—and believe me, it's a big holiday in an elementary school—because the children are just aglow with joy over it. Why do children enjoy it so much? I think they love dressing up in costumes and being someone else for a little while, of course. They're trying on a different identity and exploring a dream. But I also think there's another reason: children are on the receiving end of the treats without having to work for them or explain why they want them. There aren't many occasions when a child's desires are met, literally on demand. As responsible and conscientious parents, we ask them to explain why they want to go somewhere, do something, invite someone over, buy a new item, or especially get candy. How frustrating it must be for them when we say, in effect, "Sorry, your reasons aren't good enough!"

So the whole year is a time of works for children, so to speak, but Halloween is a day of grace. Of course works are important. We know how essential it is to recognize our duties, to serve conscientiously, to work hard at righteousness, to be disciplined disciples, to endure to the end. Judging only by physical reality, we must conclude life is hard. It is filled with adversities, challenges, temptations, and sorrow. The voice of physical reality says, "We pass through sorrow." The voice of faith says, "For it must needs be, that there is an opposition in all things," and "Adam [and Eve] fell that [we] might be; and [we] are, that [we] might have joy." (2 Nephi 2:11, 25.) And the voice of grace says, "Yea, though you walk through the valley of the shadow of death, you need fear no evil: for I am with you. My rod and my staff, they comfort you." (See Psalm 23:4.)

The point I'm trying to make is that grace is a free gift to us—not something we earn or pay for or that dangles in front of us like a carrot that we can reach if we are very obedient. Nephi, in describing his labor to preserve the plates and record his own revelations, says, "For we labor diligently to write, to persuade our children, and also our brethren, to believe in Christ, and to be reconciled to God; for we know that it is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do." (2 Nephi 25:23.) Sometimes I've heard people quote that scripture in a way that gives me the impression that I am floundering in a river, being swept toward a great waterfall. As I struggle desperately toward the shore, I see a man waiting with a life preserver on a rope, but he doesn't throw me the ring. I struggle harder, more desperately, and he shouts, "Come on! I'll save you, but only after all that you can do." I wonder if there's a possibility that he'll just watch me disappear over the falls while he shakes his head sadly and says, "Isn't that too bad? She didn't do all she could do."

My feeling about Nephi's statement is very different. Christ is in the river with us, not standing on the shore. He is the master of wind and wave, the creator of the river and the falls. He can walk on the water and command the storms to obey him. Yet he is in the water with us, feeling the batterings of the same current. He lends us his strength so we can try. He gives us his vision so that we can see the shore. He whispers encouragement in our ears. When we are exhausted, his arm is there for us to lean on. It may be true that we can always do more—but not because we have no limits. It's because he has none.

Grace is not a few feet of rope. Grace is a network of support and love. It is with us, around us, under us, above us every minute of every day. When we act in an awareness of grace, we ourselves become vessels of grace. Joni Eareckson Tada has written: "Whenever those around you see God's character displayed in your attitudes and responses, you are displaying His glory. . . . God's glory isn't reserved for a temple of stone or some heavenly vista. It can shine out clearly while you're changing a flat on the freeway . . . or counseling an angry co-worker . . . or lying in a hospital bed . . . or balancing two crying babies in the church nursery." [^9]

In this last year, my awareness of and my gratitude for the Savior's grace that gives me strength to live with grace myself has lengthened, deepened, and grown strong and tall. When I spoke at last year's Women's Conference, my husband, Ed, had been dead for only six weeks. I have had a year to accustom myself to the new rhythm of living without him, and it has been very hard. We had been married for almost forty-three years, and there was no part of my life he did not share. He was fully supportive of my calling, seeing my needs and meeting them as quietly and as happily as he did everything. If I took clothes to the dry cleaner's, a few days later, they would reappear in the closet. Ed had picked them up for me. He did the laundry and the shopping. While I was making supper, Ed would be sweeping the floor, emptying the dishwasher, and asking me how things had gone that day, telling me about an interesting meeting he'd attended, friends he had heard from, or remembering that a daughter in our hometeaching family had a birthday coming up and that he'd arranged for us to take her out for ice cream.

If I told him that I'd been asked to address a singles' fireside and was wondering what approach I, a long-time married woman, could take that would not sound patronizing, Ed would talk over ideas with me; a few days later, he'd hand me two or three articles and stories he thought I might be able to use. If we had guests, they walked into an orderly house, because Ed had cleaned and arranged it with an eye to their comfort. Before every meal, it was with Ed I shared a moment of gratitude to our Heavenly Father for his blessings. No day closed without uniting our hearts and our voices in prayers of gratefulness for our home and our sons, for the gospel's joyous message, and for each other. Together we petitioned the Lord for our needs, to help our children, to bless the leaders of the Church, and to keep us in his Spirit.

Now Ed is gone. If the clothes reappear in the closet, it's because I put them there. If the water heater needs either to be repaired or replaced, that decision is mine alone. I still talk over my day with Ed, and I often feel him with me, but I can no longer hear his voice in reply, in support, in questions and discussion.

Ed is gone, but I am not alone. I face my days and my nights, despite the difficult moments they contain, knowing that the Savior, whose Spirit permeated our home and whose love underlay the thousands of kindnesses that Ed performed, is still with me. I still feel that love and kindness. I have claimed in a new way the scriptural promises: "I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee." (Hebrews 13:5.) "Lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world." (Matthew 28:20.) "I am the Lord, I change not." (Malachi 3:6.) I feel the Savior's grace in my life. Even in the desolation and sorrow of this last year have come unforgettable experiences of grace that have filled me with amazement at their sweetness and that have dazzled me with the glory of seeing the hand of the Lord in my life.

One of those moments came at Ed's funeral. At his request, expressed long before his death, I invited a Polynesian choir to sing at the funeral services. Sharing my sorrow, they expressed their own love for Ed in their music at the chapel. But I will never forget standing in the cemetery later with Ed's casket before me, after our son dedicated the grave, after military honors had been rendered to Ed, and feeling the whole weight of that loss towering above me, ready to fall like a wave. Quietly, lovingly, without a request or a plan, those dear Saints began singing the Hawaiian songs that Ed and I loved so much—songs of farewell and sorrow, songs of love and acceptance, songs of faith and affirmation. They strengthened me with their gift of aloha. They reached out across that terrible abyss of loneliness to tell me that I was not alone. I thanked them then, and I thank them now, for their act of grace.

Conclusion

We live in a world of grace; we are surrounded, encircled, enwrapped, and continually showered by grace. When we see that and let our hearts respond with the increased gratitude and love that are surely an instinctive response, we can make it a world of grace and glory. When we exercise faith, we can pierce the mask of physical reality and perceive the spiritual reality that lies beneath it. Grace is a free gift to us from a loving Father and Savior; and to honor our agency, it remains for us to accept and receive the gift.

What would it be like for us to inhabit such a world? Right now, we can see that reality only in brief moments and enter that world only as a visitor. But this will not always be so. All of the promises of the scriptures tell us that we are the children of that world, fitted to receive and to perceive the grace of God and created to dwell in eternal glory if we choose. Doctrine and Covenants 101 contains a beautiful description of the millennial world that may, I think, give us a taste of that experience. Joseph Smith wrote:

"And in that day the enmity of man, and the enmity of beasts, yea, the enmity of all flesh, shall cease from before my face.

"And in that day whatsoever any [one] shall ask, it shall be given. . . .

"And in that day Satan shall not have power to tempt any [one] .

"And there shall be no sorrow because there is no death. . . .

"Yea, verily I say unto you, in that day when the Lord shall come, he shall reveal all things . . .

"Things most precious, things that are above, and things that are beneath, things that are in the earth, and upon the earth, and in heaven.

"And all they who suffer persecution for my name, and endure in faith, though they are called to lay down their lives for my sake yet shall they partake of all this glory.

"Wherefore, fear not even unto death; for in this world your joy is not full, but in me your joy is full." (D&C 101:26-36; emphasis added.)

May our faith in the Lord Jesus Christ grow line upon line and precept upon precept, increasing in grace until, like Enos of old, we may see His face with pleasure and dwell in His presence as partakers of His glory and in Him find a fullness of joy.

---
Notas:
[^1] Corpus Christi Last night, by chance, I read old myths of Attis and Osiris, those murdered gods, of the Fisher Kings killed to get one more green summer; read how New Guinea tribesmen tear the flesh of their human offering, sharing it like bread. What ghastly sacrament for those first twelve—this is my body, my blood. Remember me. 2. Hosanna For He rose from death like sweet grass springing. In the morning He rose like the small sparrow taking the air with a sudden whisper, just one twig behind him swinging. 3. As We Partake I start with spring: the tight pink bud, the pale leaf. Something these eight-year-olds have seen. They know it is a miracle. They've held the small hard seeds and buried them. This, I tell them, is resurrection. Their eyes gaze past me, amazed, believing; hands and feet wonderfully still. Their eyes are seeing new life sprouting out of graves, beautiful bodies swaying like young cherry trees.
[^2] Teachers can criticize. "Laura, that handwriting was pretty sloppy." "Cut out the nonsense, Jim. You know better than that." "You are not thinking very clearly."
[^3] Teachers can help or remediate. "Why don't you try it this way, Nancy?" "How do you think the situation would improve if you tried it this way, Tom?" "Barry, your long-division problems will be easier to solve if you line your numbers up more carefully."
[^4] Teachers can also respond with nonjudgmental, neutral comments. "Uh huh." "All right." "Go on." "Okay."
