Susette Fletcher Green, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women in the Covenant of Grace ( 1994)

Living by Grace: A New Frontier

SUSAN EASTON BLACK [^1]

My struggle to understand grace began when I first memorized the Primary song "I Am a Child of God." The ending of the first verse became my childish key to celestial realms. "Teach me all that I must know / To live with him some/*day," was how I sang the stanza. I thought by quoting scripture, knowing multifaceted details of the gospel, identifying slides of the Garden Tomb and Golgotha, I could successfully pass my "final judgment." A score of 72 percent on a gospel multiple-choice test, I hoped, would satisfy my Father in Heaven, and he would say of me, "Well done, thou good and faithful servant: thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy lord." (Matthew 25:21.)

Simply knowing about the gospel seemed sufficient for my eternal salvation. Therefore, descriptive knowledge became absorbing as the song sank deep into my heart. My bishop's admonition to leave the scriptures home and give the Sunday School teacher an opportunity to teach without rebuttal fell on deaf ears, for I knew that correct knowledge was the key to celestial glory. I viewed myself as a self-ordained scriptorian, leading my classmates to greater knowledge and ultimately greater glory.

This distorted, childish view crumbled a few years later. It was a sad day in my life when I heard that Elder Spencer W. Kimball had asked Naomi Randall to change a key word in her song: know was changed to do. He quipped, "Of course, Sister Randall wrote most of the words, but I wrote one!" Now the lyrics stated, "Teach me all that I must do / To live with him someday." Elder Kimball explained, "Just knowing the gospel is not enough. It is doing the will of our Heavenly Father that prepares us to return and live with him someday." [^2] I have known sorrowful days but none quite so discouraging. I soon discovered that the energy required to verbally define faith paled when compared to doing acts of faith. Discussions of true charity lacked eternal import unless I visited the sick. To know the particulars of Christ's ministry without doing Christlike acts now seemed hypocritical, empty, and pretentious.

Somewhat painfully I began to emphasize doing good. Through the ensuing years, my "do-its" mounted one on top of another: wearing dresses of modest length, choosing a bathing suit my mother would not be embarrassed to be seen in, writing journal entries, and reading scripture. As I surveyed my "do-its," I also recognized my "I-didn't-do-its," my failings. It became evident that at some level I felt more worthy, but I was far from perfect. I created my own Tower of Babel, not a Jacob's Ladder, as my outward charity was increasingly laced with inward frustration. The seminary scriptures not yet memorized, journal entries missed, and endless genealogy all underscored my continuing dilemma. Nevertheless, I congratulated myself that my "do-its" did surpass the "I-didn't-do-its," and I continued to hope that the balance of justice would tip in my favor.

Little by little, I began to reach beyond the notion of knowing good and even doing good. I realized that the real challenge is in being good, which was not something I could achieve alone. That encompasses the love and mercy of God. This realization changes the song to, "Teach me all that I must be / To live with him someday." I first glimpsed the infinite implication and power of the concept "to be," which is a form of "I AM," as I reread the account of the Lord's appearance to Moses. Moses inquired: "Behold, when I come unto the children of Israel, and shall say unto them, The God of your fathers hath sent me unto you; and they shall say to me, What is his name? what shall I say unto them?

"And God said unto Moses, I AM THAT I AM: and he said, Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, I AM hath sent me unto you." (Exodus 3:13-14.)

If I am to become Christlike, I must be lifted to fully accept Christ's name, "I AM." My bishop and stake president help me reach "I AM" by asking sincere questions that begin with, "Are you . . . ?" I respond, "I AM." It would be easier if they asked, "Do you know?" or "Do you do?" For example, "Do you know the definition of honesty?" My response: "I can define honesty and even give an example of George Washington and cherry trees." And if he were to say, "Do you do honest acts?" I could declare, "Bishop, my actions are honest." Instead he asks, "Are you honest in all your dealings?" To be temple worthy I must answer with my Savior, "I AM." A second example: "What do you know about tithing?" My simple response would be, "Bishop, it's 10 percent of my increase." And if the bishop asked, "Do you do acts of tithing?" I could respond, "I contribute by helping at home, babysitting, and listening to distressed friends." Instead he asks, "Are you a full tithe-payer?" I answer with my Savior, "I AM." He asks, "Are you morally clean?" Notice the expected response again: you and I answer with our Savior, "I AM."

This form of questioning shifts the focus from gospel knowledge and good works to being. By responding, "I AM," you and I agree to be one with Christ—to become Christlike in our consistency, in our integrity, and in our acknowledgment that we are full tithe-payers, honest, morally clean, and upright in our dealings because of Christ. How can I, so imperfect, so incomplete, answer such questions confidently with, "I AM," knowing my weaknesses and failings? The answer is in the love and mercy of Jesus Christ. We sing, "I stand all amazed at the love Jesus offers me, / Confused at the grace that so fully he proffers me." [^3] For committed, striving people, his grace, his mercy, can make up the difference between what we are and what we will ultimately become. Thus, it is by and through his love that you and I can answer with assurance that we are worthy to be called children of God.

His love extends the privilege of accepting the name of Jesus Christ in the waters of baptism, making sacred covenants in his holy house, and eventually returning unspotted to our Father in Heaven. With gratitude I express my love for Jesus Christ and for his atoning sacrifice. I internalize the scripture, applying it to my own failings, "Woman, where are those thine accusers? hath no man condemned thee? She said, No man, Lord. And Jesus said unto her, Neither do I condemn thee: go, and sin no more." (John 8:10-11.)

The grace he "so fully proffers" was bought with heaviness, rejection, and deep physical and spiritual anguish at Gethsemane. The resurrected Christ reflected on 7 March 1830: "[This suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit—and would that I might not drink the bitter cup." (D&C 19:18.) Although he battled alone, he did not despair. His suffering brought him at one with his Father—to a completeness, a fullness of love and mercy, a fullness intended for you, for me. His grace is sufficient; the assurance of immortality and eternal life is sure.

I believe in him, and I believe his words, his teachings, and his sacrifice. With that belief comes the assurance that he invites all to come unto him. We accept his invitation by entering the waters of baptism. A new being emerges who covenants to take his name and willingly promises to "bear one another's burdens . . . mourn with those that mourn . . . comfort those that stand in need of comfort, and . . . stand as witnesses of God at all times and in all things, and in all places that ye may be in, even until death." (Mosiah 18:8-9.)

This covenantal acceptance unites with great meaning the phrases "to know," "to do," and "to be." The meaning is perhaps even more true when the phrases are reversed: "to be," "to do," and "to know." "Teach me all that I must be / To live with him some day." Teach me to willingly take upon myself the name of Christ and to enter and keep sacred covenants. "Teach me all that I must do / To live with him someday." For "when ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are only in the service of your God." (Mosiah 2:17.) "Teach me all that I must know / To live with him someday." A peaceful, reassuring knowledge will fill your soul, and your hope will grow brighter as your life becomes more pleasing to our Father in Heaven.

This order of events is neither something I created nor a new insight: it is of ancient origin. When reciting the sacramental prayer upon the bread, we hear the divine order. "That they are willing to take upon them the name of thy Son," which means they take upon them the name of Christ or "I AM"—to be. The "to do" is found in the next two phrases: "And always remember him, and keep his commandments which he hath given them." The "to know" is found in the final phrase, "that they may always have his Spirit to be with them," which is the peaceful comfort of the Spirit of the Lord. (Moroni 4:3.) I testify that this order will make your life more meaningful because you are, you do, and you know.

I would like to share a personal experience, a brief moment with one who knew the ancient order of being, doing, and knowing. Several years ago I attended a luncheon in which Elder LeGrand Richards was the honored guest. I happened to be sitting close to him and overheard his granddaughter ask, "Granddad, how are you feeling?" He exclaimed, "How dare you ask me that?" It was an awkward moment for the granddaughter and for all who had overheard the exchange. He repeated even louder, "How dare you ask me that?" and added, "Look at me." He then invited those in attendance to look at him. He pulled a few strands from the top of his head while declaring, "This was once a full head of hair." He next removed his glasses and announced their importance to his sight. He took out his hearing aids and pronounced, "I can't hear a sound without the aid of these." He then removed his teeth, exclaiming, "None of these are mine."

After several awkward moments of silence, he turned to his granddaughter and instructed, "Ask me, How are you, LeGrand!" Her initial response was, "I don't want to." But with coaxing, she complied. "How are you, LeGrand?" she asked. Suddenly he stood so all could see him. His countenance had changed as he smiled at the guests and exclaimed, "I have never been better! I have made it! I have run the race, and I have almost finished the course. Soon I will be with my wife and with my Savior."

He taught me the joy that comes to the disciple, the follower of Christ, who knows that through the grace of God he can answer "I AM" to questions of worthiness, who knows he is on the path to return safely to Heavenly Father. He knew the Master because he had been His servant. He knew the Father because he had known the Son. He had done his works and knew by the grace of God that he could rightfully anticipate a glorious resurrection. His lifetime of knowing and doing had led to his being a worthy son, walking the strait and narrow path leading to eternal life. (See 1 Nephi 8:20.)

Grace on a new frontier is to venture into areas where only the righteous have traveled before. It is to accept the invitation to become constant in gospel principles and practices, having an eye single to the glory of God. It is to love him with all our heart, might, mind, and strength. It is to recognize, as Robert L. Millet so aptly stated, that "we in time gain control through being willing to relinquish control. . . . As we submit we come to know his will." [^4] As you and I come to know his will, may we remember that that knowledge comes to us through the grace of God.

---
Notas:
[^1] Corpus Christi Last night, by chance, I read old myths of Attis and Osiris, those murdered gods, of the Fisher Kings killed to get one more green summer; read how New Guinea tribesmen tear the flesh of their human offering, sharing it like bread. What ghastly sacrament for those first twelve—this is my body, my blood. Remember me. 2. Hosanna For He rose from death like sweet grass springing. In the morning He rose like the small sparrow taking the air with a sudden whisper, just one twig behind him swinging. 3. As We Partake I start with spring: the tight pink bud, the pale leaf. Something these eight-year-olds have seen. They know it is a miracle. They've held the small hard seeds and buried them. This, I tell them, is resurrection. Their eyes gaze past me, amazed, believing; hands and feet wonderfully still. Their eyes are seeing new life sprouting out of graves, beautiful bodies swaying like young cherry trees.
[^2] Teachers can criticize. "Laura, that handwriting was pretty sloppy." "Cut out the nonsense, Jim. You know better than that." "You are not thinking very clearly."
[^3] Teachers can help or remediate. "Why don't you try it this way, Nancy?" "How do you think the situation would improve if you tried it this way, Tom?" "Barry, your long-division problems will be easier to solve if you line your numbers up more carefully."
[^4] Teachers can also respond with nonjudgmental, neutral comments. "Uh huh." "All right." "Go on." "Okay."
