Susette Fletcher Green, Dawn Hall Anderson, Women in the Covenant of Grace ( 1994)

Evening Balm and Morning Manna: Daily Gifts of Healing Grace

ELAINE SHAW SORENSEN [^1]

Grace is a powerful, personal doctrine—the essence of the innermost personal connection between the human and the divine. We speak of it with cautious respect, even awe, taking care that a public discussion of the precious, silent gift does not distort it into common dogma rather than an issue of deep personal faith. In our intellectualizing, taxonomizing, and indexing of doctrines, we can lose personal, spiritual meaning. Our own inner "lived experience" as followers of Christ will give us our best understanding of grace.

One Easter I listened to a young man express his gratitude for the atonement of Christ. He was thankful that Jesus did not sin because, he said, "Now all I have to do is repent when I do something wrong; then I can have exaltation." This formula seems to be an immature understanding of the divine nature of Christ's atonement and of the process of exaltation. He spoke as though any one of us might have achieved the Atonement if, by some accidental miracle, we could simply have avoided sin. Similarly, we could, he assumed, achieve salvation by our good works and repentance—essentially by ourselves "with Jesus Christ as merely an advisor." [^2] According to this view, we do not need the direct divine intervention of a Savior.

As a listener that day, my problems were less of major sin and repentance and more of hurt, loss, and despair. It struck me that while surely it is true that Jesus was the only one who could intervene to offer mercy for justice, because he was without sin, just as important as his sinless nature was his godly nature, "full of grace and truth." (John 1:14.) Only he could offer divine healing relief to life's trauma.

Most of us have experienced faith-wrenching experiences that do not fit into the simple "sin-repent-be-saved" equation. Such trials require a deep personal consideration of God's healing gift of grace.

The Meaning of Grace

The word grace itself is beautiful to ponder. Its Greek translation refers to good-will, loving-kindness, or favor. Grace has also been called the "ability to overcome the trials of the world through the love of God." [^3]

Our LDS Bible Dictionary further clarifies the doctrinal principle: "The main idea of the word is divine means of help or strength. . . . It is through the grace of the Lord Jesus, made possible by his atoning sacrifice, that [humanity] will be raised in immortality. . . . It is likewise through the grace of the Lord that individuals, through faith in the atonement of Jesus Christ and repentance of their sins, receive strength and assistance to do good works that they otherwise would not be able to maintain if left to their own means. This grace is an enabling power that allows men and women to lay hold on eternal life and exaltation after they have expended their own best efforts. Divine grace is needed by every soul. . . . However, grace cannot suffice without total effort on the part of the recipient."

The New Testament and the Book of Mormon are filled with doctrines of grace. As Church members, we sometimes hesitate to discuss the principle, however, perhaps because we view grace as some complicated theological philosophy that is either among the mysteries not to be considered or a concern of the resurrection that has nothing to do with our day-to-day lives. Nothing could be further from the truth. We need to recognize the personal nature of grace and its power to heal in our daily living.

Grace and Works

Throughout history people have struggled to recognize the compatibility of the doctrines of works and grace. By the time Jesus came to the earth, the Law of Moses stressed almost exclusively behavioral laws and the singular value of works, especially as the Law had been distorted by the Pharisees and Sadducees. Jesus acknowledged the need for works, but moreover he "fulfilled the law," heralding the divine gift of grace. (Matthew 5:17, 19; John 14:15-21; 15:10.)

When Jesus left the earth and the Apostasy followed, the value of work for salvation again became disproportionate. By the sale of indulgences, for example, sixteenth-century churches, in effect, traded credit toward salvation for works and money. [^4] The buying and selling of indulgences in itself reflected a value on the ability of a person to do (or buy) something to achieve salvation, for himself or another. The leaders of the Protestant Reformation fought this dissonance between works and grace, and indeed they overcompensated by introducing new doctrines of salvation by grace alone.

The harmony of grace and works was an important element of the latter-day restoration of the true doctrine; however, Church members of the new dispensation are naturally inclined to overemphasize works, in contrast to prevalent sectarian doctrines of salvation by grace alone. Our propensity to rely so heavily on works also reflects our present technological, behavioristic society, which places so much emphasis on achievement. We almost worship "all we can do." In business, we measure success by the bottom line. In education, the behaviorist tradition promotes a technical training model that demands specific, measurable outcomes. Such behaviorism works well for goals that are concrete, visible, and rule driven. [^5]

Sometimes, in our spiritual lives, we also desire a simple set of rules to follow with a documented trail of our good actions to help us evaluate our place on the path to heaven or sometimes our more immediate and visible path of acceptance among our mortal peers. Such emphasis upon our own works gives a sense of control. We can find reasons for blessings and see our trials as consequences of failure. The world makes sense to us.

Because we believe so strongly in a theology based on works and repentance, true keystones of our religion, we sometimes risk overemphasizing the behavioristic power of our own works to achieve salvation and exaltation. Then, when adversities beyond our control prevent the perfect good works we desire, we feel we have failed somehow or that God has failed us.

As we strive toward immortality, our mortal nature hungers for a sense of power over all aspects of our lives. Trials or circumstances that leave us powerless make us feel guilty or that we have failed. We seem to prefer feelings of guilt to feelings of helplessness. Yet in many cases, to feel guilty is inappropriate, maybe even prideful. We are not omnipotent; we do not have power over all circumstances and people in our lives. To acknowledge some degree of helplessness is to invite humility and faith, to accept our dependence upon God. "God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace unto the humble." (James 4:6.) We learn more of that principle from Ether 12:27: "If men [and women] come unto me I will show unto them their weakness. I give unto [them] weakness that they may be humble; and my grace is sufficient for all men [and women] that humble themselves before me; for if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them." Grace intercedes to change our focus from what we can or cannot do to who we are. [^6]

Behaviorism alone does not work for things that are spiritual in nature, that cannot be measured: discernment, insight, caring, longing after goodness, creativity, ethical awareness, moral courage, love of learning, concern for excellence, love, charity—or healing. We cannot heal from life's pain, much less aspire to become godly, only by knowing and obeying commandments on a checklist. We must move one step further to submission to the Savior and acceptance of his gift of grace.

Grace is the principle that makes sense of the ironies of the Spirit: power only after submission, victory through surrender, strength by acknowledging weakness, our sin offered to his perfection, the telestial logic of justice transcended by the celestial gift of mercy.

The Need for Healing

Grace, the divine gift of the Atonement, is a healing balm readily available to relieve our pain, a nourishing manna to assuage the hungers of our daily lives. In the arithmetic of the universe, how may grief, regret, or disappointment be accounted for when repentance does not apply or restitution is not possible? Only God's grace can balance the account. Elder Gene R. Cook taught that "Christ was sent not only to help us heal the wounds of transgression and iniquity, but also to bear our grief and sorrow and guilt." [^7]

I have been haunted by countless evidences of my own negligence and inadequacies, which only Christ's atonement will redeem. I see them in the faces of my children when I disappoint them. Poor decisions may cause our families to suffer. Some of us marry the wrong person, and our children suffer; we are negligent or unconscious of acts and words that harm or destroy. The greater part of hurt, guilt, loss, and regret is borne privately, in a quiet heart, away from the warmth and casseroles of supportive friends or family. St. ExupÃ©ry wrote in The Little Prince, "It is such a secret place, the land of tears." [^8] Grace brings to that place the gift of healing that allows peace and growth.

Several years ago, I sat alone in my living room with the scriptures. For years, I had repeated apparently unanswered prayers for repair of a traumatically broken marriage. I was alone, exhausted—almost extinguished. On that night, I cried to the Lord that the only obvious answer—divorce—seemed the wrong answer, that I needed some confirmation for what I must do. That night, as no other in my life, my eyes and heart were guided to passages that gave strength and hope combined with a sweet peace and assurance of purpose for our family: the Lord was with us; we would survive.

It was a good thing that spiritual confirmation was as strong as it was, because subsequent struggles have been nearly overwhelming. Two trying years later, my children and I moved into a new home. The next few months were filled with hope, new friends, more school for me, a new job, and a wonderful welcome into our new ward. I soon settled into the hopeful myth that I had passed with faith the greatest adversity of my life, that what had been sown "in tears" could now be reaped "in joy." (Psalm 126:5.)

Before the next year was through, however, on the eve of general conference, my eight-year-old son, Todd, was killed in a shocking accident. A cog from the very gears that move the planets was gone, and for me there appeared a great dark hole in the universe.

During the months that followed, I learned that it is not enough simply to survive tragedy; trials are in vain if we gain no meaning from them, no healing, and no increase in sensitivity to the daily gifts of God's grace.

Such healing is a lifelong process. Just this last week, I was ambushed by an unexpected return of profound grief over the death of my Todd. For several days I relived the raw moments of his loss. Compounding that, I was feeling overwhelmed and deeply weary with depleting resources, loneliness, and heavy burdens of responsibility that extend into the future as far as I can see.

Through a long-distance telephone call, my mother sensed my renewed despair. She pleaded, in words I could not accept, "You must find a way to let Todd go. Allow him to be where he is, doing what he is doing. You cannot continue to try to cling to him through the veil." She ended in a wise, tearful plea, "You cannot live your whole life in Gethsemane!"

Elder Neal A. Maxwell wrote: "There is, in the suffering of the highest order, a point that is reached—a point of aloneness—when the individual (as did the Savior on a much grander scale) must bear it, as it were, alone. Even the faithful may wonder if they can take any more or if they are in some way forsaken.

"Those who, as it were, stand at the foot of the cross, often can do so little to help absorb the pain and the anguish. It is something we must bear ourselves." [^9]

Anyone who would be a disciple of Christ kneels sometime at Gethsemane. But, as my mother noted, we need not stay. When we can find the courage to surrender, to accept the gift of the Savior—who already suffered there—we can stand and move on to another garden. Grace offers the quiet promise of that safe passage.

Sharing the Manna and the Medicine

When we serve one another, we become divine instruments for gifts of grace, vehicles by which the Savior offers love to others. By being there when another needs us, we are offering God's gifts of daily grace to the lives of others. I am just now becoming aware of the thousands of daily gifts of grace that have allowed me to survive. Foremost among them have been some unplanned precious moments with my children. I have been nourished by some of the simple things they have said.

When my son Chad was thirteen, he began to call me "Mamba La Bamba." Offended, my then-eight-year-old daughter Johanna said, "Mom, you shouldn't let Chad call you Mamba La Bamba. It sounds disrespectful." I thought about it, but aside from "I need money" and "Isn't there anything to eat?" this new nickname was the most syllables I had heard from Chad in two difficult years, so I accepted it as a sign of affection.

A while ago, my son Brian began a campaign to convince me that I should buy him a computerized synthesizer keyboard (you know, the one that costs as much as an entire Hammond organ—but fits in the backseat of the car!). As I prepared dinner, I wasn't really listening to the familiar litany of "It's a good investment," "The neighbors have one," or "It will help me into the celestial kingdom." Again, Johanna the sage patiently explained the parent-child relationship in our family: "Brian, Mom will do things like die for you, but she is not going to buy you a synthesizer!"

Other simple gifts of humor and kindness grace my life. This past month, for instance, my visiting teacher announced, "You are too busy for a lesson. We are not coming this month." As I was deciding whether to show relief or disappointment, she added, "So we are bringing dinner to you on Wednesday!" Wednesday. My longest teaching day at work, the day my children are most ignored—this week, my own personal manna on Wednesday—a gift of grace.

Or take the morning in March several years ago, when I left my house at 4:30 A.M. to commute to the hospital to teach nursing students. As I pulled out at that dark hour, my car lights lit up the secretly relettered realtor's sign at the foot of my driveway. It now read, "Happy Birthday, Elaine."

So few of the most profound events of daily life are really within our control: the bloom of the tulips, the tires on the car that last an extra winter, the needed word from a friend. All are healing gifts of grace.

The Power of Grace in Our Daily Lives

Grace transcends mortal rules of justice. Life is not a mechanical scale of effort or suffering on one side balanced by the appropriate reward on the other. Life is a process of growth, where growth itself becomes the reward. I tired long ago of hearing promises of some future mortal reward equal to my suffering, as when well-meaning friends foresee financial security or loving companionship in a future whose happiness will outweigh the sadness of my past. The deceiving logic of such an idea implies that when life goes on, droning with problems, with no glory in sight, I am not yet worthy or perhaps have not yet suffered enough. That is unsettling, when all around, those apparently less righteous or less tried seem to be reaping the glorious gifts of this earth.

The fact is that trials are neither distributed equally nor sorted according to a subsequent and matching earthly or heavenly treasure. Problems are neither price nor penance for credit toward some misconceived idea of payment. Instead, life itself, even eternal life, with growth, hope, and peace promised by the Savior's atonement, becomes its own reward, offering divine gifts of the Spirit. The proving question is not What will I gain or achieve? but Who will I become?

In the noisiness and confusion of this life, we can lose hope and cling to the obvious, the garish, the brassy, as did the tempters in the time of Elijah: "And a great and strong wind rent the mountains, and brake in pieces the rocks before the Lord; but the Lord was not in the wind: and after the wind an earthquake; but the Lord was not in the earthquake: And after the earthquake a fire; but the Lord was not in the fire: and after the fire a still small voice. . . . Elijah . . . went out, and . . . there came a voice unto him, and said, What doest thou here, Elijah?" (1 Kings 19:11-13.)

Regularly in my own life, I have "wrestled with" and tried to impress God with the storms of my life, have blindly thrashed about seeking his hand in the wind and the earthquake and the fire. (See Alma 8:10.) How many times would he have whispered, "What doest thou here, Elaine?" In the silent still reality that follows, Christ reaches out, offering the quiet peace of his grace, the gift that was always there. Only then comes the healing.

I have sometimes wondered why adversity has seemed to repeat itself so many times, in so many unbecoming forms, in my life of the last several years. A dear friend directed me to the following passage: "Behold, I have created the smith that bloweth the coals in the fire, and that bringeth forth an instrument for his work." (3 Nephi 22:16; cf. Isaiah 54:16-17.) Part of the problem in all our lives is that when we say, "I didn't come here for this. I didn't raise my children for this . . . Why me?" and all the other futile thrashings and flailings, we forget who is forging the instrument and for what purposes.

I want not to speak to you as simply a survivor of trial and tragedy. I want to speak as an instrument, as one who has been fired and may be fired again by "the smith that bloweth the coals in the fire," whom God created for his purposes. I want to know God's will for me as an instrument, not as one who simply survived.

Grace is not evident as we wrestle, though there is something important about the struggle. We must stand still, quietly endure uncertainty and troubling contradictions; then come the unexpected, surprising gifts of the Spirit.

Healing by grace is a process of daily sensing, acknowledging, and transcending pain. In my early days as a nurse, I assumed cure and healing to be synonymous. Healing is not cure. Cure is clean, quick, and done, often even under anesthesia. The antibiotic kills the pathogenic organism, the scalpel cuts out the malignancy, the medicine resolves the distorted chemistry. But healing is a lifelong process of recovery and growth, in spite of, perhaps because of, enduring physical, emotional, or spiritual assault.

Those life-teaching injuries of love and loss cannot occur in surgical suites, where the pain becomes only obscure memory. Cure is passive, as one submits the body to the practitioner. Healing is active. It is the active partaking of the nourishing manna, the active application of the spiritual medicinal balm. It requires all the energy of your entire being. You have to be there, fully aware, awake, and participating when it happens.

The Gift of the Atonement

We receive the enabling grace through the Atonement, "being justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus." (Romans 3:24.) Although we cannot comprehend how it was accomplished, we can accept the marvelous gift of the Atonement. Christ set the pattern even in that. Even he knew the experience of receiving the gift of grace as a process to become more godly: "And I, John, bear record that I beheld his glory, as the glory of the Only Begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth, even the Spirit of truth, which came and dwelt in the flesh, and dwelt among us. And I, John, saw that he received not of the fulness at the first, but received grace for grace; And he received not of the fulness at first, but continued from grace to grace, until he received a fulness." (D&C 93:11-13.)

Even in perfection, Jesus was not free from anguish, suffering the bitterness and adversity of mortality. He lived without sin, the "lamb without blemish" (1 Peter 1:19), yet he knew something of the pain of mortality, and he grew "from grace to grace" (D&C 93:13). That process—grace to grace, the gift of the Atonement, the healing gift of God—is given daily and freely to each of us: "And of his fulness have all we received, and grace for grace. For the law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ." (John 1:16-17.)

Over and over the Savior affirms, "Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you," not because his treasures are hidden but simply because we must awaken and seek what is already there, waiting at the door. (Matthew 7:7; Luke 11:9; 3 Nephi 14:7.) The Savior offers his love and affirmation of our unconditional worth, as we are now and as we may become by acceptance of his grace. The gift of grace is freely given, awaiting our partaking every day, as morning manna, with gifts of enrichment and comfort, and as a healing balm, needed medicine in our desperate struggles to simply survive. Once we awaken to the abundance of the daily gift, we see it everywhere—like manna—in scripture, in literature, in art, in music, in culture, in our service to each other but mostly in the sweet, surprising gifts of life. "For by grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of yourselves: it is the gift of God." (Ephesians 2:8.)

Chapter 1 Notes

Chapter 2 Notes

Chapter 3 Notes

Chapter 4 Notes

Chapter 8 Notes

Chapter 10 notes

Chapter 14 Notes

Chapter 15 Notes

Chapter 17 Notes

Chapter 18 Notes

Chapter 21 Notes

Chapter 22 Notes

Chapter 24 Notes

Chapter 25 Notes

Chapter 27 Notes

Chapter 28 Notes

Chapter 30 Notes

Chapter 32 Notes

Chapter 34 Notes

Chapter 36 Notes

Chapter 38 Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. Jill Mulvay Derr, Janath Russell Cannon, and Maureen Ursenbach Beecher, Women of Covenant: The Story of Relief Society (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1992), p. 249.
[^2] 1. Louis Ginzberg, The Legends of the Jews, trans. Paul Radin, 6 vols. (Philadelphia: The Jewish Publication Society of America, 1987), 3: 134-36.
[^3] 2. Lowell L. Bennion, "For by Grace Are Ye Saved," Dialogue: A Journal of Mormon Thought 1 (Winter 1966): 102.
[^4] 3. Ibid., pp. 102, 101.
[^5] 4. Eliza R. Snow, "An Address," Woman's Exponent 2 (15 September 1873): 68.
[^6] 5. "Come, Come, Ye Saints," Hymns of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1985), no. 30.
[^7] 6. Martha Cragun Cox, "My Dream of a Chain," Journal, typescript, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
[^8] 7. As 1 Samuel 16:7 says: "Man looketh on the outward appearance, but the Lord looketh on the heart."
[^9] 8. My son, Grant, shared this account with me from his missionary experiences.
