Andrew Jenson, Church Chronology ( 1914)

September 21, 1823 (Sunday)

Joseph Smith, jun., while engaged in earnest prayer in his father's house in Manchester, near Palmyra, N. Y., saw the room in which he had retired for the night filled with light surpassing that of noonday, in the midst of which stood a person dressed in white, whose countenance was as lightning, and yet full of innocence and goodness. This was the angel Moroni (sometimes erroneously called Nephi), who informed Joseph that God had a work for him (Joseph) to do, and that his "name should be had for good and evil among all nations." The angel quoted many passages of Scripture, and told Joseph that the native inhabitants of America were a remnant of Israel who had anciently enjoyed the ministry of inspired men, that records engraved on plates of gold, containing their history and also the fulness of the everlasting Gospel had been preserved and were buried in a neighboring hill. While conversing with the angel, a vision was opened to Joseph's view, so that he could see the place where the plates were deposited, and he was told by the angel that he should obtain them at some future day, if he was faithful. After imparting many instructions, the angel disappeared, but returned twice during the night, and repeated what he had said on his first visit; he also gave further instructions.

September 22, 1823 (Monday)

Joseph Smith, jun., was again visited by the angel Moroni and received further instructions. He related what he had seen and heard to his father, who believed his words, and advised him to do as he had been instructed. He then went to the hill (Cumorah) that he had seen in his vision the previous night, and soon found the spot where the plates containing the ancient records were buried in a stone box. He lifted the lid of the box and beheld "the plates, the Urim and Thummim and breastplate, as stated by the angel." While attempting to "take them out," the angel informed him "that the time for bringing them forth had not yet arrived, neither would, until four years from that time."
