Andrew Jenson, Church Chronology ( 1914)

The first Elders arrived in Jackson County, Mo., and the Saints from the State of New York and other places commenced to build up Kirtland, O., where the Prophet Joseph also located with his family. Jackson County, Mo., was named by the Lord a land of Zion where the New Jerusalem should be built, and where the Saints were to gather. The land was dedicated for that purpose, a Temple site selected and dedicated, and the building of a settlement commenced. The Elders also began to preach the gospel with great zeal.

January 2, 1831 (Sunday)

The third conference of the Church was held at Fayette, Seneca Co., N. Y., and a revelation given through Joseph Smith, jun., in which the Lord promised the Saints a land of inheritance. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 38.)

January 5, 1831 (Wednesday)

James Coville, a Baptist minister, who had come to visit Joseph at Fayette, was commanded by revelation through Joseph the Prophet to receive the fulness of the gospel. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 39.)

January 5, 1831 (Wednesday)

As James Coville rejected the word of the Lord and returned to his former doctrines and people, the Lord gave a revelation explaining why he did so. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 40.)

January 5, 1831 (Wednesday)

In the latter part of this month, Joseph Smith, jun. and wife, in company with Sidney Rigdon and Edward Partridge, left Fayette, N. Y., for Kirtland, Geauga Co., O., where they arrived about the first of February.

January 5, 1831 (Wednesday)

Oliver Cowdery and fellow-missionaries arrived in Jackson County, Missouri, where they commenced their mission among the Lamanites on its western border.

February 4, 1831 (Friday)

Edward Partridge was called by revelation to leave his merchandise and be ordained the first Bishop of the Church. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 41.) This was the first revelation given through Joseph the Prophet at Kirtland, O.

February 9, 1831 (Wednesday)

In the presence of twelve Elders, the Lord gave through Joseph Smith, jun., an important revelation on Church government and how transgressors should be dealt with. The Elders were commanded to go out two and two to preach the gospel. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 42.)

February 14, 1831 (Monday)

Oliver Cowdery, Parley P. Pratt, Ziba Peterson, Peter Whitmer, jun., and Frederick G. Williams (who had joined the mission at Kirtland, O.) held a council at Independence, Mo., and decided that Parley P. Pratt should return to the East to report their labors to the heads of the Church.

February 14, 1831 (Monday)

A woman, who pretended to receive commandments, laws and other "curious matters," visited Joseph Smith, jun., who inquired of the Lord and received a revelation in which God said that none but Joseph would be appointed to receive revelations and commandments, as long as he lived and remained faithful. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 43.)

February 14, 1831 (Monday)

A revelation instructing the Elders who had gone on missions to assemble at Kirtland in June following was given to Joseph Smith, jun., and Sidney Rigdon, at Kirtland. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 44.)

March 7, 1831 (Monday)

An important revelation concerning the salvation of man and the calamities of the last days was given through Joseph Smith, jun., at Kirtland. The Saints were also commanded to gather means wherewith to purchase a land of inheritance on which to build a New Jerusalem. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 45.)

March 8, 1831 (Tuesday)

A revelation was given through Joseph Smith, jun., at Kirtland, relative to the gifts of the Holy Ghost, and John Whitmer was called by revelation to be Church Historian. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 46 and 47.)

March 8, 1831 (Tuesday)

Later in March, the Saints were commanded by revelation to save their money to purchase land for an inheritance; and Sidney Rigdon, Parley P. Pratt and Lemon Copley were called by revelation to preach the gospel to the Quakers. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 48 and 49.)

April 1831

Joseph Smith, jun., continued to translate the Scriptures.

May 1831

As a number of Elders did not understand the different spirits which manifested themselves at the time, Joseph Smith, jun., inquired of the Lord and received a revelation. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 50.)

May 1831

The Saints from the State of New York and other places commenced to gather to Kirtland, O., and vicinity; and Edward Partridge was appointed by revelation through Joseph Smith, jun., to locate them for a short time at Thompson, Geauga Co., O., agreeable to the principles of the United Order. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 51.)

June 6, 1831 (Monday)

The fourth conference of the Church was held, at Kirtland, O., on which occasion several brethren were called by revelation to the office of High Priests. This was the first occasion in which this office in the Priesthood was fully revealed and conferred upon any of the Elders in this dispensation.

June 7, 1831 (Tuesday)

Joseph Smith and about thirty other Elders were called by revelation to go to Missouri and preach the gospel by the way. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 52.)

June 7, 1831 (Tuesday)

Later in June, a revelation was given through Joseph Smith, jun., at Kirtland, to Algernon Sidney Gilbert. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 53.)

June 7, 1831 (Tuesday)

The Saints in Thompson, O., were commanded by revelation to remove to Missouri. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 54.)

June 7, 1831 (Tuesday)

The Elders, in obedience to revelation, began to take their departure for the western country two and two.

June 7, 1831 (Tuesday)

About the middle of the month, Wm. W. Phelps arrived at Kirtland with his family. He was commanded by revelation to receive the fulness of the gospel, and then to assist in writing and printing for the Church, and also accompany the Prophet Joseph and Sidney Rigdon to Missouri. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 55.)

June 7, 1831 (Tuesday)

Thomas B. Marsh and others were commanded by revelation through the Prophet Joseph to go to Missouri. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 56.)

June 19, 1831 (Sunday)

Joseph Smith, jun., Sidney Rigdon, Martin Harris, Edward Partridge, Wm. W. Phelps, Joseph Coe and A.S. Gilbert and wife left Kirtland, O., for Missouri.

July 1831

About the middle of this month Joseph Smith, jun., and his companions arrived at Independence, Jackson Co., Mo. The first Sabbath after their arrival Wm. W. Phelps preached to a western audience, over the boundary line of the United States. The following week the Colesville branch arrived. The Lord revealed the location of the New Jerusalem and the spot upon which the Temple was to be built. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 57.)

August 1, 1831 (Monday)

A revelation, directing the Saints how to locate in the land of Zion, was given in Jackson County. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 58.)

August 2, 1831 (Tuesday)

The Saints commenced erecting houses in Jackson County, the first log being laid in Kaw Township, twelve miles southwest of Independence. The log was carried and placed in position by twelve men, in honor of the twelve tribes of israel. On that occasion the land of Zion was consecrated and dedicated by Elder Rigdon for the gathering of the Saints.

August 3, 1831 (Wednesday)

The spot for the Temple, a short distance west of Independence, was dedicated in the presence of eight brethren, among whom were Joseph Smith, jun., Sidney Rigdon, Edward Partridge, Wm. W. Phelps, Oliver Cowdery, Martin Harris and Joseph Coe.

August 4, 1831 (Thursday)

The fifth conference of the Church, and the first in the land of Zion, was held at the house of brother Joshua Lewis, in Kaw Township, Jackson Co., Mo.

August 7, 1831 (Sunday)

Polly Knight, wife of Joseph Knight, sen., died in Jackson County, Mo. This was the first death among the Saints in that land. On the same day Joseph the Prophet received a revelation about the Sabbath. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 59.)

August 8, 1831 (Monday)

A revelation, directing some of the brethren to return to the East, was given through Joseph Smith, jun., in Jackson County. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 60.)

August 9, 1831 (Tuesday)

Joseph the Prophet, in company with ten Elders, left Independence, Mo., in sixteen canoes, on their return to Kirtland, O.

August 11, 1831 (Thursday)

The returning Elders reached McIlwair's Bend (of the Missouri river) where Wm. W. Phelps "saw in open vision, by daylight, the Destroyer in his most horrible power ride upon the face of the water; others heard the noise, but saw not the vision."

August 12, 1831 (Friday)

A revelation was given through Joseph Smith, jun. at McIlwairs' Bend, about the cursing of the waters in the last days. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 61.)

August 13, 1831 (Saturday)

Joseph Smith, jun., and company met several of the Elders on their way to the land of Zion. A revelation was given to them through Joseph Smith, jun., on the bank of the Missouri river. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 62.)

August 27, 1831 (Saturday)

Joseph Smith, jun., Sidney Rigdon and Oliver Cowdery arrived at Kirtland, O., from their visit to Missouri.

August 27, 1831 (Saturday)

Late in August, the Saints were commanded by revelation, through Joseph the Prophet, to purchase lands in Jackson County, Mo., and the future persecutions of the Church were foreshadowed. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 63.)

September 11, 1831 (Sunday)

The Saints were commanded by revelation, through Joseph Smith, jun., to forgive one another; and the Lord, in speaking of the present time, said it was a day of sacrifice and a day of tithing for His people. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 64.)

September 12, 1831 (Monday)

Joseph Smith, jun., removed with his family from Kirtland to Hiram, Portage Co., O., about thirty miles from Kirtland, where he continued the translation of the Bible.

September 12, 1831 (Monday)

Ezra Booth, formerly a Methodist minister, came out as an apostate.

September 12, 1831 (Monday)

A conference was held in Hiram, at which Wm. W. Phelps was instructed to purchase a press and type, at Cincinnati, O., for the purpose of establishing and publishing a monthly paper at Independence, Jackson Co., Mo., to be called the Evening and Morning Star.

October 1831

Early in this month the revelation on prayer was given. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 65.)

October 11, 1831 (Tuesday)

A conference was held at Father John Johnson's house, in Hiram, at which the Elders were instructed about the ancient manner of holding meetings.

October 25, 1831 (Tuesday)

An important conference was held at Orange, Cuyahoga Co., O. Wm. E. McLellin and Samuel H. Smith were called by revelation through Joseph the Prophet to preach the gospel. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 66.)

November 1, 1831 (Tuesday)

At a special conference held at Hiram, Oliver Cowdery was appointed to go to Independence, Jackson Co., Mo., with the revelations which Joseph the Prophet had received up to that time and get them printed. The revelation known as the Preface to the Doctrine and Covenants was given." (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 1.)

November 1, 1831 (Tuesday)

Some of the brethren having criticised the language used in some of the revelations, given through Joseph the Prophet, the Lord gave the wisest among the Elders permission to write a revelation like the least of those the Prophet had received, on certain conditions. (See Doc. and Cov., Sec. 67.)

November 1, 1831 (Tuesday)

Wm. E. McLellin, as the "wisest man in his own estimation," failed in his attempt to write a revelation. (See History of Joseph Smith.)

November 3, 1831 (Thursday)

The revelation called the Appendix was given through Joseph Smith, jun. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 133.)

November 3, 1831 (Thursday)

In a revelation given through Joseph Smith, jun., at Hiram, to Orson Hyde, Luke S. Johnson, Lyman E. Johnson and Wm. E. McLellin, the Lord explained the nature and authority of the Aaronic Priesthood, the duties of parents towards their children, etc. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 68.)

November 3, 1831 (Thursday)

John Whitmer was called by revelation to accompany Oliver Cowdery to Missouri, and to travel among the different branches of the Church in order to obtain information in his capacity as Church Historian. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 69.)

November 3, 1831 (Thursday)

Joseph Smith, jun., Martin Harris, Oliver Cowdery, John Whitmer, Sidney Rigdon and Wm. W. Phelps were appointed by revelation "to be stewards over the revelations and commandments" which had been given. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 70.)

November 3, 1831 (Thursday)

Oliver Cowdery and John Whitmer started for Missouri with the revelations, after which Joseph the Prophet, assisted by Sidney Rigdon as scribe, resumed the translation of the Scriptures.

December 1, 1831 (Thursday)

Joseph Smith, jun,. and Sidney Rigdon were called by revelation to go out and preach the gospel. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 71.)

December 3, 1831 (Saturday)

Joseph Smith, jun., and Sidney Rigdon went to Kirtland in obedience to revelation.

December 4, 1831 (Sunday)

Joseph Smith, jun., and a number of other Elders and members of the Church assembled at Kirtland to learn their duties. Newel K. Whitney was called by revelation to act as Bishop in Kirtland, and the duties of that calling were made known. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 72.)

December 8, 1831 (Thursday)

Geo. Teasdale was born in London, England.
