Andrew Jenson, Church Chronology ( 1914)

During this year the First Presidency of the Church was organized and the translation of the Bible finished by the Prophet Joseph; the corner stones of the Kirtland Temple were laid, and the Saints driven by a mob from their homes in Jackson County, Mo. The Church printing office having been destroyed by the mob in Missouri, a new press and type were secured, and the publication of the Evening and Morning Star was recommenced at Kirtland, O.

January 22, 1833 (Tuesday)

Joseph Smith, jun., Sidney Rigdon, Frederick G. Williams, Newel K. Whitney, Hyrum Smith, Zebedee Coltrin, Joseph Smith, sen., Samuel H. Smith, John Murdock, Lyman E. Johnson, Orson Hyde, Ezra Thayer, Levi W. Hancock and William Smith assembled in conference at Kirtland, O. On this occasion the Prophet Joseph, Zebedee Coltrin and Wm. Smith spoke in tongues, "after which the Lord poured out his spirit in a miraculous manner, until all the Elders and several members, both male and female, spoke in tongues." Praises were sung to God and the Lamb, and speaking and praying in tongues occupied the conference until a late hour at night. (See History of Joseph Smith.)

January 23, 1833 (Wednesday)

The conference was continued at Kirtland. "After much speaking, singing, praying and praising God, all in tongues," the brethren "proceeded to the washing of feet, as commanded of the Lord," according to the practice recorded in John 13:4-15. (See History of Joseph Smith.)

February 2, 1833 (Saturday)

Joseph Smith, jun., completed the translation of the New Testament.

February 27, 1833 (Wednesday)

The revelation known as the "Word of Wisdom," was given through Joseph Smith, jun., at Kirtland. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 89.)

March 8, 1833 (Friday)

A revelation concerning the keys of the kingdom and the oracles of God was given to Joseph Smith, jun., at Kirtland. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 90.)

March 9, 1833 (Saturday)

Joseph Smith, jun., was commanded by revelation not to translate the Apocrypha. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 91.)

March 15, 1833 (Friday)

A revelation concerning Frederick G. Williams was given through Joseph Smith, jun., at Kirtland. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 92.)

March 18, 1833 (Monday)

Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams were appointed and set apart by President Joseph Smith to be his Counselors in the Presidency of the Church, according to the revelation given March 8th. On the same occasion "many of the brethren saw a heavenly vision of the Savior and concourses of angels." (See History of Joseph Smith.)

March 23, 1833 (Saturday)

A committee was appointed to purchase lands for the Saints at Kirtland.

March 26, 1833 (Tuesday)

An important council was held by the High Priests in Jackson County, Mo., in which some misunderstanding in regard to the presiding authorities in that land was amicably settled.

April 1833

In this month the first mob gathered at Independence, Jackson Co., Mo., to consult upon a plan for the removal or immediate destruction of the Church in that county.

April 6, 1833 (Saturday)

About eighty official and some unofficial members of the Church met at the ferry on Big Blue river, near the western boundary of Jackson County, Mo., and, for the first time, celebrated the birthday of the Church.

May 4, 1833 (Saturday)

Hyrum Smith, Jared Carter and Reynolds Cahoon were appointed a committee to obtain subscriptions for building a house for the Priesthood at Kirtland.

May 6, 1833 (Monday)

A revelation on the pre-existence of man was given through Joseph Smith, jun., at Kirtland, and on the same date the Saints were commanded by revelation to build a House to the Lord at Kirtland. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 93 and 94.)

June 1, 1833 (Saturday)

The Lord gave further instructions to Joseph the Prophet about the Temple to be built at Kirtland. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 95.)

June 4, 1833 (Tuesday)

A revelation, showing the order of the Kirtland Stake of Zion, was given to Joseph Smith, jun. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 96.)

June 6, 1833 (Thursday)

A conference of High Priests held at Kirtland, O., instructed the committee for building the House of the Lord to proceed at once in obtaining material for its construction.

June 23, 1833 (Sunday)

Doctor P. Hurlburt, afterwards connected with the spurious Spaulding story, was excommunicated from the Church for adultery.

June 25, 1833 (Tuesday)

An explanation of the plat of the city of Zion was sent to the brethren in Jackson County, Mo. (See History of Joseph Smith.)

July 1833

By this time about twelve hundred Saints, including children, had gathered to Jackson County, Mo.

July 2, 1833 (Tuesday)

Joseph the Prophet finished the translation of the Bible.

July 20, 1833 (Saturday)

The printing office belonging to the Saints at Independence, Jackson Count, Mo., was destroyed by a mob, who also tarred and feathered Bishop Edward Partridge and a Brother Allen.

July 20, 1833 (Saturday)

Orson Pratt preached in Patten, Canada. This is supposed to be the first discourse preached by a Latter-day Saint Elder in The Dominion.

July 23, 1833 (Tuesday)

The Saints at Independence, Mo., made a treaty with the mob and consented to leave Jackson County. Oliver Cowdery was dispatched as a special messenger to Kirtland O., to consult with the First Presidency.

July 23, 1833 (Tuesday)

The corner stones of the Lord's House at Kirtland, O., were laid.

August 2, 1833 (Friday)

In a revelation given through Joseph Smith, jun., at Kirtland, the Lord commanded that a house be built to Him in the land of Zion by the tithing of His people. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 97.)

August 6, 1833 (Tuesday)

The Saints were commanded by revelation to observe the constitutional laws of the land, to forgive their enemies and cultivate a spirit of charity toward all men. Their rights of self-defense were also made clear. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 98.)

August 6, 1833 (Tuesday)

A few days later John Murdock was called to the ministry by revelation. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 99.)

September 11, 1833 (Wednesday)

It was decided in council to establish a printing press at Kirtland, and publish a paper to be called the Latter-day Saints' Messenger and Advocate; also that the Evening and Morning Star, formerly published in Jackson County, Mo., should be published at Kirtland.

September 11, 1833 (Wednesday)

Bishop Edward Partridge was acknowledged as the head of the Church in Zion, and ten High Priests were appointed to watch over the ten branches of the Church there.

October 1833

Orson Hyde and John Gould arrived in Jackson County, Mo., as messengers from Kirtland; and the Church in Zion dispatched Wm. W. Phelps and Orson Hyde to Governor Daniel Dunklin at Jefferson City, with a petition from the Saints.

October 5, 1833 (Saturday)

Joseph Smith, jun., in company with Elders Sidney Rigdon and Freeman Nickerson, left Kirtland on a visit to Canada.

October 8, 1833 (Tuesday)

Wm. W. Phelps and Orson Hyde presented to Governor Daniel Dunklin, of Missouri, the petition from the Saints in Jackson County.

October 12, 1833 (Saturday)

In a revelation given at Perrysburg, N. Y., Joseph Smith, jun., and Sidney Rigdon were commanded to continue their missionary labors in the East. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 100.)

October 19, 1833 (Saturday)

In answer to the petition from the Saints in Jackson County, Gov. Dunklin, of Missouri, wrote a letter to the leading men of the Church in that county, promising to enforce the laws.

October 26, 1833 (Saturday)

Joseph Smith, jun., preached and baptized twelve persons at Mount Pleasant, Upper Canada.

October 31, 1833 (Thursday)

a mob attacked a branch of the Church, west of the Big Blue, in Jackson County, Mo., destroyed ten houses, and beat several of the brethren in a most brutal manner.

November 1, 1833 (Friday)

The Saints at Independence were attacked by a mob, and Gilbert & Whitney's store was partly destroyed, besides many private dwellings.

November 2, 1833 (Saturday)

The mob attacked the Saints on the Big Blue, Jackson County, and beat David Bennett severely.

November 4, 1833 (Monday)

A skirmish took place between a company of Saints and a mob, several miles west of the Big Blue, in Jackson County. Andrew Barber, one of the Saints, was mortally wounded, two of the mob were killed, and several others wounded on both sides.

November 4, 1833 (Monday)

Joseph Smith, jun., returned to Kirtland, O., from his mission to Canada.

November 5, 1833 (Tuesday)

Col. Thos. Pitcher, commanding the mob militia, in Jackson County, demanded that the Saints should give up their arms, which order was reluctantly complied with. During the following night and the next day the mob drove the Saints from their homes at the point of the bayonet. The exiles were thereby exposed to the most severe sufferings from cold and hunger.

November 7, 1833 (Thursday)

On this and the following day the exiled Saints were busy crossing the Missouri river from Jackson to Clay County, Mo., where the inhabitants received them with some degree of kindness.

November 7, 1833 (Thursday)

Others of the Saints found temporary shelter in Ray, Van Buren, Lafayette and other counties.

November 13, 1833 (Wednesday)

A grand meteoric shower or "falling of the stars" was witnessed throughout the land, which cheered the Saints and alarmed their enemies.

December 1833

Persecution raged against the Saints who had fled to Van Buren County, Mo.

December 1833

Oliver Cowdery and Bishop Newel K. Whitney arrived at Kirtland, O., with a new printing press.

December 6, 1833 (Friday)

The Saints in Clay County, Mo., sent another petition to Gov. Dunklin, praying for redress.

December 16, 1833 (Monday)

Joseph Smith, jun., received a revelation at Kirtland, O., in which the Lord said that he had allowed afflictions to come upon the Saints in Missouri because of their transgressions, but that he in His own due time would permit the pure in heart to return to their inheritances. This was illustrated by a parable. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 101.)

December 18, 1833 (Wednesday)

The printing office at Kirtland, O., was dedicated and the publication of the Evening and Morning Star recommenced with Oliver Cowdery as editor.

December 18, 1833 (Wednesday)

Joseph Smith, sen., was ordained Patriarch to the whole Church.

December 19, 1833 (Thursday)

Wm. Pratt and David W. Patten left Kirtland, O., for Missouri, bearing a message from the First Presidency to the exiled Saints.

December 23, 1833 (Monday)

Four aged families, living near Independence, Mo., whose penury and infirmities, incident to old age, forbade a speedy removal, were driven from their houses by a mob.

December 27, 1833 (Friday)

The printing press and materials, taken from the Saints at Independence, Mo., were disposed of by the mob to Davis & Kelley, who removed them to Clay County, and there commenced the publication of the Missouri Enquirer.

December 31, 1833 (Tuesday)

Wilford Woodruff was baptized at Richland, N. Y., by Zera Pulsipher.
