Andrew Jenson, Church Chronology ( 1914)

The first High Council of the Church was organized at Kirtland, O. Zion's Camp made its famous march to Missouri, and a High Council was organized in Clay County, Mo., where most of the Saints, who had been expelled from Jackson County, had located.

January 1, 1834 (Wednesday)

A conference of the scattered Saints in Clay County, Mo., resolved to send Lyman Wight and Parley P. Pratt as special messengers to the First Presidency at Kirtland, O.

February 17, 1834 (Monday)

The first High Council of the Church was organized at Kirtland. The members were Joseph Smith, sen., John Smith, Joseph Coe, John Johnson, Martin Harris, John S. Carter, Jared Carter, Oliver Cowdery, Samuel H. Smith, Orson Hyde, Sylvester Smith and Luke S. Johnson. Joseph Smith, jun., Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams were acknowledged as presidents by the voice of the council. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 102.)

February 19, 1834 (Wednesday)

The first case brought before the High Council was tried at Kirtland.

February 20, 1834 (Thursday)

Lyman Leonard, who had returned from Van Buren County, Mo., and Joseph Summer and Barnet Cole were severely beaten with clubs by a mob in Jackson County, Mo.

February 24, 1834 (Monday)

A revelation concerning the redemption of Zion was given through Joseph Smith, jun., at Kirtland, O. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 103.)

March 28, 1834 (Friday)

Joseph Smith, jun., returned to Kirtland from his trip to the State of New York, whither he went to get volunteers for the expedition to Missouri.

April 9, 1834 (Wednesday)

Dr. P. Hurlburt, the apostate, who had threatened the life of Joseph the Prophet, was put under $300 bonds in Chardon, Ohio.

April 10, 1834 (Thursday)

The United Order at Kirtland was dissolved.

April 10, 1834 (Thursday)

The Saints, who had been expelled from Jackson County, Mo., wrote a petition to the President of the United States, asking for redress.

April 23, 1834 (Wednesday)

A revelation was given through Joseph Smith, jun., concerning the order of Enoch. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 104.)

April 24, 1834 (Thursday)

On this and the following six days the mob burned about one hundred and fifty houses belonging to the Saints in Jackson County, Mo.

May 1, 1834 (Thursday)

Over twenty men with four baggage wagons left Kirtland, O., for Missouri and traveled to New Portage, about fifty miles distant, where they waited for the rest of the company from Kirtland.

May 3, 1834 (Saturday)

At a conference of Elders, held at Kirtland, the Church was first named "The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints."

May 5, 1834 (Monday)

Joseph Smith, jun., left Kirtland with the remainder of the company, which was being organized for the relief of the suffering Saints in Missouri.

May 7, 1834 (Wednesday)

The Prophet's company of volunteers, known in the history of the Church as Zion's Camp, was partly organized, consisting of over one hundred and fifty men with twenty baggage wagons.

May 8, 1834 (Thursday)

The organization of Zion's Camp was completed, and it traveled twelve miles.

June 4, 1834 (Wednesday)

On this and the following day Zion's Camp crossed the Mississippi river into Missouri. Sylvester Smith rebelled against the order of the company.

June 8, 1834 (Sunday)

Zion's Camp was strengthened by a company of volunteers led by Hyrum Smith and Lyman Wight. It then numbered two hundred and five men and twenty-five baggage wagons.

June 16, 1834 (Monday)

A large meeting of the citizens of Clay County, Mo., held at the Liberty court house, failed to adjust the difficulties between the Saints and the Jackson County people. From the meeting Samuel C. Owens, James Campbell and about thirteen other mob-leaders started for Jackson County to raise a mob, in which, however, they failed, as Mr. Campbell and six others were drowned in attempting to cross the Missouri River.

June 19, 1834 (Thursday)

Notwithstanding the threats of enemies, Zion's Camp passed through Richmond, Mo., and camped at night between two branches of Fishing river. A mob, numbering over three hundred men, who had arranged to concentrate that night to attack them, were prevented from crossing the river by a terrible storm.

June 22, 1834 (Sunday)

An important revelation was given to Joseph Smith, jun., on Fishing river, in which the Lord told his Saints that the time for the redemption of Zion had not yet come. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 105.)

June 23, 1834 (Monday)

Zion's Camp arrived at a point near Liberty, Clay County, Mo.

June 24, 1834 (Tuesday)

The cholera, which during several preceding days had attacked some of the brethren, broke out in its most terrible form in Zion's Camp. It continued its ravages about four days; sixty-eight of the Saints were attacked and thirteen died, among whom was A. Sidney Gilbert, a prominent man in the Church; he expired on the 26th.

July 1, 1834 (Tuesday)

In company with a few friends, Joseph Smith, jun., visited Jackson County, Mo., secretly.

July 3, 1834 (Thursday)

The High Priests of Zion assembled in Clay County, Mo., and organized a High Council with David Whitmer as president and Wm. W. Phelps and John Whitmer as counselors. The members of the council were: Christian Whitmer, Newel Knight, Lyman Wight, Calvin Bebee, Wm. E. McLellin, Solomon Hancock, Thos. B. Marsh, Simeon Carter, Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, John Murdock and Levi Jackman.

July 9, 1834 (Wednesday)

Joseph Smith, jun., started on his return journey to Kirtland, where he arrived in the latter part of the month.

October 1834

The first number of the Latter-day Saints' Messenger and Advocate was published at Kirtland, O., taking the place of the Evening and Morning Star, suspended.

October 16, 1834 (Thursday)

Joseph Smith, jun., and other Elders left Kirtland to visit the Saints in Michigan, from which trip they returned in the latter part of the month.

November 25, 1834 (Tuesday)

Warren A. Cowdery was called by revelation to preside over the Saints at Freedom, N. Y., and the regions round about. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 106.)

November 29, 1834 (Saturday)

Joseph Smith, jun., and Oliver Cowdery covenanted with the Lord to pay their tithing.
