Andrew Jenson, Church Chronology ( 1914)

The Kirtland Temple was dedicated, and the Savior, Moses, Elias and Elijah the Prophet appeared to the Elders in that building and committed the keys of their respective dispensations to the Prophet Joseph Smith. The Saints who had resided temporarily in Clay County, Mo., removed to another location on Shoal Creek, which was organized into Caldwell County.

January 1, 1836 (Friday)

Wm. Smith received forgiveness of his brother Joseph, and a general family reconciliation took place in the house of the latter, at Kirtland, O.

January 2, 1836 (Wednesday)

At a council meeting, held at Kirtland, the High Council of Zion (Missouri) was reorganized.

January 7, 1836 (Thursday)

A sumptuous feast, to which the lame, the halt and the blind were invited, was held in Bishop Newel K. Whitney's house, at Kirtland.

January 16, 1836 (Saturday)

In a council of the Twelve Apostles, held at Kirtland, President Joseph Smith said: "The Twelve are not subject to any other than the First Presidency.*** Where I am not, there is no First Presidency over the Twelve." (See History of Joseph Smith.)

January 17, 1836 (Sunday)

Joseph the Prophet organized the several councils of the Priesthood at Kirtland, on which occasion the Lord poured out His Spirit in a great measure upon the brethren, who confessed their faults to each other; the congregation was overwhelmed in tears and the spirit of tongues came upon them "like the rushing of a mighty wind." (See History of Joseph Smith.)

January 21, 1836 (Thursday)

The Presidency of the Church, and the councils of Kirtland and Zion, met in the evening in the Lord's House, at Kirtland, and attended to the ordinance of anointing with oil and blessing each other. The visions of heaven were opened, angels administered to them, and the house was filled with the glory of God. Joseph the Prophet "beheld the celestial kingdom of God and the glory thereof," the "transcendent beauty of the gate through which the heirs of that kingdom will enter, the throne of God whereon was seated the Father and Son," and the beautiful streets of the kingdom. He also saw Fathers Adam and Abraham. On seeing his brother Alvin, who died before the Church was organized, the Prophet marvelled, but the voice of the Lord told him that all who had died without a knowledge of the gospel, who would have received it if they had been permitted to tarry, should be heirs of the celestial kingdom of God. (See History of Joseph Smith.)

January 22, 1836 (Friday)

The Twelve Apostles, the presidency of the Seventy and others were blessed and anointed in the Lord's House, at Kirtland.

January 28, 1836 (Thursday)

The leading authorities of the Church administered in the Lord's House at Kirtland, on which occasion angels again appeared to the brethren, and other great manifestations of the power of God were witnessed. (See History of Joseph Smith.)

February 7, 1836 (Sunday)

The organization of the second quorum of Seventy was commenced at Kirtland.

February 22, 1836 (Monday)

The sisters at Kirtland met in the Lord's House to commence their work of making the vail for that building.

March 27, 1836 (Sunday)

The Lord's House, at Kirtland, afterwards known as the Kirtland Temple, was dedicated. It is a rock building, 80 feet long and 60 feet wide, the walls are 60 feet and the tower 110 feet high. (For dedicatory prayer, see Doc. and Cov., Sec. 109.)

March 29, 1836 (Tuesday)

On this and the following day the ordinance of the washing of feet was attended to in the Kirtland Temple.

April 3, 1836 (Sunday)

Joseph Smith, jun., and Oliver Cowdery saw and heard the Savior in the Kirtland Temple. Moses also appeared before them and committed unto them "the keys of the gathering of Israel from the four parts of the earth, and the leading of the Ten Tribes from the land of the north." Then Elias appeared and committed the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham, and finally Elijah the Prophet "stood before them" and committed to them the keys of turning "the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers." (See History of Joseph Smith and Doc. and Cov., Sec. 110.)

April 4, 1836 (Monday)

The Elders began to spread abroad from Kirtland into all parts of the land, preaching the gospel.

April 17, 1836 (Tuesday)

Mary Smith, aged 93 years old, and grandmother of Joseph the Prophet, arrived at Kirtland from the East.

June 1836

Warren Parrish and other Elders were mobbed and arrested in Tennessee for preaching the gospel, and subsequently compelled to leave the country.

June 29, 1836 (Wednesday)

A large meeting of citizens held at Liberty, Clay Co., Mo., passed resolutions to expel the Saints from Clay County.

July 1, 1836 (Friday)

In a large meeting of Elders, held in Clay County, Mo., it was agreed that the Saints should leave the county, agreeably to the request of the older settlers.

July 25, 1836 (Monday)

Joseph Smith, jun., left Kirtland for a trip to the Eastern States.

August 1836

Joseph Smith, jun., arrived at Salem, Mass., where he, on August 6th, received a revelation, in which the Lord said He had many people in that city. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 111.)

September 1836

Joseph Smith returned to Kirtland from his trip to the East.

September 1836

The Saints in Missouri began to remove from Clay County to their newly selected location on Shoal Creek (later known as Far West), in the territory attached to Ray County. That part of the State of Missouri was at that time almost uninhabited, but in the following December it was organized under the name of Caldwell County.

September 22, 1836 (Thursday)

Peter Whitmer, jun., one of the Eight Witnesses to the Book of Mormon, died near Liberty, Clay County, Mo.

November 2, 1836 (Wednesday)

Preparations were made for organizing a banking institution at Kirtland, O., to be called the "Kirtland Safety Society."

December 18, 1836 (Sunday)

Brigham Young, jun., was born at Kirtland.

December 31, 1836 (Saturday)

Dr. Willard Richards was baptized at Kirtland, by Brigham Young.
