Andrew Jenson, Church Chronology ( 1914)

Far West, Caldwell Co. Mo., was surveyed, and the first foreign mission of the Church called and sent to England, where a successful opening was made. A great apostasy took place in the Church, both in Kirtland, O., and in Missouri.

April 6, 1837 (Thursday)

An important Priesthood meeting was held in the Kirtland Temple, in which new presidents were ordained to preside over the Seventies, as some of the former presidents were High Priests.

April 7, 1837 (Friday)

The city plat of Far West, Caldwell County, Mo., having been surveyed, the sale of town lots was left to Wm. W. Phelps, John Whitmer and Edward Partridge. Jacob Whitmer, Elisha H. Groves and Geo. M. Hinkle were appointed a building committee for the erection of a house of the Lord at Far West.

May 1837

A spirit of apostasy and speculation, affecting every quorum of the Church, more or less, became very prevalent at Kirtland.

June 1837

Early in this month Apostles Heber C. Kimball and Orson Hyde were set apart to go on a mission to England. This was the first foreign mission of the Church. A few days later Willard Richards was called to accompany them.

June 13, 1837 (Tuesday)

Apostles Heber C. Kimball and Orson Hyde and Elders Willard Richards and Joseph Fielding, accompanied by three brethren from Canada, namely, John Goodson, Isaac Russell and John Snider, sailed from New York on the ship Garrick. They arrived in Liverpool, England, on the 20th.

July 3, 1837 (Monday)

Ground was broken at Far West, Mo., for the foundation of a Temple, which, however, was not built, on account of persecutions.

July 23, 1837 (Sunday)

A revelation concerning the Twelve Apostles was given through Joseph the Prophet, at Kirtland. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 112.)

July 23, 1837 (Sunday)

The gospel was first preached by Latter-day Saint Elders in England, in the church of the Rev. James Fielding, at Preston.

July 27, 1837 (Thursday)

Joseph, the Prophet, was persecuted with a vexatious lawsuit at Painesville, Ohio.

July 30, 1837 (Sunday)

Nine persons were baptized in the river Ribble, at Preston, England, as the first converts to the fulness of the gospel in England. Geo. D. Watt was the first person baptized.

August 1837

In the latter part of this month Joseph Smith, jun., returned to Kirtland, O, from a mission to Canada, on which he had started July 27th.

September 3, 1837 (Sunday)

At a conference, held at Kirtland, Oliver Cowdery, Joseph Smith, sen., Hyrum Smith and John Smith were appointed assistant counselors to the First Presidency. Luke S. Johnson, Lyman E. Johnson and John F. Boynton, three of the Twelve Apostles, were disfellowshipped.

September 10, 1837 (Sunday)

Luke S. Johnson, Lyman E. Johnson and John F. Boynton made confessions and were received back into fellowship.

September 17, 1837 (Sunday)

Geo. W. Robinson was elected General Church Recorder, in place of Oliver Cowdery, who had removed to Missouri.

September 27, 1837 (Wednesday)

Joseph Smith, jun., and Sidney Rigdon left Kirtland, O., to establish other places of gathering for the Saints, and to visit with the Saints in Missouri, where they arrived in the latter part of October.

September 27, 1837 (Wednesday)

About this time the "Voice of Warning" was published in New York City by Parley P. Pratt.

October 1837

The first number of the Elders' Journal, edited by Joseph Smith, jun., and published at Kirtland, O., bears date of this month. It was published instead of the Messenger and Advocate, which had been discontinued.

October 13, 1837 (Friday)

Jerusha F. Smith, Hyrum Smith's wife, died at Kirtland.

November 7, 1837 (Tuesday)

An important conference was held at Far West, Mo., Joseph Smith, jun., having arrived from Kirtland. Frederick G. Williams was rejected as a counselor to Pres. Joseph Smith, and Hyrum Smith appointed in his stead. David Whitmer, John Whitmer and Wm. W. Phelps were sustained as the presidency at Far West, and a High Council was organized consisting of John Murdock, Solomon Hancock, Elias Higbee, Calvin Bebee, John M. Hinkle, Thos. Grover, Simeon Carter, Lyman Wight, Newel Knight, Geo. M. Hinkle, Levi Jackman and Elisha H. Groves.

November 10, 1837 (Friday)

At a general meeting held at Far West it was voted that the town of Far West "be enlarged so as to contain two square miles."

December 1837

The printing office at Kirtland was destroyed by fire, and the publication of the Elders' Journal ceased.

December 1837

Joseph Smith, jun. arrived at Kirtland O., from Missouri. During his absence a number of prominent men, including Warren Parrish, John F. Boynton, Luke S. Johnson and Joseph Coe, had united together for the overthrow of the Church at Kirtland.

December 22, 1837 (Friday)

Apostle Brigham Young left Kirtland on account of the fury of the mob, who threatened to kill him because he would proclaim publicly and privately that he knew by the Holy Ghost that Joseph Smith, jun., was a Prophet of the Most High God.

December 25, 1837 (Monday)

The first general conference by Latter-day Saints in England was held in the "Cock Pit," at Preston. The Church in England numbered already about one thousand members. At this conference the Word of Wisdom was first publicly taught in England.

December 25, 1837 (Monday)

Apostasy, persecution, confusion and mobocracy reigned in Kirtland, O., at the close of the year.
