Andrew Jenson, Church Chronology ( 1914)

Joseph Smith, jun., and most of the faithful Saints left Kirtland, O., on account of apostasy and persecution, and removed to Missouri. Adam-ondi-Ahman, in Daviess County, Mo., was surveyed, and organized into a Stake of Zion; the revelation on tithing was given; persecutions were renewed against the Saints in Missouri, and DeWitt, Adam-ondi-Ahman and Far West were taken and sacked by the mob; nearly a score of Saints were massacred at Haun's Mill, Joseph the Prophet and other Elders imprisoned, and all the Saints ordered out of Missouri, under pain of death by the exterminating order of Gov. Lilburn W. Boggs.

January 12, 1838 (Friday)

Joseph Smith, jun., and Sidney Rigdon left Kirtland, O., on horseback to escape mob violence. They traveled toward Missouri.

February 5, 1838 (Monday)

In a general assembly of Saints at Far West, Mo., David Whitmer, John Whitmer and Wm. W. helps were rejected as the presidency of the Church in Missouri, because of transgression.

February 10, 1838 (Saturday)

Thomas B. Marsh and David W. Patten were appointed presidents pro tem. of the Church in Missouri, until the arrival of Joseph Smith, jun., or Sidney Rigdon from Kirtland.

March 1838

Answers to certain questions on Scripture, principally the 11th chapter of Isaiah, were given by revelation through Joseph Smith, jun. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 113.)

March 10, 1838 (Saturday)

Wm. W. Phelps and John Whitmer were excommunicated from the Church by the Council at Far West, Mo. Some time afterwards Wm. W. Phelps was received back into the Church by baptism.

March 14, 1838 (Wednesday)

Joseph the Prophet arrived at Far West, Mo., with his family, accompanied by Apostle Brigham Young and others.

April 6, 1838 (Friday)

The Saints in Missouri met at Far West to celebrate the anniversary of the organization of the Church and transact business. John Corrill and Elias Higbee were appointed historians and Geo. W. Robinson General Church Recorder and clerk to the First Presidency. Thomas B. Marsh was sustained as president pro tem. in Missouri, with Brigham Young and David W. Patten as assistant presidents.

April 7, 1838 (Saturday)

On this and the following day, the Church held its first quarterly conference at Far West.

April 7, 1838 (Saturday)

John Whitmer refused to give up the records of the Church in his possession to the newly appointed Church clerk and recorder.

April 12, 1838 (Thursday)

Oliver Cowdery was excommunicated from the Church by the High Council, at Far West, Mo. The following day David Whitmer and Lyman E. Johnson were cut off.

April 17, 1838 (Tuesday)

Apostle David W. Patten was called by revelation through Joseph the Prophet, at Far West, Mo., to "make a disposition of his merchandise," and prepare for a mission. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 114.)

April 20, 1838 (Friday)

Apostles Heber C. Kimball and Orson Hyde sailed from Liverpool, England, for America on the ship Garrick. They arrived in New York May 12th, and at Kirtland, O., May 22nd.

April 26, 1838 (Thursday)

A revelation was given through Joseph Smith, jun., at Far West, Mo., concerning the building up of that place and the Lord's House. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 115.)

May 11, 1838 (Friday)

Wm. E. McLellin was excommunicated from the Church, at Far West.

May 19, 1838 (Saturday)

Joseph Smith, jun., Sidney Rigdon and others visited a place on the north side of Grand river (about twenty-five miles north of Far West) called by the Saints Spring Hill, which by revelation was named Adam-ondi-Ahman, because "it is the place where Adam shall come to visit his people or the Ancient of Days shall sit, as spoken of by the Prophet Daniel." (Dan. 7:9-14; Doc. and Cov., Sec. 116.)

June 28, 1838 (Thursday)

A Stake of Zion called Adam-ondi-Ahman was organized in Daviess County, Mo., with John Smith as president and Reynolds Cahoon and Lyman Wight as his counselors. A High Council was also organized with John Lemon, Daniel Stanton, Mayhew Hillman, Daniel Carter, Isaac Perry, Henry Harrison Sagers, Allanson Brown, Thomas Gordon, Lorenzo D. Barnes, George A. Smith, Harvey Olmstead and Ezra Thayer as members.

July 1838

The third number of the Elders' Journal was published at Far West, Mo. The first two numbers had been published at Kirtland, O.

July 4, 1838 (Wednesday)

The corner stones of the House of the Lord, at Far West, Mo., were laid, agreeable to a commandment of the Lord, given April 26, 1838.

July 6, 1838 (Friday)

Five hundred and fifteen Saints left Kirtland, O., for Missouri, under the direction of the Seventies.

July 8, 1838 (Sunday)

Wm. Marks, Newel K. Whitney and Oliver Granger were commanded by revelation to leave Kirtland, O., and remove to Missouri. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 117.)

July 8, 1838 (Sunday)

John Taylor, John E. Page, Wilford Woodruff and Willard Richards were called by revelation to the Apostleship, "to fill the places of those had fallen." (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 118.)

July 8, 1838 (Sunday)

In answer to the question, "O Lord, show unto they servants how much thou requirest of the properties of the people for a tithing," the Lord gave a revelation on tithing. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 119.)

July 18, 1838 (Wednesday)

A revelation making known the disposition of property tithing was given through Joseph the Prophet, at Far West. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 120.)

August 1838

During this month the Saints at De Witt, Carroll Co., Mo., were threatened by a mob.

August 6, 1838 (Monday)

The Missourians opposed the voting of the Saints at Gallatin, Daviess County, and a skirmish occurred, in which about twelve brethren gained a victory over about one hundred and fifty mobbers. Some of the brethren took their families into the hazel brush and guarded them during the night, through fear of the mob.

August 8, 1838 (Wednesday)

Joseph Smith, jun., and others called on Adam Black, a justice of the peace in Daviess County, Mo., and had a friendly conversation with him about the trouble in Gallatin.

August 30, 1838 (Thursday)

Gov. Lilburn W. Boggs, of Missouri, ordered out a part of the State militia to quell the civil disturbances in Caldwell, Daviess and Carroll Counties. The whole upper Missouri was in an uproar and state of confusion about the "Mormons."

September 3, 1838 (Monday)

A great number of mobbers had collected in Daviess County, Mo., with headquarters at Millport.

September 4, 1838 (Tuesday)

Joseph Smith, jun., and Sidney Rigdon commenced to study law, under the instructions of Generals David R. Atchison and Alexander W. Doniphan.

September 7, 1838 (Friday)

Joseph Smith, jun., and Lyman Wight appeared before Judge Austin A. King, in Daviess County, they and others having been falsely accused of threatening Adam Black's life on their visit to his house, Aug. 8th.

September 9, 1838 (Sunday)

Captain William Allred, of Far West, frustrated the plans of the mob, by arresting three men who were bringing guns and ammunition from Richmond, Ray Co., Mo., to the mobbers in Daviess County.

October 1, 1838 (Monday)

As the militia, under Generals Atchison, Doniphan and Parks had succeeded in restoring temporary peace in Daviess County, the mobbers went to De Witt, Carroll Co., and attacked the Saints there.

October 4, 1838 (Thursday)

The Kirtland Camp arrived at its destination, Adam-ondi-Ahman.

October 6, 1838 (Saturday)

Joseph the Prophet arrived at De Witt, Carroll Co., Mo., whither he went to assist the brethren who were trying to defend themselves against an overwhelming mob force.

October 11, 1838 (Thursday)

After several days' bombardment, the mob succeeded in driving the Saints from De Witt. During the siege some of them had perished from starvation, and their sufferings had been very great.

October 12, 1838 (Friday)

The exiles from De Witt arrived at Far West.

October 15, 1838 (Monday)

The brethren at Far West organized for self-defense.

October 15, 1838 (Monday)

The mobbers renewed their depredations in Daviess County, by burning the houses of the Saints, driving off their stock, etc. Col. Lyman Wight, agreeable to an order from General Parks, organized a company in self-defense. This frightened the mobbers, who fled from the neighborhood, after burning some of their own houses, of which they wickedly accused the Saints.

October 23, 1838 (Tuesday)

The Saints were fleeing from the smaller settlements into Far West for safety, the mobs increasing in numbers all around. The most wicked lies were circulated about the Saints, and their movements in self-defense were by the State authorities construed into treason.

October 25, 1838 (Thursday)

A battle was fought between a mob and about seventy-five brethren on Crooked river, Ray County, Mo., in which Gideon Carter was killed and eleven others wounded, among these were Apostle David W. Patten and Patterson O'Banion who died soon afterwards.

October 27, 1838 (Saturday)

Apostle David W. Patten was buried at Far West.

October 27, 1838 (Saturday)

Gov. Lilburn W. Boggs issued his famous exterminating order, which gave the Saints the choice between banishment from Missouri and death.

October 27, 1838 (Saturday)

About this time Sampson Avard, an apostate, secretly organized a company called Danites. The Church used all proper means to expose and counteract his schemes.

October 30, 1838 (Tuesday)

A mob under the leadership of Col. Wm. O. Jennings attacked a little settlement of Saints at Haun's Mill, Caldwell Co., Mo., and killed and mortally wounded Thomas McBride, Levi N. Merrick, Elias Benner, Josiah Fuller, Benjamin Lewis, Alexander Campbell, Warren Smith, Geo. S. Richards, Wm. Napier, Austin Hammer, Simon Cox, Hiram Abbott, John York, John Lee, John Byers, Sardius Smith and Charles Merrick. Others were severely wounded, but recovered. Among these were Alma L. Smith, who was healed in a most miraculous manner, through prayers and faith.

October 30, 1838 (Tuesday)

The mob-militia, about two thousand strong, under command of Samuel D. Lucas, arrived near Far West, and the citizens prepared for their own defense.

October 31, 1838 (Wednesday)

Joseph Smith, jun., Sidney Rigdon, Parley P. Pratt, Lyman Wight and Geo. W. Robinson were betrayed by Col. George M. Hinkle and made prisoners in the camp of the mob-militia.

November 1, 1838 (Thursday)

Hyrum Smith and Amasa M. Lyman were brought as prisoners into camp. A court martial was held, and the prisoners were sentenced to be shot the following morning; they were, however, saved through the interference of General Doniphan.

November 1, 1838 (Thursday)

On demand of General Samuel D. Lucas the citizens of Far West were forced to give up their arms, after which the mob-militia pillaged the town, ravished women, and committed other acts of barbarity.

November 2, 1838 (Friday)

Joseph Smith, jun., and fellow-prisoners were taken to Far West under a strong guard and permitted to see their families, from whom they then were rudely torn and started under a strong guard, commanded by Generals Samuel D. Lucas and Robert Wilson, for Independence, Jackson Co., where they arrived on the 4th.

November 4, 1838 (Sunday)

Gen. John B. Clark arrived at Far West with about two thousand troops, and the following day he made most of the brethren prisoners.

November 6, 1838 (Tuesday)

John B. Clark delivered an insulting speech to the brethren at Far West, in which he advised the Saints to scatter abroad and never again organize with Bishops, presidents, etc. Of the leaders of the Church, who had been imprisoned, he said their fate was fixed, their die cast, and their doom sealed, and that they would never be seen by their friends again.

November 6, 1838 (Tuesday)

The brethren were compelled to sign deeds of trust for paying the expense of the mob. About sixty men were retained as prisoners, and the remainder of the Saints ordered to leave the State, according to the exterminating order of Gov. Boggs.

November 8, 1838 (Thursday)

Gen. Wilson placed guards around Adam-ondi-Ahman, took all the men prisoners and put them under guard. A court of inquiry was organized, with Adam Black on the bench, which resulted in the acquittal of the prisoners.

November 9, 1838 (Friday)

Joseph Smith, jun., and fellow-prisoners arrived at Richmond, Ray County, Mo., where they were put in chains and much abused by their guards. On one occasion the Prophet Joseph rebuked the wicked guard with the power of God, and stopped the foul conversation with which the prisoners were being tantalized.

November 10, 1838 (Saturday)

Gen. Wilson ordered every family to be out of Adam-ondi-Ahman in ten days, with permission to go to Caldwell County and tarry till spring, then to leave the State under pain of extermination.

November 13, 1838 (Tuesday)

Joseph Fielding Smith was born at Far West, Mo.

November 13, 1838 (Tuesday)

A mock trial, which lasted sixteen days, was commenced at Richmond, and nearly sixty of the brethren were brought before Judge Austin A. King, charged with treason, murder, burglary, arson, robbery and larceny. Up to that date about thirty of the brethren had been killed and many wounded since the hostilities commenced the previous August.

November 24, 1838 (Saturday)

Twenty-three of the Far West prisoners were discharged at Richmond, Mo., as nothing could be found against them.

November 28, 1838 (Wednesday)

The remaining prisoners in Richmond were released, or admitted to bail, except Joseph Smith, jun., Lyman Wight, Caleb Baldwin, Hyrum Smith, Alex. McRae and Sidney Rigdon, who were sent to jail in Liberty, Clay Co., to stand their trial for treason and murder, of which they were falsely accused; and Parley P. Pratt, Morris Phelps, Luman Gibbs, Darwin Chase and Norman Shearer were confined in the Richmond jail to stand their trial on a similar charge.

December 19, 1838 (Wednesday)

John Taylor and John E. Page were ordained Apostles, at Far West, Mo.

December 19, 1838 (Wednesday)

A petition from the Saints in Caldwell County was presented to the Missouri legislature, causing much warm debate, but the petition was finally laid on the table, which meant that the legislature would do nothing for the suffering Saints.

December 27, 1838 (Thursday)

Anson Call was brutally whipped by a mob, near Elk Horn, Ray Co., Mo.
