Andrew Jenson, Church Chronology ( 1914)

The Saints who were banished from Missouri escaped to Illinois; Joseph the Prophet and the other imprisoned brethren made their escape. After being kindly treated by the citizens of Quincy, Commerce, Hancock Co., Ill., was selected as a new gathering place for the Saints; the building of a city was commenced and a Stake of Zion organized. Most of the Apostles started on a mission to Great Britain.

January 29, 1839 (Tuesday)

The Elders met at Far West to complete measures for the removal of the poor from Missouri, and pledged themselves to assist each other until all were removed.

February 14, 1839 (Thursday)

Brigham Young, President of the Twelve, left Far West, Mo., for Illinois, on account of persecution.

February 23, 1839 (Saturday)

Many of the fugitive Saints having arrived at Quincy, Adams Co., Ill., the citizens of that place met to adopt measures for their relief.

February 23, 1839 (Saturday)

About this time Sidney Rigdon was released from prison in Liberty jail, Mo., on bail.

March 17, 1839 (Sunday)

Thomas B. Marsh, formerly President of the Twelve, Wm. W. Phelps, Frederick G. Williams, George M. Hinkle and others were excommunicated from the Church at a conference held at Quincy, Ill.

March 20, 1839 (Wednesday)

Joseph Smith, jun., who was still imprisoned in Liberty jail, Mo., wrote an excellent epistle "to the Saints at Quincy, Ill., and scattered abroad," in which was embodied a most fervent prayer in behalf of the suffering Saints, and words of prophecy. (See Doc. and Cov., Sec. 121, and History of Joseph Smith.)

March 20, 1839 (Wednesday)

A few days later the Prophet Joseph continued his epistle and wrote among other beautiful gems that which constitutes Section 122 and 123 of the Doctrine and Covenants.

April 5, 1839 (Friday)

A company of about fifty men in Daviess County, Mo., swore that they would never eat or drink until they had murdered Joseph the Prophet.

April 6, 1839 (Saturday)

Joseph Smith, jun., and fellow-prisoners were started from Liberty jail, to Gallatin, Daviess County, Mo., where they arrived on the 8th, and were again subjected to a mock trial before a drunken court and jury.

April 11, 1839 (Thursday)

Ten mobbers made an unsuccessful attempt to kill Stephen Markham in Daviess County, Mo., because he had testified truthfully in the case of the prisoners.

April 14, 1839 (Sunday)

The committee for the removal of the Saints from Missouri moved 36 families into Tenney's Grove, about twenty-five miles from Far West.

April 15, 1839 (Monday)

Joseph Smith, jun., and fellow-prisoners, started from Daviess towards Boone County, Mo., under a change of venue.

April 16, 1839 (Tuesday)

The guard being drunk, Joseph Smith, jun., and fellow-prisoners made their escape. After a severe journey they arrived at Quincy, Ill., on the 22nd.

April 20, 1839 (Saturday)

The last of the Saints left Far West. Thus a whole community, numbering about fifteen thousand souls, were expelled from their homes on account of their religion.

April 24, 1839 (Wednesday)

Parley P. Pratt and fellow-prisoners were brought before the grand jury of Ray County, at Richmond. Darwin Chase and Norman Shearer were dismissed after having been imprisoned for six months.

April 25, 1839 (Thursday)

Joseph Smith, jun., and others visited Iowa for the purpose of finding a location for the Church. Commerce, Hancock Co., Ill., was finally selected as a gathering place for the Saints.

April 26, 1839 (Friday)

Early in the morning a conference was held on the Temple site at Far West, Mo., in fulfillment of the revelation given July 8, 1838. Among those present were Apostles Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Pratt, John E. Page and John Taylor, who ordained Wilford Woodruff and George A. Smith Apostles, "to fill the places of those who had fallen." Alpheus Cutler, the master-workman of the Temple, then commenced laying its foundation, in accordance with revelation, by rolling up a large stone near the southeast corner. Isaac Russell, John Goodson, Luman Gibbs and twenty-eight others were excommunicated from the Church.

May 1, 1839 (Wednesday)

The first purchase of land for the Church at Commerce, Ill., was made by Joseph Smith, jun., and others of the committee. The purchase consisted of two farms bought respectively of Hugh White and Isaac Galland.

May 3, 1839 (Friday)

Six of the Apostles met Joseph the Prophet near Quincy, Ill. The doings of the Twelve at Far West on April 26th were sanctioned. Elder Oliver Granger was appointed to go to Kirtland, O., to preside, and the Saints in the Eastern States were advised to gather to Kirtland and settle that place as a Stake of Zion. On the 5th it was decided to send Sidney Rigdon as a delegate to Washington, D. C., to lay the grievances of the Saints before the General Government.

May 6, 1839 (Monday)

At a conference, held at Quincy, Ill., Wm. Marks was appointed to preside at Commerce, and John P. Greene over the Saints in New York. A number of Seventies and High Priests were called to accompany the Apostles on their missions to Europe.

May 9, 1839 (Thursday)

Joseph Smith, jun., left Quincy with his family, and arrived the following day at Commerce.

May 22, 1839 (Wednesday)

Parley P. Pratt, Morris Phelps, Luman Gibbs and King Follett, having obtained a change of venue, left Richmond, Mo., handcuffed, for Columbia, Boone County, where they arrived on the 26th and were thrown into a filthy dungeon.

June 1839

The first house erected by the Saints in Commerce was raised by Theodore Turley.

June 24, 1839 (Monday)

The Church purchased the town of Nashville, in Lee County, Iowa Territory, and twenty thousand acres of land adjoining it. About the same time another tract of land lying west of Montrose, Iowa, opposite Nauvoo, was purchased.

July 1839

Much sickness prevailed among the Saints at Commerce, which at that time was a very unhealthful place, but many of them were miraculously healed by the power of God.

July 2, 1839 (Tuesday)

Joseph the Prophet advised that a town be built on the Iowa purchase, to be called Zarahemla.

July 4, 1839 (Thursday)

After more than seven months' imprisonment without conviction, Parley P. Pratt and Morris Phelps escaped from the Columbia jail, Boone County, Mo. They arrived in Quincy, Ill., after days of dreadful suffering from hunger and fatigue. King Follett, who also tried to escape, was retaken.

July 22, 1839 (Monday)

Elijah Fordham, Henry G. Sherwood, Benjamin Brown, Joseph B. Noble and many others, at Commerce, Ill., and Montrose, Iowa, were miraculously healed under the powerful administrations of the Prophet Joseph, assisted by other Elders.

August 8, 1839 (Thursday)

Apostles John Taylor and Wilford Woodruff left Commerce, Ill., on a mission to England.

August 29, 1839 (Thursday)

Apostles Parley P. Pratt and Orson Pratt and Elder Hiram Clark departed from Commerce on a mission to England.

September 18, 1839 (Wednesday)

Apostles Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball started from Commerce on a mission to England, leaving their families sick and poverty-stricken.

September 21, 1839 (Saturday)

Apostle Geo. A. Smith and Elders Reuben Hedlock and Theodore Turley left Commerce for England on a mission.

October 5, 1839 (Saturday)

At a general conference, held at Commerce, William Marks was appointed president of that Stake, Edward Partridge, Bishop of the upper Ward, and Vinson Knight, Bishop of the lower Ward. Geo. W. Harris, Samuel Bent, Henry G. Sherwood, David Fullmer, Alpheus Cutler, Wm. Huntington, Thomas Grover, Newel Knight, Chas. C. Rich, David Dort, Seymour Brunson and Lewis D. Wilson were chosen members of the High Council. John Smith was appointed to preside over the Saints on the other side of the Mississippi river, in Iowa Territory, with Alanson Ripley as Bishop. Asahel Smith, John M. Burk, Abraham O. Smoot, Richard Howard, Willard Snow, Erastus Snow, David Pettigrew, Elijah Fordham, Edward Fisher, Elias Smith, John Patten and Stephen Chase were chosen as members of the High Council.

October 17, 1839 (Thursday)

Apostle Heber C. Kimball was poisoned at Terre Haute, Indiana, but his life was saved by the administration of Apostle Brigham Young.

October 19, 1839 (Saturday)

The High Council appointed for the Church in Iowa met for the first time, at Nashville, Iowa. Reynolds Cahoon and Lyman Wight were appointed counselors to John Smith.

October 29, 1839 (Tuesday)

Joseph Smith, jun., accompanied by Sidney Rigdon, Elias Higbee and O. Porter Rockwell left Commerce for Washington, D. C., to lay the grievances of the Saints before the President and Congress of the United States.

October 29, 1839 (Tuesday)

In the latter part of this month King Follett, the last of the Missouri prisoners, was tried and set free.

November 1839

The first number of the Times and Season was published at Commerce, Ill.

November 3, 1839 (Sunday)

James Mulholland, Joseph Smith's clerk; died at Commerce.

December 19, 1839 (Thursday)

Apostles Wilford Woodruff and John Taylor and Elder Theodore Turley sailed from New York for England; they arrived at Liverpool Jan. 11, 1840.

December 21, 1839 (Saturday)

Joseph Smith, jun., arrived at Philadelphia, Pa., (from Washington), where he remained until the 30th, preaching the gospel.
