Andrew Jenson, Church Chronology ( 1914)

Joseph the Prophet and other Elders visited Washington, D. C., to seek redress for the Saints from the Federal Government, but were unsuccessful. Commerce, Ill., was incorporated as the City of Nauvoo, and Stakes of Zion were organized in different parts of Illinois. The Apostles performed a great missionary work in England, whence also the first missionary was sent to Australia.

January 12, 1840 (Sunday)

Francis Marion Lyman was born at Macomb, McDonough Co., Ill.

March 1840

Multitudes were baptized into the Church in the United States and England. Apostle Wilford Woodruff built up large branches in Herefordshire, England.

March 4, 1840 (Wednesday)

Joseph Smith, jun., arrived in Commerce, Ill., from Washington, D. C., after a fruitless endeavor to obtain redress for the wrongs suffered by the Saints in Missouri. He had presented to Congress claims against Missouri from 491 individuals for about $1,381,000. President Martin Van Buren, in answer to Joseph's appeal, said, "Your cause is just, but I can do nothing for you." The Committee on the Judiciary, to whom was referred the memorial of the Saints, reported adversely to the prayer of the petitioners.

March 9, 1840 (Monday)

Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Parley P. Pratt, George A. Smith and Reuben Hedlock sailed from New York on the ship Patrick Henry for Liverpool, where they arrived April 6th.

April 6, 1840 (Monday)

A general conference of the Church was commenced at Nauvoo, Ill. It continued three days, On the first day Apostle Orson Hyde was called on a mission to Jerusalem and on the 8th Apostle John E. Page was appointed to accompany him. The conference also adopted a series of resolutions, expressive of sorrow and disappointment at the action of the Committee of the Judiciary at Washington, D. C.

April 14, 1840 (Tuesday)

At a council of the Apostles held at Preston, England, Willard Richards was ordained one of the Twelve Apostles.

April 15, 1840 (Wednesday)

Apostle Orson Hyde left Commerce, Ill., on his mission to Jerusalem.

April 15, 1840 (Wednesday)

At a conference held at Preston, England, where 34 branches and 1,686 members were represented, it was decided to publish a monthly periodical in the interest of the Church in England.

April 21, 1840 (Tuesday)

The Postmaster General at Washington, D.C., changed the name of the postoffice at Commerce, Hancock Co., Ill., to Nauvoo, and appointed George W. Robinson postmaster.

May 9, 1840 (Saturday)

Elder Theodore Turley, who had been imprisoned in Stafford jail, England, at the instigation of a Methodist preacher, was released.

May 27, 1840 (Wednesday)

Bishop Edward Partridge died at Nauvoo, 46 years old. He lost his life in consequence of the Missouri persecutions.

May 27, 1840 (Wednesday)

The first number of The Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star was published at Manchester, England; Apostle Parley P. Pratt, editor.

June 1840

By this time the Saints had erected about two hundred and fifty houses in Nauvoo.

June 6, 1840 (Saturday)

Forty-one Saints sailed from Liverpool, England, on the ship Britannia, for the United States, being the first Saints that gathered from a foreign land. John Moon was leader of the company.

June 14, 1840 (Sunday)

The Bran Green and Gadfield Elm conference was organized by Apostle Wilford Woodruff in Worcestershire, England, consisting of twelve branches. This was the first conference organized in the British mission.

June 21, 1840 (Sunday)

At a meeting held on Stanley Hill, Herefordshire, England, the Froome's Hill conference was organized by Apostle Wilford Woodruff, consisting of twenty branches.

July 1840

The first British edition of the Latter-day Saints' Hymn Book was published in England.

July 7, 1840 (Tuesday)

James Allred, Noah Rogers, Alanson Brown and Benjamin Boyce were kidnapped from Hancock County, Ill., by Missourians, and taken to Tully, Lewis Co., Mo., where they were imprisoned, whipped and ill-treated until nearly dead. Brown and Allred escaped a few days afterwards.

July 11, 1840 (Saturday)

Apostle Geo. A. Smith ordained and set apart Wm. Barratt at Burslem, Staffordshire, England, for a mission to South Australia. He was the first missionary to that country.

July 20, 1840 (Monday)

John Moon's company of British emigrants arrived at New York.

July 27, 1840 (Monday)

Apostle John Taylor sailed from Liverpool for Ireland to open the door of the gospel in that country.

August 1840

Elder Wm. Donaldson, of the British army, sailed from England for the East Indies. He was the first member of the Church to visit that country.

August 21, 1840 (Friday)

Noah Rogers and Benjamin Boyce escaped from their unlawful imprisonment in Missouri, during which they had been put in irons and suffered much.

August 31, 1840 (Monday)

Apostle Heber C. Kimball baptized Henry Conner, a watchmaker, in London, England, as the first fruit of preaching the fulness of the gospel in that city.

September 1840

Apostle John Taylor and others first preached the gospel on the Isle of Man.

September 8, 1840 (Monday)

The ship North America sailed from Liverpool, England, with about two hundred Saints, under the presidency of Theodore Turley, bound for Nauvoo, Ill.

September 14, 1840 (Sunday)

Joseph Smith sen., Patriarch to the Church, died at Nauvoo.

September 15, 1840 (Monday)

Gov. Lilburn W. Boggs, of Missouri, made a demand on Gov. Thos. Carlin, of Illinois, for Joseph Smith, jun., Sidney Rigdon, Lyman Wight, Parley P. Pratt, Caleb Baldwin and Alanson Brown as fugitives from justice.

October 3, 1840 (Friday)

At a conference held at Nauvoo, Robert B. Thompson was appointed General Church Clerk, instead of Geo. W. Robinson. Almon W. Babbitt was appointed to preside over the Church at Kirtland, O., and a committee was appointed to organize new Stakes for the gathering of the Saints.

October 22, 1840 (Wednesday)

A Stake was organized by the committee at Lima, Hancock Co., Ill., with Isaac Morley as president and John Murdock and Walter Cox as his counselors.

October 25, 1840 (Saturday)

A Stake was organized at Quincy, Adams Co., Ill., with Daniel Stanton, Stephen Jones and Ezra T. Benson as the presidency.

October 27, 1840 (Monday)

A Stake called Mount Hope was organized at the steam mills, Columbus, Adams Co., Ill., with the following brethren as the presidency: Abel Lamb, Sherman Gilbert and John Smith.

November 1, 1840 (Saturday)

The committee organized a Stake called Geneva, in Morgan Co., Ill., with Wm. Bosley, Howard S. Smith and Samuel Fowler as the presidency.

December 16, 1840 (Wednesday)

The charter for the incorporation of Nauvoo, granted by the State legislature, was signed by Governor Thomas Carlin, but not to take effect until the first of February following.
