Andrew Jenson, Church Chronology ( 1914)

Early in the year the Saints commenced to leave Nauvoo, fleeing from the mob, which later drove the remnants out and took forcible possession of the city. The Nauvoo Temple was dedicated, and many of the Saints received their endowments before going into the wilderness. While traveling through Iowa, the exiled Saints were called upon to raise five hundred men to participate in the war with Mexico. Winter Quarters as established on the Missouri river.

January 1846

The 33rd quorum of Seventy was organized with Albern Allen as senior president.

January 13, 1846 (Tuesday)

At a council held in the Nauvoo Temple, to take into consideration the means of organizing for the removal of the Saints, 140 horses and 70 wagons were reported ready for immediate service.

January 16, 1846 (Friday)

The ship Liverpool sailed from Liverpool, England, with 45 Saints, under the direction of Hiram Clark, bound for Nauvoo via New Orleans.

January 22, 1846 (Thursday)

Apostle Wilford Woodruff sailed from Liverpool to return to America, because of the contemplated removal of the Church to the mountains. Reuben Hedlock, with Thomas Ward and John Banks as counselors, succeeded him in the presidency of the British Mission.

January 24, 1846 (Saturday)

A general meeting of the official members of the Church was held in the Nauvoo Temple, for the purpose of arranging the affairs of the Church, prior to its removal from Nauvoo.

January 30, 1846 (Friday)

The vane was placed on the Nauvoo Temple.

February 4, 1846 (Wednesday)

The Saints at Nauvoo commenced crossing the Mississippi river for the purpose of moving west. Charles Shumway was the first to cross the river.

February 4, 1846 (Wednesday)

The ship Brooklyn sailed from New York with 235 Saints on board. They were well supplied with implements of husbandry, and necessary tools for establishing a new settlement. They also took with them a printing press and materials, which afterwards were used in publishing the first newspaper issued in California.

February 5, 1846 (Thursday)

The 34th quorum of Seventy was organized at Nauvoo, with David W. Rogers as one of the presidents.

February 5, 1846 (Thursday)

About the same time the 35th quorum of Seventy was organized.

February 9, 1846 (Monday)

A fire, which broke out in the Nauvoo Temple, was put out before it did much damage.

February 9, 1846 (Monday)

John E. Page was disfellowshipped.

February 10, 1846 (Tuesday)

Joseph Young was appointed to preside over the Saints who remained at Nauvoo.

February 15, 1846 (Sunday)

Apostles Brigham Young and Willard Richards, with their families, and Apostle Geo. A. Smith crossed the Mississippi river for the West. They traveled nine miles, and camped on Sugar Creek, where Pres. Young spent the following day organizing the camps of the Saints.

February 17, 1846 (Tuesday)

Apostle Heber C. Kimball arrived in the camp on Sugar Creek. Willard Richards was appointed camp historian and Wm. Clayton clerk.

February 18, 1846 (Wednesday)

President Young and a few others returned to Nauvoo, but rejoined the camp the following day.

February 25, 1846 (Wednesday)

Bishop George Miller and company were the first to leave the camp ground on Sugar Creek to travel westward.

February 28, 1846 (Saturday)

A petition to the governor of Iowa, in which the Saints asked for protection while passing through the Territory, was approved by the Twelve. At this time the camp consisted of four hundred wagons, very heavily loaded. The teams were too weak for rapid journeying. Most of the families had provisions for several months, while some were quite destitute.

March 1846

During the month the camps of the Saints in Iowa traveled about one hundred miles. The roads were almost impassable most of the way, and the Saints suffered much from cold and exposure, the weather being very windy and stormy.

March 1, 1846 (Sunday)

The camps of the Saints made a general move from Sugar Creek and traveled five miles in a north-westerly direction.

March 27, 1846 (Friday)

At a council held at Apostle Parley P. Pratt's camp, near the east fork of Shoal Creek, the camps of the Saints were more perfectly organized. Brigham Young was elected president over all the "Camps of Israel."

April 1846

The Saints in England suffered spiritually and financially on account of the Joint Stock Company business, which was urged upon them by speculating Elders.

April 24, 1846 (Friday)

The advance portion of the camps arrived at a place on the east fork of Grand river, 145 miles from Nauvoo, which the Saints called Garden Grove, where a temporary settlement was commenced for the benefit of the companies which should follow after.

April 30, 1846 (Thursday)

The Nauvoo Temple was dedicated privately, Elder Joseph Young offering the dedicatory prayer.

May 1, 1846 (Friday)

The Nauvoo Temple was publicly dedicated by Apostle Orson Hyde.

May 10, 1846 (Sunday)

About three thousand Saints met in the Temple at Nauvoo. Apostle Wilford Woodruff preached.

May 11, 1846 (Monday)

Part of the camps continued the journey from Garden Grove, and on the 18th arrived at the middle fork of Grand river, on the land of the Pottawattamie Indians, where another temporary settlement was established, called Mount Pisgah. This was 172 miles from Nauvoo.

May 21, 1846 (Thursday)

A general council of the camps at Mount Pisgah had under consideration the subject of sending an exploring company to the Rocky Mountains that year. The subsequent call for the Mormon Battalion, however, made this impossible.

May 31, 1846 (Sunday)

Elder Noah Rogers, recently returned from a mission to the Society Islands, died at Mount Pisgah, Iowa. His remains were the first interred in the burying ground at that place.

May 31, 1846 (Sunday)

A three days' conference convened in Manchester, England, in which the business of the Joint Stock Company was the main topic.

June 1846

Amos Fielding, who returned to Nauvoo this month, counted 902 west-bound wagons in three days. By this some idea may be formed of the number of teams on the road at that time.

June 1, 1846 (Monday)

Elder Jesse C. Little wrote an appeal to James K. Polk, President of the United States, in behalf of the Saints. He afterwards called on the President, Vice-President and several members of the cabinet.

June 1, 1846 (Monday)

A conference of the Church was organized on the Isle of Man, with Samuel J. Lees as president.

June 2, 1846 (Tuesday)

Pres. Brigham Young left Mount Pisgah and continued the journey westward.

June 12, 1846 (Friday)

Elder Jesse C. Little left Philadelphia for the West, accompanied by Col. Thos. L. Kane, who had decided to visit the camps of the Saints.

June 14, 1846 (Sunday)

Pres. Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Geo. Miller and Parley P. Pratt arrived on the banks of the Missouri river, with their respective companies. Here a ferry boat was built soon afterwards, when some of the Saints commenced to cross the river.

June 16, 1846 (Tuesday)

The advance camps of the exiled Saints moved back to the bluffs across Mosquito Creek, and encamped near good water, about nine miles from the trading post. There they remained till the ferry boat was built.

June 22, 1846 (Monday)

At this date about five hundred wagons had arrived on the Missouri river; nine of the Apostles were already there.

June 25, 1846 (Thursday)

The ship Brooklyn arrived at Honolulu, Hawaii, on its way to California.

June 26, 1846 (Friday)

Capt. James Allen, of the U.S. army, arrived at Mount Pisgah and had an interview with Apostle Wilford Woodruff and Pres. Wm. Huntington and council. He was the bearer of a circular to the "Mormons," making a requisition on the camps of the Saints for four or five companies of men, to serve as volunteers in the war with Mexico. Capt. Allen was advised to visit the authorities of the Church at Council Bluffs.

June 27, 1846 (Saturday)

John E. Page was excommunicated from the Church.

June 30, 1846 (Tuesday)

Capt. Allen arrived at Council Bluffs, and on the following day he met with the authorities of the Church, showing his authority for raising five hundred volunteers from the camps of the Saints. The same day Pres. Young and Capt. Allen addressed the brethren who had assembled, and the general council voted unanimously to comply with the requisition from the government.

July 1846

The first number of Prophwyd y Jubili (The Prophet of Jubilee) was published by Dan Jones, in Wales, as the Church organ in that country.

July 1846

The Saints having continued to arrive from the East, there were now fourteen companies encamped on the bluffs near the Missouri river.

July 3, 1846 (Friday)

Pres. Brigham Young and others started for Mount Pisgah, where they arrived on the 6th, after having met eight hundred wagons and carriages.

July 7, 1846 (Tuesday)

Pres. Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball and Jesse C. Little addressed a meeting of the brethren at Mount Pisgah on the subject of raising a battalion to march to California. Sixty-six volunteered. Geo. W. Langley was sent to Garden Grove with a letter to the presiding brethren there upon the same subject. A similar communication was sent to Nauvoo.

July 9, 1846 (Thursday)

Pres. Brigham Young and others left Mount Pisgah for Council Bluffs, where they arrived on the 12th.

July 11, 1846 (Saturday)

John Hill, Achibald N. Hill, Caleb W. Lyons, James W. Huntsman, Gardiner Curtis, John Richards, Elisha Mallory and J. W. Phillips were severely whipped by mobocrats, while harvesting wheat twelve miles from Nauvoo.

July 13, 1846 (Monday)

In obedience to a call of the authorities of the camps of the Saints the men met at head-quarters on Mosquito Creek. Col. Thos. L. Kane, who had arrived in camp, and Capt. Allen were present. Pres. Young, Capt. Allen and others addressed the people in regard to furnishing the battalion. Four companies were raised on that day and the day following. The fifth company was organized a few days later.

July 13, 1846 (Monday)

At this time severe persecutions were again raging against the few remaining Saints at Nauvoo, and also against the "new citizens" who had bought the property of the members of the Church, who had already left the city for the west.

July 16, 1846 (Thursday)

At a council of the Twelve held at Council Bluffs, Ia., Ezra T. Benson was ordained an Apostle, and took the place of John E. Page, who had apostatized. Apostles Orson Hyde, Parley P. Pratt and John Taylor were appointed to go to England to set the Church in order there; Reuben Hedlock and Thomas Ward, who at that time presided over the British mission, were disfellowshipped for disregard of counsel.

July 16, 1846 (Thursday)

Four companies of the volunteers were brought together in a hollow square and mustered into service by their respective captains. They were interestingly addressed by several of the Apostles. A few days later (July 20th) they commenced their march towards Fort Leavenworth.

July 17, 1846 (Friday)

A number of men were selected to take care of the families of the volunteers.

July 21, 1846 (Tuesday)

A High Council was selected to preside in all temporal and spiritual matters at Council Bluffs.

July 22, 1846 (Wednesday)

The fifth and last company of the Mormon Battalion left the camps of the Saints and started for Fort Leavenworth.

July 23, 1846 (Thursday)

Samuel Boley, a member of the Mormon Battalion, died on the road to Fort Leavenworth.

July 29, 1846 (Wednesday)

The Mormon Battalion passed through St. Joseph, Mo.

August 1, 1846 (Saturday)

The Mormon Battalion, now numbering 549 souls, including officers, privates and servants, arrived at Fort Leavenworth.

August 7, 1846 (Friday)

At a council of the Apostles it was decided that the brethren on the west side of the Missouri river should settle together. A municipal High Council, consisting of Alpheus Cutler, Winslow Farr, Ezra Chase, Jedediah M. Grant, Albert P. Rockwood, Benjamin L. Clapp, Samuel Russell, Andrew Cahoon, Cornelius P. Lott, Daniel Russell, Elnathan Eldredge and Thomas Grover, was appointed to superintend the affairs of the Church there.

August 7, 1846 (Friday)

A small company of Saints from Mississippi, under the direction of John Brown, arrived at Pueblo, on the Arkansas river, where it wintered, waiting till the following spring for the advance companies of the "Mormon" emigration.

August 9, 1846 (Sunday)

The first meeting was held at Cutler's Park, where the exiled Saints at that time intended to spend the winter. The municipal High Council was accepted by the people and the place named Cutler's Park, in honor of Alpheus Cutler. This place, which now became the temporary headquarters of the camps, is three miles from the spot where Winter Quarters afterwards was built.

August 13, 1846 (Thursday)

Three companies of the Mormon Battalion began to move west from F. Leavenworth, after having received their arms, camp equipage, etc. On the 14th the other two companies took up the line of march.

August 13, 1846 (Thursday)

About this time the mobbers in Hancock County, Ill., concluded to drive the few remaining "Mormon" families from Nauvoo.

August 23, 1846 (Sunday)

Col. James Allen, commander of the Mormon Battalion, died at Ft. Leavenworth. The command then devolved on Capt. Jefferson Hunt, as the ranking officer, but notwithstanding this, Lieut. A. J. Smith shortly after assumed the command.

September 8, 1846 (Tuesday)

Col. Thos. L. Kane left the camps of the Saints for the East.

September 10, 1846 (Thursday)

The few remaining Saints at Nauvoo, of whom only about one hundred and twenty-five were able to bear arms, were attacked by an armed mob, about eighteen hundred strong, who with five pieces of artillery bombarded the city for several days. The brethren organized for self-defense and stopped the mobbers about two miles from the city.

September 11, 1846 (Friday)

The mobbers were prevented from entering Nauvoo by the gallantry of the "Spartan Band," who fired on the enemy with cannons made of steamboat shafts.

September 11, 1846 (Friday)

A site for building winter quarters for the Saints was selected on the west bank of the Missouri river. Teams began to return to Nauvoo after the poor.

September 11, 1846 (Friday)

The Mormon Battalion reached the Arkansas river.

September 12, 1846 (Saturday)

The battle of Nauvoo took place. Wm. Anderson, his son Augustus and Isaac Norris were killed, and others of the defenders were wounded. The mob force, which again was driven back, also sustained considerable loss.

September 16, 1846 (Wednesday)

The enemy was driven back from Nauvoo the fourth time. Through the negotiations of one hundred citizens of Quincy, a treaty was completed, by which the Saints should be allowed to move away in peace.

September 16, 1846 (Wednesday)

Some of the families accompanying the Mormon Battalion left the main body on the Arkansas river, in care of Capt. Higgins, for Pueblo. About this time Alva Phelps, a member of the Battalion, died.

September 17, 1846 (Thursday)

The mob entered Nauvoo, and, notwithstanding the treaty, immediately drove out the Saints, and treated some of the brethren in a most brutal manner.

September 20, 1846 (Sunday)

Norman Sharp, a member of the Mormon Battalion, accidentally shot himself in the arm and died a few days later, from the effect of the wound.

September 22, 1846 (Tuesday)

A partial reorganization of the Nauvoo Legion took place at Cutler's Park.

September 23, 1846 (Wednesday)

The Saints began to move to the new location for Winter Quarters.

September 24, 1846 (Thursday)

A conference was held at Putuahara, Anaa, at which 852 members of the Church in the Society Islands mission were represented.

September 27, 1846 (Sunday)

The first public meeting at Winter Quarters was held. By this time most of the Saints had removed from Cutler's Park to Winter Quarters.

October 1846

Apostle Orson Hyde succeeded Reuben Hedlock as president of the British Mission, and the Joint Stock Company was dissolved.

October 1846

Martin Harris and others, followers of the apostate James J. Strang, preached among the Saints in England, but could get no influence.

October 2, 1846 (Friday)

The Mormon Battalion reached Red river.

October 3, 1846 (Saturday)

The Battalion was divided in two divisions, of which the first, containing the strongest and most able-bodied men, arrived at Santa Fe, N. M., on the 9th, and the second, containing the sick and the women, on the 12th.

October 3, 1846 (Saturday)

Apostles Orson Hyde and John Taylor arrived at Liverpool, England, and immediately issued a circular to the British Saints, advising them to "patronize the Joint Stock Company no more for the present."

October 7, 1846 (Wednesday)

The teams which were sent back to help the poor away from Nauvoo, arrived at the Mississippi river, opposite Nauvoo.

October 9, 1846 (Friday)

The camp of the poor was organized and started for the West. Flocks of quails visited the camp and were easily caught. This was a providential supply of food for the suffering exiles.

October 13, 1846 (Tuesday)

Capt. P. St. George Cooke assumed command of the Mormon Battalion at Santa Fe, by order of General Kearney.

October 14, 1846 (Wednesday)

Apostle Parley P. Pratt and Elders Franklin D. Richards, Samuel W. Richards and Moses Martin arrived at Liverpool, England, from the camps of the Saints in the wilderness.

October 17, 1846 (Saturday)

On this and the following day a general conference was held in Manchester, England, under the presidency of Apostles Hyde, Pratt and Taylor. Dan Jones reported one thousand Saints in Wales, and a conference was organized in Ireland, with Paul Jones as president.

October 18, 1846 (Sunday)

The sick detachment of the Mormon Battalion, consisting of about ninety men, left Santa Fe for Pueblo, under command of Capt. James Brown.

October 19, 1846 (Monday)

The Battalion left Santa Fe for California. On the journey it suffered much from excessive marches, fatigue and short rations.

October 27, 1846 (Tuesday)

Milton Smith, a member of the Battalion, died on his way with the sick detachment to Pueblo.

November 1846

A memorial to the Queen of England "for the relief, by emigration, of a portion of her poor subjects," was circulated for signatures among the British Saints.

November 3, 1846 (Tuesday)

James Hampton, a member of the Mormon Battalion, died.

November 4, 1846 (Wednesday)

Milton Kelly, a member of the Battalion, died at Pueblo.

November 10, 1846 (Tuesday)

A detachment of fifty-five sick men of the Battalion, under the command of Lieutenant W. W. Willis, was separated from the main body and started back to Pueblo. Two days later John Green died.

November 17, 1846 (Tuesday)

Capt. Brown's sick detachment of the Battalion arrived at Pueblo.

November 21, 1846 (Saturday)

John D. Lee and Howard Egan arrived at Winter Quarters, as messengers from the camps of the Mormon Battalion beyond Santa Fe.

November 21, 1846 (Saturday)

Joseph Wm. Richards a member of the Mormon Battalion, died at Pueblo.

November 27, 1846 (Friday)

Capt. O. M. Allen with the remainder of the sick camp from Nauvoo, arrived at the east bank of the Missouri river.

November 28, 1846 (Saturday)

Elijah Freeman and Richard Carter, members of the Battalion (Leut. Willis' detachment), died, and were buried by their comrades four miles south of Secora, on the Rio Grande.

November 28, 1846 (Saturday)

The main body of the Battalion reached the summit of the Rocky Mountains.

December 1846

Winter Quarters, afterwards known as Florence, Nebraska, consisted at this time of 538 log houses and 83 sod houses, inhabited by 3,483 souls, of whom 334 were sick and 75 were widows. There were 814 wagons, 145 horses, 29 mules, 388 yoke of oxen and 463 cows. The place was divided in 22 Wards, each presided over by a Bishop. The Ward on the east side of the river contained 210 souls.

December 1846

The Saints on the banks of the Missouri river made great exertions to provide themselves with shelter and food for the winter. Notwithstanding this, there was much privation and suffering among them.

December 1846

The presidency of the Church in England published a balance sheet of the Joint Stock Company, showing that the Saints had been swindled and their means squandered by officers of the company.

December 11, 1846 (Friday)

The Mormon Battalion had an extraordinary encounter with wild buffalos in the San Pedro river.

December 18, 1846 (Friday)

The Battalion left Tucson. During the remainder of the month it suffered almost beyond human endurance from overmarching, and want of food and water.

December 20, 1846 (Sunday)

Capt. Willis' detachment of the Battalion joined the detachments of Captains Brown and Higgins at Pueblo.

December 22, 1846 (Tuesday)

The Battalion arrived at the Pima village, and encamped the following day by a village of Maricopa Indians.
