Andrew Jenson, Church Chronology ( 1914)

The Mormon Battalion arrived in California, and the company of Pioneers, under the leadership of Pres. Brigham Young, crossed the plains and mountains to the valley of the Great Salt Lake, where they founded Great Salt Lake City. After the return to the Missouri river the First Presidency of the Church was reorganized. About two thousand souls and nearly six hundred wagons arrived in G. S. L. Valley in the fall.

January 1847

The committee who had been appointed to settle up the Joint Stock Company business in England were able to pay one shilling and three pence on the pound of capital stock paid in.

January 8, 1847 (Friday)

The Mormon Battalion reached the mouth of the Gila river. Two days later (10th) it crossed the Colorado.

January 14, 1847 (Thursday)

A revelation was given through Pres. Brigham Young, at Winter Quarters, showing the will of the Lord concerning the camps of Israel (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 136); in accordance with which the Twelve Apostles proceeded to organize the camps by appointing captains of hundreds and fifties. The captains were directed to organize their respective companies.

January 19, 1847 (Tuesday)

John Perkins, a member of the Mormon Battalion, died at Pueblo.

January 19, 1847 (Tuesday)

Apostles Parley P. Pratt and John Taylor and a small company of Saints sailed from Liverpool, England, bound for New Orleans, but were on account of storms obliged to return to Liverpool, after nine days of rough sailing.

January 23, 1847 (Saturday)

Orson Spencer arrived at Liverpool, England, to preside over the British Mission as successor to Apostle Orson Hyde. Elder Franklin D. Richards had had temporary charge of the mission.

January 27, 1847 (Wednesday)

The Mormon Battalion arrived at San Luis Rey, a deserted Catholic mission, and from a neighboring bluff first saw the Pacific Ocean.

January 29, 1847 (Friday)

The Battalion arrived at a point near San Diego, Cal.

February 1, 1847 (Monday)

The Battalion was ordered back to San Luis Rey, where it rested a short time.

February 1, 1847 (Monday)

Apostles Parley P. Pratt and John Taylor again sailed from Liverpool, bound for New Orleans, where they landed March 10th.

February 15, 1847 (Monday)

John H. Tippetts and Thomas Woolsey arrived at Winter Quarters, as messengers from the Battalion boys at Pueblo, after extreme sufferings on the journey.

February 23, 1847 (Tuesday)

Apostle Orson Hyde sailed from Liverpool, England, returning to America. He arrived at New York April 6th, and at the camps of the Saints, on the Missouri river, May 12th.

February 28, 1847 (Sunday)

Arnold Stevens, a corporal in the Mormon Battalion, died at Pueblo.

March 1847

At this time Winter Quarters contained 41 blocks, 820 lots, 700 houses, 22 wards, etc.

March 4, 1847 (Thursday)

Thomas Ward, formerly president of the British mission, died in England.

March 15, 1847 (Monday)

Company B of the Mormon Battalion was ordered from San Luis Rey to garrison San Diego.

March 19, 1847 (Friday)

Most of the Mormon Battalion, except company B, (which was stationed as a garrison at San Diego), left San Luis Rey for Pueblo de los Angeles, where it arrived on the 23rd.

March 28, 1847 (Sunday)

After nearly three years missionary labors in the Society Islands mission, Elder Addison Pratt sailed from Papeete, Tahiti, per ship Providence, on his return to America, leaving Benjamin F. Grouard in charge of the mission.

March 29, 1847 (Monday)

A number of the Pioneers at Winter Quarters reported themselves ready to start for the mountains.

March 29, 1847 (Monday)

About that time David Smith, of the Mormon Battalion, died at San Luis Rey.

April 5, 1847 (Monday)

Apostle Heber C. Kimball moved out four miles from Winter Quarters, with six teams, and formed a nucleus to which the company of Pioneers could gather.

April 8, 1847 (Thursday)

Apostle Parley P. Pratt returned to Winter Quarters from his mission to England.

April 10, 1847 (Saturday)

M. S. Blanchard, of the Mormon Battalion, died at Pueblo.

April 11, 1847 (Sunday)

Company C of the Mormon Battalion was ordered to the Cajun Pass, about forty-five miles east of Los Angeles.

April 14, 1847 (Wednesday)

Pres. Brigham Young and his brethren of the Twelve left Winter Quarters for the Rocky Mountains. They joined the Pioneer camp near the Elkhorn river.

April 16, 1847 (Thursday)

The Pioneer company was organized. It consisted of 73 wagons, 143 men, 3 women and 2 children—148 souls.

April 24, 1847 (Saturday)

The Mormon Battalion was ordered to erect a fort on a hill near Los Angeles.

April 27, 1847 (Tuesday)

Mrs. Hunter, wife of Captain Jesse D. Hunter, of the Battalion, died at San Diego, Cal.

May 11, 1847 (Tuesday)

Albert Dunham, of the Battalion, died at San Diego, from an ulcer on the brain.

May 13, 1847 (Thursday)

Gen. Stephen F. Kearney left Los Angeles for Ft. Leavenworth, accompanied by about fifteen brethren of the Battalion. The general and four of the men went by water and the rest by land to Monterey.

May 24, 1847 (Monday)

The sick detachments of the Battalion which had wintered at Pueblo, took up the line of march for California.

May 31, 1847 (Monday)

Gen. Stephen F. Kearney's detachment of the Battalion left Monterey and traveled by way of the Sacramento Valley, over the Sierra Nevadas, via Ft. Hall, Soda Springs, and the Platte River, where it met several companies of Saints, going west, and arrived at Ft. Leavenworth in August.

June 1, 1847 (Tuesday)

The Pioneers arrived at Ft. Laramie. A company of Saints, left the State of Mississippi the previous year, joined the Pioneers at that place. It was a part of the company who had wintered at Pueblo; the remainder of it came on with Capt. Brown's detachment of the Battalion.

June 3, 1847 (Thursday)

The Pioneers crossed the North Fork of the Platte river at Fort Laramie, having traveled on the left bank of the Platte, from the Elkhorn to that point.

June 11, 1847 (Friday)

Amasa M. Lyman, who had been sent back from the Pioneer camp, and other Elders, met the sick detachment of the Mormon Battalion on Pole Creek.

June 14, 1847 (Monday)

The Pioneers recrossed the Platte river from its south to north side, 124 miles west of Ft. Laramie.

June 14, 1847 (Monday)

The first company of emigrating Saints was organized at Elkhorn river for journeying west, and on the 19th about five hundred and seventy-five wagons from Winter Quarters had crossed the "Horn."

June 16, 1847 (Wednesday)

Capt. Brown's detachment of the Mormon Battalion reached Ft. Laramie, and continued the following day westward, intending, if possible, to overtake the Pioneers, who had passed twelve days before.

June 20, 1847 (Sunday)

Thomas Smith was arrested and imprisoned at Covington, Warwickshire, England, for having cast out evil spirits. After examination, he and Richard Currell, the subject of administration, were dismissed, there being no cause of action.

June 27, 1847 (Sunday)

The Pioneers crossed the South Pass of the Rocky Mountains. On the following day they met Capt. James Bridger who considered it imprudent to bring a large population into the Great Basin, until it could be ascertained that grain could be raised there. So sanguine was he that it could not be done, that he said he would give one thousand dollars for the first ear of corn produced there.

June 29, 1847 (Tuesday)

Henry W. Bigler and others of the Mormon Battalion, stationed at San Diego, cleared the first yard for moulding brick in California.

June 30, 1847 (Wednesday)

Samuel Brannan, on his way from California, met the Pioneers at Green river, with news from the Saints who went out in the ship Brooklyn the year previous.

July 4, 1847 (Sunday)

Thirteen men of Capt. Brown's detachment of the Mormon Battalion, overtook the Pioneers on Green river.

July 7, 1847 (Wednesday)

The Pioneers arrived at Fort Bridger.

July 13, 1847 (Tuesday)

The Pioneers were encamped at the head of Echo Canyon; Apostle Orson Pratt was appointed to take 23 wagons and 42 men and precede the main company of Pioneers into Great Salt Valley.

July 15, 1847 (Thursday)

Company B of the Mormon Battalion joined the main body at Los Angeles.

July 16, 1847 (Friday)

The Battalion was honorably discharged at Los Angeles.

July 20, 1847 (Tuesday)

Eighty-one members of the Battalion re-enlisted for six months at Los Angeles. Four days later they were ordered to San Diego, where they arrived on Aug. 2nd, and were stationed as a provost guard to protect the citizens from Indian raids, etc. Those who did not re-enlist, organized into companies for traveling, and a few days later took up the line of march towards the East.

July 21, 1847 (Wednesday)

The advance company of the Pioneers camped in Emigration Canyon, went into the valley, and a circuit of about twelve miles was made before they got back to camp at 9 p.m.

July 22, 1847 (Thursday)

The advance company of Pioneers entered Great Salt Lake Valley and camped on Canyon Creek.

July 23, 1847 (Friday)

The advance company moved about three miles and camped on what was subsequently known as the 8th Ward Square of Salt Lake City. Apostle Orson Pratt called the camp together, dedicated the land to the Lord, invoked his blessings on the seeds about to be planted, and on the labors of the Saints in the valley. The camp was organized for work. The first successful plowing was done by Wm. Carter. A company commenced the work of getting out water for irrigation. Pres. Brigham Young, who was sick, and those with him, encamped at the foot of the Little Mountain.

July 24, 1847 (Saturday)

Pres. Young entered Great Salt Lake Valley and joined the main body of Pioneers at 2 p.m. Not a member of the company had died on the journey.

July 25, 1847 (Sunday)

Religious services were held for the first time in Great Salt Lake Valley. Geo. A. Smith preached the first public discourse and the Sacrament was administered there for the first time.

July 26, 1847 (Monday)

Pres. Young and others ascended what is now known as Ensign Peak, north of Salt Lake City, and name it.

July 27, 1847 (Tuesday)

Some Ute Indians visited the Pioneer camp. The Twelve and a few others started west from the Pioneer camp on an exploring expedition. Crossing the stream which forms the outlet of Utah lake, they named it the Jordan river, and then proceeded to Black Rock, eighteen miles further, where the company took a bath in the lake.

July 28, 1847 (Wednesday)

The exploring party returned to camp, a council was held and the Temple Block located.

July 29, 1847 (Thursday)

The detachment of the Mormon Battalion, which had wintered at Pueblo, on the Arkansas river, under Capt. James Brown, arrived in G.S.L. Valley, accompanied by the Saints from Mississippi. This increased the number in camp to about four hundred souls.

August 2, 1847 (Monday)

The survey of a city was commenced in G.S.L. Valley.

August 4, 1847 (Wednesday)

Twenty-seven of the re-enlisted Battalion boys were ordered to San Luis Rey, Cal., to protect the mission property.

August 6, 1847 (Friday)

The Apostles in G.S.L. Valley renewed their covenants by baptism, and the rest of the company soon after followed their example.

August 9, 1847 (Monday)

Catharine C. Steele, wife of John Steele, of the Battalion, gave birth to a female child who was named Young Elizabeth Steele. She was the first white child born in the Valley.

August 10, 1847 (Tuesday)

The building of the "Old Fort" was commenced by the Pioneers in G.S.L. Valley on what is now known as the Pioneer Square, Sixth Ward, Salt Lake City.

August 18, 1847 (Wednesday)

Nearly half of the Pioneers left G.S.L. Valley with ox teams, on their return to Winter Quarters for their families.

August 20, 1847 (Friday)

The returning Battalion boys arrived on the Sacramento river. On the 24th they reached a settlement of white people, and received the first news of the Saints settling in G.S.L. Valley.

August 21, 1847 (Saturday)

Albert Carrington, John Brown and Wm. W. Rust ascended to the summit of the Twin Peaks, the highest mountain near G.S.L. Valley.

August 22, 1847 (Sunday)

At a special conference held in G.S.L. Valley, the city, which had been commenced by the Pioneers, was named Great Salt Lake City; the river Jordan and the mountain streams on the east side of the Valley were also named.

August 26, 1847 (Thursday)

The second company of returning Pioneers left G.S.L. Valley for Winter Quarters to forward the emigration, where they arrived Oct. 31st. On their trip they met several companies of Saints who followed in the track of the Pioneers. Between six and seven hundred wagons, with about two thousand souls, arrived in the Valley that fall. When the Pioneers left for Winter Quarters, the colonists in the Valley had laid off a fort, built 27 log houses, plowed and planted 84 acres with corn, potatoes, beans, buckwheat, turnips, etc.

September 1847

The members of the Mormon Battalion who had returned to California from the Truckee river were employed by Capt. John A. Sutter, digging mill-races and erecting mills, near the place where Sacramento City now stands.

September 3, 1847 (Friday)

The returning Battalion boys, having crossed the Sierra Nevada Mountains, reached the place where the unfortunate Hastings company had perished the previous winter. A number of human bodies were yet lying unburied on top of the ground. Henry P. Hoyt died.

September 3, 1847 (Friday)

A few days later the soldiers were met by Samuel Brannan, James Brown and others, on the Truckee river. Brannan brought word from Pres. Brigham Young for those who had no means of subsistence to remain in California and work during the winter, and come to the Valley in the spring. About half of the company then returned to California.

September 8, 1847 (Wednesday)

Sergeant Lafayette N. Frost, of the re-enlisted Mormon Battalion company, died at San Diego.

September 20, 1847 (Monday)

Harriet P. Young, wife of Lorenzo D. Young, gave birth to a male child, which was subsequently named Lorenzo Dow. He died March 22, 1848. This was the first white male child born in G.S.L. Valley.

October 3, 1847 (Sunday)

The Saints in G.S.L. Valley were organized into a Stake of Zion with John Smith as president and Charles C. Rich and John Young as counselors. Selections for a High Council were also made. Charles C. Rich was elected chief military commander in the Valley.

October 16, 1847 (Saturday)

Those of the discharged Battalion boys who did not return to California arrived in G.S.L. City.

October 18, 1847 (Monday)

Thirty-two of the Battalion boys, who were anxious to meet their families at Winter Quarters, left G.S.L. City for that place, where they arrived Dec. 18th, after a hard journey.

November 1847

Capt. James Brown returned to G.S.L. Valley from a visit to California, bringing about $5,000 in gold.

November 5, 1847 (Friday)

Neal Donald, one of the Battalion boys who had re-enlisted, died at San Diego.

December 1847

Apostle Parley P. Pratt and others visited the Utah Lake, where they launched a boat.

December 5, 1847 (Sunday)

At a council of the Apostles held in the house of Apostle Orson Hyde, (attended by Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Hyde, Willard Richards, Wilford Woodruff, Geo. A. Smith, Amasa M. Lyman and Ezra T. Benson), Brigham Young was unanimously elected President of the Church, with authority to nominate his Counselors, which he did by naming Heber C. Kimball as his first and Willard Richards as his second Counselor.

December 6, 1847 (Monday)

John Smith, the Prophet's uncle, was chosen by the Council of the Apostles, as Patriarch to the whole Church.

December 11, 1847 (Saturday)

Philemon C. Merrill, with fifteen others of the Mormon Battalion, arrived at Winter Quarters; they left G.S.L. City Oct. 8th.

December 23, 1847 (Thursday)

The Twelve issued an important epistle from Winter Quarters to all the Saints, announcing, among other things, that emigration could be recommenced.

December 24, 1847 (Friday)

A general conference of the Church was commenced in a log Tabernacle erected by the Saints on the east side of the Missouri river (on the present site of Council Bluffs). It lasted four days. On the last day (Dec. 27th) Brigham Young was unanimously sustained as President of the Church, with Heber C. Kimball as his first and Willard Richards as second Counselor. John Smith was sustained as presiding Patriarch to the Church.
