Andrew Jenson, Church Chronology ( 1914)

During this year Utah Valley was settled by John S. Higbee and others, Tooele Valley by John Rowberry and several others, and Sanpete Valley by Isaac Morley and company. G.S.L. Valley was surveyed by Capt. Howard Stansbury and Lieutenant John W. Gunnison, according to order from the government. About five hundred wagons and fourteen hundred immigrating Saints arrived in the Valley, besides a number of California emigrants who, during their sojourn among the Saints, were converted to "Mormonism" and remained in the Valley. the five companies of Saints which crossed the plains from the Missouri river to the Valley this season were led by Elders Orson Spencer, Allen Taylor, Silas Richards, Geo. A. Smith and Ezra T. Benson. Capt. Dan Jones, with quite a number of Welsh Saints, were included in Geo. A. Smith's company. Elder Wm. Howell commenced to preach the gospel in France. In consequence of the scanty harvest of 1848, breadstuff and other provisions became very scarce in G.S.L. Valley, and many of the people were compelled to eat raw hides and to dig sego and thistle roots, for months, upon which to subsist. Those persons who had, imparted measurably to those who had not, so that extreme suffering from hunger was avoided.

January 1849

The first number of Udgorn Seion (Zion's Trumpet), was issued in the interest of the Church in Wales, as a continuation of Prophwyd y Jubili.

January 1, 1849 (Monday)

John Smith, uncle of the Prophet Joseph, was ordained Patriarch to the whole Church.

January 1, 1849 (Monday)

The first $1 bill of "Valley Currency" was signed by Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball and Thos. Bullock.

January 19, 1849 (Friday)

Marcus B. Thorpe, one of Pres. Brigham Young's Pioneers, was murdered in California.

January 22, 1849 (Monday)

Pres. Brigham Young and Thos. Bullock were engaged in setting type for the 50-cent bills of the Valley paper currency. This was the first type setting in G.S.L. Valley.

January 29, 1849 (Monday)

The ship Zetland sailed from Liverpool, England, with 358 Saints, bound for G.S.L. Valley, under the presidency of Orson Spencer. It arrived at New Orleans April 2nd, and the emigrants arrived at Kanesville, Iowa, May 17th, having suffered much from cholera while passing up the Missouri river.

February 1849

The Stake of Zion in G.S.L. Valley was reorganized with Daniel Spencer as president and David Fullmer and Willard Snow counselors. A High Council was also organized, of which the members were: Isaac Morley, Phineas Richards, Shadrach Roundy, Henry G. Sherwood, Titus Billings, Eleazer Miller, John Vance, Levi Jackman, Ira Eldredge, Elisha H. Groves, Wm. W. Major and Edwin D. Wooley.

February 5, 1849 (Monday)

This was a very cold day in G.S.L. City, the thermometer showed 33 degrees F. below zero.

February 6, 1849 (Tuesday)

The ship Ashland sailed from Liverpool, England, with 187 Saints, under the direction of John Johnson, bound for G.S.L. Valley.

February 7, 1849 (Wednesday)

The first number of the Frontier Guardian, a semi-monthly four-page newspaper, was published by Apostle Orson Hyde, at Kanesville, Iowa.

February 7, 1849 (Wednesday)

The ship Henry Ware sailed from Liverpool, England, with 225 Saints on board, bound for G.S.L. Valley, under the direction of Robert Martin.

February 12, 1849 (Monday)

Charles C. Rich, Lorenzo Snow, Erastus Snow and Franklin D. Richards were ordained Apostles, to fill the vacancies in the Council of Twelve Apostles caused by the reorganization of the First Presidency and the rejection of Lyman Wight.

February 14, 1849 (Wednesday)

G.S.L. City was divided into nineteen ecclesiastical Wards of nine blocks each.

February 16, 1849 (Friday)

The First Presidency and the Apostles, in council assembled, divided the country lying south of G.S.L. City into four Bishop's Wards, namely, Canyon Creek (afterwards Sugar House), Mill Creek, Holladay (afterwards Big Cottonwood) and South Cottonwood.

February 22, 1849 (Thursday)

At a council meeting held in G.S.L. City, the following Bishops were ordained and set apart to preside in the City Wards: David Fairbanks, 1st Ward; John Lowry, 2nd Ward; Christopher Williams, 3rd Ward; Wm. Hickenlooper, 6th Ward; Wm. G. Perkins, 7th Ward; Addison Everett, 8th Ward; Seth Taft, 9th Ward; David Pettigrew, 10th Ward; Benjamin Covey, 12th Ward; Edward Hunter, 13th Ward; John Murdock, 14th Ward; Abraham O. Smoot, 15th Ward; Isaac Higbee, 16th Ward; Joseph L. Heywood, 17th Ward and James Hendricks, 19th Ward.

February 25, 1849 (Sunday)

The ship Buena Vista sailed from Liverpool, England, with 249 Welsh Saints, under the direction of Dan Jones.

February 26, 1849 (Monday)

Work was commenced on the Council House, G.S.L. City.

March 1849

Provo, Utah Valley, was settled by John S. Higbee and some thirty others. On March 18th a branch of the Church was organized with John S. Higbee as president. During the year the settlers had some trouble with the Indians.

March 1849

A post office was established in G.S.L. City, with Joseph L. Heywood as postmaster.

March 1849

The Icarians arrived at Nauvoo, Ill., and bought the ruins of the Temple, with a view to refit it for school purposes.

March 5, 1849 (Monday)

The ship Hartley sailed from Liverpool, England, with 220 Saints bound for G.S.L. Valley, under the direction of W. Hulme. It arrived at New Orleans April 28th.

March 8, 1849 (Thursday)

A convention, which was held for three days, convened in G.S.L. City. Before its adjournment a State constitution for the proposed State of Deseret was adopted. Almon W. Babbitt was soon after sent as delegate to Congress, with a petition asking for admission into the Union.

March 12, 1849 (Monday)

An election took place for officers of the provisional government of the State of Deseret. Brigham Young was chosen governor; Willard Richards, secretary; Newel K. Whitney, treasurer; Heber C. Kimball, chief judge; John Taylor and Newel K. Whitney, associate judges; Daniel H. Wells, attorney general; Horace S. Eldredge, marshal; Albert Carrington, assessor and collector of taxes; Joseph L. Heywood, surveyor of highways. Magistrates were also appointed for the several Wards.

March 12, 1849 (Monday)

The ship Emblem sailed from Liverpool, England, with about one hundred Saints, under the direction of Robert Deans, bound for G.S.L. Valley.

March 15, 1849 (Thursday)

John Van Cott sold a peck of potatoes for $5 in G.S.L. City, which was considered cheap.

March 25, 1849 (Sunday)

The first public meeting was held on the Temple Block, G.S.L. City.

March 28, 1849 (Wednesday)

The Nauvoo Legion was partly reorganized; Daniel H. Wells was appointed major-general. The first company organized was under the command of Capt. George D. Grant, and those who belonged to it were styled "minute men."

April 1849

The settlers in Utah Valley built a fort near the present site of Provo City.

April 8, 1849 (Sunday)

The Fourth Ward, G.S.L. City, was organized with Benjamin Brown as Bishop.

April 9, 1849 (Monday)

The First Presidency issued the "First General Epistle" to the whole Church from G.S.L. Valley. By this time the people in the G.S.L. City fort had commenced to move out to their city lots.

May 5, 1849 (Saturday)

Elder Elijah Malin, of Winter Quarters, died of cholera, in St. Louis, Mo., returning from a mission to Pennsylvania.

June 11, 1849 (Monday)

Caleb Baldwin, one of the brethren who had been imprisoned with the Prophet Joseph in Liberty jail, Mo., died in G.S.L. City.

June 16, 1849 (Saturday)

Parties from the east en route for the California gold mines began to arrive in the Valley, and during the summer they traveled through by thousands. They brought all kinds of merchandise, wagons, tools and farming implements, etc., which were sold to the Saints below original cost, in exchange for provisions.

July 1849

Elder William Howell visited France and began to preach the gospel; he baptized the first person on July 30th, at Havre, and during the remainder of the year he baptized a few more. Among the number was a Baptist preacher about sixty years old.

July 2, 1849 (Monday)

The General Assembly of the Provisional State of Deseret met for the first time in G.S.L. City.

July 21, 1849 (Saturday)

The first endowment in G.S.L. Valley was given to Addison Pratt on Ensign Peak.

July 24, 1849 (Tuesday)

The first celebration to commemorate the entrance of the Pioneers into G.S.L. Valley was held in G.S.L. City.

August 24, 1849 (Friday)

Wm. W. Phelps ascended to the top of Mount Nebo, south of Utah Valley, to make scientific observations.

August 28, 1849 (Tuesday)

Captain Howard Stansbury and party of surveyors arrived in G.S.L. Valley, accompanied by Lieutenant John W. Gunnison.

September 1, 1849 (Saturday)

Wm. Dayton was accidentally killed and Geo. W. Bean crippled for life, by the premature discharge of a cannon at Fort Utah (Provo), Utah.

September 2, 1849 (Sunday)

The ship James Pennell sailed from Liverpool, England, with 236 Saints, under the direction of Thomas H. Clark, bound for G.S.L. Valley. It arrived at New Orleans Oct. 22nd.

September 5, 1849 (Wednesday)

The ship Berlin sailed from Liverpool with 253 Saints, under James G. Brown's direction, bound for G.S.L. Valley; it arrived at New Orleans Oct. 22nd. Twenty-six died on the voyage, of cholera.

September 23, 1849 (Sunday)

Orson Spencer arrived in G.S.L. Valley, with his company of British Saints.

October 3, 1849 (Wednesday)

Three companies of emigrating Saints were exposed to the fury of a tremendous snow storm near the South Pass. Sixty head of cattle perished.

October 6, 1849 (Saturday)

The Deseret Dramatic Association was organized in G.S.L. City.

October 6, 1849 (Saturday)

On this and the following day a general conference of the Church was held in G.S.L. City, at which the Perpetual Emigration Fund was commenced. John Taylor, Curtis E. Bolton and John Pack were called on missions to France; Erastus Snow and Peter O. Hansen to Denmark; Lorenzo Snow and Joseph Toronto to Italy; Franklin D. Richards, Joseph W. Johnson, Joseph W. Young, Job Smith, Haden W. Church, Geo. B. Wallace and John S. Higbee to Great Britain; Charles C. Rich and Francis M. Pomeroy to Lower California; Addison Pratt, James S. Brown and Hiram H. Blackwell to the Society Islands, and John E. Forsgren to Sweden. A "Carrying Company," for carrying goods from the Missouri river to the Valley and also to run a wagon passenger train, was organized. It was voted to lay off a city in Capt. James Brown's neighborhood (Ogden), and another one in Utah Valley (Provo); also to make a settlement in Sanpete Valley (Manti). For the latter Isaac Morley, Charles Shumway and Seth Taft were appointed a presidency.

October 12, 1849 (Friday)

The First Presidency issued the "Second General Epistle" from G.S.L. Valley, to the Saints in all the world.

October 19, 1849 (Friday)

The missionaries' camp was organized for traveling, Shadrach Roundy being appointed president. The company consisted of 35 men, with 12 wagons, 1 carriage, and 42 horses and mules. Among the Elders were Apostles Lorenzo Snow, Erastus Snow and Franklin D. Richards, Bishop Edward Hunter and other prominent men. It was the first company of missionaries sent from the Rocky Mountains.

November 10, 1849 (Saturday)

The ship Zetland sailed from Liverpool, England, with 250 Saints, under the direction of S. H. Hawkins. It arrived at New Orleans Dec. 24th.

November 12, 1849 (Monday)

The missionaries traveling east were attacked by about two hundred Cheyenne warriors, on the Platte river, but escaped unhurt.

November 19, 1849 (Monday)

Sanpete Valley was settled by a company, under the guidance of Isaac Morley, Seth Taft and Charles Shumway. They located near the present site of Manti.

November 23, 1849 (Friday)

An exploring company, consisting of about fifty men, was organized at Capt. John Brown's house, on Big Cottonwood, with Apostle Parley P. Pratt as president; it started the next day to explore what is now southern Utah.

December 1849

The general assembly of the Provisional State of Deseret met for the second time and held adjourned meetings at intervals through the winter. Among the important business done was the creating of Great Salt Lake, Weber, Utah, Sanpete, Juab and Tooele counties, appointing a supreme court, chartering a State University, etc.

December 1849

The first Sunday school in Utah was opened by Elder Richard Ballantyne, in the 14th Ward, G.S.L. City.

December 1, 1849 (Saturday)

Nineteen men on foot arrived in G.S.L. City from the East in a very destitute condition, having left their wagons in the snow on Echo creek, forty miles back.

December 7, 1849 (Friday)

After an adventurous journey, during which an overruling Providence was clearly made manifest in behalf of the Elders, the missionaries arrived at Old Ft. Kearney, on the Missouri river.

December 24, 1849 (Monday)

A terrific wind swept over G.S.L. Valley from the south.

December 24, 1849 (Monday)

Before the end of the year, the Saints who had settled on the Little Cottonwood creek, south of G.S.L. City, were organized into a Ward, named Little Cottonwood, with Silas Richards as Bishop.
