Andrew Jenson, Church Chronology ( 1914)

Great Salt Lake City, Utah, was incorporated and the first officers elected. The newly appointed officers for the Territory of Utah entered upon the duties of their offices. The first Territorial legislature convened in G.S.L. City and passed important laws. In the spring of the year school houses were built in most of the Wards in G.S.L. City, and also in the country Wards. A railroad (with wooden rails) was built from G.S.L. City to Red Butte canyon, to bring rocks to the Temple Block. Cedar City, Iron Co., North Willow Creek (now Willard City), Box Elder Co., and Nephi, Juab Co., were settled this year. North Ogden, Weber Co., was settled by Solomon, Jonathan and Samuel Campbell, John Riddle and others; Santaquin, Utah Co., by Benjamin F. Johnson and others, and Carson County (now in the State of Nevada) by Col. John Reese. A settlement of the Saints (San Bernardino) was founded in Southern California. Missions were opened in New South Wales, (Australia), and in India.

January 1851

City charters were granted to Ogden, Provo, Manti and Parowan, by the general assembly of the State of Deseret.

January 1851

Udgorn Seion (Zion's Trumpet), the organ of the Church in Wales, was changed from a monthly to a semi-monthly periodical.

January 1, 1851 (Wednesday)

Apostle Franklin D. Richards succeeded Apostle Orson Pratt as president of the British Mission.

January 1, 1851 (Wednesday)

The first native Elder in the Scandinavian mission (Christian Christiansen) was ordained by Apostle Erastus Snow, at Copenhagen, Denmark.

January 3, 1851 (Friday)

The first criminal trial by jury took place in the Provisional State of Deseret, in G.S.L. City.

January 6, 1851 (Monday)

The general assembly of the State of Deseret met in G.S.L. City; daily meetings were held until the 17th, when it adjourned until the first Tuesday in February. Much important business was transacted.

January 8, 1851 (Wednesday)

The ship Ellen sailed from Liverpool, England, with 466 Saints, under the direction of James W. Cummings; it arrived at New Orleans, March 14th.

January 9, 1851 (Thursday)

The bill incorporating G.S.L. City was passed by the general assembly of Deseret, and the following officers were appointed by the governor and assembly: Jedediah M. Grant, mayor; Nathaniel H. Felt, Wm. Snow, Jesse P. Harmon and Nathaniel V. Jones, aldermen; Vincent Shurtliff, Benjamin L. Clapp, Zera Pulsipher, Wm. G. Perkins, Lewis Robison, Harrison Burgess, Jeter Clinton, John L. Dunyon, and Samuel W. Richards, councilors.

January 11, 1851 (Saturday)

The G.S.L. City council assembled in the Representatives Hall, and the officers elect took their oath of office from Thomas Bullock, clerk of the county court; when the council proceeded to complete the city organization by electing Robert Campbell, recorder; Thomas Rhodes, treasurer; and Elam Luddington, marshal. The city was divided into four municipal wards.

January 13, 1851 (Monday)

Apostle Geo. A. Smith and company of settlers arrived on Centre Creek, Little Salt Lake Valley, Utah, where they located a town site, which later was named Parowan. They commenced their settlement by building a fort.

January 18, 1851 (Saturday)

On this and the following day the Seventies held a special conference in the Bowery, G.S.L. City; a number of vacancies were filled and other important business was transacted.

January 20, 1851 (Monday)

Presidents Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball, Apostle Amasa M. Lyman, Elder Jedediah M. Grant and others left G.S.L. City to visit the settlements in Davis and Weber Counties. In the evening they preached in the house of Perrigrine Sessions, and organized a branch of the Church; John Stoker was ordained Bishop. The place at that time was known as Sessions settlement.

January 21, 1851 (Tuesday)

Pres. Brigham Young and party held meeting with the people of North Cottonwood (Farmington), in the school house, and appointed Gideon Brownell presiding Elder of that branch.

January 22, 1851 (Wednesday)

The ship George W. Bourne sailed from Liverpool, England, with 281 Saints, under the direction of William Gibson; it arrived at New Orleans March 20th.

January 26, 1851 (Sunday)

Pres. Brigham Young and party held meetings with the Saints in the south fort, Ogden, when Lorin Farr was chosen president of the Weber Stake, with Charles R. Dana and David B. Dille as counselors. A High Council was also organized. Isaac Clark was ordained Bishop of the South Ward, with James Browning and James Brown as counselors; and Erastus Bingham Bishop of the North Ward, with Charles Hubbart and Stephen Perry as counselors.

January 27, 1851 (Monday)

Pres. Brigham Young and party held a meeting with the Saints who had settled on Kay's creek, (now Kaysville, Davis Co.,) and appointed William Kay Bishop of that Ward.

January 27, 1851 (Monday)

Official news of the organization of the Territory of Utah first reached G.S.L. City.

January 28, 1851 (Tuesday)

Pres. Brigham Young and party returned to G.S.L. City from their visit to the settlements in Weber and Davis Counties.

January 29, 1851 (Wednesday)

Elder James Henry Flanigan, a good and faithful American missionary, died of small-pox at Birmingham, England.

February 2, 1851 (Sunday)

The ship Ellen Maria sailed from Liverpool, England, with 378 Saints on board, under George D. Watt's direction. Apostle Orson Pratt and family also returned with that company. The ship arrived at New Orleans April 6th.

February 3, 1851 (Monday)

Brigham Young took the oath of office as governor of the Territory of Utah.

February 4, 1851 (Tuesday)

The general assembly of Deseret again met in G.S.L. City and was in session on that and the following day; also on the 10th and on the 24th; it finally adjourned to the fourth Saturday in March.

February 9, 1851 (Sunday)

The settlers who had located on Centre Creek (Parowan), Iron Co., Utah, were organized into a branch of the Church, under the presidency of Apostle George A. Smith.

February 17, 1851 (Monday)

Robert Dickson opened a school in the 14th Ward, G.S.L. City, with 18 scholars, teaching phonography.

March 1851

Brigham City, Box Elder Co., was settled by William Davis, James Brooks and Thomas Pierce.

March 4, 1851 (Tuesday)

The ship Olympus sailed from Liverpool, England, with 245 Saints, bound for Utah, under the direction of Wm. Howell. Some fifty non-Mormon passengers were converted and baptized on the voyage to New Orleans, where the company arrived about April 27th.

March 17, 1851 (Monday)

Presidents Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball and others left G.S.L. City on a visit to Utah County.

March 17, 1851 (Monday)

Elder Wm. Burton, of G.S.L. City, died at Edinburgh, Scotland, where he labored as a missionary.

March 19, 1851 (Wednesday)

A Stake of Zion was organized by Pres. Brigham Young at Provo, Utah Co., with Isaac Higbee as president, and John Blackburn and Thos. Willis as counselors.

March 23, 1851 (Sunday)

Benjamin Cross was ordained a High Priest and set apart to act as the first Bishop of Payson.

March 24, 1851 (Monday)

A company of settlers for Southern California was organized for traveling, at Payson, Utah Co., and commenced the journey the same day, under the presidency of Apostles Amasa M. Lyman and Charles C. Rich, accompanied by Apostle Parley P. Pratt and a party of missionaries going to different countries to preach the gospel.

March 26, 1851 (Wednesday)

Pres. Brigham Young and party returned to G.S.L. City from their visit to Utah County.

March 28, 1851 (Friday)

The general assembly of Deseret met and passed a number of resolutions expressive of their good feelings toward the government for creating the Territory of Utah.

April 1851

Pres. Brigham Young dictated the plan for a tabernacle to be erected on the southwest corner of the Temple Block, G.S.L. City.

April 1851

The Eighteenth Ward, G.S.L. City, was organized with Lorenzo D. Young as Bishop.

April 1851

The schooner Ravaai, which had been built by the Elders and Saints on Tubuai, Society Islands mission, for missionary purposes, was finished and launched.

April 5, 1851 (Saturday)

The general assembly of the Provisional State of Deseret was dissolved. Among a number of other acts passed during the session of 1850-51 was one providing for the organization of Iron County.

April 6, 1851 (Sunday)

The 21st annual conference of the Church convened in G.S.L. City, but after the opening exercises it was adjourned to the 7th, on account of the heavy rains.

April 7, 1851 (Monday)

At the general conference held in G.S.L. City in was voted to build a Temple. Edward Hunter was appointed successor to the late Newel K. Whitney as presiding Bishop of the whole Church. At this time there were about thirty thousand inhabitants in Utah, of which nearly five thousand were in G.S.L. City. The First Presidency issued the "Fifth General Epistle" to the Saints in all the world.

April 22, 1851 (Tuesday)

Presidents Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball and many other prominent men left G.S.L. City to visit the Saints in the southern settlements and explore the Sevier Valley.

April 30, 1851 (Wednesday)

Pres. Brigham Young organized a High Council at Manti, Sanpete Co., Utah.

May 1851

The Book of Mormon in the Danish language, translated by Peter O. Hansen, was published by Erastus Snow in Copenhagen, Denmark; it was the first edition of the book printed in a foreign language.

May 1851

The first number of the Etoile du Deseret (Star of Deseret), a monthly periodical published in the interest of the Church, was issued by Apostle John Taylor, in Paris, France.

May 7, 1851 (Wednesday)

The first wagons of the season direct from Fort Laramie arrived in G.S.L. City, laden with provisions.

May 10, 1851 (Saturday)

Pres. Brigham Young and party arrived at Parowan, Iron Co., where they remained until the 16th.

May 12, 1851 (Monday)

The first job of blacksmithing with Utah stone coal was done by Mr. Bringhurst at Parowan, Iron Co., in the presence of Gov. Brigham Young and party.

May 13, 1851 (Tuesday)

The foundation of the Seventies' Hall of Science in G.S.L. City was completed.

May 21, 1851 (Wednesday)

Work was commenced on the "Old Tabernacle," in G.S.L. City.

May 24, 1851 (Saturday)

Pres. Brigham Young and party returned to G.S.L. City from their visit to the southern settlements.

May 25, 1851 (Sunday)

The Saints who had settled at American Fork, Utah Co., Utah, were organized into a Ward; Leonard E. Harrington, Bishop.

June 1851

Apostles Amasa M. Lyman and Charles C. Rich, with about five hundred souls from Utah, arrived at San Bernardino, Cal., for the purpose of making a settlement.

June 1851

Elder Joseph Richards, member of the British army, arrived at Calcutta, India, having been authorized by the presidency of the British mission to introduce the gospel in that country.

June 3, 1851 (Tuesday)

The Channel Islands' mission was transferred from the British to the French mission, at a special conference, held in London, England.

June 7, 1851 (Saturday)

Judge Lemuel G. Brandenbury arrived in G.S.L. City.

June 10, 1851 (Tuesday)

The Indians stole about sixty head of stock near Black Rock, Salt Lake Co.

June 21, 1851 (Saturday)

The Saints' assembly hall at Aalborg, Denmark, was demolished by a mob, which also ill-treated some of the brethren.

June 22, 1851 (Sunday)

Elder Geo. Q. Cannon commenced to baptize natives in the district of Kula, on the island of Maui, Hawaii. This was the commencement of a great missionary work on that island; a few natives had previously been baptized on the island of Hawaii, and one or more at Honolulu.

June 22, 1851 (Sunday)

Elder Joseph Richards baptized James Patrick Meik, Mary Ann Meik, Matthew McCune and Maurice White, at Calcutta, India, as the first converts to the fulness of the gospel in Asia in this dispensation. These four, together with Elder Richards, were organized into a branch of the Church, called the Wanderers' branch.

July 1, 1851 (Tuesday)

Gov. Brigham Young issued a proclamation appointing the first Monday in the following August for electing members to the first Territorial legislature, according to the organic act.

July 4, 1851 (Friday)

The citizens of G.S.L. City celebrated the day by an excursion to Black Rock, in the Great Salt Lake.

July 11, 1851 (Friday)

Apostle Parley P. Pratt and company of missionaries arrived at San Francisco, Cal.

July 11, 1851 (Friday)

Apostle Orson Hyde and traveling companions, en route for G.S.L. Valley, were attacked by about three hundred Pawnee Indians, near Loupe Fork, and robbed of several thousand dollars' worth of property.

July 13, 1851 (Sunday)

The Eleventh Ward, G.S.L. City, was organized with John Lytle as Bishop.

July 19, 1851 (Saturday)

Four of the newly appointed Federal officers for Utah, namely, Judge Zerubbabel Snow, Secretary Benjamin D. Harris and Indian Agents Stephen B. Rose and Henry R. Day arrived in G.S.L. City, accompanied by Dr. John M. Bernhisel and Almon W. Babbitt.

July 21, 1851 (Monday)

Gov. Brigham Young, by proclamation, divided the Territory of Utah into three Indian agencies, and assigned the sub-agents, Rose and Day, their respective districts.

July 24, 1851 (Thursday)

Pioneer day was celebrated in excellent style in G.S.L. City and the different settlements of the Saints in Utah.

August 1851

The first kiln of earthen ware was burned at the Deseret Pottery, located near the head of Emigration or Third South Streets.

August 4, 1851 (Monday)

The first election for delegate to Congress and members of the Territorial legislature took place in Utah. Dr. John M. Bernhisel was elected Utah's first delegate to Congress.

August 6, 1851 (Wednesday)

The first branch of the Church in the Hawaiian Islands was organized by Elder Geo. Q. Cannon, in the Kula district, on the island of Maui.

August 8, 1851 (Friday)

Gov. Brigham Young, by proclamation, divided the Territory of Utah into three judicial districts. Hon. Lemuel G. Brandenbury was assigned to the first, Hon. Zerubbabel Snow to the second and Hon. Perry E. Brocchus to the third judicial district.

August 16, 1851 (Saturday)

The first general conference in the Scandinavian mission convened in Copenhagen, Denmark, Erastus Snow presiding. It was continued three days.

August 17, 1851 (Sunday)

Apostle Orson Hyde, Albert Carrington and others arrived in G.S.L. City from Kanesville, Ia., accompanied by Perry E. Brocchus, one of the newly appointed judges for Utah; they brought with them a brass cannon.

September 1851

Juab County was settled by Joseph L. Heywood and others, who located on Salt Creek (now Nephi).

September 1851

Chief Justice Brandenbury, Associate Judge Perry E. Brocchus and Secretary Benjamin D. Harris deserted their official posts in Utah and went to the States, taking with them the $24,000 which had been appropriated by Congress for the legislature.

September 1851

The Athrawiaeth a Chyfammodau (Doctrine and Covenants) was published in the Welsh language, in Wales.

September 7, 1851 (Sunday)

The general conference of the Church convened in the Bowery, G.S.L. City; it was continued four days. During the conference Judge Perry E. Brocchus, who with the other Federal officers had been invited to the stand, spoke insultingly to the large assembly.

September 11, 1851 (Thursday)

Elder Hans F. Petersen arrived at Riisor, as the first Latter-day Saint missionary to Norway.

September 21, 1851 (Sunday)

The First Presidency issued an epistle to the Saints in Iowa, counseling them to come to the Valley.

September 22, 1851 (Monday)

The first legislature of Utah Territory convened in G.S.L. City and organized by electing Heber C. Kimball president of the Council, and Wm. W. Phelps speaker of the House.

September 22, 1851 (Monday)

The First Presidency issued the "Sixth General Epistle" to the whole Church.

September 22, 1851 (Monday)

Amasa M. Lyman and party purchased the Ranche of San Bernardino, containing about one hundred thousand acres of land. The location was about one hundred miles from San Diego, seventy miles from the seaport of San Pedro and fifty miles from Pueblo de los Angeles.

October 1851

The first number of Skandinaviens Stjerne, a monthly (now semi-monthly) periodical, was published by Apostle Erastus Snow, in Copenhagen, Denmark.

October 1, 1851 (Wednesday)

John Hartley, who had met with a railroad accident, was miraculously healed under the administration of Elders, at Accrington, England.

October 4, 1851 (Saturday)

A joint resolution, passed by the Utah legislature, legalizing the laws of the provisional government of the State of Deseret, was approved by the governor.

October 5, 1851 (Sunday)

Elder Maurice White baptized Anna, a daughter of a high caste Brahmin, at Calcutta, India, as the first native convert to "Mormonism" in the East India mission.

October 21, 1851 (Tuesday)

Gov. Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Geo. A. Smith and others left G.S.L. City on a tour to the South, for the purpose of locating the Territorial seat of government. They reached Chalk creek, Pauvan Valley, Oct. 28th.

October 24, 1851 (Friday)

The last company of the immigrating Saints for the season arrived in G.S.L. City.

October 24, 1851 (Friday)

Elders Hans Peter Jensen and Hans Larsen received very cruel treatment from a mob on Bornholm, Denmark, for preaching the gospel.

October 29, 1851 (Wednesday)

Fillmore, Millard Co., Utah, which had just been settled by Anson Call and thirty families, was selected for the capital of the Territory.

October 29, 1851 (Wednesday)

Elder James S. Brown was arrested by order of the French officials at Anaa, Society Islands mission, and the next day placed on board a French man-of-war.

October 30, 1851 (Thursday)

John Murdock and Charles W. Wandell, arrived at Sydney, as Latter-day Saint missionaries to Australia, and commenced to preach the gospel.

November 1851

The first number of Zions Panier (Zion's Banner), a monthly 16-page periodical, was published at Hamburg, Germany, by Apostle John Taylor.

November 2, 1851 (Sunday)

The first meeting by Latter-day Saint Elders in New South Wales, Australia, was held by Elders John Murdock and Charles W. Wandell at Sydney.

November 7, 1851 (Friday)

Pres. Brigham Young and party returned to G.S.L. City from Fillmore, having come by way of Sanpete Valley.

November 8, 1851 (Saturday)

Apostle Parley P. Pratt and Rufus Allen arrived as missionaries in Valparaiso, Chili, South America, after 64 days' rough sailing from San Francisco.

November 11, 1851 (Tuesday)

The "University of the State of Deseret" was opened in G.S.L. City.

November 15, 1851 (Saturday)

The Deseret News, which had been suspended for lack of paper since Aug. 19th, commenced its second volume.

November 26, 1851 (Wednesday)

Elder Hans F. Petersen baptized Peter Adamsen and John Olsen in Riisor, as the first fruits of preaching the gospel in Norway.

December 1851

Three families commenced a settlement on Clover Creek (Mona), eight miles north of Nephi, Juab Co.

December 1851

The San Bernardino settlers had erected about one hundred dwellings and built a stockade fort for defense against the Indians.

December 1851

A number of Saints were cruelly treated by a mob in Brondbyoster, Sjaelland, Denmark.

December 1, 1851 (Monday)

The British mission consisted of 44 conferences and 679 branches, with 32,894 members. This is the greatest number of Saints ever reported in that mission.

December 2, 1851 (Tuesday)

A number of fishermen at Arnager, Bornholm, Denmark, armed themselves and defended two "Mormon" missionaries against mob violence.

December 3, 1851 (Wednesday)

The first baptism by divine authority in New South Wales, Australia, took place in Sydney.

December 7, 1851 (Sunday)

Peter Adamsen and John Olsen were confirmed members of the Church by Elder Hans F. Petersen, at Riisor. This was the first confirmation by Latter-day Saints in Norway. The Sacrament was also administered for the first time by divine authority in that country.

December 21, 1851 (Sunday)

A branch of the Church was organized at Spanish Fork, Utah Co., (recently settled), with Stephen Markham as president and Wm. Pace, as Bishop.

December 25, 1851 (Thursday)

Elder Wm. Willes arrived at Calcutta, India, as a Latter-day Saint missionary from England, sent by Apostle Lorenzo Snow to preach the gospel in India.
