Andrew Jenson, Church Chronology ( 1914)

In the spring of this year John D. Lee located a ranch on Ash Creek (near the present Harmony, Washington Co.), Utah, and Cedar Valley was settled by Allen Weeks, Alfred Bell and others. Early in the year post offices were established at American Fork, Springville and Payson, Utah Co., Salt Creek (Nephi), Juab Co., and Fillmore, Millard Co. About twenty companies of emigrating Saints arrived in the Valley which included most of the Saints who had been located temporarily in and about Kanesville (Council Bluffs), Iowa. During this year the Book of Mormon was published in the Welsh, French, German and Italian languages. The missionaries sent to labor in Norway were imprisoned at Frederikstad. In Hawaii and Australia the Elders met with considerable success, but the attempt to open a mission in Chili, South America, proved a failure. The Elders were banished from the Society Islands mission. Missionaries were called to India, China, Siam, Cape of Good Hope, Prussia, Gibraltar, the West Indies and other countries.

January 4, 1852 (Sunday)

The first branch of the Church in New South Wales, Australia, was organized at Sydney, with twelve members.

January 10, 1852 (Saturday)

The ship Kennebec sailed from Liverpool, England, with 333 Saints, under the direction of John S. Higbee. It arrived at New Orleans March 11th.

January 19, 1852 (Monday)

The Saints who had settled on the river Jordan, south of G.S.L. City, were organized into a Ward with John Robinson as Bishop.

January 20, 1852 (Tuesday)

Elder Knud H. Bruun was fearfully whipped and nearly killed by a mob at Falkerslov, on Falster, Denmark.

January 27, 1852 (Tuesday)

Elder Geo. Q. Cannon commenced the translation of the Book of Mormon in the Hawaiian language, at Wailuku, Maui.

January 31, 1852 (Saturday)

Nine Saints sailed from Copenhagen, Denmark, for America, being the first "Mormon" emigrants from Scandinavia.

February 1852

The Territorial Library was opened in the Council House, G.S.L. City, with Wm. C. Staines, as librarian. Congress had appropriated $5,000 towards the purchase of books, which were selected by Delegate Bernhisel.

February 3, 1852 (Tuesday)

Legislative acts, providing for the organization of the counties of Great Salt Lake, Weber, Utah, Sanpete, Juab, Tooele, Iron, Davis (previously created by acts of the general assembly of Deseret), Millard, Washington, Green River and Deseret Counties were approved.

February 5, 1852 (Thursday)

The Utah legislature adjourned, but met again on the 16th.

February 7, 1852 (Saturday)

Gov. Brigham Young approved an act, recently passed by the Utah legislature, appointing probate judges in the counties in Utah; to wit., Isaac Clark, Weber Co.; Joseph Holbrook, Davis Co.; Elias Smith, G.S.L. Co.; Preston Thomas, Utah Co.; Alfred Lee, Tooele Co.; Geo. W. Bradley, Juab Co.; Geo. Peacock, Sanpete Co.; Anson Call, Millard Co.; Chapman Duncan, Iron Co.

February 10, 1852 (Tuesday)

A branch of the Church was organized at Mountainville (Alpine), Utah Co., Utah; Charles S. Peterson, president.

February 10, 1852 (Tuesday)

The ship Ellen Maria sailed from Liverpool, England, with 369 Saints, under the direction of Isaac C. Haight. It arrived in New Orleans April 6th.

February 14, 1852 (Saturday)

The legislative assembly of Utah Territory memorialized Congress for the construction of a great national central railroad from the Missouri river to the Pacific Coast. The memorial was approved on the 3rd of March following. At the same session, the legislature petitioned Congress for the establishment of a telegraph line across the continent.

February 26, 1852 (Thursday)

Lorenzo Snow and Jabez Woodard arrived as the first missionaries of the Church on the island of Malta, and commenced preaching. A branch of the Church, consisting of 26 members, was organized there on the 28th of June following.

March 1852

A site for a city at San Bernardino was surveyed by the Saints in California.

March 2, 1852 (Tuesday)

After an unsuccessful attempt to open a mission in South America, Apostle Parley P. Pratt and Rufus Allen sailed from Valparaiso, Chili, for San Francisco, Cal., where they arrived May 21st.

March 4, 1852 (Thursday)

After establishing a mission in Scandinavia, Erastus Snow sailed from Copenhagen, Denmark, to return home, accompanied by 19 emigrating Saints.

March 6, 1852 (Saturday)

The ship Rockaway sailed from Liverpool, England, with 30 Saints and machinery purchased by Apostle John Taylor for the manufacture of sugar in Utah. It arrived at New Orleans after seven weeks' passage.

March 6, 1852 (Saturday)

Apostle John Taylor, accompanied by about twenty Saints, sailed from Liverpool for Boston, on his return home.

March 11, 1852 (Thursday)

The ship Italy sailed from Liverpool, England, with 28 Scandinavian Saints—the first from the Scandinavian mission—under the direction of Ole U.C. Monster. The company arrived at New Orleans May 10th and in G.S.L. City Oct. 16th, crossing the plains in Eli B. Kelsey's company.

March 15, 1852 (Monday)

G.S.L. County was organized with Elias Smith as county and probate judge.

April 1852

The Millennial Star, the Church organ in Great Britain, was changed from a semi-monthly to a weekly periodical.

April 6, 1852 (Tuesday)

The building subsequently known as the Old Tabernacle, which had been erected and just completed on the southwest corner of the Temple Block, in G.S.L. City, was dedicated. This structure, built of adobe, was 126 feet long, 64 feet wide and arched without a pillar. It was capable of seating about twenty-five hundred people. The ground is now occupied by the Assembly Hall.

April 6, 1852 (Tuesday)

The first general conference of the Church in the Hawaiian mission was commenced in the valley of Iao, near Wailuku, Maui.

April 9, 1852 (Friday)

A number of emigrating Saints lost their lives by the explosion of the steamboat Saluda, at Lexington, Missouri. There were about one hundred and ten Saints on board when the calamity occurred.

April 18, 1852 (Sunday)

The First Presidency issued its "Seventh General Epistle" to the whole Church.

April 22, 1852 (Thursday)

Pres. Brigham Young, accompanied by Heber C. Kimball, Orson Pratt, Wilford Woodruff, Geo. A. Smith and others, left G.S.L. City on an exploring trip. After visiting all the southern settlements and several Indian tribes, the party returned on May 1st.

April 29, 1852 (Thursday)

The Deseret Iron Company was organized at Liverpool, England, and Erastus Snow and Franklin D. Richards were appointed general agents and managers of the same.

May 5, 1852 (Wednesday)

Sixty-nine men were killed by an accident in a coal pit, at Cymback, near Merthyr Tydfil, Wales; among them were nineteen brethren.

May 8, 1852 (Saturday)

Apostles Erastus Snow and Franklin D. Richards sailed from Liverpool on the steamship Africa, homeward bound.

May 8, 1852 (Saturday)

Samuel W. Richards succeeded Franklin D. Richards as president of the British mission. Previous to this the mission was divided into pastorates, presided over mostly by American Elders, while the native brethren generally had charge of the conferences. Each pastorate embraced a number of conferences.

May 15, 1852 (Saturday)

Wm. Willes reported 189 members of the Church in Calcutta and vicinity, India, of whom 170 were "Ryots," who previously professed Christianity.

May 16, 1852 (Sunday)

The Elders laboring on the Society Islands being forbidden by the French authorities to continue their missionary labors, Elder Addison Pratt and Benjamin F. Grouard with their families sailed from Papeete, Tahiti, per ship Calao bound for America. The other missionaries followed soon afterwards.

May 31, 1852 (Monday)

Elders John F.F. Dorius, A. Andersen and others were subjected to wicked mob violence, near Skive, Jutland, Denmark.

June 27, 1852 (Sunday)

Elder Hugh Findlay arrived at Poonah, India, from Bombay, as the first Latter-day Saint missionary to that part of the country.

July 1852

A townsite called Palmyra was surveyed on the Spanish Fork river, Utah Co., on which the first house was built in the following August. This settlement was afterwards united with and absorbed in Spanish Fork.

July 1852

The first branch of the Church in Norway was organized with eighteen members by Hans Peter Jensen, at Riisor. A few days later another branch was organized at Frederikstad. The third branch was established at Brevig, where a hall was rented for holding meetings. Brevig was made the headquarters of the Norwegian mission for some time.

July 17, 1852 (Saturday)

A special conference was held at Provo, at which Apostle Geo. A. Smith was appointed to preside over the Saints in Utah County. He chose Isaac Higbee and Dominicus Carter for his counselors.

July 27, 1852 (Tuesday)

The thermometer stood 127 degrees F. in the sun, in G.S.L. City.

July 31, 1852 (Saturday)

Elder Christoffer O. Folkman was brutally whipped and nearly killed by a mob at Tinstad, Bornholm, Denmark, where he labored as a missionary.

August 1852

Provo, Utah Co., was divided into five Bishop's Wards, with Jonathan O. Duke as Bishop of the First, James Bird of the Second, Elias H. Blackburn of the Third, Wm. M. Wall of the Fourth and Wm. Faucett of the Fifth Ward.

August 1852

Elder Michael Johnson, who was sent to Sweden to continue the work commenced there by John E. Forsgren two years previously, was arrested and brought as a prisoner to Stockholm, after which he was sent in chains six hundred miles to Malmo, together with two thieves.

August 1, 1852 (Sunday)

A small branch of the Church was organized in Hamburg, Germany, by Elder Daniel Garn.

August 12, 1852 (Thursday)

Hiram Page, one of the Eight Witnesses to the Book of Mormon, died near Excelsior Springs, Ray Co., Mo.

August 17, 1852 (Tuesday)

Elder Matthew McCune, a member of the British army, arrived at Rangoon, Burmah, authorized by the American Elders laboring in India to preach the gospel in that empire.

August 20, 1852 (Friday)

Apostles John Taylor, Erastus Snow and Franklin D. Richards, accompanied by other Elders, arrived in G.S.L. City from their foreign missions.

August 28, 1852 (Saturday)

A special two days' conference was commenced in G.S.L. City; 106 Elders were called to go on missions, namely 6 to the United States, 4 to Nova Scotia and the British N.A. Provinces, 2 to British Guiana (South America), 4 to the West Indies, 39 to Great Britain, 1 to France, 4 to Germany, 3 to Prussia, 2 to Gibraltar, 1 to Denmark, 2 to Norway, 9 to Calcutta and Hindostan, 4 to China, 3 to Siam, 3 to Cape of Good Hope, Africa, 10 to Australia and 9 to the Hawaiian Islands.

August 29, 1852 (Sunday)

The revelation on celestial marriage was first made public. It was read in the conference held in G.S.L. City, and Apostle Orson Pratt delivered the first public discourse on that principle.

August 30, 1852 (Monday)

Apostle Lorenzo Snow returned to G.S.L. City from his foreign mission.

August 31, 1852 (Tuesday)

The Utah "run away judges" were superseded by the appointment of Lazarus h. Reed, as chief justice, and Leonidas Shaver, as associate justice. Ben. G. Ferris had previously been commissioned as secretary.

September 1852

Over seventy Elders left G.S.L. City for Europe and the United States, Apostle Orson Pratt being among the number.

September 1852

Elders John A. Ahmanson and Jeppe G. Folkman were imprisoned four days at Brevig, Norway, for preaching the gospel.

September 3, 1852 (Friday)

The first company of P.E. Fund emigrants arrived at G.S.L. City from Europe with 31 wagons; Abraham O. Smoot, captain. It was met by the First Presidency, Capt. Wm. Pitt's band and many leading citizens. This company brought the remains of Elder Lorenzo D. Barnes and Wm. Burton, who died while on missions in Great Britain.

September 12, 1852 (Sunday)

A branch of the Church, consisting of twelve members, was organized in the city of Poonah, British India, by Elder Hugh Findlay.

September 21, 1852 (Tuesday)

Apostle Orson Hyde arrived in G.S.L. City, with his family from Iowa. Nearly all the Saints had left Kanesville for the Valley.

September 21, 1852 (Tuesday)

Mary Fielding Smith, widow of Hyrum Smith, died in G.S.L. County.

October 6, 1852 (Wednesday)

The general semi-annual conference of the Church was commenced in G.S.L. City; it was continued till the 10th. A number of home missionaries were called to preach in the various settlements of the Saints in Utah.

October 13, 1852 (Wednesday)

The First Presidency issued the "Eighth General Epistle" to the whole Church.

October 14, 1852 (Thursday)

Elders Jeppe G. Folkman and Niels Hansen were arrested at Ingolsrud, Norway, for preaching the gospel. John F. F. Dorius, Christian Knudsen, Christian Larsen and Svend Larsen were arrested the following day, and Peter Beckstrom on the 16th, on similar charges. Christian Larsen, Svend Larsen, Dorius and Beckstrom were imprisoned at Frederikstad, while Ole Olsen (who had been arrested two weeks previously), Christian Knudsen, Jeppe G. Folkman, and Niels Hansen were confined at Elverhoj.

October 18, 1852 (Monday)

Apostle Parley P. Pratt arrived in G.S.L. City from his mission to South America.

October 24, 1852 (Sunday)

A number of missionaries left G.S.L. City for India and the Pacific Islands.

November 1852

A number of native Saints in the Society Islands mission were imprisoned and sentenced to hard labor in the mountains for holding meetings.

November 10, 1852 (Wednesday)

Elders Wm. Willes and Joseph Richards left Calcutta, on a trip to the interior of India.

November 11, 1852 (Thursday)

Apostles Erastus Snow and Franklin D. Richards left G.S.L. City for Iron County where they surveyed a tract of land for the "Deseret Iron Company." They returned to the city Dec. 12th.

November 12, 1852 (Friday)

Elder John A. Ahmanson was brought as a prisoner to Frederikstad, Norway. Thus all the missionaries in that country were in jail.

December 5, 1852 (Sunday)

Peter Beckstrom, one of the imprisoned brethren in Norway, was liberated on bail.

December 13, 1852 (Monday)

The second session of the Utah legislature convened at G.S.L. City, and was organized by the election of Willard Richards for president of the Council and Jed. M. Grant for speaker of the House.
