Andrew Jenson, Church Chronology ( 1914)

Awaiting the arrival of the Federal army from the East, the Saints in Utah abandoned G.S.L. City and all their northern settlements and moved south, but most of them returned after peace was restored. Nearly all the Elders who had been on foreign missions returned home. In the spring of this year Kane County, Utah, was settled by Joshua T. Willes at Toquerville, and in the fall by Nephi Johnson and six others, who located Virgin City. San Bernardino, Cal., was vacated by the Saints, who removed to Utah. Most of them settled at Parowan and Beaver. An edition of the Book of Mormon was published by James O. Wright and Co., 337 Broadway, New York, for speculative purposes and unauthorized by the Church.

January 6, 1858 (Wednesday)

A memorial from the members and officers of the Utah legislature to the President and Congress of the United States, praying for constitutional rights, etc., was signed in G.S.L. City.

January 16, 1858 (Saturday)

A large mass meeting of citizens was held in the Tabernacle, G.S.L. City. A petition and resolution, setting forth the true state of affairs in Utah, were adopted, and, on motion, sent to the U.S. government at Washington.

January 19, 1858 (Tuesday)

Apostles Orson Pratt and Ezra T. Benson, and Elders John Scott and John M. Kay arrived in G.S.L. City from missions to Europe, and Geo. Q. Cannon, Joseph Bull and three other Elders from California.

January 22, 1858 (Friday)

The Utah legislature adjourned, without the occurrence of a negative vote on any question or action during the session.

February 6, 1858 (Saturday)

Thorit Peck, formerly a member of the Mormon Battalion, died at Pleasant Grove, Utah Co., Utah.

February 19, 1858 (Friday)

Sixty-four Saints, mostly returning Elders, under the direction of Jesse Hobson, sailed from Liverpool, England, on the ship Empire, which arrived at New York March 20th.

February 24, 1858 (Wednesday)

Col. Thomas L. Kane arrived in G.S.L. City by way of Southern California. He came voluntarily for the purpose of bringing about a peaceful solution of the existing difficulties between the United States and Utah. After conferring with Gov. Brigham Young and other leading citizens, he went out to the army, which was encamped at Ft. Scott (near Ft. Bridger). There he had an interview with the new governor, Alfred Cumming, who concluded to accompany him to G.S.L. City.

February 25, 1858 (Thursday)

Geo. McBride and James Miller were killed and five other brethren wounded by a large party of Bannock and Shoshone Indians, near Fort Limhi, Oregon (now Idaho).

March 1858

Asa Calkin succeeded Samuel W. Richards as president of the European mission.

March 21, 1858 (Sunday)

The citizens of G.S.L. City and the settlements north of it agreed to abandon their homes and go south, all the information derived from Eastern papers being to the effect that the approaching formidable army was sent to destroy them. Their destination, when starting, was by some supposed to be Sonora.

March 22, 1858 (Monday)

The ship John Bright sailed from Liverpool, England, with about ninety Saints, mostly Scandinavians, under the direction of Iver N. Iversen. The company arrived at New York April 23rd and at Iowa City May 1st.

March 31, 1858 (Wednesday)

Lyman Wight, once a member of the council of Twelve Apostles, died in Texas.

March 31, 1858 (Wednesday)

Bailey Lake, one of a small party from Salmon river, traveling south, was killed by Indians on Bannock creek. The Indians also robbed the company of eleven horses.

April 5, 1858 (Monday)

Gov. Alfred Cumming and Col. Thos. L. Kane, with a servant each, left the army at Ft. Scott for the Valley. They arrived in G.S.L. City on the 12th. The new governor was kindly received by Pres. Brigham Young and other leading citizens and treated everywhere with "respectful attention."

April 10, 1858 (Saturday)

The Saints who were settling on Ash Creek, southern Utah, were organized into a branch of the Church, called Toquerville, with Joshua T. Willis as president.

April 19, 1858 (Monday)

Gov. Alfred Cumming and Col. Thos. Kane examined the Utah library, where James W. Cummings showed them the records and seal of the U.S. District Court, alleged to have been destroyed by the Mormons. This accusation was one of the reasons why the army was ordered to Utah. A few days later the governor sent a truthful report to the government in relation to the affairs in the Territory.

April 20, 1858 (Tuesday)

Joseph Adair, one of the first settlers of Utah "Dixie", died at Washington, Washington Co., Utah.

April 24, 1858 (Saturday)

Henry Jones was killed at Salem, Utah Co., Utah.

May 1858

The citizens of Utah, living north of Utah County, abandoned their homes and moved southward, leaving only a few men in each town and settlement to burn everything, in case the approaching troops, on their arrival in the Valley, should prove hostile.

May 5, 1858 (Wednesday)

The Deseret News having been removed from G.S.L. City to Fillmore, Millard Co., the first number of the paper published at that place was issued.

May 13, 1858 (Thursday)

Gov. Cumming left G.S.L. City for Camp Scott, for the purpose of removing his wife to the city. When he returned, June 8th, he found the city deserted by its inhabitants.

May 13, 1858 (Thursday)

Elder Samuel Francis Neslen, of G.S.L. City, Utah, died of consumption, in Williamsburg, N.Y., returning from a mission to England. He was buried in the Cypress Hill cemetery.

May 18, 1858 (Tuesday)

John Whittaker Taylor was born at Provo, Utah.

June 4, 1858 (Friday)

Jens Jorgensen and wife, Jens Terkelsen and Christian E. Kjerulf were murdered by Indians in Salt Creek Canyon, while traveling unarmed on their way to Sanpete Valley.

June 7, 1858 (Monday)

Ex-Gov. L.W. Powell, of Kentucky, and Major Ben McCullough, of Texas, sent as peace commissioners by the Federal government, arrived in G.S.L. City.

June 11, 1858 (Friday)

The peace commissioners met with Pres. Brigham Young and others in the Council House, G.S.L. City, and the difficulties between the United States and Utah were peaceably adjusted.

June 15, 1858 (Tuesday)

Commissioners Powell and McCullough visited Provo. The next day Mr. Powell addressed an audience of about four thousand persons in the Bowery, at Provo, Utah Co.

June 10, 1858 (Saturday)

Col. Thos. L. Kane arrived in Washington, D.C. Soon afterwards he reported the situation in Utah to Pres. Buchanan.

June 21, 1858 (Monday)

A company of Elders returned to G.S.L. City from their missions in Europe, Canada and the States. A number of these had sailed from Liverpool on the ship Underwriter, Jan. 21st and others on the ship Empire Feb. 19th.

June 26, 1858 (Saturday)

The army, under Col. Albert Sidney Johnston, passed through G.S.L. City and camped on the west side of the Jordan river. It subsequently marched to Cedar Valley, and there located Camp Floyd, about forty miles from the city.

July 1, 1858 (Thursday)

The First Presidency and a few others returned to their homes in G.S.L. City, from Provo. They were followed by most of the people, who likewise returned to their deserted city and settlements in the North, and resumed their accustomed labors.

July 3, 1858 (Saturday)

Commissioners Powell and McCullough left G.S.L. City, en route for Washington, D.C.

July 9, 1858 (Friday)

A party of Elders, accompanied by a few immigrating brethren, arrived in G.S.L. City, under the leadership of Horace S. Eldredge.

August 12, 1858 (Thursday)

Eli Harvey Pierce, one of the Utah Pioneers of 1847, died in G.S.L. City.

August 16, 1858 (Monday)

Wm. Evans was killed by lightning near Beaver, Utah.

September 20, 1858 (Monday)

Iver N. Iversen's company of immigrating Saints arrived in G.S.L. City.

September 22, 1858 (Wednesday)

The Deseret News resumed its publication in G.S.L. City, after publishing twenty numbers at Fillmore.

October 12, 1858 (Tuesday)

Policeman Wm. Cooke was shot and mortally wounded, in G.S.L. City, by a ruffian named McDonald. He died on the 18th. The murderer escaped.

October 15, 1858 (Friday)

The remains of Josiah Call and Samuel Brown, of Fillmore, Millard Co., were found in a state of decomposition, near Chicken creek bridge, Juab Co. They had been murdered by Indians, Oct. 7th.

October 28, 1858 (Thursday)

Jacob Hamblin, with eleven men, left the settlement of Santa Clara, in southern Utah, to visit the Moquis or Town Indians, on the east side of the Colorado river. This was the beginning of intercourse with the Indians on that side of the Colorado and of the exploration of the country, which opened the way for colonization by the Saints.

November 1858

Notwithstanding President Buchanan's "Proclamation of Pardon," Judge Chas. E. Sinclair, in the Third District Court, urged the prosecution of the leading "Mormons" for alleged treason.

November 4, 1858 (Thursday)

Associate Justice John Cradlebaugh arrived in G.S.L. City, and U.S. District Attorney A. Wilson the following day.

November 22, 1858 (Monday)

The police in G.S.L. City were attacked and fired upon by a party of rowdies. Disturbances of the peace, robberies and stealing occurred frequently in the city at that time.

December 2, 1858 (Thursday)

A violent wind storm visited G.S.L. Valley and did much damage to property. Samuel Leaver and Wm. Redman froze to death.

December 13, 1858 (Monday)

The Utah legislature convened in G.S.L. City and adjourned to meet at Fillmore.

December 18, 1858 (Saturday)

The Utah legislature convened at Fillmore, and organized by appointing Wilford Woodruff president of the Council pro tem, and Aaron Johnson speaker of the house pro tem. It then passed a resolution to adjourn the assembly to G.S.L. City.

December 27, 1858 (Monday)

The Utah legislature convened in G.S.L. City and organized by electing Daniel H. Wells president of the Council and John Taylor speaker of the House.
