Andrew Jenson, Church Chronology ( 1914)

The first Temple built by the Saints in Utah was dedicated at St. George. The settlements of the Saints were more perfectly organized into Stakes of Zion. President Brigham Young died, and the Council of Twelve Apostles once more took charge of the affairs of the Church. Elders Louis Garff and Milton G. Trejo opened a mission in Sonoro, Mexico, and baptized five in Hermosilla, the capital of Sonoro. the publication of the History of Joseph Smith (Joseph Smith's Levnetslob) was commenced in Salt Lake City by Elders Andrew Jenson and Joh. A. Bruun. This was the first book published in Utah in the Danish-Norwegian language.

January 1877

The first number of Nordstjernan, a semi-monthly Church periodical, was published in Goteborg, Sweden: John C. Sandberg, editor. After issuing a few numbers there, its publication was continued in Copenhagen, Denmark.

January 1877

Rich silver mines were discovered near Leeds, southern Utah.

January 1, 1877 (Monday)

The lower part of the St. George Temple was dedicated, under the direction of Pres. Brigham Young. There were present 1,230 persons.

January 5, 1877 (Friday)

Wm. M. Evans, a prominent Elder, died at Nephi, Juab Co.

January 9, 1877 (Tuesday)

The first ordinance for the dead in the St. George Temple was administered.

January 19, 1877 (Friday)

Samuel Holmes was crushed to death at the Utah Central Railway depot, Salt Lake City.

February 1877

Garden City, Rich Co., Utah, was settled by Wright A. Moore and others, and organized as a branch of the Church, which became a Bishop's Ward in 1879.

February 3, 1877 (Saturday)

Elder Wm. Stevenson died at Holden, Millard Co., Utah.

February 4, 1877 (Sunday)

Amasa M. Lyman, once a member of the Council of Twelve Apostles, died at Fillmore, Millard Co.

February 24, 1877 (Saturday)

The first number of the Silver Reef Echo was published at Silver Reef, Utah; Joseph E. Johnson, editor and publisher.

February 25, 1877 (Sunday)

The Saints who had settled Redmond, Sevier Co., Utah, were organized into a Ward; John Johnson, Bishop.

March 1, 1877 (Thursday)

Thos. Heath was accidentally drowned in the Jordan river, near Salt Lake City. His body was not found until four weeks afterwards.

March 6, 1877 (Tuesday)

A company of Latter-day Saints from Utah, under the direction of Daniel W. Jones, arrived on Salt river, Arizona, and encamped near the present site of Lehi, Maricopa Co.

March 7, 1877 (Wednesday)

In the Second District Court, at Beaver, John D. Lee was re-sentenced to be executed March 23rd.

March 11, 1877 (Sunday)

Matthew Ingram and Jared Pratt were killed by a snowslide, near Alta, Little Cottonwood Canyon.

March 12, 1877 (Monday)

Levi P. Luckey, who, on Feb. 13, 1877, had been appointed secretary for Utah, arrived in Salt Lake City.

March 18, 1877 (Sunday)

Lyman Leonard, one of the early settlers, died in Salt Lake City.

March 23, 1877 (Friday)

John D. Lee was executed at the Mountain Meadows, southern Utah.

March 29, 1877 (Thursday)

Wm. P. Tippets, once a member of Zion's Camp, died at Three Mile Creek, Box Elder Co., Utah.

April 6, 1877 (Friday)

The 47th annual conference of the Church was commenced in the Temple at St. George. Pres. Brigham Young, his Counselors, most of the Apostles and a number of leading Elders were present, and the Temple was fully dedicated. Pres. Daniel H. Wells offered the dedicatory prayer. A more perfect organization of the various Stakes of Zion was commenced, and John D.T. McAllister was (on April 7th) appointed president of the St. George Stake, with Thos. J. Jones and Henry Eyring as his counselors. A number of missionaries were called.

April 13, 1877 (Friday)

The Old Folks of the 20th Ward, Salt Lake City, were treated to a sumptuous supper at the meeting house. There was no general excursion arranged for the old folks this year.

April 13, 1877 (Friday)

Elder Levi W. Riter died in Salt Lake City.

April 18, 1877 (Wednesday)

At a two days' meeting held at Kanab, Kane Co., the Kanab Stake of Zion was organized, with L. John Nuttall as president, and Howard O. Spencer and James L. Bunting as counselors.

April 23, 1877 (Monday)

At a two days' meeting held at Panguitch, Piute (now Garfield) Co., Utah, the Panguitch Stake of Zion was organized by Apostles John Taylor, Lorenzo Snow and Erastus Snow, with James Henrie as president, and Geo. W. Sevy and Jesse W. Crosby, jun., as counselors.

April 25, 1877 (Wednesday)

The temple site at Manti, Sanpete Co., was dedicated. Pres. Brigham Young offered the dedicatory prayer.

April 25, 1877 (Wednesday)

The military post recently located near Beaver City was named Fort Cameron, by order of Asst. Adjutant-General R. Williams.

April 27, 1877 (Friday)

Pres. Brigham Young and party returned to Salt Lake City from St. George.

April 27, 1877 (Friday)

The case of Ann Eliza Young vs. Brigham Young was finally decided in the Third District Court, Salt Lake City, the alimony being disallowed.

April 30, 1877 (Monday)

Ground was broken for the Manti Temple.

May 2, 1877 (Wednesday)

Elder Briant W. Nowland was accidentally killed at Mr. Black's sawmill, in Butterfield Canyon, Salt Lake Co.

May 3, 1877 (Thursday)

Elder Miles Romney, a prominent Elder, died at St. George, Utah.

May 6, 1877 (Sunday)

The Saints who had founded Kingston, Circle Valley, Piute Co., were organized as a branch of the Church; Wm. King, presiding Elder.

May 10, 1877 (Thursday)

Bishop Aaron Johnson died at Springville, Utah Co.

May 13, 1877 (Sunday)

At a special conference held in Salt Lake City, Angus M. Cannon was sustained as president of the Salt Lake Stake of Zion, with David O. Calder and Joseph E. Taylor as counselors.

May 18, 1877 (Friday)

The ground for the Logan Temple was dedicated. Apostle Orson Pratt offered the dedicatory prayer.

May 20, 1877 (Sunday)

The first converts to "Mormonism" among the Pima Indians were baptized at Camp Utah, on Salt river, Ariz. Among them was the chief Che-eh-chum.

May 21, 1877 (Monday)

At a Priesthood meeting held in Logan, the Cache Stake of Zion was partly reorganized; Moses Thatcher, president; Wm. B. Preston and Milton D. Hammond, counselors. Pres. Brigham Young delivered a very important discourse on Priesthood.

May 27, 1877 (Sunday)

At a special conference held at Ogden, Utah, the Weber Stake of Zion was partly reorganized; with David H. Peery, president; Lester J. Herrick and Charles F. Middleton, counselors.

May 27, 1877 (Sunday)

On this and the following day, Salt Lake City and Ogden was visited by an editorial excursion from Nevada.

May 28, 1877 (Monday)

The reorganization of the Weber Stake was completed by the appointment of Ward officers. Ogden was divided into four Wards, instead of three as heretofore, with Francis A. Brown as Bishop of the First, Robert McQuarrie of the Second, Winslow Farr of the Third and Nils C. Flygare of the Fourth Ward. The several settlements and districts in Weber County, which hitherto had existed only as branches of the Church, were organized, as Bishop's Wards, namely, Riverdale (Sanford Bingham, Bishop); Harrisville (Pleasant G. Taylor, Bishop); North Ogden (Amos Maycock, Bishop); Plain City (Lewis W. Shurtliff, Bishop); Slaterville (John A. Allred, Bishop); Lynne (Daniel F. Thomas, Bishop); Marriott's (Jas. Ritche, Bishop); Mound Fort (David Moore, Bishop); Huntsville (Francis A. Hammond, Bishop); Eden (Josiah M. Ferrin, Bishop); West Weber (John I. Hart, Bishop); and Hooper, (Gilbert Belnap, Bishop).

May 30, 1877 (Wednesday)

Elders Helaman Pratt and George Terry commenced a short mission among the Yaquis Indians, Sonora, Mexico.

May 31, 1877 (Thursday)

Jerome B. Stillson, correspondent of the New York Herald, alleged that an attempt on his life had been made in Salt Lake City. The affair was investigated and resulted unsatisfactorily to Stillson.

June 1877

Apostle Joseph F. Smith succeeded Apostle Albert Carrington as president of the European mission.

June 6, 1877 (Wednesday)

The settlement of Santaquin, Utah Co., Utah, was organized as a Ward; Geo. Halladay, Bishop.

June 7, 1877 (Thursday)

The Saints at Gunlock, Washington Co., Utah, were organized as a branch of the Church; Dudley Leavitt, as president.

June 11, 1877 (Monday)

Alderman Walter Thomson Died at Ogden.

June 12, 1877 (Tuesday)

Dr. Ezekiel Lee died in Salt Lake City.

June 13, 1877 (Wednesday)

The steamship Wyoming sailed from Liverpool, England, with 186 Saints, in charge of David K. Udall. The company arrived at New York June 23rd, and at Salt Lake City July 3rd.

June 14, 1877 (Thursday)

Benson Ward, Cache Co., was organized; Alma Harris, Bishop.

June 17, 1877 (Sunday)

At a special conference, held at Farmington, a Stake of Zion was organized in Davis County, with Wm. R. Smith, of Centreville, as president, and Christopher Layton, of Kaysville, and Anson Call, of Bountiful, as counselors.

June 17, 1877 (Sunday)

At a special meeting held at West Jordan, Salt Lake Co., that Ward was divided into four Wards, namely: North Jordan, with Samuel Bennion as Bishop, West Jordan, with Archibald Gardner as Bishop, Fort Herriman, with James Crane as Bishop, and South Jordan, with Wm. A. Bills as Bishop.

June 18, 1877 (Monday)

The Pinto settlement, Washington Co., was organized as a Ward; Robert Knell, Bishop.

June 20, 1877 (Wednesday)

At a special meeting, held at Bountiful, that Ward was divided into three parts, namely: East Bountiful, West Bountiful and South Bountiful, with Chester Call, Wm. T. Muir and William Brown as their respective Bishops.

June 24, 1877 (Sunday)

At a special meeting held at Tooele, Tooele Co., the Tooele Stake of Zion was organized, with Francis M. Lyman as president, and James Ure and Wm. Jeffries as counselors. Three new Wards were partly organized, namely, E.T. City (Wm. F. Moss, Bishop); Lake View (Moses Martin, Bishop), and Vernon (John C. Sharp, Bishop).

June 26, 1877 (Tuesday)

South Hooper, Davis Co., which formerly constituted a part of the Kaysville Ward, was organized as a separate Ward; Henry B. Williams, Bishop.

June 27, 1877 (Wednesday)

The steamship Wisconsin sailed from Liverpool, England, with 714 Saints, in charge of John Rowberry. The company arrived at New York July 7th, and at Salt Lake City July 14th.

June 29, 1877 (Friday)

South Weber, which had formerly belonged to the Weber Stake of Zion, was organized as a Ward, with David S. Cook as Bishop, and attached to the Davis Stake of Zion.

July 1877

Elder John Jaques, who for six years past had occupied the position as assistant editor of the Deseret News, was appointed to take temporary charge of the Historian's office, during the absence of Historian Orson Pratt on a special mission to England. Elder Charles W. Penrose was appointed assistant editor of the Deseret News.

July 1, 1877 (Sunday)

The Saints residing in Morgan County were organized as the Morgan Stake of Zion, with Willard G. Smith, as president, and Richard Fry and Samuel Francis, counselors. The following Wards were also organized: North Morgan, Wyman M. Parker, Bishop; South Morgan, Charles Turner, Bishop; Richville, Albert D. Dickson, Bishop; East Porterville, Joseph R. Porter, Bishop; Milton, Eli Whitear, Bishop; Enterprise, John K. Hall, Bishop; Croyden, John Hopkins, Bishop; and Weber (Peterson), Charles S. Peterson, Bishop.

July 1, 1877 (Sunday)

At a special conference held at Nephi, Juab Co., Utah, the Saints residing in Juab County were organized as the Juab Stake of Zion with George Teasdale as president. (This organization was a continuation of the Nephi Stake of Zion organized in 1868.) Nephi was divided into two Wards, with Joel Grover as Bishop of the South and Charles Sperry as Bishop of the North Ward. Levan and Mona, which previously had existed as branches of the Church, were organized into Wards, the former with Niels Aagaard and the latter with John M. Hawes as Bishop.

July 1, 1877 (Sunday)

South Cottonwood, Salt Lake Co., was divided into three Wards, namely, South Cottonwood, Union and Granite, with Joseph S. Rawlins, Ishmael Phillips and Solomon J. Despain as Bishops, respectively.

July 4, 1877 (Wednesday)

The Sanpete Stake of Zion was reorganized with Canute Peterson as president and Henry Beal and John B. Maiben as counselors. Eleven new Wards were partly organized, namely, Chester, Reddick N. Allred, Bishop; Fayette, John Bartholomew, Bishop; Thistle Valley (Indianola), Jefferson Tidwell, Bishop; Mayfield, O.C. Olsen, Bishop; Manti South Ward, Hans Jensen, Bishop; Manti North Ward, Wm. T. Reid, Bishop; Ephraim North Ward, Lars. S. Andersen, Bishop; Ephraim South Ward, Carl C.N. Dorius, Bishop; Mt. Pleasant North Ward, Orange Seeley, Bishop; Mt. Pleasant South Ward, Wm. S. Seeley, Bishop; Pettyville (Sterling), Wm. G. Petty, Bishop, and Wales, John E. Reese, Bishop. Gunnison, Mayfield and Fayette, which formerly belonged to the Sevier Stake organization, were made a part of the Sanpete Stake.

July 5, 1877 (Thursday)

The eastern part of the Twentieth Ward, Salt Lake City, was organized as the Twenty-first Ward; Andrew Burt, Bishop.

July 9, 1877 (Monday)

The Saints residing in Summit County, Utah, were organized by Apostles John Taylor, Lorenzo Snow and Franklin D. Richards as the Summit Stake of Zion; Wm. W. Cluff, president; Geo. G. Snyder and Alma Eldredge, counselors. The organization of six new Wards was also provided for, namely; Echo (Elias Asper, Bishop); Henefer (Charles Richens, Bishop); Hoytsville (Andrew Hobson, Bishop); Parley's Park (Joseph H. Black, Bishop); Upton (Charles Staley, Bishop), and Rockport (Edward Bryant, Bishop).

July 10, 1877 (Tuesday)

Preston Thomas, sen., a prominent Elder was accidentally killed at Franklin, Oneida Co., Idaho.

July 15, 1877 (Sunday)

East Mill Creek Ward (Salt Lake Co.,), formerly the north part of Big Cottonwood Ward, was organized as a separate Ward; John Neff, Bishop.

July 15, 1877 (Sunday)

At a special conference held at Heber, Wasatch Co., Utah, the Wasatch Stake of Zion was organized by Apostles John Taylor and Franklin D. Richards, with Abram Hatch as president and Thomas H. Giles and Henry S. Alexander as counselors. Six new Wards were organized, namely, Centre (Benjamin Cluff, Bishop); Charleston (Nymphus C. Murdock, Bishop); Heber West Ward (Wm. Foreman, Bishop); Heber East Ward (Thos. Rasband, Bishop); Midway (David Van Wagener, Bishop), and Wallsburg (Wm. E. Nuttall, Bishop).

July 15, 1877 (Sunday)

At a special conference held at Richfield, Sevier Co., the Sevier Stake of Zion was reorganized by Apostles Orson Hyde and Erastus Snow, with Franklin Spencer as president; Albert K. Thurber and Wm. H. Seegmiller, counselors. Several new Wards were organized, namely, Richfield First Ward, Paul Poulsen Bishop; Richfield Second Ward, Tarleton Lewis, Bishop; Elsinore, Joshua W. Sylvester, Bishop; Central (Inverury), Wm. A. Steward, Bishop; Vermillion, Peter Gotfredsen, Bishop; Grass Valley, Joseph H. Wright, Bishop, and Joseph City, Gideon A. Murdock, Bishop.

July 19, 1877 (Thursday)

Dr. Jeter Clinton was arrested at Tooele, on a trumped up charge of murdering John Banks in 1862. He was brought to Salt Lake City and imprisoned in the Penitentiary.

July 22, 1877 (Sunday)

At a special conference held at Fillmore, Millard Co., Utah, the Millard Stake of Zion was reorganized, with Ira N. Hinckley as president, and Edward Partridge and Joseph V. Robison as counselors. Fillmore was divided into two Wards called the North and South Ward, with Alexander Melville as Bishop of the South and Joseph D. Smith as Bishop of the North Ward. Meadow Creek, Holden and Oak Creek, which hitherto had existed as branches, were organized into Wards, with Hyrum B. Bennett, David R. Stevens and Platte D. Lyman as their respective Bishops. Joseph S. Black was appointed Bishop of Deseret, which place had been resettled.

July 23, 1877 (Monday)

Farmers Ward, Salt Lake Co., was organized; Lewis H. Mousley, Bishop.

July 24, 1877 (Tuesday)

President Brigham Young deeded 9,642 acres of land in Cache Valley to the B.Y. College, at Logan.

July 26, 1877 (Thursday)

At a special conference held at Beaver, the Beaver Stake of Zion was organized; John R. Murdock, president; John Ashworth and Marcus L. Shepherd, counselors.

July 31, 1877 (Tuesday)

The first cremation in Salt Lake City took place, Dr. Chas. F. Winslow, who had died July 7th, having made provision for this disposition of his body, in his will.

August 1877

Geo. Q. Cannon and Brigham Young, jun., succeeded David O. Calder as editors and publishers of the Deseret News. After the death of Willard Richards, the first editor of the Deseret News, in March, 1854, Albert Carrington occupied the position as editor of the paper till March, 1859, when he was succeeded by Elias Smith, whose name appeared as editor and proprietor until September, 1863, when Albert Carrington again became editor. In November, 1867, he was succeeded by Geo. Q. Cannon, whose name appeared as editor and publisher till August, 1773, when David O. Calder became editor and publisher, continuing thus till 1877.

August 4, 1877 (Saturday)

After severe sufferings at the Penitentiary, Dr. Jeter Clinton was removed to the county jail, Salt Lake City. Some time afterwards he was set at liberty.

August 4, 1877 (Saturday)

Glendale, Kane Co., was organized as a Ward; James Leathead, Bishop.

August 5, 1877 (Sunday)

At a Stake conference held at Panguitch, Piute Co., Kingston, Hillsdale, Clinton (afterwards named Cannonville), and Escalante were organized as Wards, with Wm. King, Seth Johnson, Jonathan T. Packer and Andrew P. Schow as their respective Bishops.

August 7, 1877 (Tuesday)

Johnson, Kane Co., was organized as a Ward; Sixtus E. Johnson, Bishop.

August 9, 1877 (Thursday)

Apostle Orson Pratt arrived at Liverpool, England, to superintend, the republication of the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants, but soon afterwards he was called home, on account of the death of Pres. Brigham Young.

August 12, 1877 (Sunday)

Spring Lake branch, Utah Co., was organized as a Ward; Benjamin F. Johnson, Bishop.

August 19, 1877 (Sunday)

At a special conference held at Brigham City, Utah, the Box Elder Stake of Zion was organized, with Oliver G. Snow as president, and Elijah A. Box and Isaac Smith as counselors. Brigham City was divided into four Wards, with Henry Tingey as Bishop of the First Ward, Alvin Nichols of the Second, John D. Burt of the Third, and John Welch of the Fourth. Bishops were also appointed for the smaller settlements, namely: Alonzo Perry, for Three Mile Creek; Geo. W. Ward, for Willard; Peder C. Jensen, for Mantua; Thos. Harper, for North Ward; Abraham Hunsaker, for Honeyville; John C. Dewey, for Deweyville; H.J. Faust for Corinne; Wm. Neeley, for Bear River City; Arnold Goodliffe, for Curlew (now Snowville); Samuel Kimball, for Grouse Creek; Oliver C. Hoskins, for Portage; Geo. Dunford, for Malad City, and Samuel Williams, for Samaria. The three last named Wards were in Malad Valley, Idaho; all the others in Box Elder Co., Utah.

August 24, 1877 (Friday)

A delegation of fifteen Navajo Indians, among whom was the principal chief of the tribe, arrived in Salt Lake City.

August 25, 1877 (Saturday)

At a special conference held at Paris, Bear Lake Co., Idaho, the Bear Lake Stake of Zion was reorganized, with Wm. Budge as president, and James H. Hart and Geo. Osmond as counselors. Bishops for the different settlements in the Stake were also appointed, as follows: Henry J. Horne, Paris First Ward; Robt. Price, Paris Second Ward; Henry Lewis, Georgetown; Joseph Moore, Bennington; Henry H. Dalrymple, Preston; Peter Jensen, Ovid; Edwin N. Austin, Liberty; John A. Hunt. St. Charles, and Charles E. Robison Montpelier. At the continuation of the conference the following day (Sun. 26th), Wm. Hulme was sustained as Bishop of Bloomington, Robert Pope of Fish Haven, Ira Nebeker of Laketown, Joseph Kimball of Meadowville, Randolph S. Stewart of Randolph, and Wm. H. Lee of Woodruff.

August 29, 1877 (Wednesday)

Pres. Brigham Young died at his residence, in Salt Lake City.

September 1, 1877 (Saturday)

Elder John Bennion died at North Jordan, Salt Lake Co.

September 2, 1877 (Sunday)

The funeral of Pres. Brigham Young took place from the large Tabernacle, Salt Lake City.

September 4, 1877 (Tuesday)

The Twelve Apostles publicly assumed their position as the head of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

September 5, 1877 (Wednesday)

The first number of the Territorial Enquirer was issued at Provo, Utah Co.; John C. Graham, editor.

September 12, 1877 (Wednesday)

Apostles Orson Pratt and Joseph F. Smith (and family) and Franklin S. Richards sailed from Liverpool, England, bound for Utah. The affairs of the European mission were left in the temporary charge of Elder Henry W. Naisbitt.

September 12, 1877 (Wednesday)

Elder John Hubbard, of Willard, Box Elder Co., Utah, died at the Wichita reservation, Kan.

September 17, 1877 (Monday)

The corner stones of the Logan Temple were laid.

September 19, 1877 (Wednesday)

The steamship Wisconsin sailed from Liverpool, England, with 482 Saints, in charge of Hamilton G. Park. The company landed at New York Sept. 30th, and arrived at Salt Lake City Oct. 6th.

September 27, 1877 (Thursday)

Apostles Orson Pratt and Joseph F. Smith arrived at Salt Lake City, from their missions to Europe.

September 28, 1877 (Friday)

The corner stones of the Salt Lake Assembly Hall were laid near the southwest corner of the Temple Block, Salt Lake City.

September 29, 1877 (Saturday)

Hannah Fielding, widow of Joseph Fielding and one of the first who embraced the gospel in England, died at Ogden.

September 29, 1877 (Saturday)

O. Porter Rockwell was arrested and imprisoned in Salt Lake City, being charged with murder, said to have been committed about twenty years before. Oct. 5th, he was admitted to bail in the sum of $15,000.

October 6, 1877 (Saturday)

On this and the following day, the semi-annual conference of the Church was held in Salt Lake City; John Taylor, presiding. John W. Young and Daniel H. Wells, formerly Counselors to Pres. Brigham Young, were sustained as Counselors to the Twelve Apostles.

October 9, 1877 (Tuesday)

Elder James T. Lisonbee, of Monroe, Sevier Co., died at Springville, Utah Co., on his way from a mission to the Southern States.

October 13, 1877 (Saturday)

The Utah Stake of Zion, (originally known as the Provo Stake), embracing the Saints residing in Utah County, Utah, was reorganized by Apostles John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff and Erastus Snow, with Abraham O. Smoot as president and David John and Harvey H. Cluff as counselors. Two new Wards were organized, namely: Provo Fifth Ward (Lake View), with Peter Madsen as Bishop, and Salem, with Robert H. Davis as Bishop.

October 17, 1877 (Wednesday)

The steamship Idaho sailed from Liverpool, England, with 150 Saints, in charge of Wm. Paxman. The company arrived at New York Oct. 29th, and at Salt Lake City Nov. 7th.

October 23, 1877 (Tuesday)

The Saints at Portage, Box Elder Co., were organized as a Ward of the Box Elder Stake of Zion; Oliver C. Hoskins, Bishop.

November 1, 1877 (Thursday)

Elder John S. Higbee, one of the Pioneers of 1847, died at Toquerville, Washington Co.

November 7, 1877 (Wednesday)

The first number of the Amateur was published by the Y.M.M.I. Association of Ogden; Joseph A. West, editor.

November 13, 1877 (Tuesday)

Patriarch Philip B. Lewis died at Kanab, Kane Co.

November 18, 1877 (Sunday)

The Saints residing on the Weber river, below the mouth of Weber Canyon, Weber Co., were organized as the Easton Ward; Ira N. Spaulding, Bishop.

November 29, 1877 (Thursday)

A company of Latter-day Saint settlers from Utah arrived on the San Pedro river, Arizona. They became the founders of St. David.

December 9, 1877 (Sunday)

The Saints who had settled at Almy, principally as coal miners, were organized as the Almy Ward; James Bowns, Bishop.

December 16, 1877 (Sunday)

The Saints who had settled in Rabbit Valley (now Wayne Co.), Utah, were organized as a branch of the Church, called the Rabbit Valley branch; Jeremiah Stringham, president; the branch was organized as a Ward in 1878, with Geo. S. Rust as Bishop; still later it was named Loa.

December 21, 1877 (Friday)

Samuel Pitchforth, the first person baptized on the Isle of Man, died at Nephi, Juab Co.

December 21, 1877 (Friday)

The woolen factory at Brigham City, Box Elder Co., was destroyed by fire.

December 31, 1877 (Monday)

The Saints at Dingle Dell, Bear Lake Co., Idaho, were organized as a branch of the Bear Lake Stake of Zion; Wm. Passey, presiding Elder.
