We rejoice with all people in celebrating the wondrous birth of Jesus Christ, the Savior of mankind. To the solemn testimonies of millions of people now dead and of millions yet living, we add again our declaration that Jesus Christ, born to Mary in Bethlehem, is the beloved Son of the Living God, the Redeemer, our Eternal Judge, the Light and Life of the world.

The redemptive life of the Savior illuminated for all time the path to peace and offered to all cleansing from the sins of mortality. The atoning sacrifice of the Lamb of God conquered death and opened for all the way to life eternal.

In the life of the Savior, we find a divine pattern for our own lives, a subject for our lifelong contemplation, admiration and application. Though He could wither a fig tree with a single command, yet He chose to pray for His enemies. Though cruelly tested beyond mortal understanding or enduring, yet He cried out from the cross in behalf of those who derided Him and mocked Him, “Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do.” (Luke 23:34.)

To all who seek a resolution to conflict, be it a misunderstanding between individuals or an international difficulty among nations, we commend the counsel of the Prince of Peace, “love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you; That ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven.” (Matt. 5:44–45)

This principle of loving one another as Jesus Christ loves us will bring peace to the individual, to the home and beyond, even to the nations and to the world.

At this season when our hearts are turned toward those we love most, we also remember those who have least, those who are without families or loved ones and those who are in physical, emotional, or spiritual despair and disarray. We commend to all the Savior’s example in uplifting and healing others with the touch of a caring hand.

That we may all be prompted to exercise faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, to hearken to His teachings and to follow His precepts is our Christmas prayer for all people everywhere.

The First Presidency

Spencer W. Kimball

N. Eldon Tanner

Marion G. Romney

Gordon B. Hinckley
