As men worked to build the temple in Nauvoo, Illinois, in the spring of 1842, Margaret Cook and Sarah M. Kimball had an idea: they wanted to help by sewing shirts for the workers. They asked Eliza R. Snow to help coordinate. Eliza asked the Prophet Joseph Smith for his approval. The Prophet responded, “Tell the sisters their offering is accepted of the Lord, and he has something better for them. … I will organize the women under the priesthood after the pattern of the priesthood.”

Something extraordinary was about to happen: the establishment of the Relief Society of the restored Church of Jesus Christ.

On March17, 1842, 20 women gathered in the upper room of the Red Brick Store in Nauvoo. They were joined by Joseph Smith and Apostles John Taylor and Willard Richards. Emma Smith was selected as the president. She chose Sarah M. Cleveland and Elizabeth Ann Whitney as her counselors. Elder John Taylor laid his hands on the heads of each of these three women in turn and set them apart by priesthood authority.

Then the group began to discuss the name of this organization. They talked about two different words: benevolent and relief. Emma Smith spoke up. She was concerned that the word benevolent was used by some of “the most corrupt institutions of the day.” She didn’t want the Church’s women’s organization to be associated with corruption or “called after other societies in the world.”

She then said: “We are going to do something extraordinary. When a boat is stuck on the rapids with a multitude of Mormons on board, we shall consider that a loud call for relief.”

The city of Nauvoo, on the banks of the powerful Mississippi River, was near dangerous rapids. Emma used this imagery to show how any Church members in need would receive assistance from the society. She added, “We expect extraordinary occasions and pressing calls.”

Inspired by Emma’s words, everyone at the meeting agreed that the organization’s name would be the Female Relief Society of Nauvoo.

Joseph Smith and Eliza R. Snow, the second General President of the Relief Society, considered the Relief Society to be an important part of the Restoration, that the Church wasn’t complete without it. President Snow said: “Although the name may be of modern date, the institution is of ancient origin. We were told by our martyred prophet, that the same organization existed in the church anciently.”

In the following three years, many Saints from the United States and Europe moved to Nauvoo. They often came from humble circumstances and struggled to obtain housing, find work, and adapt to an unfamiliar place. The Female Relief Society of Nauvoo was indeed called upon to do extraordinary things to care for the poor—physically and spiritually. Relief Society members worked together to exchange services, provide employment, and offer relief to those in need.

After the deaths of Joseph and Hyrum Smith, Brigham Young dissolved the Relief Society in 1845. But women in the Church continued to care for each other while crossing the plains to Utah, and they even organized to help Native Americans and the poor in the mid-1850s as the Saints began to build settlements.

Brigham Young realized how important the women’s work was to the well-being of all communities, so in 1868 he commissioned Eliza R. Snow to assist bishops in establishing the Relief Society in each ward. Eliza traveled all over Utah Territory and taught women how to minister to each other, for every woman in the Church had a valuable contribution to make in building Zion. In 1880 she was officially called as the organization’s second General President.

President Snow treasured the spiritual gifts described in the scriptures and encouraged women in the Church to use these gifts to bless others. In the early days of the restored Church, and especially while the Latter-day Saints were crossing the plains and settling Utah, women commonly exercised spiritual gifts such as healing and speaking in tongues.

Today, Relief Society members throughout the world continue to exercise spiritual gifts in diverse ways. For example, women may have gifts of knowledge, faith, wisdom, discernment, or leadership. They may bring hope and healing to others. Through their faith in Jesus Christ, they may work miracles. They may receive the gifts of speaking or understanding other languages. (See Doctrine and Covenants 46:13–26.) Or they may develop less conspicuous gifts, such as listening, being able to weep, or avoiding contention.

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="164713121" id="p_hGmMh">Women have gifts of knowledge, faith, wisdom, discernment, or leadership. They bring hope and healing to others. Through their faith in Jesus Christ, they work miracles.</p> [/SIDEBAR]

We have access to God’s power by keeping our covenants. This expands our capacity to become as He is. His power brings miracles, strength, protection, virtues, and gifts that allow us to do His will.

I experienced such spiritual gifts when I served as a missionary in Italy. After a few weeks of language practice in the missionary training center, I worried that I did not have the gift of tongues, but I learned to bear my testimony in Italian and understand what others were saying, and most importantly, I learned to love. At other times, I have experienced the gift of tongues through spiritual promptings to open my mouth and say things that I wasn’t necessarily planning to say. I have also been blessed and uplifted by the inspired words of other women.

Because our wards and branches are organized geographically, rather than by personal preference, sometimes we serve alongside people who are different from us. This can be difficult, but I have found that in Relief Society, our shared love for Jesus Christ helps us form strong friendships and care for each other.

I witnessed this when I was diagnosed with leukemia while serving as a Relief Society president. The women in my ward at that time rallied around me and brought me relief. I also see this in my current ward with my dear friend Viola. She is 90 years old and always sits by me in sacrament meetings and hugs me. She is so happy to see me, and I am so happy to see her.

Also, as a single member, I minister to a recently divorced woman with four children. I love being able to help them when needs arise. I love them. I feel like I have a family in my ward with these sweet people.

Eliza R. Snow often reminded Relief Society sisters to strive to “stand as saviors on Mount Zion.” As women minister to one another as the Savior would, they become more like Him and receive the relief only He can offer. This is extraordinary.

Today’s Relief Society General President, Camille N. Johnson, taught, “Because we love God and have covenanted to serve Him, we can partner with the Savior to help provide temporal and spiritual relief for those in need—and in the process find our own relief in Jesus Christ.” With the power and authority of God, Relief Society members can be instruments in His hands to provide precious relief. We can then find the personal relief we seek.

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="164713159" id="p_odcku">To learn more about the Church’s organized efforts to care for those in need—and how you can help—visit <strong><a href="caring.ChurchofJesusChrist.org">caring.ChurchofJesusChrist.org</a>.</strong></p> [/SIDEBAR] [SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="164713162" id="p_lAcMM">To learn more about the early years of Relief Society, check out <a class="cross-ref" href="/study/church-historians-press/the-first-fifty-years-of-relief-society/front-matter/introduction?lang=eng&amp;id=title1#title1"><cite>The First Fifty Years of Relief Society</cite></a> under Church History in the Gospel Library. It includes links to the records of the Relief Society meetings in Nauvoo.</p> [/SIDEBAR]
