After missing a bus in Nairobi, Kenya, my companion and I decided to share the gospel with everyone we saw while waiting for another bus to our area. We talked to over 400 people.

One of them was Benard, who worked construction nearby. We gave him a Book of Mormon and challenged him to read it daily and ask God if it was true.

Four months later, I was transferred to Nairobi. At my first sacrament meeting there, I saw Benard. He had since been baptized and ordained to the Aaronic Priesthood.

Benard excitedly invited us to visit his home and teach his wife, Megan. As we met with Megan, we were struck by her great faith. When she prayed to know if our message was true, God answered her prayer.

We invited Megan to be baptized the next Sunday. That week, however, the city of Nairobi announced that water would be cut for 10 days! After Megan’s baptismal interview on Saturday, my companion and I prayed that her baptism could go forward the next day.

We fasted, counseled with our leaders, and tried different ways to get water—all to no avail. That evening we prepared for the baptism anyway. Then we knelt and prayed again. We felt prompted to hook one end of a hose to the dry meetinghouse kitchen tap and put the other end in the baptismal font. We said another prayer, locked up, and left for home.

The next morning when we went to the meetinghouse, to our amazement the font was full of water! We checked the kitchen tap, but still no water came out. No one from the branch had a clue as to how the font was filled.

Megan was baptized that day. The whole ward came to witness her baptism and welcome her to the Church. The tap remained dry, but everyone’s eyes were wet with gratitude.

President Russell M. Nelson has taught, “The Lord will bless you with miracles if you believe in Him, ‘doubting nothing’ [Mormon 9:21]. Do the spiritual work to seek miracles.” I know that because my companion and I did the physical and spiritual work—praying, trying different options, and following spiritual promptings—we saw a miracle from the Lord.
