Recognizing the voice of the Lord among the deceptions of the world can be difficult, but latter-day prophets and apostles have given us guidance to help.

Elder Dale G. Renlund of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles taught: “We need to understand the framework within which the Holy Ghost functions to provide personal revelation. When we operate within the framework, the Holy Ghost can unleash astonishing insight, direction, and comfort. Outside of that framework, no matter our brilliance or talent, we can be deceived.”

Just a few months after the restored Church of Jesus Christ was organized, the Saints learned about this important principle.

In August 1830 a member of the Church named Hiram Page claimed he had received revelations from God about “the upbuilding of Zion” and “the order of the Church.” Several Church members, including Oliver Cowdery, believed him.

The Prophet Joseph Smith was troubled because Hiram’s claims went against “the order of God’s house.” Joseph inquired of the Lord and received a revelation addressed to Oliver that is now recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 28.

The Lord said that Oliver Cowdery could “speak or teach” if he was “led at any time by the Comforter” to do so (Doctrine and Covenants 28:4). But the Lord also said, “No one shall be appointed to receive commandments and revelations in this church excepting my servant Joseph Smith” until the Lord appointed “another in his stead” (verses 2, 7).

In other words, all worthy seekers can be guided by the Holy Ghost for their personal responsibilities, Church callings, and families. But only the current prophet has the authority to receive commandments or revelations for the entire Church. “For all things must be done in order,” the Lord said (verse 13).

Elder Gary E. Stevenson of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles explained, “Unless you are called by proper authority, impressions from the Spirit are not given for you to counsel or correct others.”

By heeding the words of the Lord given through His authorized servants and seeking personal revelation within our responsibilities, we can avoid deception and experience peace, joy, and safety.
