“Does God really want to speak to you?” President Nelson asked in his first general conference as President of the Church.

He answered, “Yes!”

One of the ways that God speaks to us is through the scriptures (see Doctrine and Covenants 18:34–36).

However, it might be difficult at times to understand what God is communicating to each of us individually in the scriptures. Here are three suggestions that can help.

One of the best ways to understand scriptures is to pray each time before you read. “Prayer and scripture study go hand in hand,” taught Elder Ciro Schmeil of the Seventy. “They work together for our benefit. This is the process that the Lord has established.” We can pray that the Lord will bless us to understand what we’re reading and guide us during our study.

When you have questions about life, the words of Christ in the scriptures can "tell you all things what ye should do” (2 Nephi 32:3). President Henry B. Eyring, Second Counselor in the First Presidency, taught that one way you can find answers is to approach your scripture study with a specific question. He said: “I often go to the scriptures with the questions ‘What would God have me do?’ or ‘What would He have me feel?’ Invariably I find new ideas and thoughts I have never had before, and I receive inspiration, instruction, and answers to my questions that benefit me personally.”

A good method of learning and understanding how God speaks to you is to write the thoughts and feelings that come to your heart and mind. Elder David A. Bednar of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles reminded us, “Writing down what we learn, think, and feel as we study the scriptures is another form of pondering and a powerful invitation to the Holy Ghost for continuing instruction.” A great place to record these impressions is in the Gospel Library app so you will always have your scripture journal with you on your smartphone, laptop, tablet, or desktop computer.

President Russell M. Nelson said, “I urge you to stretch beyond your current spiritual ability to receive personal revelation, for the Lord has promised that ‘if thou shalt [seek], thou shalt receive revelation upon revelation, knowledge upon knowledge, that thou mayest know the mysteries and peaceable things—that which bringeth joy, that which bringeth life eternal’ [Doctrine and Covenants 42:61].” Reading the scriptures is one way for us to hear the Lord’s voice and receive His promised revelation.

Can this work for you? Over the next week as you study scriptures, give it a try. Choose one of these ideas (or one of your own), experiment with it (see Alma 32:27), and see what happens.
