FSY stands for “For the Strength of Youth.” It is a program of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints for youth ages 14 to 18 years. The program is designed to help youth develop spiritually, socially, and physically, and prepare them for future leadership roles in the Church and in their communities.

The 2024 FSY conference was held on August 26–30 at Hana International School in Nsangi-Buloba Road in Kampala, Uganda. This conference involved participants from wards and branches in the Busia Uganda/Kenya District, Kampala Uganda North Stake, Gulu Uganda District and Uganda Kampala Mission.

Many people came to the prophet Moses from morning to evening to be advised and instructed. Because of the multitude of the people, Jethro, Moses’s father-in-law, saw Moses fatigued by all that he did for the people as many came continually to Moses to seek the counsel of God’s prophet. Jethro advised Moses to teach able men to assist him. Moses hearkened to his father-in-law’s wisdom and trained able men out of Israel and delegated some of his responsibilities to make his work more focused, effective and sustainable. (See Exodus 18.)

When we hearken to the wise and act upon their counsel as Moses did, we will bless many of our Heavenly Father’s children. Preparing the rising generation for a life of faith and service requires consistently teaching and helping them build faith, wisdom, and devotion. A regular part of teaching and inspiring the youth of the Church are For Strength of Youth (FSY) Sessions. At an FSY session are a directing couple, coordinators, assistant coordinators and councilors, all of whom bless the lives of the participants.

All the leaders enthusiastically welcomed the participants from different stakes and districts. As the buses arrived at the FSY location, participants were directed to their rooms and assisted with their luggage.

This day included a morning devotional, gospel study and a devotional with the session-directing couple. Also, day 2 included entertaining activities such as music, a variety show, dance and games. Participating youth learned more about Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ, and they had fun!

The focus of the third day of FSY in Uganda was Preach My Gospel, chapters 6 and 10, which teach of developing Christlike attributes and building faith in Jesus Christ. Brother and Sister Wafula, the session directors, along with session coordinators Fred Ouma and Zaina Apori, taught the youth about becoming like Jesus Christ and developing faith in Him. Christlike attributes are developed in the lives of youth as they focus on Jesus Christ, taught Brother and Sister Wafula.

Brother Ouma and Sister Apori invited the youth to develop faith in Jesus Christ by making sacrifices, sharing testimonies, and inviting others to come unto Christ. They encouraged the youth to be like the Samaritan woman whom Jesus met at the well. After meeting the Savior, she left her water pot and went to her village and testified of Jesus and invited others to come and see Him (see John 4:11–30).

Day 4 was a day of fun and sharing talents. While all were gathered in an auditorium, many of the youth at FSY went to the stage and danced or sang for their fellow session attendees. All were cheerful and supportive of those who chose to perform. The day included a variety talent show, which was among the most enjoyed activities of the FSY session.

Day 5 was the last full day of the Uganda FSY session. The day began with a morning devotional during which the session directors reminded the youth to stay true to their faith, to keep the commandments and to continue to serve in the Church. The day concluded with a slide show featuring the participants and their activities during the five wonderful days spent together.

The youth at the Uganda FSY were reminded that the living prophet of the Lord, President Russell M. Nelson, has emphasized that the greatest work on earth today is to gather Israel on both sides of the veil by bringing souls unto Christ. Young men and young women in Uganda were counseled to follow the prophet, study scriptures, serve in the Church and help gather Israel. By doing missionary work and family history work, they are helping God’s children on both sides of the veil to live with our Heavenly Father.

In the two sessions, 1,200 youth were taught, they were inspired, they did strengthen their faith, they felt connection with other Latter-day Saint youth, and they were loved by the leaders and counselors.

Comments from some of the youth follow:

Misanya Sharon–17: I was afraid of leaving home to go and attend FSY. It was my first time, and I did not want to leave my family because it is the place that I feel loved and safe, so going to FSY for five days really scared me. But during FSY is when I developed great self-confidence. I can now stand firm in a large crowd and share my insight with others. FSY was like home—I felt loved by everyone. I was safe. I observed the young leaders during FSY having fun, teaching by example, and serving us with love and patience.

Omoriti Cyprian–18: During FSY is when I realized the importance of having daily scripture study because every morning, we participated in gospel study. I learned a lot for myself and from others, I discovered many things from the scriptures. Since that time my desire for daily scripture study has increased.

Jane Lugosi–16: I have developed a desire to help full-time missionaries because I want my friends to join the Church so that they get to enjoy what I enjoyed during FSY. It was a nice experience. I will always tell my friends about the Church, and I will bear my testimony often. I enjoyed all the activities of FSY. Indeed, I am a disciple of Jesus Christ.
