In a world of so many people, does God really know each of us?

Yes!

Elder Dieter F. Uchtdorf of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles said: “No matter where you live, no matter how humble your circumstances, how meager your employment, how limited your abilities, how ordinary your appearance, or how little your calling in the Church may appear to you, you are not invisible to your Heavenly Father. He loves you.”

All of God’s children are precious to Him (see Doctrine and Covenants 18:10; Alma 26:37). In the following accounts, members share how they learned of and continue to remember His love for them.

  “Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin: … if God so clothe the grass of the field …, shall he not much more clothe you …?” (Matthew 6:28, 30).

  As we are fortunate enough to live close to nature, my family enjoys taking long walks before sunset on the trails next to our home. During those walks, we often talk about our day and the blessings we recognized that day. Among the simple things my daughter particularly loves on our hiking trail are the wildflowers. They are colorful, wild, and free. Nobody actually waters those wildflowers daily, as they collect water and moisture from dew, fog, and occasional rain.

  This reminds me of God’s teaching in Matthew 6:28. We often worry daily of how to get ahead in life, how we look, or how we are perceived by others. But the beauty of those wildflowers is the daily simple reminder for me that God loves me and He will always provide for me and my family.

  Thang Nguyen, Texas, USA

  “When ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are only in the service of your God” (Mosiah 2:17).

  I have learned that I am of great worth to God by studying the scriptures, memorizing the Young Women Theme, reading my patriarchal blessing, and making covenants in the holy temple. I have learned that I am of great worth to God through my experience in this life. I have felt how much He loves me by the love I have for my children. When I serve others, I learn to love them like He does. He has a perfect love for all his children, which includes me. That love shows me how important I am to God, and it shows me my worth.

  Keturah Gordon, Oregon, USA

  “By small and simple things are great things brought to pass” (Alma 37:6).

  I remember back as a little girl, my mom would tell me that I was of great worth to God, that He knew me, and that I should always seek to love and serve Him. This may sound cliché, but I know it’s true, because I’ve lived it. It’s because of doing the small and simple things that the seed of truth my mother planted in my heart long ago has grown into a great knowledge and assurance that God knows and loves me and that I am important to Him. I grow closer to God by attending church and partaking of the sacrament regularly, studying the scriptures, praying continually to understand His word, seeking revelation from God for myself and my family, following God’s commandments, accepting and magnifying Church callings, loving others, sharing the gospel with others, teaching others to seek out their ancestors and to keep their own personal histories, and making and keeping sacred covenants with God.

  He sent His Son to suffer and die for me because He loves me so much and wants me to return home to live with Him someday. I have no doubt that my mother knew it, and I hope and pray that I will always remember and continue to do my best.

  Moana Piena, Hawaii, USA

  “For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life” (John 3:16).

  I’ve felt God’s love in my own life through answered prayers and the peace I feel when I study the scriptures with my family. These personal experiences remind me that God is aware of me and cares about my well-being. The plan of salvation itself is a testament to our worth in God’s eyes. He has prepared a way for us to return to Him and become like Him. This divine plan shows that He values our eternal progression and happiness.

  Perhaps the greatest evidence of God’s love is the Atonement of Jesus Christ. Our Savior suffered for each of us individually, showing that we are worth the ultimate sacrifice. I testify that God loves each of us deeply and personally. We are of infinite worth to Him. As we remember this truth, we can face life’s challenges with faith and find joy in our journey back to Him.

  Alex Lobanov, Tbilisi, Georgia

  “Remember the worth of souls is great in the sight of God” (Doctrine and Covenants 18:10).

  For me, whenever I feel unloved or down about myself, I start to remember the scripture from Doctrine and Covenants that says, “The worth of souls is great in the sight of God” (Doctrine and Covenants 18:10). This statement from our Heavenly Father has given me much comfort. He has always been there for me, no matter what. His love is eternal, and it is unimaginable that He would sacrifice His Son to save us all. This magnificent gesture of love has given me strength to overcome all odds and rise to connect with Him.

  Janette Tam, California, USA

  “For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man” (Moses 1:39).

  Learning more of the great plan of salvation and exaltation has helped me know that I am a child of God. When I study Moses 1:39, I understand that Heavenly Father has a great role to play in my life. This gives me hope and assurance.

  Through my calling and responsibilities as a husband and a father, I have learned that God is my Father and loves all of His children. Making covenants and keeping them through daily repentance and partaking of the sacrament weekly has helped me to feel His love for me and my family.

  Francis Kikambi Sseremba, Wakiso, Uganda

Do you know anyone who needs to be reminded that they are of great worth? Find a way to share God’s love with others today!
