Each of us belongs to the family of God. Our earthly families are modeled after our heavenly family and are meant to help us become like our heavenly parents.

President Russell M. Nelson called the home “the great laboratory of love.” Through a variety of challenges and triumphs, living in families helps us learn patience, charity, sacrifice, forgiveness, respect, and love.

Church leaders have spoken in general conference about family. They also have shared messages about these topics on social media, including the following:

“My children, my grandchildren, and my great-grandchildren … are among the greatest joys in my life.

“As you make decisions about your life and your family—or your future family—please remember that the ultimate treasures on earth and in heaven are our children and our posterity.

“I give thanks daily to a loving Heavenly Father who has blessed me with this family I love so dearly.”

President Dallin H. Oaks, First Counselor in the First Presidency, Facebook, Mar. 1, 2023, facebook.com/dallin.h.oaks.

“To mothers everywhere who sacrifice for their family, I wish to say … that your sacrifice is not unnoticed—not by the leaders of the Church and not by our Father in Heaven who seeks always the care of His children.

“When this earthly chapter of our lives is over and all of the honors of the world have faded away, I believe it may well be righteous mothers who first hear the words, ‘Well done, thou good and faithful servant: … enter into [my rest]’ (Matthew 25:21).”

President Jeffrey R. Holland, Acting President of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, Facebook, Dec. 21, 2023, facebook.com/jeffreyr.holland.

“Although the early years of my life were challenging because of the war and its associated worries, I was tremendously blessed to be part of a family that loved me. …

“During these early years, my family had not yet been introduced to the restored gospel of Jesus Christ. It was a very hard time. Yet I still have some happy memories of these locations because of the love of family, friends, and neighbors.

“Perhaps some of you parents (or those who will one day be parents) are concerned about the world into which you are bringing your children. Might I suggest that if you focus on raising your children with Christlike love and teaching them to love our Father in Heaven and Savior Jesus Christ, they will be empowered with the ability to navigate through all of life’s challenges. They will be able to feel the joy and peace that comes from living the Savior’s gospel despite difficulties.”

Elder Dieter F. Uchtdorf, Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, Facebook, July 17, 2024, facebook.com/dieterf.uchtdorf.

“Eternal marriage and eternal families are possible because of the covenants we make with God in His holy temples. I invite all of us to make temple marriage a priority. All who are willing to make covenants with God and with one another are invited to participate in temple ordinances that bind us together. Families, indeed, are eternal and are central to God’s plan.”

Elder Quentin L. Cook, Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, Facebook, Jan. 18, 2024, facebook.com/quentin.lcook.

“Our Father’s plan is about families. Eternity wouldn’t be as joyful without them. …

“Let me assure you that if you are married or single, have a large family or a small one, you are still part of the Lord’s family. I rejoice that the great plan of salvation is big enough for all of Heavenly Father’s children. And how especially grateful I am that God’s plan provides a way for family relationships to extend beyond the grave. I testify that when we return to the presence of God, we will be eternally united with those we love most.”

Elder Quentin L. Cook, Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, Facebook, May 15, 2023, facebook.com/quentin.lcook.

“Many young couples worry about raising children in the state of the world today.

“Some years ago, one of our young married daughters and her husband asked Sister Rasband and me this very important, life-influencing question:

‘Is it still safe and wise to bring children into this seemingly wicked and frightening world we live in?’ Our answer to them was a firm ‘Yes, it’s more than OK,’ as we shared fundamental gospel teachings and our own heartfelt impressions and life experiences.

“The Lord knew that there would be times in our lives when we would feel fear. I have been there and so have you.

“The Lord instructs us in the scriptures, ‘Fear thou not; for I am with thee: be not dismayed; for I am thy God: I will strengthen thee; yea, I will help thee; yea, I will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness’ (Isaiah 41:10).

“Our daughter and son-in-law seriously considered our conversation that night; they prayed and fasted and came to their own conclusions. Happily and joyfully for them—and for us as grandparents—our daughter is now the mother of seven beautiful children.

“Yes, we live in perilous times, but as we follow the example of our Savior, we need not fear. I pray that as we do so, we will not be troubled by the times in which we live or the troubles that come our way.”

Elder Ronald A. Rasband, Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, Facebook, May 12, 2024, facebook.com/RonaldARasband.

“The last few speaking assignments, I’ve felt impressed to include the thought that our callings, work, education, and other worthy pursuits are meant to bless our relationships—our relationships with God, family, and each other. President Russell M. Nelson said, ‘The covenant path is all about our relationship with God.’ These various aspects of our lives are a means to that end, to nourish and bless eternal relationships.

“Our calls to serve and the blessings given to our families are more intertwined than we might realize. We can’t separate the two. Just as the scripture in Mark teaches us the principle that ‘the sabbath was made for man, and not man for the sabbath’ (Mark 2:27), our callings, ministering assignments, work, and education are meant to bless us and our covenant relationship with God—and, consequently, all our other relationships.

“… When we look at these parts of our lives as ways that God intends to bless our relationship with Him and others, we can receive divine motivation, direction, understanding, strength, happiness, and peace.

“We love you and pray you will be blessed as you develop your personal covenant relationship with God.”

Sister Kristin M. Yee, Facebook, July 21, 2024, facebook.com/reliefsocietyworldwide.

“Seven years after his death, I received a text from my son—or so it appeared.

“My teenage grandson (his son) had just celebrated a birthday and was given his dad’s old phone as a present.

“And I still hadn’t updated the contact information.

“Curious to see what my son and I said to each other in the last days of his life, I began to scroll through past texts.

“I saw many short messages about errands and family events. My heart sank the longer it took to find a text that simply said, ‘I love you.’

“I knew that he knew I loved him, but I wondered if I had missed the chance to say it one last time.

“Since then, I’ve tried to end every text with ‘Thank you’ or ‘I love you so much.’

“I want YOU to stop right now and check YOUR texts.

“Sometimes we get so busy telling each other the urgent things that we forget to say the most important thing: I love you.

“I invite you to text or tell the people you love and live with just how much you care about them.

“Let’s not wait another second to let them know how much they mean to us.

“Text them. Tell them.

“I promise you won’t regret it!

“‘Beloved, let us love one another: for love is of God’ (1 John 4:7).”

Sister Tamara W. Runia, Facebook, July 23, 2024, facebook.com/youngwomenworldwide.

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="164713057" id="p_hZ3ge"><a href="https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/learn/social-media-accounts?lang=eng"><strong>Follow the teachings of living prophets and Church leaders.</strong></a></p> [/SIDEBAR]
