Warren P. Aston, Michaela Knoth Aston, In the Footsteps of Lehi: New Evidence for Lehi's Journey across Arabia to Bountiful ( 1994)

Prologue

Looking back, it is not hard to identify the real beginnings. We first met in 1974 inside one of the sealing rooms of the New Zealand Temple, where Warren was working as assistant recorder following his mission. At the time, he was considering joining a kibbutz program in Israel. Michaela, visiting the temple from Australia to be sealed to her family, had a long-standing fascination with ancient history and archaeology. Our first date together was to a movie based on the life of Christ filmed on location in the Holy Land.

A few months after our wedding late in 1974, we made our home in Brisbane, Australia. As one of our marriage goals, we planned to travel and see the far-off places that held such an interest for both of us, so Warren made a drastic career change and began working in the airline and travel industry. Since we also planned a large family, we realized that discounted travel through his employment would be the only avenue allowing us to travel often. It was probably almost inevitable that our first major trip overseas after marrying included a week in Israel. It was 1976, a time when terrorism in the Middle East was still a real threat; an explosion had killed two people at the Tel Aviv airport only days before we arrived. Although we had our first child, six-month-old Claire, with us, Warren was one of several men ordered to stand in a line on the airport runway for close questioning by heavily armed soldiers. It was a dramatic introduction to the realities of the Middle East, but in the following days dreams were fulfilled as we walked the streets of Old Jerusalem, explored the tragic cliffs of Masada, and dipped our baby's feet in the river Jordan. We joined other Latter-day Saints touring the country and enjoyed meeting with the fledgling Jerusalem branch.

By the time we flew out of Ben Gurion Airport, we had come to understand the need for strict security. But, more important, a deeper fascination with the Middle East as a whole and a desire to learn more had taken hold of both of us. As we sat in our sacrament meeting back in Australia the following Sunday, one of the speakers read the account of Jesus' sitting at Jacob's Well and talking with the woman from Samaria (John 4:5-30). We looked at each other, for only days earlier we too had sat at Jacob's Well and drunk cold water drawn from its depths; the story was very familiar to us, but now it came alive. After seeing the places and experiencing the smells, sounds, and people of the Holy Land for ourselves, the scriptures that had their origins in this part of the world—the Old and New Testaments, the Books of Moses and Abraham, and the Book of Mormon—would never be the same again. We began to realize that the three migration accounts in the Book of Mormon, which we had usually linked with the Americas, all began somewhere in the Middle East and that both Jewish and Arab culture had played important roles in the development of Nephite society.

As our family grew so did our interest in this part of the world, so different from our own countries. It almost seemed as though we had entered another world when we stepped off the jetliner in Baghdad, Iraq, on our next visit. Traveling there shortly before the tragic waste of its war with Iran began, we marvelled at the friendliness of its people before continuing to Beirut and Egypt. Visits over subsequent years took us throughout Jordan, Syria and back to Israel and Egypt. Misconceptions soon tumbled as we began to penetrate the stereotypes and the obvious.

While our ability to speak the local languages remained limited, our appreciation of the region's complexities, its history, and the people and their customs grew with the passing of time. We could not dream that in all of this there lay perhaps a higher purpose and design than simply satisfying our own interests.
