Warren P. Aston, Michaela Knoth Aston, In the Footsteps of Lehi: New Evidence for Lehi's Journey across Arabia to Bountiful ( 1994)

PART ONE

"The Place Which Was Called Nahom"

Since it was published more than 160 years ago, the Book of Mormon—which remains the focus of attack by enemies of the Restored Church—has presented itself as an authentic record of God's dealings with a branch of the house of Israel. Every reader of the Book of Mormon knows of Moroni's challenge and promise that a spiritual witness of its truthfulness is available to all who ask God sincerely.

We do not want to minimize the necessity and the great importance of gaining such a testimony for ourselves. In the end it alone will endure. As compelling as the findings of this new research are, the most that any branch of science (including archaeology) can offer is plausibility, or in other words the likelihood that something is true. Ultimate "proof" of the Book of Mormon remains exactly what Moroni said it was more than fifteen centuries ago—spiritual confirmation from God after reading it, pondering, and then praying sincerely to know for ourselves. But in naming a specific place and describing, as we shall see, in great detail another location, Nephi's Bountiful, the Book of Mormon makes available to us the simple test of matching its claims against the physical world. To those who believe the record to be true, a place such as Bountiful, for example, must exist. Somewhere on the unchanging Arabian coastline there must be a green, fertile place with large trees and much fruit and so on. To demonstrate that such is actually the case is part of the reason this book has been written. In the case of Arabia, the account of Nephi goes far beyond generalizations when geography is referred to in the text. Directions are very specific, and the extent of the detail embedded in his writing has perhaps not been fully appreciated by most of us. It is this very detail that has made it possible to check the claims of the Book of Mormon against the real world in the setting it claims for itself.

We sincerely hope that those who already know the Book of Mormon is true will have additional verification of their faith and that the uninterested will have new reasons to more seriously consider the claims of the book. And those who still dismiss the book as a fraud or merely the product of Joseph Smith's environment will have to explain how so much specific information (which was not available to anyone in 1830) can now be demonstrated as totally accurate.

A MAP AND A NAME

And it came to pass that the Lord commanded my father, even in a dream, that he should take his family and depart into the wilderness (1 Nephi 2:2).

In what may well be the most epic of all recorded journeys, the Book of Mormon prophet Lehi's odyssey across two-thirds of the globe had its beginning at Jerusalem about 600 B.C. Since publication of the Book of Mormon in 1830, the general direction of the land route taken by Lehi and his family after leaving their home has never really been in question. The record kept by Lehi and Sariah's younger son Nephi makes it clear that the group, numbering about two dozen persons, traveled in the desert wilderness in "nearly a south-southeast direction"

(1 Nephi 16:13) along the eastern coast of the Red Sea. This very specific direction seems to have been followed throughout the first phase of their journey, as verses 14 and 33 go on to indicate.

As we shall later discuss, this placed them in the general area of the ancient trade routes that brought a huge volume of incense and other commodities north from southern Arabia. It does not tell the whole story, however, to refer to these trade routes as the "frankincense trail," for while frankincense, myrrh, and other kinds of incense were among the most precious commodities brought out of the little-known lands of Arabia, they were far from being the only ones. In most places the "trail" actually was a general area rather than a specific, defined track, and it varied according to local politics, taxes, and so on. What is relevant here, however, is that there can be no question that the Lehites were traveling near and, perhaps often, actually on these much-traveled routes of commerce at this stage of their journey. (See figure 1.)

After an unspecified period of desert travel, Lehi's party pitched their tents again to "tarry for the space of a time" (verse 33), phrasing which suggests that they were perhaps in an area where they could plant and harvest crops. [^1] During this time Ishmael, Nephi's father-in-law and possibly a relative to Lehi, died "and was buried in the place which was called Nahom" (verse 34).

After a period of mourning for Ishmael, the Lehites resumed their journey and traveled "nearly eastward from that time forth" (1 Nephi 17:1), [^2] or toward the Indian Ocean. Although this eastward path avoided the more heavily populated regions of early Arabia, it also had the result of taking them through the most difficult and dangerous terrain of their long journey. Eventually they would arrive at the seacoast at a place of remarkable fertility, timber trees, and "much fruit" that they called Bountiful (17:5). In this place, which contrasted so greatly from the desert wastes they had traveled in, the vessel that would take the colony across the Indian and Pacific oceans was constructed. Two distinct civilizations would arise in ancient America from the journey begun at this place.

Because Nahom is a pivotal point in the land journey Lehi made (marking a major change in direction), identifying the place on today's map is critical to reconstructing the route traveled. Locating Nahom would also help us identify Bountiful, as it lay "nearly eastward" of Nahom.

Beginnings

One morning early in 1984, Warren was commuting to work and took a six-year-old issue of the Ensign magazine with him to read. This randomly selected issue (August 1978) printed a letter from Ross Christensen, a BYU professor of archaeology, that discussed a possible location for the place Nahom mentioned in the First Book of Nephi. [^3] The letter suggested that Nahom may equate to a place called "Nehhm" about twenty-five miles northeast of the Yemen capital Sana'a appearing on a 1763 map by the German surveyor and mapmaker Carsten Niebuhr. Dr. Christensen proposed that a search for other maps and references to the name should be made. Although Warren had read the issue previously, the letter now intrigued him, and he began wondering what had been done to follow up the points raised by Dr. Christensen. Although sure that scholars had pursued the matter, over the following days he was unable to resist the growing impression that he should discover the outcome. We contacted the Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies (F.A.R.M.S.) in Provo, Utah, a nonprofit research organization that had become the largest and most widely regarded body of its kind. Until F.A.R.M.S. was begun in the early seventies, Book of Mormon researchers generally worked alone, often duplicating each others' work and leaving many important findings locked away (and sometimes jealously guarded) in filing cabinets inaccessible to anyone else. John Welch—a lawyer whose interest in scriptural research was sparked by his discovery, while still a missionary, of ancient chiastic writing patterns in the Book of Mormon—had recognized the need for an organization where research could be coordinated, encouraged, and then made available to anyone who was interested. F.A.R.M.S. was born as a group independent of the Church and of BYU, and it was to them that we turned for advice. What had been learned about Nahom in the years since the Ensign had published the letter? Surprisingly, it eventually became clear that no one had taken Brother Christensen's suggestions further, and a plan for doing so began to take shape. Although we had little to base the project on other than our previous experience traveling in the Middle East and a strong interest in the scriptures, we began planning to visit the legendary land of Sheba, Yemen.

Figure 1. The Arabian peninsula, including incense trade routes and major centers.

The opportunity to do so came much sooner than we expected, and things started to happen. Through Warren's employment came an offer of tickets to Cairo, and only a few months later, in November, we were in Egypt. A series of minor miracles saw us obtain air tickets and visas there to visit the Yemen Arab Republic. Although we had a sense that we were being helped in our effort, we could find no one who had been to Yemen, and we had little idea what to expect. Michaela was more than seven months into her fifth pregnancy, and her health was a high priority. Our concerns were not helped when we arrived in the Yemeni capital, Sana'a, in a street seemingly overflowing with sewage and garbage. All but one street in Sana'a remained unpaved, and a huge cloud of dust hung over the city. Although some buildings were made of modern materials, many were built of mud bricks, and the older part of the city was still encircled by the remnants of a mud wall. In its markets, surely the most colorful and chaotic of any in the Middle East, small bags of frankincense were for sale, in some instances alongside machine guns, grenades, and even surface-to-air missiles. Although Sana'a was the capital, wild-looking tribal warriors strode the streets carrying guns and the traditional jambia, a curved dagger worn in front, prominently and proudly. The few women in sight were well covered but with a uniquely Yemeni touch: a bright red, black, and white patterned face-veil. Every afternoon the whole country seemed to shut down for several hours while the men gathered to chew their bulging wads of qat, a green leaf that is mildly narcotic and has, by some estimates, become the country's largest crop. By late afternoon the full effects of the qat were evident in the glassy stares on many of the men's faces, and riding in a vehicle with a driver in that condition became a real act of faith. The call to prayer echoed across the city from scores of minarets in the early hours of each day as crippled beggars crawled or were carried through the streets to take up their positions on street corners.

Throughout our stay, events kept reminding us that we were in a medieval country that had been almost totally isolated by its politics from the outside world for hundreds of years. Michaela once found herself surrounded by dozens of armed men in the city who refused to let her leave until her picture was taken with them, and Warren stumbled upon a naked madman with long, matted hair who was kept manacled to a post outside a remote village. The revolution of 1970 had allowed change and development to begin, but even today Yemen is such an improbable destination that most people cannot locate it on a map. But Yemen, further isolated by rugged mountains, became a land we grew to love for the proud and unspoiled openness of its people and the wild beauty of its mountains and deserts. It was attractive in another sense, too. The ancient past, unusually well preserved in the dry climate, was almost untouched. Anything likely to predate Islam holds little interest to most Yemenis, who regard such things as belonging to the pagan period and therefore of little consequence. The ruins near the great dam of Marib, for example, standard on any tourist itinerary, were partially excavated by an American team in 1952 until they were driven away at gunpoint by local people. Since then the sands have simply recovered the temples and other buildings until little can now be seen. Even today some of the most important sites remain untouched by any scholar or archaeologist, and it can truly be said that our knowledge of the ancient past of southern Arabia, once known as Arabia Felix or Happy Arabia, is still very much in its infancy.

Trying to learn more about the early history of the area, we had the interesting experience of finding an inscribed metal plate displayed in the National Museum. The plate dated to about A.D. 400-500, dating to about the same time and measuring about the same size as the plates Joseph Smith translated into the Book of Mormon. [^4] This plate was brass, not gold, but it was further confirmation that metal plates were used anciently in many parts of the world for recording important matters. We were able, with some difficulty, to photograph the plate, which we knew would be of interest to LDS scholars. (See figure 2.)

Figure 2. Cast brass plates on display in the National Museum, Sana'a, dating to about A.D. 400.

Our own interests, however, lay not in metal plates or stone ruins but in a single word on an obscure map published two centuries ago. We struggled against conditions and restrictions very different from our previous experience in Arab countries. Even to venture beyond the city required police permits, and we were politely but firmly advised that travel to some areas we planned to see was not possible. As our time in Yemen began to run out, we did not seem to be getting very far. It was not until our last full day in the country that we had our first small but encouraging success. We located a recently printed map showing "Nehem" in the same general area as the 1763 map, and it became clear that they both referred to the same place about twenty-five miles northeast of Sana'a. The name, therefore, had survived to the present from at least the time Niebuhr had produced his map. We also determined that Nehem was connected with the name of an important present-day tribe occupying the mountains overlooking the large Jawf valley. In this small beginning lay the clues from which we would eventually trace the history of this name to near the time of Lehi. Slowly, very slowly, our door on the past began to open.

NAHOM

And it came to pass that Ishmael died, and was buried in the place which was called Nahom (1 Nephi 16:34).

Nahom is unique among the places mentioned by Nephi during the long travels across Arabia by the Lehites. Most of the places in the wilderness mentioned in the Book of Mormon were named by Lehi in true Semitic fashion (see 1 Nephi 2:8-10, 14; 16:6, 12-13; 17:5). But the wording of 16:34, "the place which was called Nahom," indicates that Nahom was an already existing, locally known name of the place. [^5] (This verse also is the clearest evidence in the text that Lehi's family had contact with other peoples during the journey; they could only have known about Nahom from someone outside the group. Although people outside of their own group are not specifically mentioned, they were not traveling through empty wilderness, and the mere lack of clear references to other people is no evidence that they traveled without encountering others. Although much of their travel may have been by night and cooler parts of the day to avoid the heat—this is hinted at later in the account in 1 Nephi 17:13—once safely clear of the Jerusalem area, contacts with other people on the journey to Nahom could have been quite frequent.)

How likely is it that the name of a remote burial area in the highlands of Yemen could survive two and a half millennia down to the present? With the inevitable changes wrought by time, would we even recognize it if it survived? By what means would a name be preserved over such a long period?

These are good questions. At the beginning of our research, it seemed unlikely that any substantial connection to the Book of Mormon Nahom would ever be made, that a connection would remain just an interesting possibility. Almost a decade later, however, the picture that our research has revealed about this place not only has answered these questions but confirms Nephi's account in striking ways. (See figure 3.)

Figure 3. Map of southeastern Arabia showing the final stages of Lehi's journey and all locations referred to in the text.

The Rarity of the Name

The first point to be made is that the name NHM (in any of its variant spellings, Nehem/Nihm/Nahm, and so on) is not found anywhere else in Arabia as a place-name. It is unique. It is known to appear only once in southern Arabian writings (as a personal name) and a handful of times in northern Arabian Safaitic texts. [^6] There are also some interesting appearances of the name in the Old Testament; as Naham (1 Chronicles 4:19), as Nehum (Nehemiah 7:7), and, of course, as the name of the Prophet Nahum, whose brief book provides some of the Bible's most vivid poetic imagery. The Prophet Nahum was from Galilee, probably Capernaum ("the village of Nahum" [^7]), and delivered his prophecies between 660 and 606 B.C., making him a contemporary of Lehi. [^8] These biblical occurrences of the name, however, are far removed geographically from southern Arabia, and no historical connection with the tribal name in Yemen can be made. The fact that the name appears only once as an Arabian place-name argues strongly in itself for a possible link with Nephi's Nahom. [^9]

The Meaning of Nahom

Any student of the scriptures knows how much significance a name can have and how much depth can be added to our understanding of the story once we understand what the name means or refers to. We think, for example, of the special significance of the name Gethsemane ("the olive-oil press") in relation to Christ's suffering for us in that garden, or of Bethlehem ("House of Bread"), the birthplace of him who was called the Bread of Life. Nahom, too, has special significance.

Two closely related Semitic roots are possible for the term Nahom, NHM [with a dot under the H] and NHM. What is important is that both these roots relate in significant and very specific ways to the experiences of Lehi's group while at Nahom. The first root, NHM [with dot], has the basic meaning of "to comfort, console, to be sorry," so in Hebrew we see it used extensively in connection with mourning a death. In Arabic the root (NAHAMA) refers to a "soft groan, sigh, moan." [^10]

The second root, NHM, is also found in biblical Hebrew and means to "roar," "complain," or "be hungry." Similarly, in ancient Egyptian it refers to "roar, thunder, shout," which are similar to the Arabic meanings of "growl, groan, roar, suffer from hunger, complain." This clear association with hunger may well have reference to the fasting usually associated with mourning for the dead anciently. [^11]

It is hard to imagine any place-name that would be more appropriate in view of what Nephi tells us happened there. Not only do the two roots of Nahom refer unquestionably to both mourning and consoling [^12] (and perhaps also to fasting) in connection with Ishmael's death and burial, but they seem to go still further and echo the complaining and the rebellion that followed his burial.

When we read 1 Nephi 16:35 again in this light, we see how peculiarly fitting the name Nahom is for a place of burial and mourning and then as a place where complaining about the threat of hunger led to rebellion:

The daughters of Ishmael did mourn exceedingly, because of the loss of their father, and because of their afflictions in the wilderness; and they did murmur against my father, because he had brought them out of the land of Jerusalem, saying: Our father is dead; yea, and we have wandered much in the wilderness, and we have suffered much affliction, hunger, thirst, and fatigue; and after all these sufferings we must perish in the wilderness with hunger.

One scholar has pointed out that we can go still further and see in the narrative the intentional use of phrasing that links the events at Nahom with earlier events that were basic to the Hebrew nation. [^13] Reading the account this way, it becomes clear that Nephi, at least, saw the parallels between the Lehite exodus from Jerusalem and the Exodus from Egypt by the Israelites centuries earlier.

The Book of Mormon does not state that Ishmael died at Nahom, only that he was buried there. Likely the Lehite encampment was in the Jawf valley and Ishmael was carried up into the hills for burial. Perhaps it was because the word Nahom captured so well other aspects of their stay in the area that Lehi saw no need to rename the place, thus preserving the original name in the record kept by Nephi. We can see, therefore, that this deceptively simple account and the place-name itself fit perfectly a place of burial and mourning in every respect.

Dating Nahom

Now that we can show the extreme rarity of the NHM name in Arabia and how aptly it fits all the elements of Nephi's account, we will examine the evidence allowing us to trace the history of the name in Yemen. We have already mentioned an obvious method—maps such as Niebuhr's 1763 map that show the name. The story of how Niebuhr came to publish his map is both a fascinating true-life adventure and a tribute to his tenacity and courage. It begins with an even earlier map. In 1751, a French cartographer, Jean Bourguignon D'Anville, published his great map of Asia showing Nehem in the same position relative to Sana'a as all the later maps do. To date, this is the earliest known map actually showing NHM. For our purposes it is also the most significant of all the maps because D'Anville used much earlier sources to prepare it, notably the Arab geographers Idrisi (1100-1165), Abu'l Fida (1273-1331), and Katib Chelebi (1609-1657). [^14] The publication of this map in the mid-eighteenth century demonstrated to the Western world how ignorant it was of inland Arabia. Aside from some of the coastal seaports, almost nothing was known of the entire southern half of the peninsula besides legends and myths. In what was a rather unusual move for his time, the Danish King Frederick V sponsored an expedition to these little-known parts from 1761-1764. Niebuhr was to become the only survivor of the expedition, leaving us an accurate account of a pioneering journey. Thus it was that his map, made in 1763, showing Nehhm, was based upon his own travels in the Yemeni highlands. The Danish expedition, working under primitive and dangerous conditions, had only the most basic equipment and methods available to them and succeeded in traveling only in the western half of the modern republic. Nevertheless, their maps and descriptions provided Europeans with the most accurate information about the area for more than a century to come. [^15]

Niebuhr describes Nehhm variously in his writings as a "Lordship," an independent "State of Yemen," and a "principality," whose warlike sheikh ruled over a few towns, together with many villages on a mountain. [^16] (See figure 4.)

Figure 4. Niebuhr's 1763 map of Yemen showing the tribal district of NEHHM northeast of Sana'a.

After Niebuhr, more than a century passed before the next known reference to the place by an outsider. A young French Jew, Joseph Halevy, also spoke of it. In 1869, disguised as a rabbi, Halevy traveled through the area searching for antiquities and wrote of the "independent hill-canton of NEHM on the arid eastern downs" northeast of Sana'a. [^17] Halevy's local guide, Hayyim Habshush, also kept a little-known account of the journey, in which he refers often to the district of NIHM, the NIHM tribe who lived there, and their uncommon acceptance of and respect for local Jews. [^18] A typical reference to the historicity of the tribe is made by the English explorer Philby in 1936. While exploring in the Jawf valley, he noted:

A third tribal area farther back in the mountains [is] known as Bilad Nahm . . .[one of] an ancient trio of laconic names going far back into the history of Hamdan. [^19]

Over the succeeding years, many other maps have been printed that show some variation of the NHM place-name, and always in the same location. [^20] Today the district is well known and remains identified with the Nihm tribe, which continues to the present. The usual pronunciation of the name now is "Neh-Hem," and we will usually spell it as Nehem from this point on.

While maps preserve the name back into the Medieval period, there are other, much earlier, references to the tribal name. In most of the Arab world, there has been great change in its peoples and tribal areas over the centuries, but Yemen is different. Its isolation in the southwest corner of Arabia and the extreme ruggedness of the country have kept most of the tribal areas relatively secure from the displacements of famine, migration, and war.

Two recognized authorities on the tribes of Yemen have expressed it this way:

The first thing to be noted about Yemeni tribes is that they have been where they are for a very long time. The names Hashid and Bakil are pre-Islamic. Many of the lesser tribal names go back a thousand years, and there are few names of present-day tribes that one cannot trace back at least to the 17th century. Tribes as such do not move. Nor do they over-run each other. [^21]

Robert Wilson has noted:

Substantial traces of the pre-Islamic (tribal) order continued to exist well into the Islamic period. Over the past ten centuries there is little or no evidence of any major tribal movements in this part of Yemen, and the overwhelming impression is one of minimal change, even if tribal alliances have from time to time altered or developed. [^22]

That the tribal name predates Islam is beyond question. To date, the earliest written reference to the name comes from the Prophet Mohammed himself, in a diplomatic letter written about A.D. 620 to the southern tribes of Arabia. [^23] With the dawning of Islam, only a handful of Moslem historians concerned themselves with early Arabia, but even in the little that was written and that has survived to the present, the Nihm tribe is referred to often. For example, al-Kalbi's important work, the 'Kitab al-Asnam', written about A.D. 821, refers to the Nihm while discussing religious practices in pagan Arabia. [^24]

The most prolific and best known of these historians was al-Hamdani, who died at Sana'a in A.D. 945. Hamdani mentions the Nihm tribe in his Sifat Jazirat al-Arab, [^25] a geographical book, and also in the tenth book of his Al Iklil, [^26] listing it as part of the Bakil confederation or grouping of tribes. He also makes references to the Bakil tribes in about the first century A.D. [^27] Although he does not name the Bakil tribes individually for the earlier period, the clear inference is that Nihm was one of them. This gives us, then, a possible reference to the tribe of at least A.D. 50-100, with the implication that the tribe existed earlier still.

The traditional genealogy of the tribe has them descending through Hamdan as follows: [^28]

[^29]:

Warren was able to meet with the son of the sheikh of the Nihm tribe, who informed us that the tribe, an important part of the Bakil group of tribes, numbered approximately 24,000 persons as of 1987. [^30] The tribe is affiliated with the Zaydi branch of Islam, introduced to Yemen when the fighting Hamdan tribes (Hashid and Bakil) were reconciled about A.D. 900. Since that time, the Zaydi influence has been predominant among the northern tribes, keeping their tribal structures largely intact, unlike those in the south. Today the tribe continues to occupy the mountainous area northeast of Sana'a, just as it always seems to have. It is an area of barren, stony hills overlooking the wide plains of Wadi Jawf, off-limits to outsiders and mostly unexplored. Here, as in other parts of the country, loyalty to one's tribe comes before everything else, including even the government, which maintains only limited control over the area. On one occasion at a "roadblock" set up by local tribesmen near Marib, Warren and his driver were held up by a man armed with a machine gun, who relented only when another vehicle approached.

When taken together, the evidence recording the name can be summarized as follows:

[^31]:

We can now account for the name in its present location for approximately 1,900 to 2,000 years of the 2,600 years that have elapsed since Nephi wrote of the place. That this could be the actual place Nephi wrote of must be seriously considered in the light of these facts. And there is more—circumstantial evidence suggests that the place could already have been known as Nahom long before the Lehites arrived about 600 B.C. We will consider this next.

BURIAL GROUNDS IN NEHEM

Since the Book of Mormon Nahom was a burial ground, we were excited to discover on a later visit to Sana'a that an ancient burial ground had recently been located in the hills of Nehem itself. Warren met with the leader of the French archaeological team that made the find and has worked in the area many years and was informed that the circular rock tombs may date to 3000 B.C. or earlier. [^32] Although much work remains to be done at the site, it appears probable that the tombs were used and new ones constructed until about A.D. 1000. This very close association of Nehem with burial matters therefore suggests the possibility that the name may be as ancient as the tombs. There is no reason why the local people would not have allowed a Hebrew burial on their sacred ground. They were pagans, in the true sense of the word, for more than a millennium after Lehi's day.

The Nehem tombs seem to follow the general pattern for Arabia in that they are circular and are built in elevated positions. A second, more extensive area of similar tombs to the east of the Jawf valley, first made known to the outside world in 1936 by Philby, [^33] may also be connected with Nehem, although the tribal boundaries do not now extend that far. A little more is known about this area—possibly the largest burial site in Arabia—but it too has never been examined by professional researchers. Here, on the Ruwaik, 'Alam Abyadh, and 'Alam Aswad ridges northeast of Marib (and reportedly the Jidran ridge nearby) are circular tombs, many thousands of them. Built of flat limestone slabs, they vary in size from twelve to twenty-six feet in diameter and from five to ten feet high. Those examined by Philby had a raised floor in the interior burial chamber. He also discovered the remains of a raised, stone-lined pathway leading to what appeared to be a ceremonial "high place" atop a hill close to the Ruwaik ridge. This burial area in particular is distinguished by its size and its remoteness from any known areas of past habitation and water sources. While much is yet to be learned about both sites when conditions allow, they unquestionably predate the arrival of Lehi in the area, and one may well have been the place to which local people led Lehi's mourning party to bury Ishmael.

RUINS, AGRICULTURE, AND CLIMATE IN THE JAWF

Generally speaking, the image most of us have of Arabia as a place of desert desolation (wilderness seems to have been the favorite term used by the Lehites) is accurate enough. Yet, increasingly, many scholars are beginning to accept that some major changes to the climate have occurred over the past few thousand years in at least some parts of inland Arabia. In many regions, for example, the present rainfall cannot account for the extensive and even extreme erosion that has taken place. Some evidence suggests that the most recent period of desiccation began about A.D. 300, the persistent drought [^34] contributing to the decline of the incense trade and the kingdoms it supported.

A picture of extensive vegetation with streams and herds of wild animals long since extinct is quite different from the arid wastelands that typify most of Arabia today, but it is one that now has ample evidence to support it in some areas. Nowhere is this more true than in the Wadi Jawf, next to the mountains of Nehem. Here lies possibly the highest concentration of ancient cities, dams, temples, and burial areas of the Arabian peninsula—clear indications of a more favorable climate centuries ago.

These sites include the historically important Minean capitals of Qarnaw and Baraqish (Yatil), which controlled important sections of the developing trade routes at the time of Lehi. The great dam complex at nearby Marib also irrigated an extensive area and functioned until about A.D. 570.

The importance of the burial sites in particular has not been missed by those who have probed the ancient past of the region. Philby wrote of the tombs:

The evidence of more plentiful water in these parts in ancient times argues the presence of a large agricultural and pastoral community in those days. . . . These great desert cemeteries [are] probably by far the most important discovery of my whole journey. . . . If we could date them and identify their builders, one of the great problems of early human civilization would be well on the way to solution. [^35]

Nigel Groom, the leading authority on the incense trade, said much the same thing:

A large area of ancient tombs north of Marib may be the remnant of a culture of the sixth to third millennia moist period in the Sayhad, which is now a sanddune desert. [^36]

Discussing the tombs, Brian Doe made this observation:

These tombs appear to confirm that this area was once inhabited, and extended for many miles. Now dry and arid, such settlements could only have occurred under milder and wetter conditions. This was probably at least before the 3rd millennium B.C. and even earlier. [^37]

So the physical evidence indicates that an area which today supports only scattered bedouin once allowed areas of extensive agriculture and a settled population. This harmonizes well with the Book of Mormon account, which implies that Lehi's group intended to remain long enough to grow and harvest crops before departing eastward across the barren deserts, skirting the Empty Quarter. The casual reader may at this point wonder why the daughters of Ishmael would complain so strongly that they might "perish from hunger" if they were encamped at a relatively fertile area. At first glance, this appears almost as a contradiction. But if we read the verse in context, it seems clear that their complaint was a general one; for in the bitterness of their grief they saw only the prospect of more hardship and hunger in the future under Lehi's leadership. Clearly they were in a fertile place (else why would they have planned to remain there for "the space of a time"?), but they knew that their present stop was only temporary and not their final destination. Perhaps, too, they already knew something of the trek that lay ahead and that it would surpass the journey from Jerusalem to Nahom in terms of danger and hardship.

THE TURN EASTWARD

And it came to pass that we did again take our journey in the wilderness; and we did travel nearly eastward from that time forth (1 Nephi 17:1).

Probably the strongest evidence, however, that identifies Nahom (and therefore Lehi's easterly turning point) can be found in a study of the incense trade routes. The trade routes represent, of course, the available water sources, but they also must follow terrain suitable for camel caravans to use. Scholars still debate the question of how long camels have been used to transport cargo over great distances, but in any event, the method predated Lehi by many centuries. Top-heavy when loaded, the camel is best suited to level ground offering either a sand or soil footing rather than rocky or mountainous regions. As a consequence, the trade routes tended to follow the valleys and plateaus, usually avoiding higher ground. Constantly shifting sand dunes could add days of extra, unplanned travel, as loaded camels cannot traverse steep slopes. Since water holes do not move, the advent of modern mapping allows us to reconstruct these ancient desert highways with a fairly high degree of certainty. No one in 1830 could do so.

It is of the greatest interest to the student of the Book of Mormon to note that the major trunk of the trade route passed through the Jawf valley within a few miles of Nehem. And it is here—and nowhere else—that the trade route branched eastward toward the Hadhramaut coast and the ancient port of Qana, the modern Bir Ali, to which most of the incense was shipped. Some minor trade routes did branch off to the south, but the major route was to the east. [^38]

History provides us with a striking confirmation that the Jawf valley was indeed the area where passage in an easterly direction was possible, confirming Nephi's picture of danger and hardship in an event that occurred only a few hundred years after Lehi's travels. Most scholars agree that it was at Baraqish, near Nehem, that the invading Roman army under Aelius Gallus in 25 B.C. arranged for food supplies before marching east into the desert. Their goal was to discover the source of the incense, and the most direct route lay directly east rather than southward into the fertile Marib region. Before they perished from lack of water at "Marsiaba" (probably the present al-'Abr), prisoners captured there told the Romans that they were only a two-day march from the country that produced "aromatics," or legendary Shabwah, which lies near the coast. [^39] Thus, a tragic footnote in the history of southern Arabia provides support for an even earlier travel account—that kept by Nephi. (See figure 5.)

We shall shortly examine other aspects of the desert journey Lehi made and the relevance of the trade routes, but one other statement made by Nephi is significant at this point. There can be no doubt at all that the Lehites had the ability to determine direction with great precision (for example, "nearly a south-southeast direction" [Nephi 16:13]). In view of this, it is interesting that the direction ("nearly eastward" [Nephi 17:1]) given by Nephi after leaving Nahom seems strangely nebulous by comparison. One reason, perhaps, is that the water sources followed may have led the group to meander to the extent that Nephi was justified only in generalizing the direction taken. As we shall learn, however, the more likely reason is that their journey to Bountiful was actually so close to true east that a more specific direction could not be given. But in a general sense, the Book of Mormon is right on the mark when it links travel eastward from the Nahom area.

THE PRE-ISLAMIC ORIGINS OF NEHEM IN THE YEMEN REPUBLIC

When we draw together all of the foregoing aspects, a logical scenario develops that suggests a plausible account for the origin and the preservation of the name over the centuries.

The NHM name may have had its genesis as early as the Neolithic period (about 3000 B.C.), commencing with the use of the hills overlooking the then fertile Jawf valley as a burial area.

The etymology of the name makes its association with the mourning of the dead clear. This suggests the likelihood that the place may have been a neutral ("hawtah") enclave where tribes in the region could bury and mourn their dead in a high place without interruption.

Figure 5. Map of the Nahom/Wadi Jawf area. (Reproduced from "A Sketch Map of South West Arabia" compiled by Nigel Groom and published by the Royal Geographical Society, London, in 1976.)

Control of the site and the resulting close identification of the name by one of these tribes probably took place at an early stage in the history of NHM. The process of the tribal name itself becoming NHM may not have been complete until nearer the Christian era. Other than possibly embracing a larger area than it now does, there is no indication of tribal relocation at any stage.

The near proximity of Nehem to the cities of the Jawf valley such as Baraqish and Ma'in must have contributed to its establishment as an accessible burial site on the nonproductive surrounding hills. Further, the converging of the trade routes—still developing in 600 B.C.—at the same juncture would have helped ensure its importance and transmission of the name in the region.

With the decline of the trade routes and the city-states they supported, the reduced population would have resulted in Nehem eventually ceasing to have more than a purely local importance as a place of burial. A millennium of virtual disuse since then would have meant that the original significance of the name would have dwindled in the collective memory of its tribal people until its true origins were lost.

This is a reconstructed and theoretical history that cannot be proven, but its individual component facts are generally accepted by scholars. Taken together, the preservation of this rare name—with all its exact parallels to the Lehite account—must be considered as striking confirmation of the record in which it appears. The Book of Mormon reference to Nahom as an ancient place-name in southern Arabia can now truly be considered validated.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] First, of course, there is a clear relationship between the locations of Bountiful and Nahom. Bountiful was "nearly eastward" of Nahom (17:1). Given the Nephites' ability to determine direction with great accuracy, we should expect Bountiful to lie close to the 16th degree north latitude, just as Nehem does. The peninsula coast has undergone significant climatic and topographical changes in the past two thousand years (for which there is no evidence), or Thomas Key, A Biologist Looks at the Book of Mormon (Issaquah, W.A.: Saints Alive in Jesus, 1985), 1-2.
[^2] The terrain and water sources from Nahom onward permitted reasonable access from the interior deserts to the coast. Nephi's account is not based on historical reality; it is fictitious. The Periplus of the Erythraean Sea, Travel and Trade in the Indian Ocean by a Merchant of the First Century, translated by W. Schoff (New Delhi: Oriental Books Reprint Corp., 1974), 29-35. Probably written by a Greek merchant in the first century, the Periplus gives a detailed eyewitness account of ports on the Arabian peninsula within a few centuries of Lehi's day.
[^3] Nephi's usage of the term Bountiful appears to indicate that both the general area (17:5, 7) and the particular location where the Lehites camped (17:6) were fertile. The Book of Sir Marco Polo the Venetian (London: Henry Yule, 1903), vol. 2.
[^4] Bountiful was a coastal location (17:5) (it would logically have to be on the east coast of Arabia), suitable for a seashore encampment (17:6) and the construction and launching of a sizable ship (18:8). Travels in Asia and Africa, 1325-1354, trans. H. Gibb (London, 1929). See also Defremery and Sanguinetti, eds., Voyages (Paris, 1874), vol. 2.
[^5] It was very fertile, notable for its "much fruit" and honey (17:5, 6; 18:6) and perhaps small game that could be hunted (18:6). Agricultural and fishing pursuits are additional possible food sources, although not mentioned in the text. Wendell Phillips, Unknown Oman (New York: David McKay, 1966).
[^6] Enough timber of types and sizes to permit the construction of a vessel able to carry several dozen persons and remain seaworthy for at least a year was readily available (18:1, 2, 6). A Descriptive Account of the Ruins of El Balad (trans. Bombay Geographical Society, Dec. 1846), 12:25-27
[^7] Freshwater supplies available year-round would have been necessary for the extended stay required for the building of the ship. Wendell Phillips, Unknown Oman, 168-171, 194.
[^8] There was a mountain prominent enough to justify Nephi's reference to it as "the mount" (17:7; 18:3; italics added) and also near enough to the coastal encampment that he could go there to "pray oft" (18:3). Lynn and Hope Hilton and Gerald Silver, In Search of Lehi's Trail (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1976).
[^9] The incident of Nephi's brothers' attempting to throw him into the depths of the sea (17:48) makes sense only if there were substantial cliffs overlooking the ocean. Groom, Frankincense and Myrrh, chapter 10, especially 211-13.
[^10] Ore from which metal could be smelted and tools fashioned was available in the vicinity (17:9-11, 16) together with flint (verse 11), seemingly near the ore source. Groom, Frankincense and Myrrh, chapter 9, map on 167.
[^11] That Nephi required a specific revelation and great effort to locate ore and fashion tools indicates that, despite the attractiveness of the place, Bountiful may have had little or no resident population that could contribute tools and manpower to the ship-building process. Today this region probably qualifies as the least-developed part of Arabia.
[^12] Suitable winds and ocean currents were required to carry the vessel out into the ocean (18:8, 9). Van der Meulen and Von Wissman, Hadramaut-Some of its Mysteries Unveiled (Leyden, E. J. Brill, 1964), 158-62; and Ronald Lewcock, Wadi Hadramaut and the Walled City of Shibam (Paris: UNESCO, 1985), 17, 53, 55, 124-25.
[^13] Q'uran 2:25, 26:129.
[^14] Winnett and Read, Ancient Records from North Arabia (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1970), 45.
[^15] William Hamblin, "Pre-Islamic Arabian Prophets," Mormons and Muslims (Provo: BYU Religious Studies Center, 1983), 85-104.
[^16] Ibid., 91-92.
[^17] Hugh Nibley, "Lehi in the Desert," Improvement Era 53 (January-October 1950), and in CWHN, 5:124-28; Eugene England, "Through the Arabian Desert to a Bountiful Land: Could Joseph Smith Have Known the Way?" in Noel Reynolds, ed., Book of Mormon Authorship, (Provo: Religious Studies Center, 1982), 152.
[^18] Groom, Frankincense and Myrrh, 109-11.
[^19] The Periplus of the Erythraean Sea, Travel and Trade in the Indian Ocean by a Merchant of the First Century, translated by W. Schoff (New Delhi: Oriental Books Reprint Corp., 1974), 29-35. Probably written by a Greek merchant in the first century, the Periplus gives a detailed eyewitness account of ports on the Arabian peninsula within a few centuries of Lehi's day.
[^20] Claudius Ptolemaeus (Ptolemy) about A.D. 90-160, writing shortly after Pliny, produced his Geography, a catalog of places supplementing a series of maps.
[^21] Pliny, Natural History, translated by Rackham (London: Heinemann, 1952), 37-63. Pliny the Elder, A.D. 23-79, commanded a Roman fleet at the time of his death during the eruption of Vesuvius. Of his writings, only Natural History, completed in A.D. 77, survives.
[^22] Groom, Frankincense and Myrrh, 111.
[^23] Ibid., 110.
[^24] Ibid., 232. See the map on p. 99.
[^25] The Periplus of the Erythraean Sea. See also Groom, Frankincense and Myrrh, which discusses the harvest cycles in detail, 146-47.
[^26] Groom, Frankincense and Myrrh, 165-66; see also F. Clements, Oman the Reborn Land (London: Longman, 1980), 27; Robert Stookey, Yemen-The Politics of the Yemen Arab Republic (Colorado: Westview Press, 1978), 10, and trade route map.
[^27] Groom, Frankincense and Myrrh, 96-120.
[^28] W. H. Ingrams, "Hadhramaut: A Journey to the Sei'ar Country and through the Wadi Maseila," Geographical Journal 88 (1936): 524-51 gives a firsthand account of travel through Wadi Masilah.
[^29] Frank Albright, "Explorations in Dhofar," Antiquity Journal (1955) 113:37-39 gives a brief account of the beginnings of fieldwork in Dhofar, the 1952 Wendell Phillips expedition that excavated at Khor Rori, al-Balid, Mirbat, and Mughsayl. Assistant Surgeon H. J. Carter landed at Rakhyut in 1844 on a coastal survey for the government of Bombay; see Groom, Frankincense and Myrrh, 101. Other accounts of early seafaring in the region seem never to refer to Rakhyut or Kharfot; see, for example, R. B. Serjeant, The Portuguese Off the South Arabian Coast: Hadrami Chronicles (Oxford Clarendon Press, 1963).
[^30] United Bible Societies, Fauna and Flora of the Bible (Helps for Translators) (N.P.: United Bible Societies, 1972), 11:11.
[^31] John Tvedtnes, "Was Lehi a Caravaneer?" F.A.R.M.S. Report TVE-84.
[^32] G. Goettler, N. Firth, and C. Huston, "A Preliminary Discussion of Ancient Mining in the Sultanate of Oman," Journal of Oman Studies 2 (1976): 43-56.
[^33] Daniel T. Potts, The Arabian Gulf in Antiquity (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1990), 2 vols. See especially vol. 1, chap. 10, "The Oman Peninsula, 1300-300 B.C. Although confined to the northern part of modern Oman, Potts offers a valuable summary of exploration, major archaeological sites, ceramics, stone working, metallurgy, glyphs, the extent of human occupation ("total" during the Iron Age, 389), and epigraphic documents that should largely reflect the Dhofar situation for the same period.
[^34] George F. Hourani, Arab Seafaring in the Indian Ocean in Ancient and Early Medieval Times (Khayats, 1963) deals with early trade routes, ship types, and navigation methods. G. R. Tibbetts, Arab Navigation in the Indian Ocean Before the Coming of the Portuguese (London: Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland, 1981), vol. 42, discusses monsoon winds.
[^35] Ben R. Finney, "Anomalous Westerlies, El NiÃ±o, and the colonization of Polynesia," American Anthropologist, vol. 87, no. 1 (1985): 20. John L. Sorenson, F.A.R.M.S. Update (Provo, April 1986). David L. Clark, "Lehi and El NiÃ±o: A Method of Migration," BYU Studies, p. 57-65, vol. 30 (Summer 1990) is a fuller treatment of the ENSO effect from an LDS viewpoint. This article has a useful bibliography, although his projected sailing date for Lehi (August, in the midst of the monsoon) seems very unlikely given our present knowledge of Khor Kharfot.
[^36] Although preliminary, the most comprehensive treatment of the various aspects dealing with Lehi's sea voyage is John L. Sorenson, "Transoceanic Crossings in the Book of Mormon," in Monte S. Nyman and Charles S. Tate, eds., First Nephi, The Doctrinal Foundation (Provo: BYU Religious Studies Center, 1988), 251-70; see also F.A.R.M.S. SOR-88.
[^37] Tim Severin, The Sindbad Voyage (London: Arrow, 1982). The Sohar was returned to Oman and today sits at a major road intersection in Muscat.
[^38] 38. Groom, Frankincense and Myrrh, 165-88, especially 167.
[^39] 39. Strabo, Geographica, Book 16, 4:22-24; and Groom, Frankincense and Myrrh, 74-76.
