Warren P. Aston, Michaela Knoth Aston, In the Footsteps of Lehi: New Evidence for Lehi's Journey across Arabia to Bountiful ( 1994)

PART THREE

The 1993 Expeditions to Bountiful

Wadi Sayq, Oman

April 15, 1993

A light breeze, still cool from the night just past, made tiny ripples as it rustled the stands of long reeds in the lagoon. Behind us was the beach, the white sand covered with countless freshly dug crab mounds rising above the constantly crashing surf. This week, for the first time ever, a team of qualified observers had assembled in this remote and beautiful place, potentially so significant to Latter-day Saints, to probe and measure its features.

The sun felt warm on our backs as we set up one of the cameras on its tripod and watched the others make their way to the spot for our team photograph. After so many years of work and planning and many delays, the first phase of the expedition was underway at last. As relieved as we were, it felt almost as satisfying to see such a diverse group, from very different backgrounds, come together and work with a common purpose. First came our geologist, William Christiansen. Bill had flown straight in from Salt Lake City with only an unscheduled day in London en route because of the visa problems that plagued several members of the team. Experienced at working in U.S. oil fields, he now taught geology and astronomy at the Salt Lake Community College; he had graduated from the University of Utah with a master's degree in geology. Our Middle East surroundings were quite new to him, as we soon learned when we departed from Salalah. The trip had been punctuated with stops so Bill could take countless pictures of camels as we passed, or as we sometimes had to give them right-of-way on the road. Bill's naturally cheerful nature and his unique sense of humor and appreciation for what he was seeing came to be valued by all of us, even though he was often out of sight, halfway up a mountain. Toward the end of the visit, we were all taking it upon ourselves to point out camels he might have missed.

Noel Reynolds, the president of F.A.R.M.S., and his son Jonathan arrived next. A BYU professor with a Ph.D. in political science, Noel was based with his large family at the BYU Jerusalem Center for a year. Of all of us, Noel and Jonathan had encountered the greatest difficulty in getting to Oman. After leaving Jerusalem, they eventually spent many days in Jordan and Bahrain before the final visa approval came through, two days after the rest of the team had arrived in Oman. In the final six months leading up to the visit, Noel had coordinated the travel arrangements for the team from his Jerusalem office and was responsible for evaluating the project while in the field and making recommendations for future work. Jonathan, at seventeen by far the youngest among us, was also probably the fittest person present, and his presence would later prove invaluable in a dangerous situation that took place toward the end of the visit.

The stylishly bearded gentleman now approaching was Paolo Costa from Italy, our archaeologist. With a doctorate in his field and many years of experience excavating in the Arab world, Paolo was certainly the best-qualified person to evaluate the site initially. He had worked for eight years as the chief advisor in archaeological matters to the government of Oman. Familiar with sites all over Oman, he had actually been dropped by helicopter at Wadi Sayq for about two hours on May 10, 1989, but the visit was too short to reach any conclusions. Now he was back, giving us the beginnings of our understanding of human involvement at Khor Kharfot.

We made up the balance of the team at Wadi Sayq. Michaela acted primarily as an assistant to Dr. Costa, helping him survey the main sites and also helping ensure that everyone remained well fed. Warren handled the still and video photography, led the exploration, and gave general team support.

Three other members of the team did not take part in this first phase. David Johnson, Ph.D., a professor of archaeology and anthropology at BYU, had been involved with leading the effort to excavate since the inception of the project. With more than fifteen years of experience excavating at Petra in Jordan, David was to lead the work when the digging would take place at specific locations identified during the visit of the first team.

Ali Mahash Al-Shahri from Salalah, a self-trained researcher who has initiated the first cataloging of ancient sites and inscriptions in Dhofar, had previously visited the site at Warren's suggestion and begun surveying the area for cultural remains. Ali met with all the team in Salalah and would also be involved in future attempts to understand the ruins at Khor Kharfot.

Also scheduled for a visit to the site when the conditions would be better suited for a survey of the vegetation would be a botanist. The botanist would attempt to establish the flora present in Wadi Sayq for both timber and food sources about the period of Lehi.

THE BACKGROUND TO THE EXPEDITION

The expedition was the natural extension of the work we had done in Arabia since 1984. With the identification of Wadi Sayq as the only location in Arabia fitting Nephi's description of Bountiful, it became clear to both ourselves and F.A.R.M.S. that qualified archaeologists, geologists, botanists, and so on were needed to further evaluate and refine our findings. The human traces at the site needed proper investigation, especially as it became obvious that no one had any clear ideas about the history of the area. Evaluation of a written report and photographs of the large mound structure, for example, resulted in more than a dozen different ideas by scholars and archaeologists when they responded to our invitation to comment on it.

A major step toward identifying who could best contribute to the effort came in July 1990, when Warren attended the annual Arabian Seminar in Great Britain. Here he was able to discuss the research with recognized world leaders in their fields, and it was here that he first met Dr. Costa and Ali Al-Shahri when they gave papers in the seminar. These and other contacts made were to prove essential as the concept of an expedition team developed.

In the later stages of our work, the involvement and support of F.A.R.M.S. had increased to the point where F.A.R.M.S. became the obvious body to coordinate the planned fieldwork. In March and April 1991, we made a formal proposal that fieldwork in Oman was now necessary in order to identify the ruins there, but we pointed out that our proposal of Wadi Sayq as the probable site for Bountiful hinged on scriptural criteria alone. Nephi's record gave us no reason to suppose that any traces of the Lehite's brief sojourn there could be expected, especially after such a long time had passed. The geological aspects of the project were recognized as being of more likely significance than the ruins, which would be important primarily for what they would tell us about the history of the area.

Warren was in Utah on business shortly afterward and discussed the expedition with John (Jack) Welch, the founder of F.A.R.M.S. Jack, who had been involved in evaluating our work from the very beginning, was totally supportive and encouraging, and the decision to proceed was made. In further discussions with Dr. John Sorenson, widely recognized as the leading authority on Book of Mormon geography, the scope of what could be done at the site was explored and possible team members were discussed. David Johnson, a BYU archaeologist with many years of experience excavating in Jordan, was then approached by John to lead the team, and the other key personnel—the geologist and botanist—were considered. Having a team structure then allowed us to formulate approximate costs for the expedition sponsors.

Six months later, in November 1991, Warren returned to Provo for further meetings at BYU. Over a working lunch in the faculty restaurant on the Provo campus, the F.A.R.M.S. board—Noel Reynolds, Stephen Ricks, Mel Thorne, Brent Hall, Bill Hamblin, Dan Peterson, and John Sorenson—met with him and David Johnson to discuss the proposed project. It was the first time most present had met David, and the meeting allowed a stimulating cross-pollination of ideas about the project. The result of this meeting was so positive that April 1992, only five months away, became the target date. It was also planned that the coastal exploration of Yemen would be completed at the same time, just prior to the team's assembling in Oman.

David began the long process of applying to the Omani government for the permits necessary to excavate and began working with Dr. Costa in Rome, who was invited to be the second archaeologist on the team. These negotiations were to take many months, however, and ultimately the April date had to be postponed until September, just following the monsoon period.

All was in place for the entire team to rendezvous in Muscat, Oman, when we experienced one of the banes of an archaeologist's life. With less than a week before departure, David was informed that the expedition permits had been suspended temporarily. To have this happen when everyone was literally half packed to leave was, to say the least, very disappointing, and concerted efforts by David to resolve the matter came to naught. Over the following weeks, it began to appear that the delay might be lengthy, even indefinite. Late in November, Warren briefly visited Oman to meet with his contacts there about the situation and also to undertake contingency photography of the site. He determined that the delay was due partly to continuing border negotiations between Oman and Yemen and, with the assistance of members living in the country, initiated some other approaches in the effort to secure the needed permits.

Our own continuing research in the meantime made it seem increasingly likely that many of the ruins probably dated to well within the Islamic period. As the months passed without any definite word on the permits, we made the recommendation to F.A.R.M.S. that the fieldwork proceed as planned, but without excavation taking place. Rather than continue to postpone the other fieldwork to an uncertain future, we would go ahead, and the actual digging would take place at a later date. With the concurrence of Noel Reynolds, president of F.A.R.M.S., Dr. Costa was invited to participate in surveying the site and making some preliminary judgments about the ruins there. It was decided that David Johnson would lead the team at a later time when the excavations would take place. Likewise, the botanist would visit at a time when the vegetation was not as dry. The first week of April 1993 was set for the first team visit to Wadi Sayq.

Publicity about the whole venture had so far been confined to brief notices in the quarterly F.A.R.M.S. newsletter, Insights. Already the large mound structure had been damaged by tourists who went to the site, guided by our paper on Bountiful. This unfortunate incident underscored for all of us the importance of restricting publicity to ensure that the site remain unvisited and that all of the other ruins we had reported to F.A.R.M.S. remained untouched until qualified people had properly done their jobs.

We arrived in Muscat on Friday, April 9, 1993, joining Paolo Costa, who had flown in from Rome the previous evening. Much of the following day was spent in obtaining supplies that would be difficult to obtain in Salalah and in meeting with Rod McIntire, general manager of the Oman Refinery. Rod, his wife, Rosalea (who would join the second team later in the year), and their daughter were based in Muscat, and he had become our Oman coordinator for the expedition during the preceding months. His assistance, like that of Brent Hall at the F.A.R.M.S. office in Provo, was of great value and appreciated by all of us.

The following morning a ninety-minute jet flight carried us up over the ranges that surround Muscat and then down over a thousand miles of endless flat desert wastes to Salalah. The familiar surroundings of the Salalah Holiday Inn became our first base camp as we took possession of our four-wheel-drive vehicle and purchased food items and other supplies. Bill Christiansen joined us when he arrived on the evening flight, but Noel and Jonathan sent a message advising that they were further delayed and might not arrive for another two days. With time now a priority, the four of us left early the next morning, Monday, April 12, and drove south from Salalah to Rakhyut. En route we discovered a new vantage point overlooking Wadi Sayq and looked down on the magnificent panorama, seeing much more than had ever been visible before. With only a few weeks remaining before the monsoon rains began, the vegetation was at its driest, and surface features were more clearly exposed. It was the best possible time of the year to survey and examine sites that usually were obscured in the dense green vegetation.

After departing from the Jerusalem area, Lehi and his group spent the greater part of their Arabian journey in remote desert wastes. Nephi makes it clear that their long wilderness sojourn was a schooling period, teaching them lessons they would later need in the New World.

The Wadi Arabah is by far the most likely route taken by the Lehites as they traveled from their home. This view is of the east side looking south toward the Red Sea. Today the Jordanian port of Aqaba and the Israeli town of Eilat on the Red Sea mark the end of Wadi Arabah.glf1

The mountains of Nehem overlook the wide plain of Wadi Jawf in Yemen. While encamped in this area, Ishmael died and was buried. It was here that the direction of Lehi's journey changed eastward toward Bountiful.

The impressive ruins of the walled city of Baraqish in the Jawf valley remains as a silent witness of the wealth generated by the incense trade.

Sana'a, capital of modern Republic of Yemen, stands in a mountainous basin only 25 miles southwest of Nehem.

Some of the thousands of rock burial tombs lining the low hills of Ruwaik and 'Alam Abyadh in the desert northeast of Marib. Rarely viewed by outsiders, they are similar in style and age to the Nehem tombs.

Thick layers of flint cover the Qamar ranges inland of "Bountiful" for many miles and were possibly the sources of stones referred to by Nephi in his account (1 Nephi 17:1).

The barren Qamar mountains isolate "Bountiful" and prevent coastal access other than through Wadi Sayq.

The flood-scoured floor of Wadi Sayq leading to the coast at Khor Kharfot.

Frankincense, once a fitting gift for the Christ child, is today sold in the markets of Salalah, Oman.

The April 1993 expedition team traveling to the Bountiful site by boat.

Khor Kharfot—the Bountiful site—viewed from the surrrounding mountains in this view facing northeast.

The lagoon at Kharfot, fed by springs and runoff, is the largest body of freshwater reaching the coast in Arabia. This view is taken from the beach facing west.

The April 1993 expedition used this beach shelter as its base camp.

This prominent peak overlooking the site on the western side of the bay may be "the mount" Nephi wrote of. Here Nephi prayed "oft" and received revelation from the Lord (1 Nephi 17:7, 18:3). Steep cliffs lie at its base.

Sunrise at the largest and most obvious ruin at Kharfot, possibly the remains of the "fort" after which the place is named.

One of the several ancient rock alignments found on both sides of the valley at the coast. The age and purpose of these structures remain unclear at the present time.

Large timber trees offer abundant timber along the sides of the valley almost to the present seashore. Sycamore fig (Ficus Sycamorus) and tamarind (Tamarindus Indica) trees are the two most common species at Kharfot today.

The setting sun highlights a tree in this view—a vivid contrast to the deserts the Lehites had wandered in for years.

Date palms produce the probable "fruit" that Nephi wrote of (1 Nephi 17:5), giving rise to the name Bountiful.

The elevated western plateau is the likely place that Lehi would have temporarily settled while at Bountiful and seemingly contains the oldest ruins in the area.

This photograph shows the view a departing sea voyager would have looking back at "Bountful."

Local fishermen catching sardines on the beach at Kharfot. The abundant fishing here may have provided the Lehites with their primary food source while constructing their ship.

The first expedition team on site at Khor Kharfot in April 1993. From left: Jonathan Reynolds, Noel Reynolds, William Christiansen, Michaela Aston, Paolo Costa, and Warren Aston.

The second expedition team on site in September 1993. From left: Warren Aston, Chad Ashton, Rosalea McIntire, Malcolm Rea, Michaela Aston, and Gary Widdison.

We sat against cushions on the floor in the home of one of the headmen of the village of Rakhyut to negotiate the price of the boats we needed. The midday meal, a huge mound of rice on a large circular tray, with chunks of fish in a savory tomato sauce, was placed in the center of the room, and we helped ourselves to scoops of rice with our hands as we talked. Curious boys and older men gathered around to look at the rare sight of Europeans in their village and to try a few words of English as they tried to fathom our interest in going to Wadi Sayq. By midafternoon we were bumping our way down the coast in two fishing boats on very rough seas, high plumes of spray soaking us and our supplies. We landed on the east end of the beach and carried everything up the high sand beach as the boats returned to Rakhyut. On previous visits to the place, Warren had camped near the freshwater springs, about a ten-minute walk from the beach, but this time we set up our camp next to the beach itself, hoping the ocean breezes would deter mosquitoes. This curse of the tropics would descend upon us in clouds at sunset, aided and abetted by swarms of sandflies. Having ever-present wandering herds of cows and large areas of standing water only encouraged the prolific insect population. We wondered whether it would have been much different in Lehi's day. A concrete shelter, erected by local villagers midway on the beach about a year previously and looking very out of place in the unspoiled surroundings, provided relatively clean shelter for our equipment and for some of the team. For washing and cooking we used the springs where visiting locals also cooked and made the most of tree shade. A small concrete reservoir had been installed at the spring for the use of locals, who seemed to regard the wadi as something of a picnic-ground retreat from their mountain hamlets. When the reservoir outlet was blocked, it would rapidly fill up with the lukewarm springwater, and this became our laundry, bath, and dishwasher. Our first meal that night was a simple one of savory rice; our supplies had been limited to what we could reasonably carry in with us. Some of our more perishable items hung from a tree branch in a bucket near a semi-permanent wood fire that cooked our meals and boiled water. Nighttimes were interesting. As clouds of bats flitted from place to place, a surprisingly cool breeze would blow down the wadi, and we would begin to forget the mosquitoes and drift off to sleep, only to be abruptly jolted awake by the sound of snapping twigs as twenty or more inquisitive cows passed by our tents a few feet away.

Beginning the next morning, our days followed a pattern dictated largely by the heat. Working from first light while it was still cool, we had to seek shelter in the middle of the day, using the time to rest, write up notes, and take care of the dozens of other things necessary for personal survival. Being in such a remote place without any communication or proper transportation meant that even a minor accident, cut, or bite could quickly become a serious matter. Although we saw snakes on occasion, the sun was our biggest enemy, sapping our strength as each day wore on and making frequent applications of sunscreen to exposed parts of the body essential. Clouds were rare, but occasional afternoon breezes would blow new life into our efforts. Each of us carried a small bottle of water wherever we went, refilling it whenever we were near the springs. Probably all of us had visions of freshly cooked fish and lobster dinners. We had so much to do, however, that no one was ever able to find the time to fish or find lobsters, although toward the end of our stay it almost became necessary, as our food items fell prey to ants, inquisitive cows, and local boys. One whole meal disappeared when a cow loomed out of the darkness and devoured it as it cooked on the fire.

Almost from the beginning, pieces of the puzzle that the place represented began to fall into place. On the same day we arrived, both Paolo and Bill had raised the likelihood that the beach may have only been formed quite recently, meaning that the sea would have originally extended some distance inland. Over the following days more evidence was gathered that supported the idea that the ocean came where the lagoon and marsh area now stood, thus presenting a completely new view of the place. This meant that the timber trees lining the sides of the valley were even closer to the sea than they now are and gave us new clues as to where the Lehites would have camped when they first arrived at the "seashore." There were some clear indications that water had been even more plentiful in the past, both from springs and runoff from the surrounding mountains.

Bill used a palm-sized satellite transponder in his work, a prototype kindly donated by a U.S. company for the expedition. This allowed him to fix locations to within a few feet by automatically triangulating signals from whatever satellites were overhead at the time. An important part of his work was to establish more clearly the geological structure of the place and determine the extent of erosion and to what degree the annual flooding down the valley had affected the site.

On the second day, Warren returned to Salalah to collect Noel and Jonathan, who had finally solved their visa problems and had arrived from Bahrain. By the time they had driven back to Rakhyut, the sun had almost set, and they joined a group of locals on the beach watching an enormous whale-shark, which can reach up to sixty feet in length, cruising offshore. Few boats were still operating as the monsoon-driven seas became heavier by the day, and no one could be convinced to take them down the coast in the dark. Instead, they spent the night camped uncomfortably on the mountain overlooking Wadi Sayq. The next morning the three of them walked along the ridges until they stumbled across the narrow, rock-lined path that zigzagged down the mountainside to the valley floor. The team was finally together. Noel and his son made the strenuous hike back up the trail the following day to take the vehicle back to Rakhyut and rejoined us by boat shortly after.

The team gave particular attention to the western extremity of the coastal delta. This was an elevated and fairly flat terrace protected by the prominent peak rising behind it and by high cliffs overlooking the ocean. Warren had previously reported a circular rock structure here, but with the vegetation now so much drier, details of other structures were readily visible and could be examined. This impressive place had a beautiful sweeping view down over the mouth of the bay and was covered with the remains of square and circular stone walls. Close to the best-preserved ruins lay a large, flat grassy area protected by rocks and trees on all four sides. It was this area, we came to feel, that Lehi and his people would have found ideal for sheltering themselves from the high winds and rough seas of the monsoon season. Certainly they could not have remained on or near the beach for several months of each year, so possibly the high western terrace provided shelter or building materials for them at such times.

Dr. Costa was able to examine and survey the other obvious ruins during his time on the site. For Michaela, working with him, it was a childhood dream come true as she took notes, helped take measurements, and labeled surface samples among the varied remains. There was much more to examine than any of us had anticipated. The entire eastern terrace near the beach was covered with the outlines of buildings, and there were scores of burial sites concentrated in an area next to the beach on the western side. From the orientation of what Dr. Costa believed was a mosque amid the graves, it was obvious that many of the traces were as we had suspected, Islamic—probably only a few hundred years old. Others, however, were probably thousands of years old, giving us a picture of intermittent habitation over a very long period. Along the western side of the valley were stone walls that had enclosed large, irrigated fields in former times. To excavate all of these sites would involve years of effort, so we felt grateful to have in Dr. Costa probably the best-qualified person to initially identify the different types of ruins.

When the time came for Paolo to leave, he could not be dissuaded from walking back to Rakhyut along the coast—partly, we suspected, because of the rough boat trip down. Locals assured us the walk could be done in about three hours. Having viewed the coastline from the boat, we knew that the journey was not going to be easy, so as a precaution Noel and Jonathan walked with Paolo. They left just after sunrise, and the remainder of the team did not hear their story until the next day. Their walk out of Wadi Sayq took them over much more difficult terrain than had been expected, and their water and food supplies were exhausted early on. The lack of shelter from the sun compounded the seriousness of the situation, which could have ended in tragedy had not Jonathan been able to go on ahead and obtain bottles of water from the village. Eight hours later, suffering badly from heat exhaustion and exposure, they finally reached Rakhyut.

To the great relief of the remaining team members, Michaela, Warren, and Bill, a fishing boat arranged by Noel arrived the next morning to collect them and the supplies. The prospect of being forced to hike out with so much heavy equipment was not an appealing one, and no boat ever seemed so welcome. Carrying out the team's gear onto the beach, we discovered that we had had visitors during the past night. Two sets of very large feline pawprints stretched along the beach from a lynx, now almost extinct, or perhaps it was the "tiger" that locals had mentioned on an earlier visit. We left the site by boat and were met in Rakhyut by Noel and Jonathan, who had mostly recovered from their adventure the previous day. We all then drove up onto the plateau and followed the road as it paralleled Wadi Sayq through the Qamar mountains toward the Yemen border. This final project was to determine more clearly the extent of the coppery-red flint deposits that lay thickly upon the ground in places for many miles and to see sections of the interior wadi. In one place we were able to climb down a ravine to within a few hundred feet of the wadi floor, which wound between the starkly layered walls of the rounded mountain ranges. There was great beauty in the midst of this spectacular desolation, so oppressively silent and remote as to feel otherworldly. Here and there an occasional shrub or frankincense bush clung to a precarious existence on the bare slopes overlooking the narrow passage below. It was not difficult to imagine a small, prophet-led group making its way through the bottom of this long, hidden valley after years of wandering across the deserts of Arabia and, perhaps on the second or third day, emerging into the lush green valley we had left just hours earlier.

All of us were embarrassed by our worn and dirty appearance when we arrived back in Salalah that evening. It had not been an easy venture, and the air-conditioned hotel was a world removed from the simple and primitive surroundings of our campsite in Wadi Sayq. But we all felt the elation that comes from having achieved something that was both difficult and significant. A scientific evaluation of Wadi Sayq had been started, the first expedition to a place that was arguably a specific Book of Mormon location. It had been a good, solid beginning to the work that needed to be done at this special place.

We began to go our separate ways the next evening. Paolo had already left to Muscat to pursue government contacts of his own, Bill Christiansen and the Reynoldses would leave the following day, and we had a connecting flight to Australia to catch that night.

Only five months later we were back in Oman, leading another team of six in an effort to complete what the April visit had not. Delays and problems had robbed the first team of some valuable time, so this visit was intended to complete all the basic exploration and also see the site immediately following the monsoon rains. From Australia we were accompanied by our sixteen- year-old son, Chad, and by Malcolm Rea, who had long shown interest in our research; in Oman we were joined by Rosalea McIntire and Gary Widdison, LDS Church members working in Muscat. After flying down to Salalah together on Thursday, September 23, 1993, we spent that afternoon examining Khor Rori on the coast about half an hour's drive north of Salalah. Khor Rori was a large sea inlet used as a port in ancient times, and it let us visualize what Khor Kharfot might have been like before it was dammed by the formation of the beach. (See figure 18.)

Figure 18. Prior to the formation of its beach, Khor Kharfot may have been similar in appearance to the Khor Rori inlet east of Salalah, an imprortant trading port anciently.

That evening we were invited by the chairman of the Dhofar Municipality, His Excellency Abdulla Bin Aqeel Ahmed, to a dinner party at his palatial residence on the outskirts of the town. We were welcomed with true Arab hospitality and generosity; incense perfumed the air, and some of the men present had used kohl to accentuate their eyes. The women of the household, even small girls, kept out of sight, but the women in our party were able to meet them later on. The banquet lay spread out on traditional trays on a huge table—a sharp contrast to the simple conditions we knew awaited us at the site the next morning. During the evening, we were interested to learn from Mr. Aqeel that there were plans to possibly pipe water from Khor Kharfot, which he described as the largest local source of freshwater, up to the surrounding villages. It was an important meeting, and the local chief of police joined us later in the evening. The cooperation of these men would be essential in gaining the permission necessary to one day excavate at the site, but for now we were excited to be granted a permit that would allow us to travel through the military checkpoint into the restricted border area.

The following morning, having driven a short distance past the checkpoint, we gazed for the first time down into the very beginning of Wadi Sayq as it started to wind its way toward the coast. Behind us to the west stretched the gently rolling Mahra plateau, over which Lehi must have traveled; before us, the tortured chasms of the Qamar mountains. Entry into Wadi Sayq down the gently sloping sides of the valley here was clearly feasible enough, but almost immediately thereafter the surrounding cliffs became too convex and deep to enter. We had hoped to take our four-wheel-drive vehicle down onto the wadi floor and drive toward the ocean as far as possible, but we were in a sensitive military area, and buildings and other constructions along the road made it impossible to enter. Pillboxes and armed soldiers were everywhere, and we had to content ourselves with hasty photographs of landscapes from within the moving vehicle.

We continued along the plateau toward Dhalqut, the coastal town about five miles west of Khor Kharfot. Within a few miles, we passed from pure desert to lush, grass-covered countryside just as we had on earlier visits to Rakhyut, lying on the other side of Wadi Sayq. At one point a huge bank of fog drifted over us, but we emerged into blinding sunlight and blue skies. Large trees began to appear, and the fields were dotted with small yellow and white flowers. Closer to the coast and almost on the edge of Wadi Sayq, we were led by local villagers along a narrow track that took us through the trees to the very mountain edge overlooking Kharfot, a beautiful panorama in the afternoon sun. The descent to this point, so close to Kharfot, was so gentle and the views out over the ocean so impressive that we asked ourselves if Lehi could have entered Wadi Sayq here, much closer to the coast. Perhaps, but the final cliffside descent into the valley would still have been difficult.

As we left the area, we met Salim. He was an older man with the dignified, fine-boned features of the mountain people and the natural bearing of a sheikh, which, it turned out, he was. We gave Salim a lift down to Dhalqut, where he showed us a suitable place to camp overlooking the sea. Near here he pointed out what must surely be the largest tree in all of Arabia, an African import that we measured at more than forty feet in circumference.

In all of our traveling and exploring, it seemed that always someone special was there to assist. On this trip it was Salim. Instinctively he seemed to understand what we needed to do and threw the full weight of his influence into whatever was needed. The next morning, after we finished exploring the luxuriant countryside west of Dhalqut, he arranged a boat that took Michaela, Rosalea, and Malcolm to Kharfot, stopping offshore to fish for a short time. The sea was alive with fish of all sizes, and, as if to remind us of the sea's bounty, the Omanis scooped up buckets of tightly packed sardines being corralled into a silver circle by larger fish in a feeding frenzy below the surface. The locals rarely ate sardines but used them as bait and for feeding their cattle and camels. Michaela and the others were thrilled to discover that reports of the fishing offshore had not been exaggerated. The fish almost leaped into the boat, and they kept several handlines busy pulling in three-foot-long mackerels and other fish, several of which ended up as part of the evening meal. We had come prepared with cooking foil but discovered that the local method was easier and also retained the natural juices of the fish—chunks of fish were simply boiled in seawater. There was, for a short time, a super-abundance of fish, and from time to time locals also invited us to join them for a meal, sometimes including camel milk and yogurt. Always there was rice, expertly cooked and eaten with onions and fish or goat's meat. Landing on the beach, it was important in view of Salim's standing in the community that he carry the heaviest load of equipment ashore and be the first to reach the campsite. We took with us also a bag of food and drinks that Salim had earlier presented to us as a gift.

In the meantime, Warren, Gary, and Chad returned to the checkpoint in the mountains. On one of the escarpments looking out over the valley, several miles from its beginnings, they made a final attempt to climb down the three thousand feet or so of nearly vertical rock slopes to the base of the valley. For several hours the three of them descended carefully, zigzagging under a hot sun in order to get lower. Finally, when it seemed they could go no lower, they stored their equipment in the shade of a rock ledge, and Warren, with only a camera around his neck, half crawled, half slid down the remaining few hundred feet of gullies to a ledge only ten feet above the floor of Wadi Sayq. Unable to get lower, Gary and Chad tried to throw bottles of water down to him, but each smashed uselessly on the rocks.

It was Warren's seventh visit to Oman, and reaching the actual base of the interior valley at last proved to be an emotional moment for him. Over this narrow, boulder-covered passage, almost devoid of vegetation and enclosed between towering limestone walls, Lehi and his group had probably passed just a day or so before emerging at the place they called Bountiful. Nothing moved. The silence was almost overwhelming. The stark, lifeless landscape gave no hint whatever of the lush vegetation just a few miles farther on. With dehydration a real danger, there was time only to take some photographs and then begin the difficult climb back up to the others.

Like clockwork, the boat arranged by Salim arrived the next morning at Rakhyut and carried the three climbers back to the rest of the team at Khor Kharfot. Base camp had once again been set up in the concrete shelter near the beach. With the exploration of the border area and the interior completed, the team now focused on the western plateau and its enigmatic rock structures. Up the old foot trail leading from the beach we carried an electronic metal detector and a heavy-duty metal auger, the latter designed to extract—corkscrew fashion—a five-foot-long soil core that we hoped would reveal something of the past when analyzed back in the United States. The monsoon rains had ceased only a week or so earlier, and lush vegetation now covered everything in a stunning contrast to the dryness of April. We were keen students of the Book of Mormon, not archaeologists or geologists, but there was plenty to occupy each of us for the next six days. Michaela began clearing vegetation around the main structure, which was built against a large, straight rock face and then, with Chad, began measuring it and preparing a detailed plan of the ruins. Exposing some of the walls to sunlight showed us that these structures, whatever they were, must have looked impressive when first built, as the limestone was milky white, turning dark gray only after long periods of exposure to the elements. Rosalea and Malcolm began the long task of systematically searching for metal with the detector, covering first the entire area near the main structure and then cross-sections of selected areas lower on the plateau.

To Gary fell the most arduous job—trying to coax the auger deep enough into the soil to get a proper sample. By the end of the first afternoon, it was obvious that the soil in this whole area lay only inches deep over solid rock, and no matter how hard we tried, the auger would go no farther than about a foot. Eventually we settled on a soil core taken on the edge of the coastal valley near the springs; we hoped it would tell us something of the sea inlet.

Most of the team also made a full day's trek into the interior from the coast, clambering over the huge boulders marking the point where Wadi Kharfot intersects Wadi Sayq. Here, Malcolm's previous hiking experience and Rosalea's inexhaustible fund of stories proved valuable in helping us enjoy and appreciate what we were seeing. However, the vegetation became a bigger obstacle to travel on foot than the actual terrain (which was probably smoother 2,600 monsoon floods ago); we reflected that Lehi and Nephi and their party might have appreciated their long-legged camels while passing through such dense undergrowth. An interesting and significant fact emerged during this exploration—altimeter readings showed that the interior valley was between thirty and fifty feet below sea level, rising gradually to sea level only at a point more than a mile inland from the present beach. Clearly, the sea inlet had probably extended much farther than we had thought originally.

Chad made his major contribution to the expedition during our lagoon project on our last full day at Kharfot. We wanted to understand the freshwater lagoon better (was it contaminated by the sea?) and, lacking any other volunteers, Chad was assigned to check the depth of the lagoon and to take a sample of water. We did this by floating him out onto the lagoon on an inflatable mattress with a long pole, a sample container, and a shorter stick to fend off the swimming cobras and man-eating pythons that locals assured us inhabited the reeds surrounding the water. A long rope tied around one of his ankles further guaranteed his speedy exit from the water if that was judged necessary by his sharp-eyed fellow team members watching from the safety of the beach. No snakes attacked, and Chad returned with the news that the lagoon averaged six to eight feet in depth and was home to some quite large fish. When the water was analyzed, it had only 0.15 percent salt content—probably from salt spray and occasional rogue waves crossing the beach in storms.

We made an attempt at infrared photography as the visit ended. Variations in the color of the vegetation invisible to the eye can often disclose buried features and changes to the underlying soil, and we hoped that some indication of the sea inlet might result. In April, logistics made it impossible to use the heat-sensitive film we had carried carefully from Australia, and on this visit, too, it proved difficult to protect the film from the heat. However, we made a series of four photographic sequences at various points in the coastal valley and returned them for analysis.

On the last morning, Salim accompanied us on the second boat that ferried us back to our waiting vehicle at Rakhyut and rode with us up to one of the villages in the hills above. His help had been valuable and unstinting, and everything about him epitomized the best that the people of Arabia can offer. It had been, we felt, a worthwhile effort, and each member of the team had made a real contribution to the work done. Each had brought his or her insights to add to the rich tapestry of the picture we now had of Nephi's Bountiful. All of the team flew back to Muscat together that evening knowing that all of the basic exploratory tasks were now complete and that a basis for eventual excavation had been laid.

What can be said now in conclusion from both expeditions? We can state that everything that has been found at this site has been confirmatory and tends to strengthen our belief that Khor Kharfot/Wadi Sayq is the Bountiful Nephi spoke of. Aside from metal ore (for which no qualified person has yet sought), it meets all of the scriptural criteria exceptionally well. We have found no inconsistencies or problems to cast doubt upon the account that Nephi recorded.

We can now go further and state that the two 1993 visits have, in their turn, begun to shed additional light on the Nephite experience at Bountiful. Nowhere is this more true than in the sea-inlet concept that must now be considered certain. At some point in the past, Kharfot was probably a good-sized port, overlooked by the fort that gave rise to its name and that may now be represented by the large mound ruin on the east side of the bay. Knowing that this place was once an inlet of considerable size allows us to propose how a sizable ship could have been constructed close to the ocean despite the violent storms and high seas of one or more monsoons. Building the vessel on or near the slightly raised west side of the bay would have provided the required shelter and still allowed it to be launched via the inlet into the open sea. Additionally, knowing that the ocean extended even closer to timber trees and also to the likely place of settlement on the plateau than it now does helps us to view the place as even more attractive and suitable than it now appears.

We have no data yet to indicate how long the present beach has been in existence, but it must predate the 1895 voyage along the coast by Theodore Bent and his wife. Judging from their detailed description of the coast and its ports, Kharfot would certainly have rated a mention had it then been an inlet and port, [^1] but they do not mention the place.

Archaeological data indicates that the site has been occupied at various periods over the past several thousand years, and, pending proper excavation, it appears that the earliest settlement was located on the small western plateau. [^2] Significantly, this is also the location other factors indicate is the most likely encampment for the Lehites. As we reexamined what Nephi said about the place, we were struck by the fact that after mentioning that he went "up into the mountain" (1 Nephi 17:7), he never again refers to going "up" to converse with the Lord, only that he went "into" the mount (18:1-3). Then, in relation to the ship, he uses the expression "down" four times (18:5, 6, 8), all of which makes perfect sense if the group moved from the seashore up onto the western plateau, partway up the mount, at the time Nephi began receiving his instructions from the Lord. From there, of course, it was always "down into" the ship. It remains possible, of course, that going "down into" may simply indicate that the ship had decks, or perhaps both explanations are correct.

Understanding that settlement has been intermittent here allows us to resolve the seeming paradox of such a fertile and attractive place likely having no local population during Lehi's sojourn there. The unique combination of climate and geographic isolation makes it entirely feasible, even likely, that Kharfot may have been uninhabited during the brief years of Lehi's time there and yet have provided vacant housing or at least abundant building materials. At this early stage in our understanding of the history of the site, we cannot be sure of the periods in which Kharfot has been inhabited since the day when Nephi's ship put out into the open sea. But, bearing in mind the factors that make this place unique on the Arabian coastline, it is perhaps unsurprising that the possibility has now been raised that the Bountiful site may have later played an important role in the history of the incense trade. Several of the early accounts refer to the port of "Moscha" as the primary port for the sea transportation of Dhofari incense. [^3] Although Khor Rori, east of Salalah, has often been identified as Moscha, there are strong epigraphic reasons for doubting this and, additionally, the Periplus places Moscha some distance west of Khor Rori or closer to the general area of Khor Kharfot. Although questions remain, the extensive ruins at Kharfot and the attractiveness of its inlet-port have drawn attention to the possibility that Moscha may have been just such a place. [^4]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Theodore Bent, Geographical Journal, vol. VI, August 1895.
[^2] Report by Dr. Paolo M. Costa to F.A.R.M.S, May 1993, presented July 1993 at the Arabian Seminar in London and published in the Proceedings for that seminar, p. 27-33 and analysis of settlement data in report to F.A.R.M.S. by Warren and Michaela Aston, July 1993.
[^3] The Periplus of the Erythraean Sea and Claudius Ptolemaeus (Ptolemy). If the measurements of the Periplus are correct, then Moscha should lie about 40 miles west of Salalah.
[^4] Personal communication to the authors from Nigel Groom, March 1994.
