Zulma sat on one of the church benches and smoothed the skirt of her school uniform. Colored light shone through the stained-glass windows, and a cross stood at the front of the chapel. Zulma went to a church school, so she went to worship services twice a day with the other students. Zulma liked her church. She loved Jesus and loved to learn about Him.

She sat quietly as the priest began to talk. But today something felt different. Suddenly a new thought came into her mind and heart: There is more truth out there.

Zulma scrunched her eyebrows. More truth? What did that mean?

The thought came again. There is more truth.

Zulma closed her eyes and focused on what she was feeling. She had learned lots of good things at church. But now she wondered if something was missing. Maybe there was more that God wanted her to know. But how could she find it?

Later she talked to her older brother, Alberto, about her thoughts.

“You think there’s more truth out there?” Alberto asked.

Zulma nodded. “I want to learn about other churches,” she said.

“OK,” Alberto replied. “I’ll go with you!”

For several years, Zulma and Alberto visited different churches. After one church service, Alberto said, “That church taught good things.”

Zulma agreed, but they still felt like something was missing, so they kept searching.

One day Alberto raced up the steps to their house. “I found the church we’re looking for!” Alberto said. He gave Zulma a big hug.

Zulma’s eyes got wide. “Where? How?”

“My friend met some missionaries from The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints,” Alberto said. “I listened to them, and I believe what they taught!”

Zulma and Alberto were so happy that they danced all around the house. But then Zulma got some bad news. Mamá didn’t want her to meet with the missionaries. “You’re only 12,” Mamá said. “You’re too young.”

Since Alberto was older, he was allowed to keep meeting with the missionaries. A few weeks later, he was baptized.

Zulma kept asking Mamá again and again if she could learn from the missionaries. Finally, Mamá said yes.

When the missionaries taught Zulma, she felt warm in her heart. One of the missionaries had a hard time speaking Spanish, but it didn’t matter. What mattered was how good Zulma felt. When she learned about Joseph Smith and the Book of Mormon, she knew she had found the truth she was looking for!

Zulma wanted to be baptized. But what would Mamá say? Zulma was so happy when Mamá said yes! On the day of her baptism, Zulma dressed all in white. She knew God loved her. She knew He knew her. And she knew that He had helped her find His restored Church!
