Terrance D. Olson, R. Lanier Britsch, Counseling: A Guide to Helping Others, vol. 2 ( 1985)

Preface

We have been gratified with the warm acceptance Counseling: A Guide to Helping Others, Volume 2 has received. It is evident that it has filled a need for information among individuals who do lay counseling. Professionals, too, have expressed confidence in its usefulness. And many readers have used it as a self-help manual.

Even before we sent the first volume to Deseret Book for editing and publication, we were aware of a number of significant omissions. Before the volume was in print we began inviting potential authors to write the chapters that are included in this book. We have maintained the same editorial philosophy in this volume as in volume 1. It is not necessary to read volume 1 to benefit from the chapters contained herein. Each chapter is independent of all others. You may begin reading in any chapter and gain from the experience.

Each chapter is written by a Latter-day Saint scholar or therapist who is thoroughly familiar with his subject. We have made every effort to eliminate jargon and specialized words. Our goal has been to present up-to-date professional concepts in lay terms. We believe that knowledge is a blessing and that it contributes to inspiration.

Because all of our authors are committed Latter-day Saints, these books reflect certain assumptions regarding the nature of man and his ability to change that similar secular books do not. We believe that people have the ability to determine their own mental attitudes, and that they have the

power within them to change, to grow, to seek, and to find those ideas and patterns of behavior that can bring peace and happiness. The counselor, trained or lay, can only suggest and encourage and set the appropriate example. People themselves must create the mental, spiritual, and physical environments that can bring them to the level of joy and the absence of remorse that they desire.

Happiness is difficult to define. Some people see it more as the absence of negative things than as a positive state of being. But joy and happiness can also be seen in a positive sense, of having appropriate attitudes toward life and of enjoying life's experiences as they occur.

Happy people have many attitudes that set them apart from unhappy people. That people should keep the Lord's commandments and repent of their sins is fundamental to being happy. Three attitudes are especially pertinent:

dishonest people. And good men and women sometimes see their children fall away from activity in the Church. It is not fair, we say. Nobody who understands this life and the gospel ever said it would be.

Happy people recognize that life is difficult, uncertain, and unfair. But they do not take offense. Having confronted these realities, they go on their way living life fully. Because they know the realities of life and have resolved the difficult issues, they are free to help others instead of brooding about their own problems. Happy people invariably give of themselves in the service of others.

As editors we express gratitude to a group of happy people, the authors who so generously contributed the* time, talents, knowledge, and training to these books. We realize that their contributions have been made in a spirit of service to the members of the Church and also as a manifestation of personal friendship to us. The authors have done a great service for those among us who are troubled and who seek sound direction for their lives.

We also thank the many fine people who have worked with us at Deseret Book. We extend special gratitude to Jack Lyon, who edited these volumes. He has handled his labors with competence, skill, and a warm spirit. We also thank the word-processing technicians who have processed parts of these manuscripts, especially those who serve in the Faculty Support Center of the College of Family, Home, and Social Sciences at Brigham Young University. Finally, we again thank our wives and families who have encouraged and supported our efforts.

As with volume 1, the contents of the various chapters are the thoughts and contributions of the various authors, but we would not have included them if we did not agree with their contents.
