Terrance D. Olson, R. Lanier Britsch, Counseling: A Guide to Helping Others, vol. 2 ( 1985)

2

Recognizing Mental Disorders

David G. Weight

All societies have been faced with the problem of how to help those with mental disorders. In our society about 15 percent of the population experience serious emotional problems each year. It might seem that these disorders could be easily recognized, but diagnosing a mental disorder is much more complex than it appears. Some symptoms are extreme, as in the case of someone who believes he is commanded by God to kill atheists. But what about the person who believes that recent storm damage shows that God is upset with new laws passed by the city council? Or, consider the person who washes his hands unusually often because he is concerned about shaking hands with others because they might have been recently inoculated against smallpox and be infectious.

What is the difference between those who are eccentric and yet function well in society, and those who are actually a threat to their own or others' well-being? And what about behaviors that are viewed as abnormal in one culture but as reasonable in another?

Consider these observations by Emily Dickinson:

Much madness is divinest sense To a discerning eye; Much sense the starkest madness, 'Tis the majority In this as all, prevails. Assent, and you are sane: Demur,—you're straightway dangerous And handled with a chain.

To complicate matters, we also encounter those who are viewed as normal and successful and yet who feel miserable and confused.

Defining Disorders

A mental disorder is not a disease, but rather a way of thinking or behaving due to a complex set of causes, including heredity, environment, traumatic experiences, and learned reactions to the stresses of life.

The degree of a person's mental health can be judged by his appearance, behavior, thinking, mood, and perception. If he does not have extreme problems in these areas, he is probably adapting well to life.

Appearance

Although appearance and grooming vary widely among normal people, a person's appearance can give some clue to his mental health. Someone who pays little attention to his appearance maybe overly preoccupied with his own thoughts and oblivious to the social needs of others. This may indicate a mental disorder. This is especially true when basic personal hygiene is ignored by a person of normal intelligence. Bizarre dress often indicates unusual thinking patterns as well.

If you are counseling someone you think may have a mental disorder, look for signs of tension and anxiety or depression. Does he seem angry or frightened, or is he demanding and hostile? Pay attention to his eyes. Does he look around nervously or avoid eye contact? Does he stare at you or at something else? Does he seem to look through you rather than at you? Any of these may indicate some mental problem.

Behavior

Perhaps the most dominant symptom in every mental disorder is anxiety. Does the person show constant nervousness? Has he had periods of panic in which he thought he might pass out or go insane? Other symptoms of anxiety are headaches, dry mouth, ringing in the ears, difficulty in swallowing and breathing, sweaty hands, dizziness, numbness and tingling in the extremities, digestive problems, heart palpitations, and strong fears. Still other indicators include strange posturing or very stereotyped movements. For example, the person might sit rigidly for a long time or repeat a certain behavior almost like a ritual, or he might collect items of little value and use or display them in unusual ways.

Any remarkable changes in a person's behavior may suggest a mental disorder. These include a sudden drop in quality of job performance, schoolwork, ability to concentrate, and self-care, and increasing social isolation. Often people who know the person best will report that he is just "not the same."

Repeated abnormal behavior may indicate a mental disorder. If the person keeps coming back for help with the same problem, his behavior maybe becoming an obsession. This is particularly true if the person keeps talking about the same concerns without realizing that he has already raised the issue. For example, a man may confess that he has had unacceptable sexual feelings toward a certain girl. Then the next week, he may confess that he had unacceptable sexual feelings toward a different girl.

Thinking

Disturbed thinking is sometimes a sign of a mental disorder. The main symptoms of disturbed thinking are delusions, which are incorrect inferences or false beliefs about reality that are devoutly maintained in spite of obvious evidence to the contrary. Delusions are not merely errors in thinking, as in the case of a person who believes he is completely worthless because he has disappointed his family. Delusions are false psychotic beliefs, such as those held by a man who believes his words are not his own but are being spoken by a supernatural source, a woman who believes that an electronic device has been implanted in her head so that her thoughts can be monitored, or someone who believes he need no longer eat since he has no insides.

A more difficult delusion to evaluate is one where the person believes he is being attacked, cheated, persecuted, or conspired against. Since such things do occur from time to time, you must evaluate whether the person's fears are justified. If you tell a person that his fears are delusions, he may become angry or feel rejected. Instead, ask the person for the reasoning behind his fears. Try to understand how the person is thinking, and then determine whether he should see a professional counselor.

Some mentally disturbed people have ideas that do not relate logically to scientific views of cause and effect. An example is a person's belief that his environment has particular and unusual significance for him, as when he thinks that the message of a radio broadcast is meant especially for him.

Related to such ideas is magical thinking In this case the person believes that his thoughts, words, or actions might override normal laws of cause and effect. For example, a woman believes that if she has good spiritual feelings all day, her son will not become ill or have an accident. A man believes that if he were around an emotionally ill person it would cause him to become emotionally ill.

There are also other beliefs that may indicate mental disturbances, such as when someone says, "I sometimes have a feeling of gaining or losing energy when certain people touch me," or "I might cause something to happen just by thinking about it," or "I have felt that there are messages for me in the way things are arranged in store windows."

Some disturbed people may overvalue a certain belief. For example, a person may let the principle of good nutrition dominate his life. He may say, "I know mother seemed to get better after her surgery, but if she had just taken the right vitamins every day, she wouldn't have needed surgery in the first place." He may then begin a campaign to challenge the need for any medicine or physicians.

One of the most typical cases of mental illness is the person who believes that his thoughts are known by others and that external forces can control his thinking. Such a person might falsely believe that he has been possessed by evil spirits or that someone is exercising influence by the use of hypnosis? telepathy, or spiritual control. Since there are very few cases of documented possession by evil spirits, we may assume in most of these cases that the person's thinking is disordered. But such delusions can be very frightening to the person, and he may take extreme measures to protect himself—even to the point of killing someone in order to "appease the external forces." Such a person is potentially dangerous, especially if he fears someone is trying to hurt him.

One example is the person who is struggling with impulses to kill himself and who thinks that others want to kill him or are provoking him to attempt suicide by leaving knives on a kitchen table. (In an extreme case a man actually killed his family and himself to protect them against living in a sinful world.)

Some people who claim extreme religious commitment twist religious principles into destructive beliefs. We occasionally hear of such people "sacrificing" family members or ignoring important responsibilities to follow a "holy grail." Such fanaticism is the opposite of authentic religious commitment. Anyone claiming to receive revelation for others should be held suspect, especially when the information is believed to have relevance for the Church or for large groups of people for whom the person has no particular responsibility. In one such instance, a person received a "revelation" that important new documents were about to be found and that he would recognize these documents and point out to his church how policy should be changed. He believed he had been selected for these "revelations" because there was too much corruption in "high places."

Your initial contact with such a person does not require an on-the-spot solution. You can usually schedule another discussion time. Meanwhile, you can consult with a professional as to the next steps you should take.

Disturbed people often think in a confused fashion and use unclear or illogical reasoning. Such thinking includes bizarre associations of words and meanings. These people may create new words, repeat answers that no longer make sense, or use a word for another word that has a similar sound, even though the meaning is totally different. Here are some quotations from people who think in this manner:

"Parents are the people who raise you. Parents can be anything—material, vegetable, or mineral—that has taught you something. A person can look at a rock and learn something from it, so a rock is a parent."

"I'm not trying to make noise. I'm trying to make sense. If you can make sense out of nonsense, well, have fun. Trying to make sense out of sense. I'm not making sense [cents] anymore. I have to make dollars." [^1]

In response to the question of why people believe in God a disturbed person responded, "Um, I'm making a do in life. Isn't none of that stuff about evolution guiding isn't true anymore now. It all happened a long time ago. It happened in eons and eons and stuff they wouldn't believe in him. The time that Jesus Christ people believe in their thing people believed in Jehovah, God that they didn't believe in Jesus Christ that much." [^2]

Mood

A person's moods may range from manic excitement to the depths of depression. Extremes in mood must be viewed as pathological. The person with borderline manic excitement may be seen merely as very excitable and energetic until the disorder becomes extreme. Symptoms include decreased need for sleep, high levels of energy, and inflated feelings of self-esteem. The person may reduce his food intake, strongly seek out people, demand more sexual activity, talk a lot, and exaggerate past achievements. He may indulge in excessive laughing and joking, buying sprees, or reckless driving.

A severely depressed person may have reduced energy, decreased productivity, sleeping and eating disturbances, reduced sexual interest, and feelings of sadness—even a desire to end his life.

In some cases, the person appears almost devoid of sensation. He seems unable to experience pleasure and does not experience emotions appropriately—he may laugh at the news of a loved one's death, or cry at inappropriate times. If depression lasts for two weeks or more, it is imperative that the person be referred to a professional for treatment—he may be suicidal.

The lay counselor should watch carefully for excessive guilt. Some people have such perfectionistic expectations that they constantly feel guilt where most other people do not. This is of greatest concern when the person responds to guilt through inappropriate behavior or irrational ideas. Examples would be a woman who believes that she has committed an unpardonable sin and that the death of her child is part of her punishment, or a man who feels he is unworthy of his wife and family because he has occasional sexual feelings toward women other than his wife.

Perception

The mentally ill sometimes have disturbed perceptions —they see or hear things that are not really there. Hallucinations are different from illusions, in which the person sees or hears something he perceives to be different than it actually is. A woman who sees a belt lying on the floor and believes she has seen a snake suffers from an illusion. A man who sees snakes wriggling out of someone's mouth is having hallucinations. Hallucinations of sounds most often involve voices but may also include music. An extremely disturbed person might report hearing two or more voices in conversation. Sometimes these voices are frightening. One woman reported hearing a running commentary on her "sins."

The person who has visual hallucinations has a greater probability of having organic causes for his hallucinations than psychological ones.

It is not unusual for people who have undergone open-heart surgery to have a brief period of perceptual changes. They often report visual hallucinations and may even have delusions that nurses and doctors are trying to kill them. This is usually the result of temporary brain changes and usually clears up spontaneously in a few days.

People having hallucinations should definitely be referred to a professional for evaluation.

Although many people are aware of their mental problems, others deny their difficulties and hold to their disordered beliefs. This is an important consideration when making referrals. The person who does not recognize his difficulties can become angry and resist attempts to help him. This is particularly true of those who fear that they will be abused or taken advantage of. You should encourage the person to discuss his own perceptions of his problems. This may help him come to the point where he will ask for help.

Incidentally, the fact that people with severe mental disorders often have extreme religious views does not mean that religion has caused their disorder. When a person begins to have unusual internal experiences, such as seeing things or hearing voices, do not immediately assume that these are supernatural experiences. This does not deny the existence of legitimate religious experience, but it does suggest the importance of making proper diagnosis of the causes of unusual behaviors and then taking appropriate action.

Recognizing Mental Disorders

About the Author

Dr. David G. Weight, professor of psychology at Brigham Young University, received his bachelor's and master's degrees from that institution and his Ph.D. from the University of Washington. A clinical psychologist, Dr. Weight has had broad experience in therapeutic work in Washington and Utah. He is a consultant to Utah Valley Regional Medical Center Mental Health Services and a large school district. He supervises a department of the BYU Comprehensive Clinic. Professor Weight has written a number of professional articles. In addition to his professional activities, he has been a member of the board of education of the Provo School District.

In the Church, Dr. Weight has served as a missionary, bishop, high counselor, and Young Men's president.

He and his wife, Shauna, are the parents of five children.

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (Washington, D.C.: American Psychiatric Association, 1980), pp. 361, 355.
[^2] 2. Ibid., p. 362.
