Terrance D. Olson, R. Lanier Britsch, Counseling: A Guide to Helping Others, vol. 2 ( 1985)

4

Addictive Behavior

Brent Q. Hafen and Kathryn J. Frandsen

Addiction. It's an emotionally charged word that brings visions of darkened alleys, empty whiskey bottles strewn in a gutter, a desperate soul with his fingers wrapped tightly around a bundle of fine white powder. It brings to mind the alcoholic, the junkie—those who have lost control, surrendered to chemicals.

Strictly speaking, scientific authorities haven't arrived at a concrete definition of addiction. As a word, it stems from the Latin addicere, meaning to bind a person over to one thing or another. One thing we do know for a certainty: it is not limited to the craving of alcohol or drugs. There are many kinds of addictions, and they manifest themselves in many kinds of behavior.

Some people are addicted to food—or, more correctly, to eating. They eat to relieve boredom, frustration, anger, unhappiness, loneliness, jealousy, and hatred—or to reward themselves for some special achievement. They eat to console themselves in times of grief. They eat to inspire themselves. They reward themselves emotionally by eating.

Other people are addicted to watching television. Instead of talking or reading or participating in athletics, they watch television. Television, in fact, becomes a way of escaping into a life they deem more pleasurable. It's easy to forget their worries and frustrations by identifying with a fleeting character who appears every Thursday or Friday night. Deprived of the experience, they become distracted, jittery, or hypnotic—unable, really, to function normally in the world around them.

Still others are addicted to gambling—not to winning money, but to the thrill associated with the roll of the dice, the spin of the wheel, or the horses pounding down the home stretch, all the while knowing that their lives (or fortunes) are on the line. Gambling—taking a risk—becomes an exciting prospect that, much like eating or watching television, relieves boredom, soothes unhappiness, and allows an escape into another, more desirable world. The addiction to gambling, one of the fastest growing addictions in the nation, has recently been defined as a disease by a chain of self-help groups called "Gamblers Anonymous," fashioned after the popular Alcoholics Anonymous.

A closely related addiction is the addiction to risk: not only gambling, but literally placing one's life in danger. A "risk addict" gains actual arousal or excitement from placing himself in danger—scaling a sheer rock cliff with a small pick hammer, catapulting from an airplane and waiting until the last second to release the parachute, heading into a hairpin curve at seventy miles an hour.

Some become addicted to crime or violence, gaining arousal from the violation of other people or the destruction of other people's property. Some become addicted to sex, suffering an overwhelming obsession with pornography, sexual fantasizing, sexual paraphernalia, or promiscuous behavior. Still others become addicted to people: while they have difficulty with one-on-one relationships, they thrive on group socialization. Scarcely a night goes by without a visit to a bar, private club, or party.

Some addictions don't appear to be harmful on the surface, but they are actually good habits gone awry. Consider exercise, for example a person may take the good habit of exercising three times a week to excess until it becomes a twice-daily ritual during which he avoids dealing with his problems. Deprived of his exercise for even a brief time, he becomes hostile and angry; he gradually but steadily loses the ability to view things in perspective.

Similar is the "workaholic," the person who drives himself nearly to the point of extinction with his hard work. He may spend fifteen hours a day at the office, bring work home, stay up until the wee hours agonizing over a problem, and even creep into the office on weekends. He scarcely admits he has a family, or that his family may have problems that need his attention. He neglects home, friends, and personal life—but who can fault him? He's usually a success in business and is rewarded profusely for his dedication and loyalty to his job.

Because addiction can take any of these—and many other—forms, it is critical to separate it from the most common manifestation of alcohol or drug abuse. It is essential to understand how addiction (regardless of its manifestation) occurs. It is critical that we be able to determine when addiction exists. And it is helpful to list the characteristics of addiction and of those who are addicted or who are most prone to become addicted. If we are to succeed in making a difference, we need to understand how to help people change addictions into healthy habits—and how to prevent addiction from occurring in the first place.

Factors Leading to Addiction

Why does addiction occur? There are almost as many theories about what leads to addiction as there are theorists —almost everything has been blamed, from the overbearing mother to the arrangement of chemical transmissions in the brain. Many of them make sense, while others seem less rational.

Some of the major thoughts on how or why addiction occurs include the following:

The behavior is reinforced. Before an addiction can occur, the behavior must be reinforced in some way—usually by creating pleasure. The workaholic is reinforced because he gains honor and recognition from his superiors at the office. The person addicted to chocolate enjoys the taste. The Russian roulette player thrills to the arousal associated with the risk.

The addiction is an attempt to meet basic needs. Human growth and developmental psychologist Abraham Maslow described human needs as a pyramid. At its base are the most basic needs the need for food and water in order to survive, for example. At its pinnacle is the highest level of human need, the need to become the best you possibly can (termed self-actualization by Maslow). Called "the hierarchy of human needs," Maslow's model describes five levels of need that must be met:

The Addiction relieves stress. Life without some kind of stress would be worthless, but when stress becomes overwhelming, it can be destructive. Some people are successful in dealing with stress; others try to escape by denying the problem or somehow running away from it. Addictive behavior is often a way to run from problems, to hide from problems, or to deny that problems exist. The workaholic whose teenage son is failing in school can blissfully escape the grueling problem of having to work with his son: after all, he's so busy at the office that he doesn't have time for family problems.

The addiction results from peer pressure. At various stages in our lives, particularly during adolescence, we are especially vulnerable to peer pressure the subtle or overt influences exerted by people our own age, in similar circumstances, or simply close to us physically or emotionally. Peer pressure can not only influence the addiction to begin with, but it can help determine its extent.

The addiction can exist within our value system. Our own value system, including the behaviors we consider acceptable, are typical sources of many addictions. We have beliefs about what is right or wrong. If our socioeconomic position, religious beliefs, education, traditions, and role expectations do not allow shooting heroin, then we will probably not develop such an addiction. However, we may become addicted to otherwise acceptable behaviors. Overeating, oversleeping, compulsive gambling, or obsessive television watching may become an addiction.

Serious physical illness is present. Serious physical illness especially chronic or terminal illness can create for an individual a situation much like a steel trap: he envisions that he is going to be held prisoner forever, with no rational way out. To escape from the stress of the situation, he may turn to addiction. In some cases, the addiction may provide an escape from pain or disfigurement.

There is pressure to perform or succeed. One of the most powerful factors leading to addiction may be the pressure to perform or succeed; the person who feels he just can't measure up might try to escape into an addiction. Within his own value system, he now has an excuse for his failure, which somehow makes it more acceptable.

The person hates himself A person who actually comes to hate himself may seek an addiction as a subconscious way of punishing himself. The addiction may seriously hamper his ability to cope with life, but he reasons that he doesn't deserve any better anyway. With that rationalization, the addiction seems defensible.

There may be a genetic link. At least a few prominent researchers believe there may be genetic determination of those who are susceptible to addiction, just as some believe that susceptibility to cancer may be genetically determined. This genetic makeup does not guarantee addiction, they say, but does determine whether a person will become addicted as a result of repeated reinforced behavior. Some even say that a true addict must have an abnormal chromosome- and without it, the person will never be truly addicted.

Addiction may be due to varying brain activity. Closely related to the genetic theory is one that says a person is highly susceptible to an addiction if messages are transmitted in his brain with varying intensity. When nerve transmissions occur with unusual speed in certain parts of the brain, researchers say, the feeling linked to an addictive behavior may be much more intense than usual, leading to the important reinforcement required to establish addiction.

Society allows addiction. While peers may pressure a person into addictive behavior, society contributes by allowing it—in other words, we have evolved into a society that has become much more lenient. Gone are the strictures that bound us even half a century ago; the byword is "do your own thing," and few people are persecuted for addictive behavior until it becomes clearly destructive (such as severe alcoholism). Medicine and psychiatry have become much more accepting; the media views addictions of all kinds as part of life.

Determining When Addiction Exists

Taking into consideration the many factors that can lead to addiction, it is extremely difficult to always determine exactly when addiction exists. When does a person cross the fragile line between habit and addiction? When does an activity go from being considered normal to being considered too much?

The distinction are difficult to draw, but some signs can help:

The Characteristics of Addiction

Using the criteria listed above, it is possible for a lay counselor to determine when an addiction exists. Another important consideration is to determine what distinguishes a healthy habit from an addictive behavior.

Some of the signs of a healthy habit include:

Some of the signs of addictive behavior include:

By stubbornly clinging to addictive behavior, the person creates all kinds of problems for himself. His health may be compromised, as in an addiction to alcohol, drugs, or eating. He may no longer be able to function properly, and other aspects of his life fall into neglect, sometimes seriously compromising his status within the family or the community. His relationships with his spouse, other family members, and friends may be compromised. He may even experience serious social problems, such as involvement in criminal activity or problems with creditors.

Healthy habits, on the other hand, enhance life. They increase the ability to function normally, and they usually promote health. As a result of healthy habits, a person is better able to communicate and relate to friends and members of his family; a person whose habits are healthy is not likely to experience serious social problems, because his awareness is acute and his priorities are not with the habit to the detriment of other things.

Characteristics of Addicted People

In any case of addiction, the real factor is not the substance or the behavior, but the person himself. Pulling the handle on the slot machine may be a passing fancy for one person and an overwhelming compulsion for another. Eating sugary sweets may be an occasional treat for one person and an almost hourly ritual for another.

Regardless of the addiction, an addicted person shares certain traits and characteristics with other addicted people.

One of the most common and overwhelming of these traits is the fact that the addicted person does not have the confidence to face life without the addictive behavior. He may simply feel as though he can't go on without the addictive behavior, or he may actually feel that life wouldn't be worth living if he were denied the chance to indulge himself with the addiction. A woman who was addicted to drinking cola drinks was told she had become diabetic and that she would need to severely limit her consumption of soft drinks. She literally decided that life was not worth living if she could not have the cola—and died at the age of twenty-five from complications of diabetes, still drinking twelve to fourteen cola drinks a day. Clearly, she may not have consciously wished to be dead, but her addictive behavior led to her death.

The addicted person is generally negative. Instead of anticipating joy and pleasure, he fears pain, failure, and disappointment. A nonaddicted person looks forward to life's experiences for the joy and fulfillment they bring; an addicted person has convinced himself that life holds plenty to be anxious and unhappy about and little to look forward to.

The addicted person suffers from all kinds of fear—fear of interaction with others, fear he may not perform well on the job, fear he may fail at school, fear he may not be a suitable husband or father. By constant fears and worries, he escapes into the addictive behavior, however falsely, to gain some reassurance that is never forthcoming.

Some addicted persons believe they have no control over what happens to them. They think that their addictive behavior and the substances associated with it are more powerful than they are, and that they are mere victims with no ability to refuse or overcome.

The addicted person regards life itself as a burden— something he can't cope with or handle. The nonaddicted person regards life as a pleasurable, fulfilling challenge and regards life's problems as temporary hurdles that can be overcome with work and effort. The only way the addicted person sees to overcome life's problems is to escape them.

The addicted person feels extremely dependent—either on other people or on addictive substances or behaviors. He feels incapable of making an acceptable life-style for himself free of the addictive behavior. He views the addictive behavior as inevitable—something he can't (or won't) give up or escape.

The addicted person often feels emotionally detached from other people, and, when other people stand in the way of the addictive behavior, he may view them as mere objects to be manipulated or exploited. He may even be able. to relate somewhat normally to others until it comes to the addictive behavior, and then he may lose the ability to view others with rationality. He may even seek out others who share his addiction.

Finally, the addicted person welcomes the control that the addiction places over him; he feels some kind of safety and reassurance in submitting himself to it. If he is deprived of that chance to submit, he feels fearful and incapable of going on.

Characteristics of Addiction-Prone People

Because we have been able to identify common characteristics of addicted people, we have been able to a large degree to identify those who are prone to becoming addicted. Consider the following list. It is only suggestive of traits people may have developed that allow them to be more addiction-prone than fully healthy people.

Addiction-prone people:

Latter-day Saint lay counselors should remember that all people have their agency to choose what they will do and be. That certain people have personality traits that match those listed above in no way determines their future behavior. The role of the lay counselor is to help an addicted person recognize that he has the freedom and the power to change his thoughts and his behavior.

How to Help Addicted People Change

Addicted people can be helped to change. Some people are able to cure themselves of addictions. You've probably heard stories of or know someone who just decided to stop smoking and did it; who decided to stop overeating and did it; who decided to stop gambling and just walked away. For the vast majority of addicted people, however, self-help just isn't enough. Usually, the problems that led to the addiction to begin with are overwhelming, and until they are gone or the person feels strong enough to confront them, the addictive behavior will persist. In many cases, a person may simply trade one addictive behavior for another—escaping into the fantasy world of television instead of the fantasy world of drugs, for example. Before you make any attempts to help another person, you need to recognize certain realities that accompany addictive behavior:

Those who are trying to break the habits of smoking, chewing tobacco, drinking alcoholic beverages, drinking coffee or tea, or abusing drugs should be encouraged to stay close to the Lord through prayer and regular Church activity. Probably they will feel unworthy, but they must learn to rely on the powers of heaven. Help them to remember the great blessings that can come from overcoming their addiction.

About the Authors

Dr. Brent Q. Hafen, professor of health sciences at Brigham Young University, received his bachelor's and master's degrees from the University of Utah and his Ph.D. degree in health sciences from Southern Illinois University. A member of numerous professional associations, he has been a member of the advisory board of the Utah State Division of Alcoholism and Drugs.

A regular speaker at professional training seminars and workshops, Dr. Hafen is also the author, co-author, or editor of many books and manuals and as many articles and workbooks.

Dr. Hafen has served as a counselor in the Provo North Stake presidency. His previous Church callings include bishop, bishop's counselor, member of branch presidencies, member of a stake mission presidency, and high councilor.

He and his wife, Sylvia, are the parents of seven children.

Kathryn J. Frandsen, press secretary for Congressman Howard C. Nielson and writing colleague of Dr. Hafen, has studied at Brigham Young University. She has worked as an editor and editorial writer for four publications, including the Ensign and BYU Today, and she has co-authored a number of books. She is an active Church worker.

She and her husband, Cullen, are the parents of two children.
