Terrance D. Olson, R. Lanier Britsch, Counseling: A Guide to Helping Others, vol. 2 ( 1985)

5

Drug Behavior

Brent Q. Hafen and Kathryn J. Frandsen

Seventeen-year-old Greg is exhausted. The school year is drawing to a close, and he feels a frantic pressure to perform well on exams—after all, he wants desperately to get the highest grade-point average possible so he can get into the college of his choice. His dream is to become a lawyer, and he needs all the help he can get. He thrusts his hand into his pocket; the small capsules he fingers are his key to mustering the energy to get through the next three weeks.

Robin was functioning on less than three hours of sleep. The twins had spent a fretful night, and throughout the long hours of the day they had been fussy and demanding. Between changing diapers and spooning baby food into their mouths, she has tried to keep the main floor clean and get a good start on dinner. The guests would be arriving in two hours, and she was hopelessly behind. Robin headed for the medicine cabinet; she needed something to calm herself down.

Everything at the office seemed to be caving in, and Bill didn't know which way to turn. Two of the employees he supervised were causing problems and demanding too much of his time. With a busy period drawing near, the work was piling up, and there didn't seem to be enough hours in the day. Right at the worst time, the boss demanded that he take a few trips—and he knew he'd fall even further behind. He knew he shouldn't stop in at the club for those drinks after work each night, but it became so difficult for him to relax at home that he felt he really needed them.

Greg, Robin, and Bill have something in common—they all have a drug problem. A person who enjoys an occasional drink with friends doesn't necessarily have a drug problem; a woman who uses a sleeping aid very infrequently doesn't have a drug problem. But people who come to depend on drugs (including alcohol) to help them "get through the day" have a drug problem.

And it's a problem that's growing rapidly in the United States today.

The Extent of the Drug Problem

Falling under the category of "drug" is a variety of substances that can sometimes be used legally and that can be obtained with a doctor's prescription in a pharmacy. Some "drugs of abuse" can even be purchased over the counter by anyone with the money to do it. Drug abuse doesn't always involve substances that are bought from a street seller or obtained in some other illicit way.

In order to understand the extent of the drug problem, it's important to understand the wide variety of drugs that can be involved.

Depressants

As the name implies, depressants are drugs that depress the central nervous system—in other words, they slow down circulation, slow down breathing, and make you sleepy. Common depressants include tranquilizers, like Valium; barbiturates, like Seconal; alcohol; and methaqualone (Quaalude).

Tranquilizers—such as Valium and Librium—are the most commonly prescribed drugs in the United States; at one point, Valium was used more frequently than aspirin by women in this country. Doctors prescribe them to help relax muscles or to help relieve tension and anxiety. But because they are safe under controlled conditions, people tend to misuse them—to take them more often or to take more than prescribed. That's when people get into trouble: they decide they need the tranquilizer just to cope with the stresses of everyday life.

Barbiturates are much less safe than tranquilizers; doctors use them to sedate patients in hospitals and to treat insomnia, tension, or anxiety. The potential for overdose is high: barbiturates can cause loss of memory, confusion, drowsiness, and even coma. The potential for abuse is also high: barbiturates cause physical dependence, which means that you have to increase the dose to get the same effect.

One of the greatest problems with depressant drugs is that people aren't aware of the danger of mixing them with alcohol. Alcohol is a depressant too, and when you mix it with another depressant, you can get much more sedation than you had intended. A frequent cause of overdose is taking Valium and then having a drink or two.

Stimulants

A second classification of legal drugs is stimulants. The stimulants (such as nicotine, caffeine, and amphetamines) stimulate the nervous system, making you nervous, alert, and more active. Some people use them to disguise the effects of fatigue; others use them to relieve drowsiness.

Some stimulants such as the caffeine in tea, coffee, and cola drinks or the nicotine in cigarettes—are available without a prescription. Others, such as amphetamines, usually do require a prescription.

Amphetamines, usually prescribed as diet pills, are also used medically to treat people with chronic fatigue or to help people overcome mild depression. Unfortunately, the same thing occurs as with depressants: people who get stimulants by prescription end up abusing them by taking them more often or in greater quantities than prescribed. The result is tolerance, psychological dependence, and exaggerated drug effects—the person can become extremely alert and active, or he can become angry, suspicious, and irritable.

One stimulant—cocaine—is obtained most often illicitly and is the subject of growing abuse throughout the country.

Narcotics

Used medically to suppress coughs or to relieve intense pain (generally following surgery), narcotics such as Demerol, morphine, and codeine—can produce a feeling of euphoria and are highly addictive. Narcotics are safe when used under strict medical supervision, but much narcotic use is illicit and dangerous.

Marijuana

A drug surrounded by controversy, marijuana causes different effects on each person who uses it; some become relaxed or euphoric, while others become anxious or panic-stricken. Most often, a user loses a keen perception of time and loses some short-term memory. Use and sale of marijuana is illegal in all fifty states, while a few states have decriminalized the possession of a small amount of marijuana.

Much of the controversy surrounding marijuana is due to the fact that little is known for sure about its longterm effects; while some argue that marijuana is harmless, others have made claims about devastating long-term consequences.

Inhalants

Inhalants substances that are sniffed or inhaled—are generally not illegal themselves, but the practice is. A number of common household items (such as gasoline, aerosol sprays, cleaning products, or glue) are used as inhalants, mostly by children. This cuts oxygen off from the brain, resulting in an extreme "high."

Inhalant use is extremely dangerous; lung and kidney damage is common, and death can result.

Hallucinogens

None of the hallucinogens (such as LSD or PCP) currently have recognized medical uses; they are obtained illicitly and have been the subject of intensive law-enforcement efforts. Hallucinogens affect perceptions—users have a warped feeling of what is seen, heard, felt, and understood. Some hallucinogens occur naturally and are derived from plants; some mushrooms are hallucinogenic, as is peyote (which comes from the peyote cactus). Other hallucinogens, such as "angel dust" and LSD, are produced in the laboratory.

At the beginning of this decade, the government identified seven drugs that give particular cause for public concern because of their potential for serious health problems, the extent to which they are used, or the way in which they are used.

Today some of the most alarming drug use occurs among high school students—once not heavily involved in drug use, they now use marijuana, cocaine, amphetamines, barbiturates, hallucinogens, opiates, and alcohol in growing numbers. Still another source of concern is among women: the number of women alcoholics has doubled since the close of World War II, and the rate of women using all kinds of drugs (legal and illicit) has grown tremendously in the last twenty years.

American society is drug-oriented. We spend more than $30 billion each year for legal drugs, including over-the-counter medications, chocolate, coffee, tea, cola drinks, tobacco, and alcohol. One study estimates that you could easily find at least thirty such substances in any American home—but most Americans take their legal drug behavior for granted. What's more, most of us would defend it—we simply don't consider it to be addiction or abuse.

Perhaps it's time to rethink our definitions of-those words. By addiction we don't mean the skid-row bum who slurps cheap wine in a bleary trance or the high-school dropout who hovers in a dark room with a heroin needle in hand. Addiction can refer to anyone who relies on any substance to gain a sense of well-being: the joint after class, the cup of coffee in the morning, the mild sleeping pills at the end of a hard day.

Nor does the word abuse apply only to extreme cases. Abuse means using any substance that is illegal, but it also means using a legal substance in a situation where it is illegal, using a drug or other substance without medical approval, or using a substance in excess of the accepted standards for self-medication.

You are abusing a substance when you can no longer control your behavior or when you can no longer control your desire for more. You are also abusing a substance if you use it only to alter your state of mind or to impair your consciousness.

To put things in a nutshell, there are certain realities about drug use and abuse that we need to face. People use drugs because they want to feel better; they keep taking drugs because they derive certain pleasures or rewards from the drug use. A person won't stop taking a drug until he finds something better—some more effective way to feel good.

Personality: Who Uses Drugs?

Obviously, not all drug users are alike; they can be as different as the sixty-eight-year-old woman who abuses the aspirin her physician advised her to take sporadically and the sixteen-year-old boy who gathers with his friends to smoke marijuana during lunch hour. But researchers have been able to identify certain personality traits or characteristics that may make a person more likely to get involved in drug abuse.

Just because a person possesses some of the identified personality traits does not mean that he will begin abusing drugs; it does mean that he has traits that may lead to drug abuse.

What does that mean to you? It doesn't mean that you should become alarmed if your teenage daughter or some teenager you are working with has some of the traits. It doesn't mean you should jump to conclusions if the woman next door fits the picture. Nor does it mean that you should panic and resign yourself to eventual addiction if you recognize them in yourself. What it does mean is that we can all be more informed about the things that make us act as we do. If you recognize that your teenage daughter has a number of the traits, for example, you can begin early to help her learn to change those traits, and, when possible, you can help her examine alternatives that can fill her needs.

The personality traits that have been identified among drug-addicted people are almost identical to those shared by others who have addictive problems. This subject maybe reviewed by turning to page 40 in the previous chapter.

Apart from specific personality traits, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services identified four major groups who appear to be at extremely high risk for drug abuse. Those groups include the following: youth, women, ethnic and racial minorities, and the elderly.

The Role of the Home and Family

People who come from happy homes and who grow up in well-adjusted families have much less tendency to use drugs than do people who come from troubled surroundings.

Adolescence is usually the time when drug behavior begins; the impact of the home and family is great, and certain home and family situations have been identified as leading to drug abuse.

The following situations have a tendency to precipitate drug use among family members:

Why People Turn to Drugs

In general, people turn to drugs to fill a felt need—a need to relieve anxiety, to grow, to experience adventure, to relieve boredom, to cope with stress, to escape from problems. When drugs begin to satisfy those needs—or when a person is simply convinced that they do—the drug behavior is reinforced. A teenager who turns to drugs to escape his chaotic family atmosphere finds solace and escape while he is high; the behavior is reinforcing, and he goes back for more. Before long, he is dependent on the drug to remove him from his family situation. He is addicted.

As a society, we are taught to turn to drugs and alcohol. According to critics, television is a major offender situation comedies portray drug and alcohol use, advertisements for beer proliferate during prime time, and movies give the subtle message that drugs are a great solution for what ails you.

What Signs Indicate Drug Involvement?

While occasional drug use may escape detection, there are many signs that enable you to determine whether someone is using drugs regularly. Some of the signs are physical (such as needle marks on the arms), while others are changes in behavior. Here are some of these signs:

It is difficult to face up to the fact that someone you care about may be abusing drugs, but you should watch for the signs and face the problem if you confirm it. A child who was once well behaved and advanced at school may become a completely different person as a result of drug use: she may lie, shoplift, steal, stop doing homework, get involved with prostitution, drop out of school altogether, abandon her old friends, demand more privileges at home, demand complete privacy, or even attempt suicide. Watch for dramatic changes that you can't explain.

If you think that you might have a problem with drug abuse yourself, it's just as important that you confront your own problems. You might think that drug abuse is a clear-cut situation, but it isn't always that way: drug abuse can creep up insidiously. The National Institute on Drug Abuse has outlined ten questions you can ask yourself to determine whether your drug behavior is a problem:

What Can Be Done to Help

Researchers generally agree that drug use stems from unmet needs (real or imagined), and that a person will continue using a drug as long as it helps fulfill an important need for him. Drug use is not always pleasant or enjoyable in itself, but it almost always works to reinforce something, or the drug use would not continue.

In order to help someone get away from drug use, you as a lay counselor have to help him discover alternative ways of meeting his need. This involves the difficult first step of identifying the need that has precipitated the drug behavior in the first place.

Two words of caution are necessary here. First, a person must want to change his drug behavior before you can help him. You can't simply force an unwilling person to give up something that has been a source of relief or pleasure.

Second, you may be able to help a person who has inappropriate drug behavior, who is experimenting, or who is using drugs to meet unfilled needs. You probably will not tee successful in helping someone who has developed a strong addiction to a drug; he will almost certainly require professional help. You should also be aware that some drug addiction carries with it physical dependence, and that sudden cessation of drug use can result in severe withdrawal symptoms. In some cases withdrawal can threaten life, and physicians try to hospitalize a person so he can be closely monitored and the withdrawal can be gradually accomplished with safety.

Following are suggestions as to how you can help a person who wants to change by helping him discover his alternatives:

You might also encourage the person to get more physical exercise, which can help in many ways. Many people balk at the idea of touching toes and doing pushups; point out that there are plenty of enjoyable activities, such as swimming, bicycling, walking, or dancing. Follow through by making participation feasible—find out if the person needs equipment, transportation, someone to care for her children, and so on.

In general, be available to help provide alternatives. Encourage constantly; drug use and its associated entrapments are discouraging, and a person who is trying to steer away from drugs needs constant help, love, and reinforcement.

Preventing Drug Use and Abuse

While the suggestions for helping someone get away from drugs are by necessity limited, there are almost a limitless number of things you can do to prevent those around you from falling into the trap of drug use to begin with.

The family is the key to preventing drug use and abuse; the home environment and the family unit are central to the drug use and abuse pattern. Try the following in your own home as you relate with family members, and encourage other parents to do the same:

In conclusion, build an atmosphere of love, respect, and trust in the home. Set limits for your children but be flexible and reasonable. Respect their growing need for independence, but help them understand that you still care about them and want them to be happy.

Parents must spend time with their children and make them feel a valuable and worthwhile part of the family. By helping children establish a firm value system and a good sense of self-worth, you are helping them gain the skills they need to make responsible decisions about drug use in the future.
