Terrance D. Olson, R. Lanier Britsch, Counseling: A Guide to Helping Others, vol. 2 ( 1985)

7

Eating Disorders: Anorexia Nervosa and Bulimia

Della Mae Rasmussen

Billions of dollars are spent by millions of Americans each year in an unending quest for one thing: slimness. There is a national obsession with dieting, calorie counting, and beautiful thin models in books and magazines and on television and billboards. The message bombarding us from every direction seems to be: if you are thin you will be happy, you will have wonderful relationships, be admired, and have a fine career, and all your problems will be solved. Nearly everyone has been on a weight loss diet at one time or another, and millions of people go from one diet to the next, always hoping for the magic wand that will produce a beautiful, lean body without too much effort. Even though we see a great emphasis upon exercising and proper nutrition today, the most important thing seems to be getting slim rather than maintaining good health. A person's weight, measurements, and appearance have become too much a measure of a person's worth.

Most people can go on a diet, go off a diet, overeat one day, and cut down the next day, managing to stay somewhere within their normal weight range. They become rather philosophical about never being really thin. With certain people, however, the desire for thinness eventually takes first place in their lives. These people suffer from an eating disorder, either anorexia nervosa or bulimia. They have the distorted belief that the thinner they are, the happier they will be. In their efforts to achieve happiness and thinness they become involved in the dangerous behaviors of an eating disorder. These behaviors become a way of coping with the demands of life. Kim Lampson, one of the most experienced therapists in the field, states that "the behaviors are like a life preserver, simultaneously a means of survival and a signal of distress."

Anorexia Nervosa

Anorexia nervosa has sometimes been called the "starving disease." Historically, a number of cases of anorexia nervosa have been reported, but until recently it was thought to be rare. In the last fifteen to twenty years there has been a great increase in diagnosed cases. People are becoming more aware of the name and the extent of the problem. Perhaps one in every one hundred or two hundred white females between the ages of twelve and eighteen may suffer from anorexia. Between 90 and 95 percent of those who have the disorder are female. This may be the result of the greater cultural emphasis on the physical attractiveness expected of females.

The age of onset is usually early to late adolescence. Medically, the diagnosis is made for anorexia nervosa when the following conditions are present:

Some Characteristics of Anorexic Girls

A common evidence of anorexia nervosa is amenorrhea (the absence or cessation of menstruation) in females. It occurs in almost every case.

Anorexics fear loss of control, and by rigidly controlling their food intake they feel they can at least control one area of their lives. An anorexic girl may spend a great deal of time thinking about and preparing food, and she may watch her family eat an elaborate meal she has prepared while she eats a piece of celery, some lettuce, and a glass of water. One anorexic reported that one apple made her feel as if her stomach would literally burst.

Most people with this disorder steadfastly deny their illness and resist getting help. They like the feeling of losing weight and resent any interference from family, friends, or professionals. People who do not know of the problem will often compliment the person on her weight loss, thus reinforcing the anorexic behavior, since the motivation behind the refusal of food is the obsessive fear of weight gain and the accompanying pleasure of weight loss. The thinner she becomes, the more "special" she feels. Anorexics appear to be frightened of the demands of adulthood, preferring to remain in their childhood with an undeveloped body. They show little if any interest in dating and boyfriends.

Typically, one who develops anorexia will be characterized as a "model child," one who never gave her family any problems. The girls tend to be "people pleasers," perfectionistics, overachievers, compulsive, and self-disciplined. As weight loss continues, a girl's thinking tends to become more irrational and distorted, caused in great measure by the starvation state and the malnourishment of the brain.

Physical Abnormalities from Anorexia Nervosa

Some of the physical abnormalities resulting from anorexia nervosa include the following:

Fluid and electrolyte imbalance causes dehydration and potassium deficiency and is the most serious symptom, resulting in muscle weakness, apathy, mental confusion, and irregular heartbeat. Death from kidney or heart failure may result.

Recovery

It is estimated that 50 percent of anorexia sufferers will completely recover normal weight and eating patterns, and 25 percent will improve but retain significant eating or weight problems. Mortality rates are estimated to be as high as 15 to 21 percent. Of those who return to normal weight, from 3 to 50 percent remain amenorrheic. As anorexics recover, most of the abnormalities are reversed; however, some remain permanent.

It must be remembered that despite the characteristics of anorexia, each individual is unique. Every case must be treated on an individual basis.

Factors in the Development of Anorexia

Some factors in the development of anorexia nervosa include the following:

Families of the anorexic appear most often to be "enmeshed." They value "rightness" and not being different. They have a high degree of concern and involvement with each other. They want everyone to think and act in the same way, and, to avoid conflict, they do not discuss personal needs and feelings openly. The anorexic child is often involved in parental conflict in some way and may feel responsible for such conflict because she is not a perfect daughter. She will often feel guilty and unworthy and attempt to find acceptance through her achievements and being attractive.

Families of children with eating disorders are not bad families; they are most often simply families doing the best they know how. They feel great pain over a daughter's problem. One mother wrote to me as follows:

What It's Like to Be the Mother of an Anorexic Child

While the key word to an anorexic is control, the word that expresses the feelings of most parents of anorexics is helpless—helplessness, frustration, anxiety, fear, guilt, and lots of pain. In just a short span of time, you watch your beautiful, happy, well-adjusted, and successful daughter go through a frightening metamorphosis. Overnight you seem to be the mother of a frighteningly thin, unhappy, spiteful, angry, noncommunicative, and very manipulative individual whom you barely know or recognize.

You feel totally unequipped to deal with, let alone help, this new person in your home. All of the normal motherly feelings of love, nurturing, and caring are still there, but where they were welcome before, now they are rejected suspiciously and angrily. After all, "You are what caused this problem!" Then come the feelings of guilt, failure, and self-recrimination. It is not a case of "What did I do to deserve this?" Rather, you start wondering "What did I do wrong? Why couldn't I be a better mother.?"

Where communication had been pleasant, it now becomes loud and tense on both sides, if it occurs at all. Then there are the tears. Gallons of tears. In front of her, in the privacy of your room, in response to a query from a friend about your daughter. You read all you can find about this illness that previously had been an unknown word to you. But what you read is of little comfort. In fact, it can easily have the opposite effect.

You start to feel a real strain in your relationship with your husband as you invariably disagree on how to relate to your daughter or on what direction to go to help her get professional help. You turn to what seems to be one of the few sources of reassurance, friends who have already been through this hell and know just what you are feeling and just what to say. Through it all, you are scared to death! And you pray a lot.

Rapid recovery is not to be expected, and, in severe cases, hospitalization is necessary to prevent death by starvation or one of the other severe symptoms. The victims cling tenaciously to their distorted beliefs, and I strongly suggest professional help for the sufferer and her family. Those professionals involved should be a medical doctor for a thorough physical evaluation, a nutritionist for help with healthy food intake and eating patterns, and a counselor or psychotherapist to help with emotional needs. These professionals should be chosen from those who thoroughly understand eating disorders and can offer continuing assistance. The victim is not helped by the admonition "Now you just go home and put on some weight, my dear."

Signs to Watch For

If you suspect that someone is beginning to suffer from anorexia, you should watch for these signs:

Some few anorexics are not starvers but bingers. This group appears to have several characteristics more like the eating disorder of bulimia than the anorexic who controls her weight in ways other than purging.

Bulimia

Bulimia is an eating disorder in which the person binges on huge quantities of food, usually high-calorie foods and sweets, and then purges the food through self-induced vomiting or the use of large amounts of laxatives and diuretics. The word bulimia is derived from the Greek and literally means "ox hunger." Like anorexia, bulimia often begins as the result of dieting. The person tries to lose weight but still eats large quantities of food. She panics over her overeating and uses purging to prevent weight gain. Eventually the behavior becomes compulsive. It is difficult for people who have never experienced this horrible, out-of-control feeling to understand it. Since the person feels guilty and embarrassed, she is usually secretive about her behavior and may suffer from bulimia for several years before seeking help. Bulimics are usually of normal weight or perhaps slightly overweight, although one bulimic of record weighed almost three hundred pounds!

Bulimia usually starts in the late teens or early twenties, but it varies from early teens to much later ages. The incidence is growing and is of almost epidemic proportions. According to some experts, between 20 and 30 percent of college-age students are involved in bulimic behaviors. The incidence is growing and is of near-epidemic proportions. As with anorexia, probably over 90 percent of the victims are female. Recently, however, reports show that the number of males appears to be increasing.

A bulimic is usually similar in many ways to an anorexic in her behavior and attitudes, but she may differ in the following ways:

Many bulimics report that as their binge-purge behavior becomes a compulsion, they spend almost every waking hour thinking about food—how to get it, how to eat it without being detected, and how to get rid of it once it is consumed. Some bulimics binge and vomit many times a day, some once or twice a week. The practice becomes bulimic when it can no longer be controlled. Although generally bulimics have high moral principles, they sometimes lie, hide, and even steal to support their food habits. Expenditures of $100 a week are fairly common, with one bulimic telling of a habit amounting to $100 a day. One young woman reported that she spent every noon hour driving from one fast-food place to another, gorging as she drove, and then using up to seventy-five laxative tablets to purge. A person would die from this dosage if her tolerance had not been built up over time. Ironically, it has been estimated that only about 12 percent of the calories consumed are purged by the use of laxatives. It is also clear that no method of purging rids the body of all the calories taken in binges, since bulimics seldom achieve thinness with their purging methods. The binge-purge behaviors themselves are reinforcing, however, because they relieve the anxiety suffered by the victim.

Physical Abnormalities Resulting from Bulimia

Bulimia is a serious disorder and may result in lasting physical effects and even death. There may be extensive erosion of tooth enamel from the stomach acid. The habitual use of vomiting or laxatives can cause permanent kidney damage. Losing large amounts of body fluids may result in kidney failure. The salivary glands often become swollen, giving the chipmunk-like look of some bulimics. Sometimes the stomach will rupture or develop ulcers, and the esophagus may be punctured. As with anorexia, the electrolyte balance is thrown off, and the potassium level may be severely depleted, causing heart difficulties.

Binging and purging rewards the sufferer because it fills up her time so that she can avoid facing the demands of life. The behavior, therefore, becomes relaxing and reinforcing.

A bulimic has difficulty expressing her true feelings, which become so distorted that she does not recognize them for what they are but feels them as hunger. Her attention and energy are taken up with the binge-purge activities.

As with anorexia nervosa, there is no quick fix for curing bulimia. The bulimic, being caught up in her "all or nothing at all" thinking, may declare, "I am going to recover quickly and completely. Fast is best." But eating disorders are among the most difficult problems to deal with for the individual, for the family, for school and church leaders, and for professional counselors.

Treatment for Eating Disorders

Kim Lampson, a recovered anorexic-bulimic who has worked with hundreds of victims, says, "Before 'curing', a foundation must be laid for personal growth, self-esteem, quality relationships, and the ability to live each day. It is essential for all involved to realize that the disorders, are not a food problem, but a self-esteem problem."

Recovery requires personal choice and perseverance. The person must decide to get well. But much support is needed once the person wants to stop her destructive behavior. The cooperation of the individual, the family, school and church leaders, counselors, or psychotherapists is needed. Those affected by the person and her behavior also need support in dealing with the problem. They should remember that pressure to change immediately is premature and will only force the sufferer deeper into her behavior.

In order to recover, the person suffering from anorexia nervosa or bulimia needs the following:

Patience is essential. She can practice saying, "It is okay to fail. It is an opportunity to learn rather than an opportunity to punish myself." A setback then becomes a learning experience, not a disaster.

The sufferer must understand her right to be treated with respect, to have and express personal feelings and opinions, to be listened to and taken seriously, to say no without feeling guilty, to ask for what she wants, to make mistakes, and to make choices based on rational thinking.

She must realize that she is not responsible for the feelings of others. They have their own rights and the power to make choices just as she does. She can be direct and honest and behave appropriately. She can show a genuine concern for the rights of others and their feelings as well as her own. Her assertiveness will not drive people away but will enrich her relationships with others. She can express her love and care for others without fear. She can disagree with someone and be close at the same time. This knowledge is crucial. There is no cure, according to Lampson, until a person can honestly express feelings in ways that bring about closeness rather than distance.

Family Issues

Those who attempt to help the child and her family should follow certain guidelines: Families do not need more guilt and blame. They do need acceptance and the reassurance that they have probably done the best they could. All family members could heal hurts by recognizing that no one is perfect. They need to forgive each other for their real or imagined weaknesses. Families are usually tired and frightened from the stress of living with a child with an eating disorder. Family therapy can be helpful if members are available to meet together. Families can help the sufferer in important ways:

Fortunately, most anorexics and bulimics do recover, in time. While there are no "pat answers" in treatment and recovery, skilled counselors are available and research is going forward. There is hope.

Suggested Readings and Resources

Anorexia Nervosa and Related Eating Disorders, Inc. P.O. Box 5102, Eugene, Oregon 97405, phone (503) 344-1144.

Bruch, Hilde. The Golden Cage: The Enigma of Anorexia Nervosa. Harvard: Harvard University Press, 1978.

Chemin, Kim. The Obsession: Reflections on the Tyranny of Slenderness. New York: Harper and Row, 1982.

Lampson, K. Kim, M.Ed. Lecture given at Brigham Young University, November 1983.

For additional information write to: K. Kim Lampson, M.Ed., Providence Professional Building, Suite 301, 550 16th Avenue, Seattle, Washington 98122.

National Anorexic Aid Society, Inc. P.O. Box 29461, Columbus, Ohio 43229.

Neuman, Patricia A., Ed.S., and Patricia A. Halvorsen, Ph.D. Anorexia Nervosa and Bulimia: A Handbook for Counselors and Therapists. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold Company, 1983.

Vincent, L.M. Competing with the Sylph: The Pursuit of the Ideal Body Form. New York: Berkeley Books, 1979.

About the Author

Dr. Della Mae Rasmussen, a counselor at BYU Counseling and Personal Services for almost two decades, received her bachelor's degree from the University of Utah and her doctorate in counseling psychology from BYU. She has published in professional journals as well as in children's literature.

In the Church she has served on the Primary General Board, on the Church Teacher Development Committee, on a Church writing committee for parent education, and in many ward and stake callings.

She and her husband, Paul, are the parents of six children.
