Terrance D. Olson, R. Lanier Britsch, Counseling: A Guide to Helping Others, vol. 2 ( 1985)

9

Premenstrual Syndrome

Robert N. Gray, M.D.

Premenstrual syndrome, or as many refer to it, PMS, has become a household term over the past few years. It has been discussed widely by the press, on television news and information programs, and to some degree in nearly every type of magazine. PMS has become a major concern if not a problem for many people.

What Is PMS?

Although recognized by clinicians for centuries, PMS was first described in medical literature in 1931 by R.T. Frank, who called it "premenstrual tension" and described it as "a feeling of indescribable tension," "a desire to find relief by foolish and ill-considered acts." [^1] Even though women have long experienced the symptoms of PMS, it has been poorly understood by both the public and the medical profession Until recent years few women with PMS reported their complaints, and those who did seek medical attention were often thought to be irrational or emotionally unstable. Since Frank's work and observations in 1931, considerable effort has been directed toward the clinical characterization of the syndrome and toward delineation of the physiology of PMS.

It has long been known that many women become tense, irritable, and anxious or depressed during the seven to ten days before menstruation. This state frequently leads to a deterioration in their relationships with family, friends, and co-workers. These emotional changes have been responsible or at least implicated in marital problems, child abuse, and even criminal behavior (any of which may be totally out of character for the person except during that time in her cycle). In two recent court cases in Great Britain involving women who committed murder, PMS was recognized as a mitigating factor, resulting in the court finding the women to have been in a state of "diminished responsibility." However, in 1982 an attempt to use this plea in the United States was unsuccessful. [^2]

With women playing an increasingly prominent role in business and industry, attention has been focused on the effect of PMS on absenteeism and inefficiency. It has been observed that 36 percent of 1,500 women in one plant sought sedation in the premenstrual week, and estimates suggest that absenteeism due to PMS caused a loss of $5 billion in 1969 alone. [^3] Although the association between PMS and intellectual impairment has not been clearly established, there are an increased number of psychiatric hospital admissions, accidents, and suicide attempts in women during the premenstrual phase of their cycle.

Due to the tremendous exposure of society to the term PMS, the sensationalism PMS has been afforded by the media over the past few years, and the frequently non-specific symptoms it causes, PMS has become the female hypochondriac's favorite diagnosis. Many women who feel they have PMS simply do not fit the diagnostic criteria and are most likely experiencing anxiety or depression due to other causes.

Symptoms of PMS

PMS encompasses emotional, behavioral, and physical symptoms. The symptoms occur cyclically beginning seven to ten days before onset of menstrual bleeding and regressing or disappearing at the onset of the menstrual period or within one or two days thereafter. In most women with PMS, the symptoms are most severe two to five days before their period, with rapid relief with the onset of bleeding.

Pain after menstrual flow has started (dysmenorrhea) is an entirely different problem. Dysmenorrhea and its treatment will be discussed later in this chapter. Though PMS and dysmenorrhea are separate problems, some women experience both.

The symptoms most frequently associated with PMS are abdominal bloating, swelling of the extremities, fullness and tenderness of the breasts, and mood changes, including irritability, depression, and anxiety. Additional symptoms include fatigue, headache, constipation, acne, and an increased thirst or appetite, which may include a craving for sweets or salty foods. [^4] In some women, the premenstrual symptoms are consistent from cycle to cycle; in others, however, they vary in type and severity from month to month. Transient weight gain may occur during the premenstrual period but is not a criterion or symptom of PMS.

The most frequently reported emotional states associated with PMS are tension, anxiety, depression, and hostility. Some women also report feelings of loneliness or guilt. Some quite abruptly feel incompetent or worthless and, consequently, become unwilling to take any risks for fear of being rejected.

Behavioral changes may include feelings of lethargy and inability to cope with normal day-to-day activities. Some women cannot face going to work, engaging in social activities, or interacting with people in anyway. They may also have erratically alternating spells of lethargy and bursts of energy. Some report sudden flurries of compulsive activity, such as housecleaning or desk organization. In more severe cases of PMS, there may be abrupt outbursts of anger and aggression, particularly toward family members. Another area of behavioral change is fluctuation in sexual desires, which can increase or decrease, depending on the individual.

The Incidence of PMS

In an effort to assess or establish the incidence of PMS in the general population, several large studies have been done in the United States and in Great Britain. These studies indicate that 80 to 95 percent of women have at least one of the symptoms of PMS, and that 30 to 40 percent have symptoms severe enough to temporarily disrupt their life-style through mental or physical incapacitation. The diagnosis or classification of PMS is applied to this latter group of 30 to 40 percent. The studies indicate that the onset of the symptoms of PMS can occur at any time between the onset and the end of a woman's menstrual life. In addition, some women may experience symptoms during the first several months of pregnancy, usually at the same time a period would be due. Women who have had a hysterectomy or other surgery on the reproductive system may continue to have PMS or may develop PMS unless both ovaries were removed at the time of surgery. Women who have had both ovaries removed, for whatever reason, will no longer experience PMS, but will commonly have the hot flashes and sweating that go along with a surgical menopause.

Painful Periods

Dysmenorrhea, or painful periods, needs to be differentiated from PMS. Media coverage, particularly in women's magazines and on television talk shows, has tended to lump PMS and dysmenorrhea together, suggesting that both are medical disorders with a known cause and physiological basis and with accepted specific medical treatments. [^5] This is not the case; the two problems are related only by the fact that they both affect the reproductive system. The cause of dysmenorrhea seems to be an excessive production of hormones called prostaglandins. Prostaglandins appear to cause us to sense pain, particularly visceral or deep pain. Since the discovery of the prostaglandins, control of prostaglandin pain has changed radically through the development of drugs known as anti-prostaglandins. These medications function by preventing the synthesis or production of prostaglandins or by preventing binding of the prostaglandin at the receptor sites. Some of the more common drugs in this group are Ponstel, Motrin, Naprosyn, and Meclomen (trade names).

What Causes PMS?

The cause of PMS is not nearly as clearly defined as that of dysmenorrhea. Since it was first described a variety of causes have been proposed.

In 1931, R. T. Frank was the first to propose that PMS was caused by an excess of female sex hormone in the blood, and he recommended cathartics or strong laxatives to try to eliminate excessive sex hormones. Similar studies presented much discussion and deliberation about the two major female sex hormones, estrogen and progesterone. Every woman with intact ovaries and pituitary gland produces these hormones in a cycle each month of her menstrual life, except during pregnancy. (See figure 1.) In figure 1, day one is the first day of menstrual bleeding or flow. By following the lines you can see that during the first six days of the cycle the hormone levels remain constant in relation to each other. Between days six and eight the estrogen level begins to rise and rapidly peaks out at day twelve, then falls just as rapidly to just above baseline levels by day fifteen. Then it starts another slower rise to peak at day twenty or twenty-one and then drops gradually to baseline levels by day twenty-eight. Progesterone begins to rise at day twelve and continues to rise, peaking at day twenty-two; then it makes a long, steady drop, reaching the baseline level by day twenty-eight. During this time ovulation occurs about day fifteen, interestingly enough, shortly after the hormone levels cross on the graph, and menses begin again on day one of the next cycle. PMS occurs during the last week or so of the cycle when both hormones have peaked and are in a downward course.

Several proposals as to the cause of PMS involve the relationship of these hormones during the premenstrual period of time. One proposes that women with PMS have an estrogen excess; another proposes that they have a progesterone deficiency in the premenstrual period. Another speculates that unopposed estrogen causes fluid retention, swelling of the breasts, abnormal metabolism of sugars, and accumulation of estrogen in the brain, thus causing the anxiety and depression. However, in contrast, some women with normal estrogen levels still had PMS. These researchers concluded that PMS must be due to progesterone deficiency because of the rapid drop in progesterone in this phase of the cycle. However, no large double-blind studies have been conducted that unequivocally substantiate this fact, and trial therapy with progesterone has not been completely successful in the treatment of PMS.

Vitamin-B therapy for PMS was popular in the 1940s and is used in some areas today. Some physicians feel that vitamin B6 in large doses can correct defective estrogen metabolism in women with PMS.

In 1947 Simkins proposed vitamin-A deficiency as a cause of PMS, although little success was found in using vitamin A for therapy in PMS. It is doubtful that a cyclic vitamin deficiency could exist, due to the composition of the average diet in the United States and the amount of supplemental vitamins present in our foods and taken as dietary supplements.

Some researchers have proposed hypoglycemia as a cause for PMS, but it seems unlikely that hypoglycemic episodes could occur exactly when the symptoms of PMS are present, nor does the ingestion of food seem to help PMS, whereas it does relieve hypoglycemic symptoms.

Allergy to progesterone has been proposed as a possible cause of PMS. Some interesting though not completely successful treatment has been carried out using allergy management principles and small doses of progesterone.

Psychosomatic causes have been examined carefully, but there is no proof of a psychological origin for PMS. Rather, the symptoms of PMS tend to cause psychosomatic illnesses in the afflicted person.

Some researchers have cited water retention as the cause of PMS; however, some rather involved studies regarding fluid retention show quite contradictory results. Some women gained from one to three pounds at the time of ovulation and again in the premenstrual period, but others actually lost weight during the same times. Premenstrual breast swelling and pain does not correlate with an increase in total body water. During the normal menstrual cycle, breast volume gradually increases by 100 milliliters starting just before ovulation and reaching a maximum on the first day of menstruation. Hence, again, there is no correlation with the onset of PMS.

Numerous other causes have been and are under investigation, including many so-called minor hormones such as renin, aldosterone, angiotensin, vasopressin, prolactin, epinephrine, norepinephrine, dopamine, and most recently alpha-melanocyte stimulating hormone and the endorphins. The latter two theories seem to present some strong hopes for an answer to the real cause of PMS.

Treatment of PMS

Treatment of PMS has run the gamut from witchcraft and laxatives to sophisticated hormone blocking agents. Presently experts begin treatment with nondrug therapies, including insight into the problem, relaxation techniques, biofeedback, exercise, weight reduction, and nonprescription medications such as vitamin B6. If not successful, they progress to drug therapy with a variety of agents including spironolactone (a diuretic and aldosterone antagonist), bromocriptine (particularly effective for breast engorgement and irritability), and natural progesterone (cannot be taken orally).

Specialists or clinics may or may not be effective in treating the average woman with PMS. The success of treatment frequently depends as much on the woman's relationship with her doctor as it does on the method of treatment. Frequently the family doctor or the woman's own gynecologist will be much more effective in her long-term care than the less personalized but perhaps more scientifically oriented clinic.

Both lay counselors and professional counselors should not only be aware of the existence of PMS but should have at least a rudimentary understanding of the physiology involved and the variable symptoms. PMS should be considered whenever a woman complains of cyclic disturbances of any kind. A counselor's knowledge of PMS should be extensive enough that he or she may discuss the problem with the woman and her family in at least enough depth to give them an overview of the problem. The counselor should be able to suggest further care available to the woman.

Suggested Reading

The most complete and most recent article on PMS is titled "Premenstrual Syndrome," by Robert L. Reid and S.S.C. Yen. It was published in the American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, vol. 139, pp. 85-104. This paper contains an extensive bibliography of 305 references relating to PMS. It is well written and is relatively easy reading. It should be available through most hospital medical libraries and will definitely be found in all medical-school libraries.

Premenstrual Syndrome

Obstetrics and Gynecology, 139 (1981): 85-104.

About the Author

Dr. Robert N. Gray, an emergency-room physician at Utah Valley Regional Medical Center, received his undergraduate education at Adams State College in Alamosa, Colorado, and his M.D. at Northwestern University Medical School. He was a family practitioner for ten years before becoming an emergency-room physician in 1978.

In the Church he has served as a seventies president, a bishop's counselor, a bishop, a high councilor, and in a stake presidency.

Dr. Gray and his wife, Nancy, are the parents of five children.

---
Notas:
[^1] As they accept responsibility for their happiness, they will find personal power and increased self-esteem. Teach them that choosing self-fulfilling thoughts and behavior is the ultimate personal freedom. In order to have charge of their lives, they may need to break emotional or financial dependencies on others. Taking this step is frightening because it requires responsibility, energy, and risk of failure. Yet it is encouraged by Church leaders as the only way to work out personal salvation. Wider James E. Faust said, "This life is not a passive life. The word of God constantly sets before us images of vigor and power, all of which images and actions under his benign guidance can be directed and controlled." [^7] Peter J. Stein, Understanding Single Adulthood, paper presented at the annual meeting of the National Council on Family Relations (Boston: 1979), p. 3.
[^2] As singles turn to God through prayer and repentance, they will find new vision. Without vision we perish. They will experience a new perspective on life and the advantages of being single. Ibid.,p.3.
[^3] As singles choose to love themselves, they will be able to love others. [^8] Self-esteem is their choice. It cannot be given by others. If they look for it outside themselves, it will be "other-worth" rather than "self-worth." Patricia Russell and Karen Jensen wrote in the February 1974 Ensign, "A woman can and must have an identity, be useful, and feel important and needed whether she is single or married. She must feel that she has something to offer." [^9] Cynthia S. Burnley, Identities and Life-Style Adaptations of Never-Married Women paper presented at the annual meeting of the Society for the Study of Social Problems (Boston: August 1979), p. 4.
[^4] As singles put marriage in its proper eternal perspective, they will be free from worldly expectations that marriage must happen in this life. Life begins with discipleship, not at the altar. Discipleship is a reaching toward second birth and a reawakening followed by an eternal searching for what is noble and good. Peter J. Stein, Single (New York: Spectrum Books, 1976), pp. 63-64.
[^5] As singles give service to others, they are fruitful and multiply and replenish the earth with good will and good works. A multitude of discouragements are overcome through service. Isolation and turning inward lead to depression and a failure to reach out to others. Companionship, self-respect, Ida Smith, "Demographic, Social, and Personal Dimensions of Singleness n Family Perspectives (Winter 1983), p. 3.
