Terrance D. Olson, R. Lanier Britsch, Counseling: A Guide to Helping Others, vol. 2 ( 1985)

14

Spouse Abuse

W. Eugene Gibbons

Clearly the gospel neither teaches nor condones family violence, aggression, or abuse of any type. Yet some men justify and rationalize their physical abuse of their families on the basis of so-called religious principles. Often, in their defensiveness, they caution others that to interfere in their private life is the ultimate invasion of privacy and agency. They say that such an invasion is unconstitutional or even satanic. Still others protest that society authorizes them as fathers and husbands to discipline family members however they wish. Unfortunately, some Latter-day Saint parents also share these attitudes; Latter-day Saint families are not free of abuse. How can we who are counselors respond to those who abuse family members?

Attitudes Concerning Abuse

The counselor's task is complicated by the problem of differentiating between physical force and abuse. For centuries people have argued about whether a slap is a blow and whether a blow constitutes violence; and they argue whether it is right or wrong to strike at all. Thus, the most serious question a counselor may find himself struggling with is what constitutes abuse.

Because we live in a society where widely differing opinions about physical force are held, a lay counselor should not be embarrassed or dismayed if he realizes that the level of compulsion and force he has learned is out of harmony with what the gospel permits. He may feel that because society has "spared the rod," it has lost its ability to discipline and teach the present generation, or he may be horrified at the use of physical coercion and see such behavior as the ultimate expression of sin.

While there maybe heated differences of opinion, Latter-day Saint counselors can find the only lasting answers in gospel principles. They must fuse those principles with careful study, deep commitment to family life, sorrow for the sinner, and change in the behavior of all involved in any kind of physical abuse.

Abuse: A Family Problem

A counselor needs to be concerned with the relationships that exist among the various individuals in the family. Sometimes the atmosphere includes a concern with the maintenance of power, control, and balance within the family unit. The abusive husband and the abused wife each represent a separate, distinct unit interacting within the larger family system, which is also a unique unit in interaction with broader society. When family violence occurs, it is possible that every family member is either a participant or a victim. Although all family members can usually be included in counseling, unfortunately some members sabotage change because, in their perverted view, the violence has come to serve a "necessary" function within the troubled family. Such a view has been found among many families suffering conflicts.

These families have developed a "system" of family abuse—a repetitive cycle or pattern where both the victims and the abuser "cooperate" in violence. Such patterns can even be transmitted across generations, and family members often become cynical about the possibility of change.

Professionals who work with family violence and spouse abuse have identified three characteristics of abusive and abused individuals. The first characteristic is low self-esteem (often rooted in past generations). It is characterized by the violence that is a symptom of the pain that arises when a person has a limited sense of personal worth. A second characteristic is the feeling of helplessness. A person with these problems worries about how to control his life and environment. The abuser husband uses violence to "gain control." Meanwhile, the victim lives in constant fear and is usually convinced that she is powerless to do anything about the problem. The third characteristic is that family members find it difficult to identify, discuss, and solve their problems. A typical abuser/abused couple sense that their dreams of a happy marriage are slipping away. Their attempts to resolve their difficulties sometimes result in violence and intensify the problem.

Offering Help

There are a variety of issues and "dos" and "don'ts" that lay counselors must keep in mind as they try to resolve problems of abuse. In addition, there are times when referral to appropriate professional help is the only responsible course.

Abuse and violence must not be overlooked. They can be life-threatening. Violence is a criminal behavior that must be stopped. Protection of the abused person is the counselor's first concern. It must be kept in mind, however, that the dynamics of chronic battering are usually complex. For example, a counselor's immediate reaction might be to encourage the abused wife and the children to either move in with relatives or to move into a shelter for the abused. This seems reasonable, but it does not take into account the possibility that such a decision may result in an episode even more violent than any other episode previously experienced. In addition, the wife may still feel that she loves or needs her mate and that he doesn't really mean to harm her or the children. She may be unable to see any pattern, sequence, or cycle to the abuse and may sincerely believe it will stop. She desires to end the violence but generally has no thought of ending the relationship. Therefore, a lay counselor should hesitate to suggest separation, even to a shelter or home, unless the victim rationally understands what she is doing, can verbalize how she is feeling and thinking, and has weighed the consequences of her decision to leave the home. There are times when the abused individual needs to make a decision to leave home, but the decision must be hers, and it must include long-range plans. It must not be precipitous or impulsive. However, in cases of emergencies and violent episodes, short-term protection is essential. An abused wife may even need police protection or a place to relocate for a few hours. Even the ramifications of her remaining away overnight need careful evaluation. The abused wife needs help in understanding the consequences of her decisions; she must prepare to live with what might follow.

The abused wife needs understanding and support. Her view of reality must be respected. The counselor can expect her to be resistant and protective. She may feel that if change occurs the marriage will still eventually deteriorate. Usually, she is certain that help to stop the violence will not be forthcoming. She may not believe that there are helpers who really understand her situation. She fears that she is the only one who has ever experienced such a crisis. She is ashamed of her own inadequacy, of her inability to make decisions, and of the fact that her home is not happy. Because she is convinced that she must carry her burden alone, she needs empathic assistance in expressing and sharing her fears, pains, hopes, and ambivalent feelings about her husband.

One of the most helpful contributions a lay counselor can make is to help the abused woman reestablish control over her life. Her feelings of helplessness and hopelessness are devastating, but she can be counseled to see that problems can be addressed and that solutions can be found. She still has choices. Richard J. Anderson, a Utah social worker, suggests that the counselor should talk with the abused woman rationally, suggesting realistic choices, so that she may develop a new sense of control. [^1] He should show her that she can gain by evaluating and selecting from a variety of alternatives. The counselor should help her to move away from all-or-nothing thinking, such as "Either stay in this relationship or have no relationship." Instead, she should be shown that she can leave, stay with the hope and commitment that things will change, seek individual or marital counseling, temporarily separate, stay and relinquish the hope that he will change, and so on. There are other options. The abused wife needs to feel that she has the power to change and control her life.

The abuser also needs help. If the primary purpose of intervention and counseling is to salvage the family, the counselor must not ignore or reject the offender. He needs the understanding, support, forgiveness, and counsel of someone who can influence him to change his behavior. He will probably not welcome this support, however. He will make it difficult for a counselor to counsel and may try almost anything to avoid a visit with a counselor. He is usually very resistant and does not believe anyone really cares about him or his side of the conflict. He will be extremely sensitive to any show of authority and will watch for attitudes and cues that suggest that the counselor's mind is already made up. The abuser needs to know that the counselor is committed to understanding his legitimate concerns, his pain, his anger, his isolation, his guilt, his frustration, and his disappointment about his marriage. Even though it may appear to others that he is out of control, he wants to believe that someone is willing to hear what he is attempting to do. He wants a valued person to understand his motives and hopes and not to view his behavior in isolation. Until he believes that the counselor understands him, he will not listen to counsel about his harmful behavior. It will be impossible to help him until he esteems the counselor as a friend. (See D&C 38:24-25.)

With trust established, a counselor can begin by teaching the family problem-solving and coping skills for dealing with everyday challenges. The counselor can show individual family members how to identify, talk about, and work through their stress, conflicts, and feelings. However, the counselor must remember that the abuser does not believe he can control his angry feelings. He invariably has difficulty expressing what he is experiencing and generally expresses emotions, such as frustration, guilt, and disappointment, in anger. He is convinced that he is victimized by his mate. He wonders why everyone is against him and why no one wants to hear his side of the story. In being angry and hurt, the abuser is bewildered that no one wants to nurture or comfort him. He is often unaware of his emotional conflicts and tends to express much of what he feels through exaggerated masculinity and violence.

The abused wife, too, has responsibility. She must be committed to change and not simply to a life of longsuffering. Her motto must be "I may be his excuse, but I will never be the reason for his abuse." The cycle cannot be changed if she continues to visualize herself as a helpless victim of her husband's rage. Even though the wife needs protection, empathy, and support, the counselor does her no favors if he charts a course for her that permits her to continue in the victim's role.

A Warning

Working with couples in abusive situations is a complicated process that should not be taken lightly. However, when a person does decide to work with and counsel a couple, he needs to remember that anger and stress are central factors in abuse. The counselor must work with these problems with the couple in a systematic way. In his article, "Structured Conjoint Therapy for Spouse Abuse Cases," John W. Taylor suggests that it is the responsibility of the counselor to promote personal responsibility for anger and stress; to show the connection between stress build-up and volatile anger levels; to point out and to begin to change the pattern of escalation of mutual anger and frustration; and to use rising anger and stress levels as warning signals that are preliminary to more harsh or violent behavior. [^2]

Behavioral Hints of Stress or Abuse in Families

As a result of many years of counseling abusers and their families, Richard J. Anderson has developed a profile of the male abuser and the abused female.

Profile of the Abusing Male

Profile of Abused Female

Review of Abusers' Attitudes

A general profile can be drawn of the husband and wife in abusive interaction. Invariably, the male abuser tries to confuse the issue of abuse and to legitimatize his actions by suggesting that his experience is unique to him and his family. He needs to be affirmed as a unique, worthy individual, but a counselor must not become distracted or sidetracked by his denials or rationalizations. The abuser is usually much like other abusers, and the abused is quite like others who are abused. Often, when abuse is a pattern, couples set up implicit or explicit rules that govern their behavior as well as a subset of rules about how each partner may behave with respect to those rules. Thus, if a couple sets a rule about fidelity, they also set a rule about which partner may define, violate, or change the rule.

Conclusion

If couples are serious in their desire to stop the abusive pattern and to improve their marital relationships, they will begin to take responsibility for their individual behavior and to acknowledge the many little games they play and the skill with which they provoke one another. Only as couples begin to treat their mates with respect, and only as they begin to give one another positive attention and nurturing, can they change.

Summary of Counseling Guidelines

Spouse Abuse

Casework 65 (January 1984): 14.

Suggested Readings

Gelles, Richard J. The Violent Home: A Study of Physical Aggression Between Husbands and Wives. Beverly Hills: Sage Publications, 1972.

Langley, Roger and Richard C. Levy. Wife Beating: The Silent Crisis. New York:

Pocket Books (Simon and Schuster), 1977.

Martin, Dee. Battered Wives. New York: Pocket Books (Simon and Schuster), 1976.

Walker, Lenore L. The Battered Woman. New York: Harper and Row, 1979.

About the Author

Dr. W. Eugene Gibbons, chairman of the social-work department at Brigham Young University, received his bachelor's, master's, and doctor of social work degrees from the University of Utah. Dr. Gibbons has worked as a psychiatric social worker at the Utah State Hospital and as director of outpatient and social services for Timpanogos Community Mental Health Center in Provo, Utah. He is presently chairman of the Utah state board of mental health. He has authored several professional articles and is a member of a number of professional and honorary societies.

In the Church, Dr. Gibbons has served in a variety of callings, including bishop, stake executive secretary, YMMIA president, elders quorum president, and first counselor in the Orem Utah Stake presidency.

He and his wife, Evelyn, are the parents of six children.

---
Notas:
[^1] How successful and satisfying was your first (or other) marriage? Did satisfying, rewarding, and growth-promoting events outweigh disappointments and unresolved problems? Did earlier experiences contribute to personal growth and development, or did they contribute to feelings of inferiority, inadequacy, or guilt? If the experiences were primarily negative, did you learn enough from them so that you are capable of creating something better in a new relationship? Divorced man/single woman. Discarding excess baggage. It is not unusual for people to carry into another marriage unresolved issues from an earlier marriage. These unresolved issues may be both conscious and unconscious. In more extreme cases it may be wise to seek professional help in an effort to understand and resolve as many past issues as possible. Unresolved issues frequently become hurdles to one's personal adjustment as well as relationships with others. Your bishop. If he is not able to give you the help you need, he will probably tee in a position to make intelligent referrals. Paul C. Click, "Children of Divorced Parents in Demographic Perspective," Journal of Social Issues 35 (1979).
[^2] Are you basically a happy, positive, growing, productive person? Do you have something constructive to offer another person and a new relationship, or are you seeking marriage as an escape from an unhappy, unpleasant, and overwhelming situation? Divorced man/widowed woman. Establishing realistic expectations. Most people entering a first marriage do so with unrealistic expectations. After marriage, however, they review those expectations and adjust them appropriately. Failure to adjust one's expectations may result in great disappointment and sometimes may even precipitate a divorce. Likewise, people may enter a second marriage with unrealistic expectations. For example, they may expect a second or subsequent marriage to be like a first one or to be like a first family. But a combined family may never be like a first family. As a lay counselor, you should observe the person you are helping, and if his expectations seem to be seriously unrealistic, it may be wise to refer him to a professional who can provide guidance by reviewing what expectations are realistic for a combined family. LDS Social Services or similar social agencies in your community. Margaret Crosbie-Burnett, "The Impact of Remarriage on Labor Force Participation, Divorce Decree Modification, Ex-Spousal Relationship, and Extended Family Reorganization," paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the National Council on Family Relations, St. Paul, Minnesota, October 1983.
