Terrance D. Olson, R. Lanier Britsch, Counseling: A Guide to Helping Others, vol. 2 ( 1985)

17

Dealing with Physical and Mental Handicaps

June Leifson

As Eldon Watson watched his young wife, Ann, bring their first child into the world, he hoped, as every parent hopes, that his baby would be well and whole. But his wishes were shattered when he looked at his child—the baby girl had a cleft lip and palate. A thousand thoughts rushed through his mind at once. What about his wife? Would she accept the baby? Would the child be able to play and dance and sing and date and . . . ? He looked at the doctor, but the doctor seemed to look everywhere but at Eldon. The nurses had tears rolling down their cheeks. Even though these people were obviously aware of the problem, they offered no support nor any encouragement. Fortunately, however, Eldon and Ann had caring families who gave help and support. They were lucky; not everyone has family, friends, and others who can help. Also, the Watsons had a good health insurance plan. But not everyone has good family support and good financial backing. Nor is everyone capable of giving competent help in times of difficulty such as this.

How can you, as a lay counselor, offer help to parents, to families, and to friends of the handicapped?

Every Situation Is Unique

First, remember that each physical and mental handicap is unique; no two families have the same problem. Do not assume that the same or a similar medical diagnosis presents the same problems to two different families.

Like Eldon and Ann, Allen and Carol Franz had a child with a cleft palate, but their child had other more severe problems. It was born with microcephaly—an abnormal smallness of the head. It had no eyes and was severely retarded. The Franzes had no health insurance and little or no family support. Carol stated that her mother had died just a few months before the baby was born. "When I really needed her, she wasn't here," she said.

Not only will financial conditions and family support vary, but also reactions and feelings toward a handicap will be interpreted and felt differently by each individual. A mother with a child born with Down's Syndrome stated, "I just wanted to scream. I was in shock. I just couldn't believe it could happen to us." A father's response when he had a child born with Down's Syndrome was: "I was stunned— shocked. My head was rolling. I felt sorry for myself; I felt sorry for the boy. I wanted to ask the Lord, Why me? What have I done? I had a sense of deep depression." Clearly, depending on family circumstances, finances, reactions, and feelings, a lay counselor will have to provide different kinds of help to each family.

Lay counselors can expect parents to exhibit a certain amount of guilt, depression, anger, grief, and frustration when confronted with a disabled child. The birth of a disabled child may be viewed as the death of the "normal and perfect" child who was to realize their personal aspirations. But expressions of reaction and emotion are seldom simple and clear-cut. A person's reactions are frequently blurred when he is first told of physical or mental problems; there may even be two or three reactions at the same time. One minute a person may feel guilt; the next minute he may feel guiltless but angry. The family may feel they should pull themselves together immediately, but intense emotional reactions usually require time to heal their pain.

Someone Somewhere Can Help

Lay counselors do not have to have all the answers, but they should let the family know that there is someone somewhere to help them; you and they together can find the answers and help. The hardest problem to overcome is fear of the unknown—not knowing where to obtain help. Eldon's situation in the delivery room could have been helped greatly if someone had immediately said, "There is help for this condition. There are operations and therapies that can help." When a doctor or a nurse does not provide this help, a lay counselor should add support and comfort. In every state, in every town, in every ward and branch there are resources to help families. These resources include medical specialists, county health nurses, books in the local library, and home teachers who can give special priesthood blessings. There are many support and resource groups who can give individuals and families the opportunity to hear from others who have gone through similar experiences. They can give honest, straightforward answers to tough questions. For those who become disabled later in life from adolescence onward—there are hospital rehabilitation centers, the Division of Rehabilitation, or the Governor's Committee on Employment of the Handicapped that can give assistance. There is someone somewhere who can help. As a counselor, you should assure the family that they are not alone.

Accept the Situation for What It Is—Go On

Help the family (and the individual, if he is mature enough or mentally capable) to accept the situation for what it is and go on. Trying to move forward is important. The handicap may be difficult to accept, but families need to objectively look at their circumstances. They (and others) often look at the person with the disability and see only the disability; they do not see the person. As one mother said, "In reality, my child is 90 percent normal, only 10 percent handicapped."

Another counseling problem may be the guilt of the parents. Even though as child's disability may come from the parents through a genetic defect, drug use, sickness, or an accident, their guilt must be resolved. Bishops and priesthood leaders can offer advice and direction. The lay counselor can help parents accept the situation, seek forgiveness if appropriate, and go on to build their lives.

The family and the disabled person, when capable, need to realize and emphasize the strengths and possibilities they and the disabled person have. Families have great strengths that can be developed. These strengths may be the physical or emotional ability of the family members to help the handicapped person. They may be the family's willingness to communicate, to be united, to show loyalty, to cooperate with each other, and to show love. Because some families consider accepting help a weakness, counselors can help such families realize that to accept help when needed is actually a strength.

In addition, families with handicapped members need to have a sense of security—a sense that they are working together to provide encouragement and support for each other. They also need to provide genuine praise and recognition for each other for every task performed (even small, simple tasks). As the family succeeds in its quest for strength, it will be able to give strength and help to the handicapped person. An important part of this supportive family climate is humor. Families and individuals need the relief that humor gives. But all must be sensitive. All must understand the difference between ridicule and humor and know the disabled person well enough to realize when humor will help.

Actions That Do Not Help

One common concern expressed by families who have members with physical and mental handicaps has been the negative reactions and responses of other people. One father said about his son, "His problem is obvious, and people don't know what to say or how to act. It is hard to accept their reaction. It's hard to go out in public with him. People want to have everything perfect. It makes it hard dealing with one's own ego." Not only adults but also children can be cruelly insensitive. For example, the first time one couple took their child to church, one of the Boy Scouts ran down the aisle, pulled the blanket down off the deformed baby, and said, "See."

It doesn't help when well-meaning individuals are more curious than concerned, when sympathy is not true sympathy, or when others don't really understand the problem. One insensitive person said to a mother of a mentally retarded child, "Well, your child is fine now." This mother wished that her child were "fine," but she realized that the child would be mentally retarded for life. Failure to accept the facts does not change reality.

Similarly, handicapped people do not want to be compared with others. Disabled people are unique. They do not want to hear about other handicapped people who succeeded where they cannot. Likewise, the parents of the handicapped do not want to hear about other handicapped people when the comparisons are not appropriate. Encouragement is necessary, but it must be given at the right time, with the correct facts, and in a sensitive way. By staying alert to such things, the lay counselor may be able to protect the troubled family from unintentional abuse at the hands of well-meaning but uninformed people. For example, the lay counselor could explain the situation to neighbors, friends, Church members, and others. This can remove the problem of morbid curiosity and place everyone on a more equal footing.

Neither the parent of a handicapped child nor the handicapped person himself (regardless of age) wants the disabled person to be treated as an object. An example of this is when a handicapped person goes with his parents or a friend to the supermarket to buy something. Because the clerk feels uncomfortable, he communicates with the parent or friend rather than with the handicapped person who is shopping. When a handicapped person has one disability, even a slight one, people often treat him as if he has many or more severe handicaps. For example, blind people are sometimes treated as if they are not only blind but also hard of hearing, unable to speak, and mentally incompetent. Lay counselors can help by explaining this human tendency to the family members and to the handicapped person, if he is capable of understanding. In addition, the lay counselor should be careful not to make this mistake himself.

All handicapped people do not have identical needs. Meeting the needs of a person with one disability differs from meeting the needs of another. We all have unique needs, wants, and desires. It is also important for the lay counselor to realize that most handicapped persons are not primarily in need. Many disabled persons are professors, doctors, bank managers, church leaders, home builders and so on. They can not only take care of themselves, but they can also offer valuable service to church and community.

Actions That Help

To help families and their handicapped members, the lay counselor needs to try to see the world from their viewpoint. This is called empathy. It involves both sympathy for their difficult situation and the attempt to see things the way they do. One of the best ways to understand how a disabled person and his family feel is to become well acquainted with them. A less direct, but helpful, approach is to read literature written from the viewpoint of the disabled and their families. Negative attitudes can be changed; positive attitudes can be intensified. Concern, caring, love, and kindness go a long way toward bridging any gaps that may exist between you, the family, and the handicapped person. Realize that although through the resurrection the person will someday be whole, the future promise of a perfect body will not solve the present problems of the disabled. The here and now of the situation also must be confronted. Disabled persons must learn how to manage their physical problems as well as they can. They must also learn to handle possible failures and painful interactions with others.

This places a responsibility on the lay counselor to be both empathetic and honest. The lay counselor should learn to speak the truth gently. The greatest barriers to disabled people are the attitudes of those around them. The lay counselor needs to take a hard look at his attitudes toward the disabled and to discover those feelings and incorrect ideas that may impair counseling.

Be practical in your help. For example, if a person with a white cane is standing on a street corner, ask him first if he would like your assistance before you take him across the street. If you plan to visit a disabled person, realize that the person who has disabilities is usually more susceptible to respiratory diseases and illnesses than others. Visit him when you are well. If the family of a disabled person states that they are doing just fine, but you can see that their world is crumbling around them, seek concrete ways to help them. You could take in a hot meal or two, take some of the children for an afternoon, do the washing and ironing, shop for needed items, or sit with the disabled person so the family can have a free afternoon or evening.

Your practical help is necessary, but you must allow the family or the handicapped person to be independent, at least as much as possible under the circumstances. When handicapped people develop their strengths and become self-sufficient, they gain confidence to face and enjoy life more fully.

The counselor should not only help the handicapped person and his family be self-reliant, but he should also help them understand that God is mindful of them and that handicaps can have a purpose. About a blind man, Jesus taught, "Neither hath this man sinned, nor his parents; but that the works of God should be made manifest in him." (John 9: 2-3.) President Spencer W. Kimball has said, "In the face of apparent tragedy we must put our trust in God, knowing that despite our limited view, his purpose will not fail. With all its troubles life offers us the tremendous privilege to grow in knowledge and wisdom, faith, and works, preparing to return and share God's glory." [^1]

In the Book of Mormon, Jacob teaches us that we are not to counsel the Lord, but that we are to take counsel from his hand. (Jacob 4:10.) The Lord does understand why we have the disabled, the blind, the deaf, and the deformed even if we, his children, do not have all the answers. We do not need to ask why, but we do need to seek faith in and support from the Lord.

What can a lay counselor do? You must pray for those with special challenges; then you must be willing to let the Lord answer prayers in his own way. He knows which ways are best—he is a caring Father. President Kimball has said, "The Lord has not promised us freedom from adversity or affliction. Instead, he has given us the avenue of communication known as prayer, whereby we might humble ourselves and seek his help and divine guidance, so that we could establish a house of prayer." [^2]

Have Hope and Faith

What else can a lay counselor do? He can stand in for the Good Shepherd. He can help the families have hope—an anchor to hold onto during the inevitable times of trouble. Hope provides the inner reassurance necessary to go forward.

Teach the families and the handicapped person to have faith in the eternal perspective of the gospel. President Kimball has said that when elders bless and recoveries do not follow, often there is not only disappointment but also a diminishing of faith. He noted that not all the sick and afflicted were healed in other dispensations, either. "Even the Savior, with all power on earth and in heaven, did not heal them all. He could have done so . . . but many did not have the faith to be healed . . . others he did not heal because they were not to be healed." [^3]

President Joseph F. Smith wrote that a person will not al ways be marred by scars, wounds, deformities, defects, or infirmities, for these will be removed in their course, in their proper time, according to a merciful providence of God. President Smith said, "Deformity will be removed; defects will be eliminated, and men and women shall attain to that perfection of their spirits, to the perfection that God designed in the beginning. It is His purpose that men and women, His children, be born to become heirs of God, and joint heirs with Jesus Christ, shall be made perfect, physically as well as spiritually, through obedience to the law by which He had provided the means that perfection shall come to all His children." [^4]

Dealing with Physical and Mental Handicaps

Suggested Readings

Darling, Rosalyn and Jon Darling. Children Who Are Different. St. Louis: C.V. Mosby Company, 1982.

Despain, Goldie. "Does the Church Provide Curriculum or Resource Material for Handicapped Members? Ensign, August 1981, pp. 28-29.

Ensign, April 1976. This issue contains a number of articles related to various handicaps and how members handle them.

Guidebook for Parents of Handicapped Children (currently being written to help parents understand the position of the Church on handicaps). Special Curriculum Office, 50 East North Temple, Room 2445, Salt Lake City, Utah 84150.

Hawkes, Mary Jane. "Sharing Sarah." Ensign, June 1981, pp. 32-34.

Komatsu, Adney Y. "After Much Tribulation Come Blessings." Ensign, November 1979, pp. 68-69.

For general information regarding Church programs for the handicapped write: Director of Handicapped Services, Personal Welfare Services, 50 East North Temple, Salt Lake City, Utah 84150.

About the Author

Dr. June Leifson, assistant dean of the College of Nursing at Brigham Young University, received her bachelor's degree from BYU, her master's degree from Wayne State University, and her Ph.D. in family sciences from BYU. She has been selected for numerous honors and awards, including Outstanding Young Woman of America. In 1977, she was a delegate to the White House Congress of Handicapped Individuals. In 1982, she received the Beatty Award, the Utah Public-Health Association's highest award. She has served the Church as a missionary, as a Young Women's president, as a stake Special Interest leader, and in many other ways.

---
Notas:
[^1] See Seymour B. Sarason, Work, Aging, and Social Change (New York: Free Press, 1977), pp. 245-51. Sarason discusses the belief, especially strong for professional people, that one must remain in a single career until retirement. He labels it the "one life-one career" imperative.
[^2] Letter from Thomas L. Kane to Brigham Young and others, July 11, 1850, LDS Church Archives; quoted in Leonard J. Arrington, "In Honorable Remembrance: Thomas L. Kane's Services to the Mormons," BYU Studies 21 (Fall 1981): 392.
[^3] Spencer W. Kimball, "The Things of Eternity - Stand We in Jeopardy?" Ensign 7 (January 1977): 3.
[^4] Joseph F. Smith, Improvement Era, June 1909, p. 592.
