Terrance D. Olson, R. Lanier Britsch, Counseling: A Guide to Helping Others, vol. 2 ( 1985)

18

Coping with Challenges in the Adult Life Course

Kenneth R. Hardy

"To everything there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven: A time to be born and a time to die; a time to plant, and a time to pluck up that which is planted." (Ecclesiastes 3:1 2.)

A common misconception as we are growing up is that once we are adults, having finished school, obtained a job, or gotten married, life proceeds pretty much on an even keel, without much change, until we are old and feeble. But those of us who have lived through adulthood know better. There are lots of ups and downs, good times and not so good, quiet times and hectic times. Sometimes we feel sure of ourselves; at other points, we are filled with doubts and, perhaps, misgivings about the choices we have made. For few, if any, is adult life a bed of roses. For most, there is a full share of challenges to be met.

Life Seasons and the Life Structure

Unless our lives are cut short from our three score and ten years (tine American life expectancy teeing about seventy-one years for men and seventy-seven for women), each of us experiences a life course of four major seasons, like the seasons of the year, which overlap and merge into each other: (1) pre-adulthood, those growing-up years of infancy, childhood, and adolescence; (2) young adulthood; (3) middle adulthood; and (4) late adulthood. Although each of these periods lasts about twenty-five years, because they overlap they run their full course in eighty years or so. Again, as the four seasons of the year may run a somewhat different course from year to year, so there are individual differences in our life course. For some, adulthood comes early, perhaps precipitated by parental death; for others, it is delayed; for some, young adulthood is stretched out like an Indian summer; while for others, fall comes early. These transitions may come out of phase for some of us, earlier or later than for those around us. Some of life's challenges we can expect, since they happen to most of us, for example, the slowing speed and reactions with age (we just can't keep up with the young adults on the basketball court anymore) . Other events are not anticipated, such as the sudden death of a spouse at age thirty-five. Unanticipated events more often assume crisis proportions, partly because they catch us unprepared; though if they are negative in character, we may perceive them more readily as unjustified or tragic.

The challenges of adult living come not only with "significant" events, but also with the day-to-day demands of life when things seem to be going more routinely. Perhaps we can do a better job of coping through planning and preparation if we have a better awareness of the possibilities that lie ahead.

Our "life structure" is built around the major choices we make and the course we then follow as we act upon those choices. Our choices and actions will be affected by the limits our world imposes upon us and by the actions of people around us. Our lives are centered around several life themes, areas in which we commit our energies and make our choices. Some common life themes include our life "dream"; our work; our relationships with others; our family life; our beliefs about life's meaning and purpose; and our life "clock" or expected life span. Generally, we could say that for a person's life structure to be "adequate" at any given time, it should provide at least a modicum of personal satisfaction and should be prized and rewarded by society. Sometimes, though, we will struggle through the more difficult periods of life if we can sustain our hope that things will improve and that our dreams can reach fruition. For example, a husband and wife may willingly submit to years of subsistence living to complete an education, expecting that circumstances will improve after the schooling is completed.

As time passes, we may question the adequacy of our choices and actions in one life theme or another. Perhaps a child gets into serious trouble; our employer offers us a promotion that requires a move to another state; a life-threatening illness occurs; or we are called to or released from a demanding Church position. Perhaps the ticking away of our life clock or the cumulative impact of personal and world events causes us to reexamine what we are doing. wishing, and believing.

If several major themes are affected at once, we enter a crisis period that requires important readjustments. A change in one thematic area may produce effects in others. For example, a job transfer may create disruptions in marital and family relationships if the spouse and children don't want to move; it may sever friendship ties and lead to a change in Church callings. Crises can initiate significant personal growth as we stretch ourselves to cope with them; on the other hand, if we are overwhelmed by them, their effects can be devastating.

Life Themes in Adulthood

Let's now consider each of the life themes in turn, noting how each theme appears in different periods of the life course.

The Life Dream.

The life dream is the vision of what we might do or become, what we might bring to pass in our lives. It excites us and helps us sustain our efforts as we try to bring to fruition the anticipations for the future contained within the dream. One of the tasks of early adulthood is to form and make specific that vision out of the shapeless longings of youth and then to set a course of action to bring it about. For example, John Goddard, the well-known explorer, constructed a list of some forty adventures or explorations he wanted to complete in his life, such as traveling the Nile from its source to the Mediterranean Sea. Another person might dream of becoming a gentleman farmer, complete with mansion and large, productive acreage. Someone else might envision being a fulfilled mother at the center of a loving home, surrounded by adoring children and a devoted husband. Yet another woman might not have crystallized a dream and may drift along for years, perhaps being a part of others' dream fulfillment, without any clear sense of her own desires. The dream usually includes within it elements of the other themes of work, of love and friendship, of growing older, of religion and life purposes.

Youthful zest, enthusiasm, and the vitalizing idealism associated with the life dream are great aids in carrying the person into and through the young adult epoch. For there are momentous changes associated with moving out of the parental home, performing missionary service, establishing oneself in a new social group, getting into the world of full-time employment, and creating and solidifying new personal relationships. These often reach fruition in marriage and the creation of a new family unit.

As we continue our lives, there will be times when we reflect upon our experiences, appraising whether our dreams are being realized, whether they are "pipe dreams" that are totally unrealistic, whether our dreams need revision since they may not represent what we now want, and so on. Actually, this appraisal is continuous, but most of the time we ignore or suppress it as a disruptive intrusion in the onward course to which we are committed. Periodically, though, we will engage in a more conscious, deliberate, and sometimes agonizing reappraisal. Many seem to experience this at midlife (roughly, ages thirty-five through forty-five). For example, a husband who has been buried for years in his work and career advancement may be shocked into the realization that he doesn't know his children and that his marriage has gone sour. Sometimes a poignant event (such as the death of a loved one) causes our feelings to surface, precipitating such a review. At such times we may rearrange the relative importance of our various life themes, with some assuming a new importance and others being relegated to a minor role.

Work, Occupation, Career

A central theme for most of us deals with the kind of work we will do as a vocation, including the "unpaid" vocation of homemaker. There are two common misconceptions we should consider here. The first is that after some initial indecision people decide upon their vocation, usually by their early twenties, and then stick with that commitment for life. The second misconception is that a person should remain with a given occupation for all of his or her working life. In actuality, there is wide variation in how quickly and certainly vocational decisions are made; furthermore, permanence in a vocational pathway is not necessarily related to a "successful" work career. In an analysis of persons listed in Who's Who in America, Sarason found that about 40 percent had made some kind of career change, and, of these changers, about one-fourth had made one or more major career shifts. This was true for persons listed in the 1930s, in the 1950s, and in the 1970s. [^1] One example of a man who took a long time to find his niche in the world of work is James Michener, one of the most widely read authors of our time. He knocked about doing various things for many years. He was thirty-eight years old before he settled down to serious writing. Perhaps a few examples of persons I am aware of, all of them devoted Church members, will give some flavor of the variety to be found.

One man began teaching school at age twenty and taught in the same school district for forty-seven years before retirement. He did painting and wallpapering on the side to help support his family.

Another man (N. Eldon Tanner) also began teaching school at age twenty. He too engaged in business activities on the side to help support his family. However, at age thirty-seven, he was elected to the Alberta provincial legislature, and two years later he became a cabinet officer of the provincial government. At age fifty-five he became president of a business firm; at age sixty-two he was called as a general authority, remaining so until his death at age eighty-four.

Still another man entered military service after high school graduation during world War II. Returning to civilian life, he went into the business world and became financially successful through a variety of enterprises. Called as a bishop, he felt very inadequate to counsel ward members. Following his release, he sold out most of his interests, moved his family to a university community, and started college in his late thirties. He graduated in three years, went on for an advanced degree, and is now a professional psychologist.

One woman was a full-time homemaker, rearing several children. In her early forties she returned to college, graduated, completed a doctoral degree, and now works full-time as a professional.

As a final example, a young man went to college immediately after high-school graduation, but he dropped out after two and one-half years to try his hand in business. He became an insurance agent, did very well at it, and was promoted to a managerial position. Unsatisfied with that line of work, he returned to college, graduated, and then went on to law school. He is now a practicing attorney.

Career shifts are likely to increase in the years ahead. In the midst of the computer revolution in our highly technological society, the pace of change has been stepped up, and the already bewildering array of occupational specialties is increasing. More and more, we will need periodic retraining to keep current and to take advantage of new opportunities as well as to avoid unemployment due to obsolescence and other economic causes. Additionally, Americans today believe that work should be personally fulfilling. All of this suggests that both men and women will find it more difficult than ever to settle into one line of work and remain in it for a lifetime. Thus, we can anticipate more frequent job or career changes. It is improbable that the stresses associated with such changes will disappear. If we anticipate that they will happen and plan for them, however, we can reduce the stress and better cope with it.

As we consider whether or not it is necessary for us to stay in one career path, a little thought experiment might prove enlightening. Suppose you were given a bonus on your life span. Let's say you had 150 years to live, and that you would have reasonably good physical and mental functioning for that period of time. Would you want to continue in the same work in which you are now engaged for the rest of your life? If not, what would you like to do? Would you like to pursue several additional careers? This experiment might suggest that there is nothing inevitable about having just one career in one's life. Additionally, a belief in eternal life suggests an extended sequence of possible careers, though we know practically nothing about career opportunities on the other side of the veil!

In the season of young adulthood, a major task of living is that of finding a work niche, settling into it, giving it a (perhaps extended) try, and progressing within it. By middle adulthood we have ordinarily established our credentials; now, however, we may reappraise our job choice and our progress within it, our future prospects, and our possibilities for making a change before it's "too late." As suggested by the work histories above, some may opt for a change. Others may stay where they are, either out of choice or necessity. Women today often confront tough choices as they approach mid-life. The woman who has remained single or who has chosen a childless marriage while pursuing paid employment may reconsider the possibilities for children before her child-bearing years pass. A woman who has- chosen marriage and motherhood in her early twenties without concomitant paid employment may experience a reappraisaI as her children grow up and may consider entry into the labor force in some way.

As we enter our sixties, we anticipate changes in our work status. For most, there will be no more promotions, the person having reached his terminal position. Retirement or partial retirement, early or delayed retirement, what to do with more free time, and adjustments due to changes in income must be considered as we move into late adulthood. Some enjoy, indeed relish, the retirement years; others, for whom the work theme is vital to their self-definition, put off retirement as long as possible and are miserable when it comes. The self-employed, not locked into a standardized retirement age, often work beyond the normal retirement age.

Personal Relationships

Another major life theme centers upon our relationships with other people not the casual or superficial interactions we have with acquaintances or work contacts, but rather relationships with others with whom we have more powerful emotional attachments. Usually these are members of our family of origin (parents, brothers, and sisters), friends of both sexes (most commonly about our own age), possibly a few work associates, marriage partners, children, and grandchildren. The foundation of these relationships is formed, of course, in pre-adulthood. Beginning with our dependence upon our parents in infancy, we work out adult-child relationships; then with brothers, sisters, and playmates, we develop ways of relating to peers, most commonly of the same sex; in our teen years, we struggle through the exciting and anxious process of forming attachments to peers of the opposite sex. Through all of this development, our affectional needs, our social skills, our tendencies to be distant and wary or open and trusting are molded.

As we become adults, major shifts occur that affect these relationships. [typically, we move out of our parents' home, and as we do so, we find that our child-parent relationship changes. Managerial care by our parents is less direct. Gradually, parents and children may develop a new relationship as peers and friends. Brothers and sisters, no longer vying so much for parental attention and favor, may find their relationships changing, frequently for the better. Casual relationships with opposite sex friends give way, through the years of young adulthood, to more lasting, committed friendships and relationships. For most (90 percent), marriage results. In America today, that first marriage is often followed by divorce and remarriage before midlife. Also, in our geographically mobile society, we lose contact with the friends of youth. Adult men typically report having few close male friends; many report having none at all. As the adult years proceed, if children enter our lives, they may provide a major focus for our emotional attachments.

It is interesting to note where people invest themselves emotionally; which relationships, if any, they will focus upon. It is instructive to consider how these concerns might change over the years of early, middle, and later adulthood, and to contemplate how the importance of these relationships might change as the life course proceeds. Some observers suggest that young adult men typically focus their energies on job and career to the relative neglect of family. In our Latter-day Saint society, men strongly committed to the Church may compound the situation by giving devoted service to time-demanding Church callings after the work day is over. The Church has recognized this problem, and the Brethren have striven in various ways to encourage men to give appropriate attention to the cultivation of family relationships.

Traditionally, we have conceived of men as being concerned with activities and things as they pursue achievements in the world, while we have conceived of women as being more concerned with feelings and people. Whether or not this is a culturally prescribed and thus self-fulfilling phenomenon, it has been true more often than not that women have given more care to the cultivation of relationships than have men. It has been noted, for example, that women provide the bulk of intergenerational helping in our society; that is, if older parents need help, the women (daughters or daughters-in-law) usually step in; if children need help, the women (mothers, grandmothers, aunts) generally provide it. Through such help, relationships are solidified.

Some observers have suggested that as adults move into the era of middle adulthood, men may reexamine their priorities and may shift toward a greater focus on interpersonal relationships, mending the marriage (or perhaps trying out a new one), trying to get closer to their children, and so on. They may also invest more in their relationships with their parents, as they see parental vigor and health decline, and recognize more vividly the limited time of the mortal life. Conversely, women who have immersed themselves in the care of home and family through the young adult years are sometimes reported to experience an opposite reaction to that of men as they enter midlife. Some, at least? turn outward from the family with a new or renewed interest in education, employment, and community involvement.

Those who do not marry, as well as those who return to singlehood through divorce or death of a spouse (and who do not remarry), may focus on peer (usually same-sex) relationships, sometimes sharing living quarters. They often develop special relationships with other family members (parents, nieces, nephews, and so on). Some evidence suggests that single women are happier with their lives than married women of corresponding ages. The evidence also suggests that single men are less happy than single women. Perhaps this is due to less adequate domestic arrangements and to less satisfactory or meaningful peer associations.

One other relationship should be mentioned, as it is one of considerable significance for many adults: the mentoring relationship. In young adulthood there may be someone, usually five to fifteen years older, who may provide sponsorship, guidance, support, and inspiration, usually in a personal and direct way, for the person. The mentor may open doors, teach the person the ropes, model appropriate behavior, and build the person's self-confidence. In time, as the person achieves experience and maturity, the relationship must change; at times, there is a stormy break, especially if the mentor needs the relationship to continue.

As the life course continues toward and into middle adulthood, the person may take his own turn at mentoring. Mentoring occurs in many settings: in the trade, business, or profession; in the sports world; in child rearing and home management; in the Church. Bishops, stake presidents, and auxiliary and quorum presidents often serve as mentors to their close associates. Youth leaders and teachers may also function as mentors.

Personal relationships of depth and stability greatly enrich our lives. They provide much of the stuff that makes our lives seem worthwhile. When those relationships end or become disturbed, much grief and agony ensue. The vicissitudes of these relationships tell much of the story of our lives.

Life Meaning and Purpose

The theme of life's purpose is the larger context into which we place the events of our lives. It includes the things we believe in and to which we commit ourselves, the people and institutions toward which we feel a sense of loyalty or obligation, and our ethical and moral sentiments. This framework provides direction and meaning in our lives. Through it we may come to envision our life as having some mission or purpose against the larger backdrop of history. Throughout our lives we form and then modify our system of making sense of our life experience. For Latter-day Saints, the gospel provides an encompassing framework, a focus for our devotions.

It is quite characteristic that from the midteen years through the twenties we are searching for a value system. During these years, typically, conversion and commitment to religious, political-economic, and other ideologies occur. Some youth may passively or vigorously disavow the values of their parents, opting perhaps for an attractive alternative, or perhaps floundering for a more or less extended period of time until a substitute is found or created. And, of course, after a period of rebellion or noncommitment, some may experience an upsurge or renewal of faith in a belief system that didn't "take" in their earlier years.

Once we have worked out our values and beliefs, it is difficult for us to change them, at least in any major way. As a missionary church, we are well aware that the great bulk of our converts come from the youth and young adult groups. While substantial numbers may come from those in their thirties, relatively few are forty or beyond. Similarly, for those who are lifetime members of the Church, activation or reactivation occurs more readily in the twenties and early thirties; it is less likely after forty. Of course, at any age, each of us may come to the point when our present belief system is so unsatisfying, untenable, or incomplete that we become quite receptive to new options. Generally, this is more likely before our patterns of commitment are finely rooted, or when life events create upheavals within us, causing us to question anew our earlier assumptions and beliefs. Such was the case for Thomas L. Kane, a noteworthy example because of his role in early Church history. The son of a noted federal judge, he led in his youth a privileged life of education and travel and had entertained a future that would fulfill political ambitions of fame and public prominence. But what started out as a casual encounter with the Mormons led him soon, at age twenty-four, to visit the beleaguered Saints, following their expulsion from Nauvoo, in the year 1846. He wrote of this experience four years later, "I believe there is a crisis in the life of every man, when he is called upon to decide seriously and permanently if he will die unto sin and live unto righteousness. . . . Such an event, I believe . . . was my visit to [the Mormon camps on the Missouri]. . . . It was the spectacle of your noble self denial and suffering for conscience' sake, [that] first made a truly serious and abiding impression upon my mind, commanding me to note that there was something higher and better than the pursuit of the interests of earthly life for the spirit made after the image of Deity." [^2]

While Kane did not join the Church, he stated, "But now, I have lost almost entirely the natural love for intrigue and management that once were a prominent trait of my character." His commitment to loftier ideals was demonstrated in many subsequent acts of public service, most particularly in his assistance to the Mormon cause.

The "Life Clock"

At all ages, we have some sense of the passage of time in relation to the running out of our life course, but that awareness changes drastically over the years. The baby's focus upon the immediate present enlarges to the daily pattern of the child, who gradually comes to look forward to the time when he or she is grown up and able to do the things adults can do. As youth and young adults expand and crystallize the life dream, it seems that life stretches out almost endlessly before them. Growing old and dying seem almost hypothetical, something that happens to others. The young, at the height of their bodily vigor and mental agility, push the awareness of death aside; the fulfillment of plans and the achievement of goals occupy center stage. But with the passing of the years, we become more conscious that our life span is limited, that time will run out for us. While our bodily faculties diminish only gradually, the modest loss is noticeable enough to prick our consciousness. The deaths of our grandparents, then of our parents and their generation, and perhaps of some of our peers makes much sharper the recognition that our turn, too, is coming, and that we must come to terms with the reality of death. As we go through middle adulthood and into late adulthood, time seems to speed up, the years passing by ever more swiftly.

Young adults experience a tug-of-war between their desire to explore, to have adventure, and to be "free" and uncommitted and the conflicting wish to settle down, to establish roots through marriage, home, family, and steady employment. Those who settle down early may later wonder if they missed out on the excitement of young adulthood, while those who postpone settling down until their thirties may wonder if they passed by golden opportunities in job entry or marriage. As time passes, we have some sense that if we are going to marry, buy our first dwelling, and so on, we should do so about a certain point in time.

During the years between the mid-thirties and the mid-forties, as we pass the anticipated midpoint of our life, we look back upon the past and also look forward to the future. We consider the things we still might change in our family relationships, our careers, in our personal habits, and in our value systems.

In the forties and fifties, we tend to experience a greater sense of urgency to make amends for our neglect of or damage to others, and to accomplish things while we can. At the same time, we engage in a more studied reflection of what we are about. These are the "solid citizen" years, where we experience ourselves at the center of society, the anchor generation between the older folks and the younger ones we are shepherding. For most of us, these are the years of fruition, when our careers reach their peaks and when our children mature and leave the nest, giving us some evidence about how they have turned out. Many experience these years as "the best years of our lives." We also begin to wonder what our legacy will be, what we will leave for our children and the world, what social impact our lives will have made.

In the sixties and seventies, the scales have definitely tipped on the side of being old rather than young. Now we spend much time reviewing the past. While we may initiate new projects, these are usually of more modest dimensions than those of young and middle adulthood. As health and vigor permit, we may try to bring to a satisfactory conclusion unfinished business or projects, though at a more measured pace than formerly. Those who feel particularly robust may initiate ambitious new projects, and some may bring these to a satisfactory conclusion.

In our eighties and nineties, should we survive in reasonably good health, we may experience as a bonus granted to us before it is our turn to leave. By now, we have outlived most of our peers and perhaps some of our children.

Throughout adulthood there abides the persistent wish for life after death. Unless quenched by despair, cynicism, sin, or hopeless misery, the flame of faith enlightens our path with the promise of reunion with those who have preceded or who will follow us through the veil.

Gospel Helps

We have now partially reviewed the course of five themes, those of the life dream, work, personal relationships, life meaning and purpose, and the life clock. These themes don't tell all the story of our lives, of course. Our hobbies and recreational pursuits, our ethnic background, and community and other involvements in society are some, though not all, of the other threads that complete the tapestry of our lives. But having discussed what we have, let us now look at some of the contributions the gospel framework might make in helping us and those around us cope with the challenges in the adult life course that we have considered.

A central value of the gospel is that it provides an eternal perspective. It shows us that this mortal probation, our life on earth, is but a brief way station on an eternal journey, and that life has a wise and glorious purpose. I think it significant that in all dispensations, God has provided his prophets with transcendent visions of space and time, parts of which have been shared with the people and which we find in our scriptures. He has also revealed commandments, principles, and teachings to guide us in making decisions and in acting consistently with eternal goals and righteous purposes. This perspective can help us work out life themes that will lead us to joy rather than to bitterness and regret. It can help us keep our priorities properly ordered so that pursuit of goals in one life theme will not crowd out others to which we should attend. As President Spencer W. Kimball has said, "If we live in such a way that the considerations of eternity press upon us, we will make better decisions." [^3]

This suggests that proper planning through the gospel vision can prepare us for the inevitable vicissitudes of life and can prevent us from making some serious mistakes. It can also make us resilient against the stresses of expected and unexpected crises. But, generally, a gospel vision does not come easily or early in life. For many, the gospel perspective is not prized in early adulthood, and for many more it is lost farther along the way. All of us make mistakes, some of them bad ones. Fortunate it is, then, that the gospel teaches us that life's conditions are redemptive and educative rather than condemnatory and punitive. We can repent; we can change; we can seek to make amends and to correct our course at any age. The parable of the prodigal son, the parable of the laborers in the vineyard hired at different times of the day, the Savior's treatment of the woman caught in adultery all are examples of God's willingness to help lift us sinners out of old mistakes and start us on a better course.

The eternal perspective of the gospel also comforts us in our declining days. As we experience the diminution of our powers and the waning of energy, as our bodily mechanisms wear out, we can accept this in good spirits, being assured that on the other side of the veil we shall pick up the unfinished business of life with full vigor and continue on the pathway of eternal growth.

Making Good Decisions

But a view into the eternities does not necessarily illumine our short-range decisions. It is a condition of mortality that we live by faith, seeing darkly into the days end years ahead. Obtaining a patriarchal blessing, especially as we enter young adulthood, may provide us with some glimpses into the book of our life possibilities and give us some general direction. Wisely, perhaps, such a blessing is rarely specific enough to guide us in day-to-day decisions. Instead, it paints with broad brushstrokes.

Our lives are not fully programmed in advance; rather, they are open-ended to allow the full exercise of agency. The choices we make are real. One of our probationary tests seems to be to check our willingness to place ourselves in the Lord's hands, trusting him to help us in our daily wale as well as at life's critical junctures. Another test is to give ourselves fully into his service. At times, specific guidance may come in answer to fervent prayer, perhaps after fasting; it may come through a father's blessing or other special priesthood blessings. At such times, there maybe a special calling for us to fulfill or a virtuous reason for us to pursue a certain course. Yet, in many cases, it is probably true that it doesn't matter to God which of several options we exercise as long as we operate within righteous guidelines. But a life guided by faith is perhaps designed to keep us humbly attuned to the promptings of the Spirit, thereby leading us to discern when our own best judgment is quietly ratified and when another course might better be followed.

Missionary Service in Young Adulthood

Participating in missionary service, particularly for those on the threshold of young adulthood, can help to establish one upon a favorable life course. Therein are provided opportunities to give oneself wholeheartedly and fully to a life of Christian service, to develop love for other people of varying ages and circumstances, to make decisions guided by the Spirit, to form and cultivate mutually beneficial companionships, to organize one's daily activities for maximum effectiveness, to enhance a scripturally-based gospel knowledge, and to make good choices based upon well-ordered priorities. A successful missionary is much better equipped to complete the transition into young adulthood.

The Special Friend

A special friend is someone who shares our vision, our dream; who believes in us and who supports us in our struggle to achieve our dream, who participates fully in it. A mentor cannot fulfill all these requirements. For those who marry, it is particularly fortunate if one's spouse is someone with whom they can go hand-in-hand toward the actualization of the dream they share. A wise marital choice is valuable in this regard, but equally important is a continuing mutual commitment and willingness to work as a team to achieve common and individual purposes.

For those who do not marry, it is most beneficial to have a good friend who can fulfill the requirements just mentioned, at least to some degree. Possibly a series of such friends at different periods may partially substitute here.

The Gospel in Home Living

Through all the years of early, middle, and late adulthood, the consistent implementation of Church standards and programs within our personal and family life can Neatly help us cope with the changing stresses of life. For example, the use of family councils, personal interviews, family home evenings, and parental planning sessions can resolve conflicts and foster love, unity, and close relationships within the family. Personal and family preparedness programs can prevent many problems and help with emergencies. Continuing educational and vocational development can increase career opportunities and employment security and enrich life; sound financial management, including food production and storage, adequate insurance coverage, and a savings and budgeting program can provide for economic resilience; developing esthetic and avocational talents and appreciation can add much to life; involvement as individuals and as family groups in service to others—in neighborliness, missionary work, genealogical and temple work, and Church callings—can foster character development and spiritual growth.

Writing entries in a personal journal in a thoughtful, consistent manner can provide opportunities to review our actions in relationship to our goals. Summarizing these in our personal history gives us opportunities to reflect upon the broader purpose of our lives and to revise our course as needed. As we participate in activities with our extended families in genealogical research, in family reunions, and in family projects—we can, if we will, place ourselves in the broader sweep of family and human history, in the great drama of mortal existence. We can cement ties with our kin, drawing closer to those to whom we owe much, with whom we share much, and to whom we can give much.

For many, great opportunities open up in the retirement years that can fill late adulthood with satisfying and ennobling service, years that might otherwise be filled with aimless busywork, loneliness, self-pity, or a surfeit of recreation. Full-time missionary work may be a possibility, as may temple work. Continued genealogical research and the development of family histories can produce generational ties. A variety of other voluntary service options, if exercised, can make the retirement years as busy and meaningful as we

care to make them: welfare projects, foster grandparenting, sub-for-San/as, neighborly visiting of the home-bound, and so on.

Gospel Service

In serving others we find much of the meaning of life. Those others are found everywhere: within the walls of our own home; among our ancestors; in our neighborhoods; indeed, wherever our influence might reach. In the larger sense, our life task is to grow toward sanctification, and the most important virtue toward that end is that of Christ-like love. We foster and demonstrate the love of God and of his children through a life of consistent service. The Church formalizes many opportunities for service in the callings we receive, but our service should not be limited to formal assignments. As we extend ourselves in love, we reap a harvest of trust, mutual respect, caring, and true friendship, whether within the home or outside it.

An important service we can provide adults of any age is to extend empathy, compassion, and gospel reassurance as they experience the challenges of the adult life course. When they are agonizing over seemingly endless vocational decisions or are experiencing marital distress or family conflicts; when they are crying out against the injustices, tragedies, and seeming futility of life; when they are discouraged about insufficient worldly success or wondering if their life has made any difference; when they are filled with remorse or misgivings over past mistakes—in all such cases we can help. At these times, we can help people understand that difficulties in adult living are normal. We can share our gospel perspectives to help the person with his decisions and struggles. Since we ourselves are trying to find our own way, we can extend empathy. Finally, we can extend compassion, patience, long-suffering, and kindness—in a word, love - as we support the efforts of others to work through their difficulties.

Coping with Challenges in the Adult Life Course

Suggested Readings

I have drawn heavily from what I consider to be the best single reference to the adult life course: Daniel J. Levinson, The Seasons of a Man's Life (New York: Knopf, 1978); the book is also published in paperback (New York: Ballantine, 1979). His general conception of the life course, the elements of the life structure, and the temporal processes affecting that structure I find very insightful. In this work, Levinson postulated a rigid sequencing of periods of stability and change affixed to precise ages, an idea that has not received general support.

Of course, I have also relied upon the work of many other contributors to adult psychology. A good general treatment of this field is the text by Judith Stevens-Long, Adult Life: Developmental Processes, 2nd ed. (Palo Alto: Mayfield, 1984).

About the Author

Dr. Kenneth R. Hardy, professor of psychology, has taught at Brigham Young University for over thirty years. He received his bachelor's and master's degrees from the University of Utah and his Ph.D. from the University of Michigan. He has been a consultant in interpersonal relations and community development and has published articles in both professional and Church periodicals.

He has served in the Church as bishop, bishop's counselor, high councilor, ward executive secretary, and in many other teaching and administrative callings.

He and his wife, Mary, are the parents of six children.

---
Notas:
[^1] Look within yourself, analyze your feelings, and determine your true beliefs; don't be afraid of what you find.
[^2] Doubt is not necessarily a rejection of God. Again, it is important to recognize the multiple meanings of the word doubt. In its modern, constructive sense, it means to be unsettled in belief or opinion; to be uncertain or undecided. It implies a lack of information or evidence upon which to base a belief. Doubt, according to this usage, is an inevitable consequence of a maturing, inquiring mind and should be managed, not denied. In contrast, the more traditional meaning of doubt includes the notion of distrust. In a religious context, doubt is associated with a rejection of God and a thankless denial of his goodness. Is there any wonder the word doubt has such a strong negative connotation? Sincere questioners can be encouraged to disclose their commitment to learn at the same time they reveal their questions. They can also avoid being hurt or offending others by choosing their words carefully and defining any likely-to-be-misunderstood expressions. Work to be worthy of building faith through obedience, prayer, study, and good works.
[^3] No one knows everything We in the Church often use the words I know to describe our testimonies ("I know the Church is true.") Most often, we mean that we have received a witness of the Spirit. That kind of knowledge comes by means other than what science or technology subscribe to, and it is possible to receive this sure witness from God. But no mortal can know everything about God and his ways. (See Moses 1:5) And sometimes people use the word know to mean strong belief or faith (in other words, "I intensely believe the Church is true," or, "My faith is strong that the Church is true.") Establish personal study programs to expand the information and evidence upon which your beliefs and knowledge are built.
