Terrance D. Olson, R. Lanier Britsch, Counseling: A Guide to Helping Others, vol. 2 ( 1985)

19

Helping Those with Religious Questions and Doubts

D. Jeff Burton

To some it is given by the Holy Ghost to know that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. . . . To others it is given to believe on their words, that they also might have eternal life if they continue faithful. (D&C 46:13-14.)

Mormonism is known, among other things, for its emphasis on personal conviction and strong testimony. Members often expect to receive a manifestation or confirmation that the essentials of the gospel are true. Partly because of this expectation, Latter-day Saints with unresolved religious questions and uncertainties may experience agonizing introspection, emotional difficulties, and even self-imposed alienation.

One aspect of the problem is that while some Latter-day Saints are patient in their search for understanding and are willing to seek additional insights into unresolved questions of faith, others are troubled by their unanswered questions. They seek a complete fulfillment and understanding, and when this ideal is not achieved, such seekers often experience feelings of unworthiness or guilt. Perhaps some of their religious colleagues even question their tendency to question, further suggesting that there must be something wrong with their faith.

Although many Latter-day Saints live comfortably close to an unruffled ideal, others have not achieved such serenity. For example, some seekers repress their natural urge to question in order to maintain an unruffled image, and they may settle for the appearance of belief in place of actual conviction. Such self-deception creates emotional conflict and is attended by feelings of guilt and hypocrisy. They may say to bishops, priesthood leaders, Relief Society presidents, and friends such things as "I'm living a lie," "What's wrong with me? I can't live up to the expectations of others," or "I feel so guilty. The Lord must hate me."

Some Latter-day Saints feel caught in a circle of attempts and failures to gain a testimony. They may feel frustrated, discouraged, and unworthy.

They may say, "I've prayed and fasted but I still have questions. Why don't I get the same answers as others?" or "I just can't accept a calling while I have these nagging doubts," or "I don't deserve blessings because I have uncertainties and questions inside."

Furthermore, members desiring to discuss their questions and doubts often find communicating about religious issues difficult or impossible. With no exchange of ideas, their emotional, spiritual, and intellectual growth may suffer. If others feel uncomfortable talking with them about their questions, they may become emotionally alienated from the Church and even stop all Church activity. They may tell you something like, "If I can't have the same assurance as others, I don't want to participate," or "I can't talk to anybody about this," or "If it weren't for the kids I'd just quit it all."

People with unresolved doubts may experience marital conflicts, denial of reality, weakened ability to deal with feelings and emotions, and reduced motivation to learn. They may say, "My wife keeps saying, 'Why can't you just believe? Why do you have to question everything.?' She thinks I'm not trying, that I'm somehow unworthy of the blessings of a sure knowledge. Why can't she just understand that I do have questions?"

Interestingly, the struggle of a doubter reveals a degree of faith. Without some religious faith, there would be no reason to seek or to be dissatisfied with not understanding it all. People do not seek to understand that in which they have no faith. It is the recognition or hope for truth that helps guide those who are troubled about religious matters.

Religious doubt may arise at any age, but it is more typically seen during the years of intellectual maturation. Counselors should be particularly sensitive to this problem among young adults, and especially among college students.

Counseling Those with Doubts

Many of the problems associated with religious questions and doubt grow out of misconceptions concerning the relationship of knowledge to faith and the roles these play in our lives. By sharing the following perspectives on the nature of religious conviction and commitment, counselors can help struggling members to see their circumstances in a more positive light and pave the way to personal growth and emotional satisfaction.

I. Mormonism and society have different meanings for the terms faith and belief. Latter-day Saints often see the terms belief and faith as synonymous, both being the natural result of learning truth. The scriptures often equate the two words. However, in our present-day society, particularly in the sciences, the terms belief and faith have come to have distinct, mutually exclusive meanings.

In the contemporary sense, belief is a mental state that tells us something is true based on experience, information, evidence, or authority. For example, if we flip a coin fifty times and tabulate the results of heads versus tails, we are likely to believe from the evidence that each comes up about equally. Of course, no one person's interpretation of the evidence will prove satisfactory to everyone. A mother looks at a newborn baby and has sufficient evidence to believe in the existence of God. But a biochemist looking at the same child may marvel at the power of evolution.

The term faith, on the other hand, refers to a feeling, a trust in "the evidence of things not seen." (Hebrews 11:1.) Belief is learned; faith is evidence yet to be learned. Belief is what we really think; faith is what we are willing to accept in the absence of proof.

Also, faith implies an active personal commitment. Thus, under these definitions, it is possible to question aspects of our religion yet live the gospel by faith.

Accept the possibility that you and the person you are counseling may be operating under different definitions as you discuss belief and faith. Define your terms to assure clear communication.

To know, in its technological sense, is to have a clear understanding, to be relatively sure. Knowledge is familiarity with or awareness of facts and evidence. But in mortality nothing can be known by scientific criteria with perfection, only in degrees of confidence. While science and statistics have developed elaborate methods for testing, verifying, and strengthening the evidence upon which beliefs and knowledge are based, not even scientific tests produce perfect knowledge. Furthermore, scientists themselves use faith when they rely on their own methods or unproven assumptions.

Questioners can be shown that since no one can claim perfect knowledge in everything, it is only reasonable to expect a degree of uncertainty in this mortal life.

A popular approach to dealing with such questions is to blame Satan or the weakness of the questioner. But if wondering is natural, if seeking more light and knowledge is a legitimate gospel activity, and if one so seeking is obedient to gospel principles, then guilt and repression of questions are unnecessary and only serve to cause pain and to divert attention away from dealing responsibly with real religious issues.

Point out that varying strengths of belief in different facets of the gospel are not uncommon, and that questions are not the same as unbelief; indeed, it is highly unlikely that any two people will share exactly the same convictions on all issues. Help the person with questions or doubts to see himself as an integral part of a diverse Church rather than as an outsider.

On the other hand, a philosophy of sincere inquiry does not license questions asked in a spirit of challenge or accusation. Suppose a Church member has trouble understanding why the Lord would command Nephi to kill Laban. How does he seek information and express his true feelings without sounding distrustful, negative, or dissenting? Such threatening overtones can frequently be avoided by prefacing questions with honest statements of feelings, such as "I'm troubled by . . . " "It bothers me greatly, but I am skeptical of . . ., " "This is a question that has caused me a lot of turmoil. I want to talk to you because I respect you. I wonder if you could tell me what you know about . . . ?"

Counsel the person that the pursuit of truth is rarely harmed by sincere questions made in the spirit of humble curiosity.

Similarly, President Joseph F. Smith testified before the Congress of the United States that Latter-day Saints "are given the largest possible latitude of their convictions, and if a man rejects a message that I may give to him but is still moral and believes in the main principles of the gospel and desires to continue in his membership in the Church, he is permitted to remain." In the same setting, he observed:

Members of the Mormon church are not all united on every principle. Every man is entitled to his own opinion and his own views and his own conceptions of right and wrong so long as they do not come in conflict with the standard principles of the Church. If a man assumes to deny God and to become an infidel we withdraw fellowship from him. But so long as a man believes in God and has a little faith in the Church organization, we nurture and aid that person to continue faithfully as a member of the Church though he may not believe all that is revealed. (Reed Smoot Hearings, pp. 97-98.)

The priority of faithfulness over particular beliefs is further demonstrated in the temple-recommend interview, which stresses a person's behavior, obedience, attitude, faithfulness, and commitment.

It is possible to show that questions and uncertainties concerning religion need not keep a person from participating in all facets of the gospel and need not prevent him from full enjoyment of gospel blessings. Through faithfully living the gospel, one may gain a witness that the gospel is true.

Caution the person against jumping to conclusions based on inevitably inadequate information. Reemphasize the need for faith while he is gathering information and knowledge.

It is possible that a person's troubled response to doubt and questioning is related in part to the way he was reared. Suppose, for example, as a young boy he innocently asked, "Did Joseph really see God?" If his parent or teacher responded with horror, "Of course he did! How could you ask such a thing?" the child may have concluded that questions are unimportant or bad. As he grew to adulthood, he may have come to see skepticism and curiosity as defects in his character. Personal doubts may have been seen as inappropriate temptations rather than as challenges to be explored and investigated. Thus, leaders, teachers, and parents may have unwittingly planted the seeds of trouble years ago.

A person may also be influenced by local responses to perceived skepticism. The people in his community may encourage guilt as a response to his doubt and inculcate the notion that questioning is a sign of sin, slothfulness, or error. Such negative reactions represent the fears and weaknesses of individuals and are not part of the gospel.

Help the person to understand himself and those around him, and urge him to accept others with patience and love while learning new ways to manage questions and doubts. After all, compassion for the uncompassionate is central to the Savior's mission.

There is a spiritual dimension to religion, sometimes called the supernatural or metaphysical, that cannot be explained by contemporary empirical methods. And a person's spirit and mind can be taught truths by God that cannot be learned otherwise. But this requires obedience, faith, and a sincere heart. We are to learn by faith as well as by study. (D&C 88:118.)

So explore with the "sincere doubter" the possibility of giving the spiritual side of life a better chance to succeed. Sensitively explore the possibility that the person's attitudes or sins may be blocking his spiritual learning.

In Summary

As in all counseling, Church leaders, parents, and friends need to show concern, compassion, and understanding for the pain and difficulty the religious doubter may be experiencing. In addition, there are a number of practical suggestions the counselor can offer:

Finally, counselors should leave their charges with hope.

James Francis Cooke said, "The most welcomed people of the world are never those who look back upon the bitter frustrations of yesterday, but those who cast their eyes forward with faith, hope, courage, and happy curiosity."

Suggested Readings

Faith. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1983.

About the Author

D. Jeff Burton, an industrial hygienist, received his B.A. from the University of Utah and his M.A. from the University of Michigan.

He and his wife, Alice, have served as lay counselors and resource persons in the Salt Lake Winder Stake, where he is a high councilor. Brother Burton has published several articles on the problem of doubting.

He has served as a missionary in Japan, as a stake missionary, as a counselor in two bishoprics, and in other Church capacities. He and his wife are the parents of four children.
