Terrance D. Olson, R. Lanier Britsch, Counseling: A Guide to Helping Others, vol. 2 ( 1985)

20

Retirement: Its Opportunities and Challenges

Phileon B. Robinson, Jr. Evan T. Peterson Gary D. Hansen

"Age is opportunity no less than youth itself though in another dress. And as the evening twilight fades away the sky is filled with stars, invisible by day."

—Henry Wadsworth Longfellow

Retirement is a relatively new development on the social scene. A century ago there were virtually no retired persons except for the very wealthy. Some Americans think of retirement as the beginning of the end, and the career-oriented person may experience severe depression and withdrawal after retiring. The male suicide rate for many years has been highest for those age sixty-five and older.

Research shows that about half of older employees would prefer to continue working even if they had a chance to retire. Being able to work produces feelings of pride, accomplishment, and creativity. Work provides structure and order to one's life.

Obviously, work is much more than a source of income, as it partially regulates lives, provides social relationships, and offers a variety of important experiences. But retirement years can be filled with opportunity and meaning in spite of the losses associated with withdrawal from the labor force.

Retirement and the Law

Mandatory retirement is undergoing a transformation in this country, largely due some humanitarian concern and to the financial strain placed on the Social Security system. The Age Discrimination in Employment Act (1967) protects workers between the ages of forty and sixty-five from discriminatory practices in employment. In 1978 the act was amended to include workers up to the age of seventy. In July 1977 Maine became the first state to end all mandatory retirement.

Early retirement became increasingly popular during the 1960s. It was originally promoted by labor unions for industrial workers, but the trend has been changing because of the demands of the aging population on the Social Security system, accelerated inflation (which has a severe impact on those with a fixed income), and the fact that older people are now in better health and are capable of working longer.

Retirement Expectations

Some scholars and counselors have tried to identify the phases of retirement. Before retirement, many people develop fantasies about what their lives in retirement will be like. When retirement actually takes place, they go through a honeymoon phase in which they attempt to live out these pre-retirement fantasies. They plan to get a lot of things done around the house; to study music or art; to be of more help to their spouse; or to visit their children and grandchildren more frequently. They may plan to serve a mission or two or to get caught up on their temple work, genealogy, or life history. If their ideas for retirement are based on realistic information, they could well experience success and move into a period of stability. However, if their expectations are unrealistic, they will be unsuccessful in their retirement until they develop a realistic understanding of it.

Adjustment to Retirement

Adjustment to retirement can be a challenge. As you help people approaching this stage of life, consider their situation. First, the person will lose his job as well as his related work and social roles. Second, he will have reduced income and loss of purchasing power. He may have problems associated with advanced age, such as declining health and the illness or death of his spouse. For some Latter-day Saints, another loss occurs about the same time as retirement from the labor force: retirement from Church activity. Many older Church members are not called as bishops, Primary teachers, stake presidents, Sunday School teachers, Relief Society presidents, and so forth. As a matter of fact, many are released from a variety of different positions. Those in positions to help the retired maintain active Church service can bless their lives by doing so, and the retired have much to offer the Church as well.

Four factors (income, health, family and friends, and spirituality) largely determine the options that retired people have. Income is usually the most important factor. People who adjust most easily to retirement are those who have made adequate provision for financial security and who have achieved their job-related goals. Those who have looked forward to retirement and who have plans and activities that will keep them involved tend to be happier. Retirement satisfaction is also related to certain occupations. Professionals and those from upper management show the most satisfactory adjustment to retirement.

Typically, health does not decline because of retirement, but, a person's health can determine much of the quality of his life. Family and friends also have a profound influence on his well-being. Money cannot buy friendships nor the love that exists among close family members.

The four factors are interrelated. For example, good health can help to produce a strong financial situation. Conversely, a good financial condition can help to maintain adequate health.

Spiritual well-being enhances adjustment to retirement. Those who are spiritually secure tend to view life more positively than do those who are spiritually insecure and uncertain.

Financial Preparation

Latter-day Saints preparing for the economic needs of their advanced years may be faced with some especially important challenges. Mormons have a longer life expectancy than most people, so economic planning is especially important. They often have larger families, with a commitment of resources to children continuing even after the children leave home. Indeed, it is not unusual for a Latter-day Saint father to retire before his last child has left home, so in some cases retirement funds will be supporting more than just an elderly couple. Also, Latter-day Saints make substantial financial contributions, especially for tithing and missions.

Financial preparation for old age is extremely important for everyone. We don't know how long we will live. We don't know with certainty what our future financial obligations will be. For example, an extended illness can use up all of the savings that a couple has accumulated. Also, we don't know what the rate of inflation will be in the future.

Here are a few practical suggestions about financial preparation:

Some type of private pension is usually required in order for retirees to have sufficient income. As recently as 1950, only about 10 percent of American workers were covered by some form of private pension. Today more than 30 percent of workers are covered. Most of these private plans have begun since the creation of Social Security and are designed to supplement it. Unfortunately, the majority of current retirees receive little or no pension beyond their Social Security income. Authorities agree that retirees need about 75 percent of their preretirement income to avoid a drop in their level of living. Savings are often inadequate, and many American retirees have to live on about half of their pre-retirement income. This is likely to be very difficult, especially in advanced old age and in widowhood, when the potentials for poverty and dependency are so high.

Older adults, before and after retirement, should acquire and use the best consumer information available. Such publications as Consumer Reports, Changing Times, and Money can be helpful. Inflation increases the probability that continued work will be essential for many, and second careers have been satisfying to both older men and women because of the added income, the satisfaction of productivity, and the involvement with others that they afford.

Investments should include assets that will respond favorably to inflation, such as real estate and some stocks and mutual funds. Those planning retirement should maximize their Social Security earnings, develop a substantial private pension or IRA or Keogh account, and have a combination of fixed- and variable-return assets in their savings and investment portfolio. Those who take these steps will enjoy more security and prosperity. They will be able to maintain an enjoyable life-style without the dread of deprivation, compromise, and dependency.

Those who want a secure future should regularly review their insurance programs, Social Security benefits, private pensions, and other savings and investments. They will use the best professional financial, tax, and legal counsel available. They will preserve their estate through proper planning and appropriate transfer arrangements. Only judicious attention can minimize unexpected losses and disappointments.

Health and Retirement

When old people are asked to list their problems they consistently rate health at or near the top. In a recent national survey in which respondents were asked what their most serious problem was, three times as many mentioned health as loneliness, the next most serious problem. Good physical health, like financial security, seems to be important not only because its absence brings suffering, but because it determines the limits of the other areas of life.

The old are usually addicted more with long-term health problems than are the young. Common examples are heart trouble, arthritis, diabetes, rheumatism, and hypertension. On the other hand, old people suffer less than young people from temporary illnesses such as the common colds or pneumonia.

Although sickness tends to increase with age, fewer than 5 percent of the elderly are hospitalized at any one time. However, more than 20 percent of them spend time in hospitals or care institutions before they die. Compared with those under age sixty-five, they have three times as many hospitalizations, and their hospital stays are three times longer.

Supportive families and friends can play a significant role in the health care of the retired. Their help often delays institutionalization. When the aged go to institutions, their physical needs are cared for mainly by professionals. But even then, home teachers, visiting teachers, family, and friends can continue to contribute to their social and emotional well-being. Since these moves often take old people from their own families and neighborhoods, special effort is usually required to serve their needs. The help of those living near the new residence of the elderly maybe required to give the necessary support. The tragic depression of the elderly in nursing homes can be radically changed by the visits of a loving wife or husband. A caring friend or church leader can also reinforce a person's sense of self-worth and strengthen his courage and ability to endure his trials. Of course, a person's own attitude toward life influences the benefits he can receive from loyal friends and family. Elder LeGrand Richards noted the importance of a good mental attitude when he wrote, "The only reason I can give for my long life is that I am a very happy man and have been all my life." Professionals could easily note other influences that would help to explain his long life, but probably no one would deny the benefit that came from his enthusiasm for living. If it didn't add years to his life, it certainly added life to his years.

As people age and their hearing and vision deteriorate, they become increasingly accident prone. They should take precautions against slick floors, sliding rugs, and steep stairs. They might consider installing handrails and bright florescent lights. They may need to avoid driving after dark, and older pedestrians may need special help to avoid accidents. The fact that the period of convalescence is usually longer for old people following illness or accident emphasizes the need for more precautionary measures. Unfortunately, in some cases older patients never do fully recover from the effects of a serious fall or other accident.

When Latter-day Saints think about achieving good health, their minds naturally turn to the Word of Wisdom, which includes much more, of course, than the oft-mentioned exclusions from our diet. The spirit of the revelation speaks to us about our emotional and intellectual health as well as our physical condition. The spiritual, physical, intellectual, and emotional forces in our lives are all interrelated. We need regular physical examinations, adequate nutrition, daily exercise, and appropriate intellectual and cultural stimulation. Starting vigorous physical exercise late in life should be done with caution after consultation with a physician.

Family and Friends

Our most significant social relationship is usually with our spouse. If there is a good marital relationship before retirement, there is more likely to be a good marriage after retirement. A good marriage is one in which the couple knows how to enjoy each other and how to solve marital problems rather than one in which there are no problems. However, if the couple has not learned how to work out their problems, and particularly if they have both used their work as an escape from confrontation with each other, then the added time they spend together after retirement will indeed seem burdensome. Some women complain that their retired husbands seem to be always "underfoot." Others say they have "twice as much husband and half as much income." Many retired couples are alone together for the first time since the early years of their marriage. They may need to rebuild the relationship they used to have or create new bonds and shared activities. By trying new things while keeping a good sense of humor, they can solve many difficulties.

Children and grandchildren are another source of joy and satisfaction to many older people. Those who have achieved a good relationship with their adult children and with their grandchildren balance their love and concern so that it is not interpreted as interference or pressure. Most older people have frequent contact with their children, but for the day-to-day activities, they rely more on their friends and neighbors. Their children are, in a sense, an emotional reservoir for them. They can get help from them if they need to, but they prefer not to. The giving and taking between older adults and their adult children seems to be best when it is reciprocal. The older person does not want to be considered only when babysitting chores are needed, and the adult child does not want to be thought of only when his parents need something. Both cling to their independence while they continue to cherish each other.

Loneliness is a serious problem for many elderly who live alone with no family members nearby. Especially at night, on weekends, and on special occasions such as Christmas or the birthday of a loved one, visits and telephone calls from family, friends, and home teachers and visiting teachers are very important.

Spirituality and Learning

Latter-day Saints know that the mind is a gift from God and that man has stewardship for its use. This is important for aging Church members because never before in their lives have most of them had such a fine opportunity to read, study, and develop the mind. As physical activities become less attractive, intellectual pursuits become more important. Actually, relatively few older people participate in formal education programs. Many of them, however, do engage in learning activities alone or in other informal ways. Personal study projects of various kinds are becoming increasingly popular with adults of all ages. Sometimes nonparticipation in formal education is due to declining health, a lack of transportation, or some other similar reason.

While some older people say they are too old to learn, research clearly demonstrates that healthy old people can learn all they want or need to learn. The capacity to learn in old age can be greatly enhanced by a strong desire to learn. Learning skills will be more effective if educational activities have been engaged in regularly over the adult years. "Use it or lose it" applies to both physical and intellectual abilities.

From a leader of the American Association of Retired Persons has come the following statement about adult participation in learning activities: "The most pragmatic reason for improving one's mind is that this is the place where one increasingly lives as one grows older. As external pleasures diminish with age, a sparsely furnished mind becomes a prison cell when it should be a lounge, a library, and a balcony upon the world."

Members of the Church have a special responsibility to continue to grow in knowledge. We are told to "seek . . . out of the best books words of wisdom." (D&C 88:118.) We are also commanded to study all things that pertain to the kingdom. (D&C 88:79.) We might learn a language, learn to play the piano, learn to write, or learn hundreds of other things that are available to us. The Church provides many excellent study aids.

Many universities, including Brigham Young University, offer home-study courses. There are excellent adult education programs in many areas of the country. Many people have access to schools that offer evening courses as well as day courses. Many classes can be taken without having to pay for academic credits. Even those who live in isolated parts of the country usually have libraries from which they can select good books.

Activity in Retirement

Members of the Church have many opportunities to be involved in worthwhile endeavors following retirement. Many of these activities are a continuation of the things the people enjoyed before retirement. These may include writing personal and family histories, doing genealogical work, serving frequently in the temple, working in the name extraction program, working on a welfare farm, serving a mission, organizing and promoting family organizations, studying the scriptures, and, of course, continuing with ward and stake assignments and church attendance. Our work as Latter-day Saints is never finished.

Opportunities for public service are also available. There is work to do in senior centers, in chapters of the American Association of Retired Persons, in the Red Cross, in community hospitals, and in many other organizations.

Counseling Others about Retirement

Those wanting to help people in retirement might ponder the things they would do in their own family to help aging relatives. Then, keeping in mind the suggestions in this chapter, they can apply their insights to those people they are counseling.

Suggested Readings and Resources

Clark, Harold Glen. "How to Get Better as You Get Older." Ensign, December 1975.

Featherstone, Vaughn J. "The Savior's Program for Care of the Aged." Ensign, November 1974.

Hansen, Gary D. "Growing Older: Everybody's Challenge." Ensign, November 1973.

Publications from the American Association of Retired Persons, 1909 K Street NW, Washington, D.C., 20049.

Resource Center on Adult Development and Aging, 303 HCEB, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah 84602.

About the Authors

Dr. Phileon B. Robinson, Jr., director of the Resource Center on Adult Development and Aging at Brigham Young University, received his bachelor's degree from BYU, his master's degree from Northwestern University, and his Ph.D. in adult education at the University of Nebraska. Prior to his present position, he was assistant dean of the Division of Continuing Education at BYU for twenty years. He has served in the Church as a mission president, a stake presidency member, and a counselor to a bishop, and in many other callings. Phil and his wife, Hortense, are the parents of seven children.

Dr. Evan T. Peterson, professor of sociology at Brigham Young University, received his bachelor's and master's degrees there and his Ph.D. degree from the University of Michigan. He has held numerous positions at BYU, including chairman of the sociology department, director of the Survey Research Center, and acting dean of the College of Social Sciences. He has taught as a visiting professor at a number of universities. Dr. Peterson is the author of over fifty books, chapters, articles, and other publications. He has served in the Church as a bishop, in bishoprics, as a high councilor, as a missionary, and in other priesthood callings. He and his wife, Gail, are the parents of six children.

Dr. Gary D. Hansen, a financial and tax-planning consultant, received his bachelor's degree at Utah State University, his master's degree at the University of Minnesota—Minneapolis, and his Ph.D. from the University of Oregon. He has taught at BYU and the University of Nebraska. He has served in the Church as a bishop's counselor and a ward clerk, and in other priesthood callings. He and his wife, Bonnie, are the parents of seven children.
