Terrance D. Olson, R. Lanier Britsch, Counseling: A Guide to Helping Others, vol. 2 ( 1985)

21

Chronic Illness

William G. Dyer

Remember in things the poor and the needy, the sick and the afflicted, for he that doeth not these things, the same is not my disciple." (D&C 52:40.)

A central part of the message of the Savior has always been to look after the sick and afflicted. The parable of the Good Samaritan examined the response of the hated Samaritan who attended to the wounds of an afflicted Jew. For such service, the good Samaritan has become the embodiment of the person who truly loves his neighbor as himself.

Most members of the Church and most bishoprics, Relief Society presidencies, home and visiting teachers, and neighbors probably feel with some justification that they respond immediately and generously whenever there is illness in the ward or branch. Whenever a mother has a new baby, someone has an operation, or serious illness or injury strikes a member, the other members rally around and attend to the needs of the sick person and his family. However, a number of sick people are neglected, ignored, mistreated, and misunderstood. These are those who suffer from chronic illness, who have illness or disabilities that persist, that do not get better. A chronic illness is a great trial for the sufferer, who often feels great emotional stress, for the debilitating condition goes on and on without an apparent end. The chronially ill person, his family, his neighbors, and his church leaders often need to learn how to cope with this type of situation so they may all be able to bear their infirmities.

Normal and Chronic Cycles of Illness

Illness or injury come to all of us, and we usually expect to follow a pattern that is characteristic of most illness. Figure 1 shows this pattern. The person has an illness and falls from the path of normal health. Then comes a period of diagnosis and treatment followed by a period of convalescence. Finally, the person returns to good health again.

The person who is ill and his family, friends, and neighbors are used to this cycle and generally move in to help during the illness, treatment, and convalescence, assuming that at some point the person will return to normal health and that their assistance will no longer be needed. However, in the case of the chronically ill, this cycle does not occur. Figure 2 shows the pattern of chronic illness. The person becomes ill and loses his normal health. He too goes through a period of treatment and sometimes a form of convalescence, but for a number of reasons, depending on the illness, the person does not return to a condition of normal health but continues in a fluctuating pattern of chronic ill health. The person may have periods when he feels better or worse, but at no time does he ever return to complete good health.

Unfortunately, family members, friends, and neighbors do not know how to respond to this unfamiliar pattern, and usually they shift their attention away from the chronically ill person as others with the more normal cycle of sickness occupy their attention. It is at this point that the person with the chronic illness feels that he no longer gets the support, understanding, and assistance he needs to help him endure his continuing pain, depression, and anxiety.

The Patient

The person who finds himself in persistent poor health must make adjustments. Since he, too, is used to the normal cycle of illness, he often cannot accept his illness but, in an increasing state of anxiety, frantically turns from one doctor, treatment, or proposed cure to another. This may be interspersed with periods of depression and apathy where the patient feels completely hopeless and wants to "give up." It is at these times that the patient especially needs support and encouragement from family, friends, and Church leaders.

The patient may also fluctuate between two opposing ways of handling his illness. He may say, "I'm not going to let this get me down; I'm going to try to live my normal life." He may then try to assume normal duties in the home, community, or Church, but he really is not well. People surrounding him are, in a sense, relieved that the person seems to be well and they then ease their support, let the patient take over his former duties, and are glad he has returned to "normal." But the person is not back to normal. He still feels sick. He feels a need to have people understand him and be sensitive to his struggle to live a normal life, but he is distressed to find that others now assume he is well and let him take over all the old responsibilities he really is not capable of handling.

Or, the chronically ill person may find that the only way to keep from being reburdened with all the old duties is to make his illness seem worse than it really is. If he stays in bed and appears to suffer, then others can accept the person as being ill and will move in to help.

One chronically ill mother reported that her teenage children would help wonderfully around the house if she stayed in bed, but if she got up and tried to work, the children expected her to assume all her duties again. It is as though people think that one is either sick or well. But, there are intermediate degrees of sickness and health, and the person in that twilight zone, along with his family, friends, and others, needs to learn how to live in that intermediate state.

As a person lives with illness from year to year, regaining his health naturally becomes a major preoccupation. His treatment and symptoms become the center of his thoughts and actions. Others often cannot understand this single-mindedness and may begin to avoid the patient. The patient himself may need to try to plan other interests and activities that broaden his world and allow for a wider range of discussion and interaction with others.

Something as ordinary as everyday greetings may create a problem for someone who is chronically ill. Someone greeting him may naturally ask, "How are you doing?" The sick person doesn't want to complain, so he responds with something like "I'm all right" or "I'm feeling better." This seems to satisfy the inquirer and is also what he may went to hear, for most people want to hear that people who are ill are improving. A more honest response from the patient would be, "I'm about the same, but I appreciate your concern."

Also, a patient may appear well, and may even feel well for a time, but his appearance may be at variance with his actual feelings. One bishop remarked that a man in his ward worked five days a week but never came to church or filled an assignment. The bishop felt for a long time that the man, who claimed to be a faithful Church member, was really something of a hypocrite. This bishop, however, spent time finding out more about this man and discovered that he was chronically ill but mustered all of his strength to go to work to make a living for his family and then used the weekend to recoup his meager energies. What this man needed was understanding and support, not condemnation, and when the bishop finally understood the situation, he was able to give the man and his family the help they needed.

Many chronically ill people find it difficult to live with their illness. They fight it, hate it, and give in to it; they feel abused and picked on, abandoned, and rejected by everyone, including the Lord. Learning to cope with their condition is a major challenge. It is possible to learn from long-term illness, to grow with the burden rather than be diminished by it. However, only a person who has had such an affliction can really appreciate the struggle of another.

The Family of the Chronically Ill

When illness strikes a person, the other family members move in, and, expecting the normal cycle of illness to occur, plan rather unconsciously to handle an illness of limited duration. They assume the extra duties, wait on the sick person, and see this as a challenge and a responsibility that they are willing to handle. If the illness becomes chronic, however, the family is often not prepared. Strains and disturbances may occur. Sometimes there are subtle and hidden feelings of resentment toward the sick person, a kind of blaming him for not getting better and allowing the whole family to return to normal. The sick person often senses this resentment and tries to reduce that by struggling to resume a normal role, which often results in even worse health. Sometimes family members slip into a pattern of isolating and ignoring the chronically ill person. They cope with the problem by blocking it out of their minds and even gear their activities to avoid and ignore the ill person in hopes of reducing some of their distress and strain. This may leave the sick person feeling unwanted, rejected, and alienated from the family. This, in turn, contributes to the stress in the family.

This is a difficult situation, for with the loss of the normal functioning of any family member, role relationships are disturbed and a new balance must be established in the family. If the mother or father is ill, someone else must pick up their duties in addition to providing care for the sick person. When a son or daughter is ill, the family loses whatever their contribution was to the family activity and work pattern. This shifts the person's responsibilities to other family members.

The family needs to establish a new set of duties and expectations about what each family member will need to do to accommodate the illness of the sick person. A daughter may have to prepare family meals; a son may have to do the washing; and the father may have to be the family chauffeur and shopper—all in addition to their regular activities and with the expectation that this will continue indefinitely. This is a great deal to ask of family members, and it takes a great deal of understanding, discipline, discussion, love, and faith to accept this new way of life. Chronic illness can disrupt and divide a family, or it can provide the family with an opportunity to grow in understanding, patience, sacrifice, and love for one another.

Friends, Neighbors, and Church Leaders and Members

Surrounding the chronically ill person and his family is the social world of friends, neighbors, and the Church. These can either be a source of support and help or a source of feelings of neglect, rejection, misunderstanding, and frustration. Most people help at the beginning of the illness. But when the person does not get better, they become confused and slowly begin to shift their attention away from the person. This loss of support often makes the sufferer feel neglected and rejected. Many chronically ill people who suddenly develop a more visible health problem like a heart attack or have an operation find that other people begin to respond with warmth and support that had been denied during the chronic period.

Since chronic illnesses are foreign to the experience of most people, it is often unclear to them how to respond. Many chronic sufferers have emotional illness that others find upsetting or difficult to respond to.

People in a ward or branch who wish to help bear the infirmities of those who are ill might consider the following ideas:

any physical, mental, or emotional condition that leaves the person at a level of health below what could be called normal.

Don't just thoughtlessly ask, "Is there anything I can do for you?" Some people do not like organized branch or ward assistance—they prefer only spontaneous support. Others welcome an organized and sustained support program.

There is Hope with Endurance

One sister who was afflicted with multiple sclerosis reported how being remembered by others and being treated "normally" was important to her. When asked what her greatest source of strength was, she said it had come from the gospel, either from spoken words of leaders or from the scriptures. She noted two very comforting and strengthening articles: "Sweet Are the Uses of Adversity," by A. Theodore Tuttle (Improvement Era, December 1967, p. 47), and "The Crucible of Adversity and Affliction," by Marion G. Romney (Improvement Era, December 1969, p. 66). Once when she was feeling low, President Joseph Fielding Smith had given a talk in dune Conference on the MIA theme for that year: "Search diligently, pray always, and be believing, and all things shall work together for your good, if ye walk uprightly." (D&C 90:24.) She noted, "President Smith said this doesn't mean that we'll necessarily be free from trials and difficulties, but that if we do what is right the Lord will turn our trials and difficulties into blessings. The Lord has done just that for me. Sometimes I see it more clearly than at other times, but I do believe he makes all things work together for our good."

Chronic illness may be difficult to bear, but it can be used as a source of strength. At a time when many of the Brethren who have counseled us regarding adversity are now suffering from it, we might redouble our efforts toward our neighbors who are similarly suffering. We can help the chronically ill endure to the end of their adversity. We thus become a part of those things that will work together for their good.

About the Author

Dr. William G. Dyer, past dean of the School of Management at Brigham Young University, received his bachelor's and master's degrees from BYU and his Ph.D. from the University of Wisconsin. He is a noted authority on behavior change, having been consultant or trainer for numerous large corporations. Dr. Dyer is the author of thirteen books and monographs and over sixty-five articles.

In the Church he has served on the general board of the Sunday School, as a bishop, a high councilor, and a missionary, and in many teaching positions.

He and his wife, Bonnie, are the parents of five children.
