Terrance D. Olson, R. Lanier Britsch, Counseling: A Guide to Helping Others, vol. 2 ( 1985)

23

Career and Employment Strategies

Lynn Eric Johnson

Sooner or later every family and most individuals face career and employment challenges, and many people will face them more than once. How they are resolved has a great bearing on everyone's future happiness and success. Yet most people do little to take full advantage of available career-assistance resources. You, as a lay counselor, can be a valuable resource for youth and adults who are seeking jobs, planning training programs, or upgrading present employment.

Counseling Guidelines

There are several guidelines to keep in mind when helping others plan their futures.

Remember that the person you are counseling has the responsibility to make his own decisions and to live by the consequences. Although you may want to take control of a situation, you generally should not. The person who must bear the consequences should make the decisions. You may be asked, "What do you think I should do?" But unless you feel inspired to share your preferences, it is usually safest to resist the urge to dictate another person's future. Turn the question around by asking, "What do you really went to do?" Ask appropriate questions, suggest issues to explore, offer assistance, and be optimistic and encouraging, but insist that the person make his own decisions.

Realize your limitations. There is much information available and there are professionals who are trained to use it. Don't be embarrassed to say, "I don't know the answer to that question. Let me help you find someone who does." This will save your time and also be of most help to the person you counsel.

Try to be aware of your biases and prejudices. Do your best to remain neutral. Encourage each person to make the most of the future.

Finally, the person should always pursue a career that matches his greatest personal interest. Even though opportunities may be few, if the person is enthusiastic and prepared, he can probably find an opening or create one. Encourage the person to make a thorough study of the true situation before rejecting a career choice near and dear to his heart. Enthusiasm, persistence, creativity, talent, and special training may make it possible to succeed in just about any field if a person can adapt properly.

The Changing Career Marketplace

We live in a time of rapid change. Employment specialists predict many changes in the job marketplace within the next few years. For example, technological subindustries will flourish. One such subindustry is telecommunications dealing with data and facsimile transmission. Others are office automation and data processing equipment, which facilitate the transmission and reception of messages over great distances. Future calls for qualified people to design, maintain, and service telecommunicating systems will be great.

Robotics is another exciting high-tech field that promises to provide ground-floor opportunities for many related occupations. Lucrative career possibilities exist for designers, technicians, and computer specialists, along with sales and marketing people.

Engineers will be in demand for the continuing development of synthetic fuels and defense projects. They will also be involved in the further development of microprocessors, fiber optics, satellite transmission, computer-aided design, and computer-aided manufacturing. Peterson's Guide for Engineering Science and Computing Jobs lists thirty-four engineering fields that recruiters are trying to fill. High demand areas include mechanical, computer science, electrical, electronics, industrial management, chemical, civil information science, engineering physics, and systems engineering—and there are many others. There will also be a demand for environmental, biomedical, fire protection, energy, ocean, ceramic, and plastics engineers.

Due to technological advancements and the increased average age of the U.S. population, the health-care industry will provide many new careers. In 1979, the number of persons aged sixty-five or older was 24.7 million, or 11.2 percent of the total U.S. population. By 1990, those who are sixty-five years old or older will number 29.8 million, or 12.2 percent of the U.S. population. Caring for these people will require geriatric physicians, psychologists, psychiatrists, support workers, social and recreation workers, physical therapists, employment specialists, and an army of clerical workers. Also, there will be a strong need for general practitioners, specialists, dentists, and technical medical-support workers such as emergency medical technicians, optometric assistants, electrocardiograph technicians, occupational therapists, dietitians, nutritionists, ultrasound technicians, nurses, and so forth.

Shorter working hours and new technological advances will provide more time for leisure activities. As a result, the service sector will grow faster than any other occupational group through the next few decades. Service careers will include travel agents, vacation assistants, hotel help, recreation pros, dude ranch staffs, tour guides, and multilanguage teachers. It is projected that people will be eating out more, so job openings will become available all the way from the local fast-food restaurant to the top of the giant hotel chains.

The growth of the entertainment industry will create additional jobs for artists and technicians along with marketing, advertising, public relations, and sales personnel. In the mid-1980s each month the cable industry alone continues to add 250,000 subscribers, 1,000 new jobs, and at least one more satellite service. Thousands of new openings are being created at the design, manufacturing, sales, and distribution levels of the computer and video-game industry.

Energy production will remain critical. The day is getting close when industry will decide to manufacture and distribute solar parts and accessories on a significant scale. This will open opportunities for engineers, architects, surveyors, insulation workers, welders, painters, general construction people, contractors, sales and marketing people, and so on.

Conservation-related careers may continue to emerge as government and industry pursue the effort to rid the environment of pollution and industrial wastes. Soil conservationists, scientists, technicians, and skilled and semiskilled workers will be needed.

Ergonomics is the study of the man-machine relationship. Specialists in this field seek to develop ways for men and machines to work more harmoniously and productively together. As technology progresses, this field will continue to expand.

Farming occupations will continue to decrease. Presently only one in thirty-six workers tills the soil. By the year 2000 only one in sixty workers will work on a farm. (However, there are many agriculture-related jobs, especially internationally, that will be available: researchers, agri-business, scientists, sales, and so on.)

The tedious jobs in industry are declining. Boiler tenders, core makers, eletroplaters, electrotypers, machine-tool operators, machine set-up workers, printing compositors, photoengravers, press operators, and production painters have all but been replaced by automatic, computer-controlled equipment.

Office requirements are rapidly changing. The use of computers has severely dampened future employment prospects for bookkeeping workers, cashiers, file clerks, keypunch operators, office machine operators, postal clerks, shipping and receiving clerks, and stock clerks. The message here is to upgrade office skills to deal with new techniques, equipment and services.

Liberal arts training in languages, philosophy, humanities, music, history, psychology, sociology, and similar fields can have special value for those in such fields because their training can be applied in a variety of occupations. Jobs such as bank officer, industrial psychologist, marketing researcher, and lawyer require an ability to reason and communicate. For these and many other similar management-type occupations, it pays to get a broad education. However, it is also strongly recommended that some business, computer, math, statistical, public relations, organizational behavior, economics, accounting, or other business-related classes be added to such training.

Assisting Youth

As a counselor, you may find the following guidelines helpful in counseling young people who are preparing for their careers:

What to Look For In a Career

Following are nine areas young people should consider as they choose a career. The Occupational Outlook Handbook and similar resources at libraries, counselors' offices, and places of employment can help young people as they think about these areas.

1 . Nature of work and working conditions. What daily tasks are performed? Will the employee work with data, people, or things? Will he have regular hours, shift work, or be on call at all times? Will the work environment be pleasant? What are the employee's opportunities for improving his skills? How much responsibility is involved?

Developing Interviewing Skills

You can help young people develop employment interviewing skills by helping them practice their posture, appearance, and responses to interview questions. According to Frank S. Endicott, who surveyed ninety-two companies, the following are the most frequently asked questions during interviews. Take the role of interviewer and ask the questions that will most help the youth you are counseling.

What are your future vocational plans? In what school activities have you participated? Why? Which activities did you enjoy most? How do you spend your spare time? What are your hobbies? In what type of position are you most interested? Why do you think you might like to work for our company? What jobs have you held? How did you get them and why did you leave? What courses did you like best? Least? Why? Why did you choose your particular field of work?

What percentage of your college expenses did you earn? How? How did you spend your vacations while in school? What do you know about our company? Do you feel that you have received good general training? What qualifications do you have that make you feel you will be successful in your field? What extracurricular offices have you held? What are your ideas on salary? How do you feel about your family? How interested are you in sports?

If you were starting college all over again, what courses would you take? Do you prefer any specific geographic location? Why? Do you date anyone regularly? Is it serious? How much money do you hope to earn at age thirty? At age thirty-five? Why did you decide to go to this particular school? Do you think that your extracurricular activities were worth the time you devoted to them? Why? What do you think determines a person's progress in a good company? What personal characteristics are necessary for success in your chosen field? Why do you think you would like this particular type of job? What are your parents' occupations?

Tell me about your home life during the time you were growing up. Do you prefer working with others or by yourself? What kind of boss do you prefer? Are you primarily interested in making money, or do you feel that service to humanity is your prime concern? Can you take instructions without feeling upset? Tell me a story! (This is an open-ended question used to test creativity end ability to deal with a novel situation.) Do you live with your parents? Which of your parents has had the most profound influence on you? How did previous employers treat you? What have you learned from some of the jobs you have held? Can you get recommendations from previous employers? What interested you about our product or service? What was your record in military service? Have you ever changed your major field of interest while in college? Why? When did you choose your college major?

It is also a good idea for the potential employee to have questions to ask the interviewer, especially if he offers the applicant the job. The applicant should be sensitive enough not to ask questions that would hurt his chances of receiving a job offer. Following are some questions the applicant might ask:

In your opinion, what are the most valuable traits a person can have for this company? What is the advancement pattern you want people to follow? How are moving expenses shared? What is the relocation pattern or requirement with this job? Does the company want me to get additional schooling, and is there any financial assistance provided? What are the special requirements for this job: travel, overtime, weekends? Are there any special financial provisions for these? How are new ideas and suggestions received and rewarded? Are promotions made from inside the company or outside? What compensation is allowed for the use of my own tools, car, home, computer, or supplies? How can I keep my retirement program intact if the job is discontinued? How are relocation decisions made? If for any reason I am laid off, what is the severance pay arrangement? what reassignment assistance is offered?

What provisions are there for pregnancy leave? Who has the supervisory assignment to accelerate my development in the company? Could you share some of the company's future plans with me and how I might be of help? What other aspects of this job do I need to know? What special problems or challenges can I help solve? What further information can I provide? When will you be making a decision on this position? May I return at that time to discuss your decision?

Help the person you are counseling create a resume that sells by using as many facts as are appropriate for a given job. For young people, a one-page document is usually sufficient. (For adults, a three-page resume maybe best, if hand delivered.) It should be tailor-made for the recipient and focus on solutions to the employer's greatest needs. One of the finest sources for resume examples is Who's Hiring Who, by Richard Lathrop, listed at the end of this chapter.

Stress the importance of follow-up. Far too often jobs are lost because the applicant does not send a follow-up letter, make a phone call, or, best of all, make a visit.

Assisting Adults

Adults can use many of the suggestions for young people given in this chapter, but they should also consider the following ideas.

They should develop a sound financial base. Salaries can be lost. Whenever possible, the sources of family income need to be diversified and expanded. A variety of financial resources should be considered, according to each person's or each family's needs and strengths. For example:

1 . Savings. The average time a person is between jobs in America is ninety to one hundred and twenty days. Sufficient savings to provide for living expenses during this period can be very important.

Some of these might include development of children, advancement at work, times when a wife returns to the work force, education, times of heaviest financial needs, times and types of diversified incomes, missions for family members, the onset of chronic illness in old age, and so on. Then, the person can plan how to best meet his future needs.

The Church's employment agencies and LDS Social Services. Each bishop has a directory that has information listing the addresses, phone numbers, and personnel involved in these programs. Wards and stakes are also encouraged to have employment representatives who are well informed about local employment opportunities. Further information may be obtained by contacting the Church's Welfare Services Employment, Seventh Floor, 50 East North Temple Street, Salt Lake City, Utah 84150.

Private agencies. Virtually every city has private employment agencies that help people and employers get together. Each needs to be carefully evaluated in light of the individual's needs. A phone call filled with questions and answers about agency structures, services, specialties, track record, and fees (as much as ten percent of the first year's salary) should precede a visit. A second call to the Better Business Bureau to ascertain an agents reputation is also recommended.

Vocational rehabilitation. Combined federal and state funds are available to help the disabled and handicapped obtain employment training suitable to their capabilities. Check under the state listings in the phone book.

Job Service. Again, federal and state funds are used to provide extensive services: job placement; testing for aptitudes and interests; training in job-seeking and interviewing skills; personal advisement; and the administration of various federal and state assistance programs. Check your telephone directory or in the Occupational Outlook Handbook, for sale from the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. 20402. This publication is also available at most libraries or from high school counselors. A number of other training programs and career opportunities are also described in this publication.

The Church. Church leaders and members are able to help each other in many ways. The person can contact Church leaders in various parts of the world by using the Church Directory.

Implementation

The implementation of a plan to obtain schooling or a job or to make career changes is probably the most challenging problem of all. The principles can be fairly easily learned, and the support systems are all in place, but many people are afraid to act.

How can a lay counselor help a person overcome his fears to achieve his desired goal? This will depend on the person, but there are some common elements helpful to everyone.

First, plan together what the person needs to do. Careful planning eliminates fear of the unknown. Make sure every aspect of the problem is considered and that a solution is prepared.

Second, break the plan into manageable steps and help the person start working on it. Too many people look at the whole job-finding process and are overwhelmed. Then, arrange times to get back together to review the completed steps and the one to come.

Third, help the person develop self-confidence through his successful completion of the initial steps. Work together to build a momentum of emotion and activity.

Fourth, establish time limits and a financial budget to help the person manage his resources and keep moving.

Fifth, counsel together less frequently as the skills and strengths of the individual develop. The goal is to help the person become self-sufficient, independent, and, in fact, able to help others.

Career and Employment Strategies

Suggested Readings

Bolles, Richard N. the Three Boxes of Life. Berkeley: Ten Speed Press, 1981. This book discusses three periods of life education, work, and retirement. In analyzing these areas, the author provides a structure to deal with the transition into each one.

———. What Color Is Your Parachute. Berkeley: Ten Speed Press, 1983. Successful job hunters were interviewed by the author, and he has attempted to distill their successes into four principles, including: keeping at it, knowing what you want, deciding where you want to work, and discovering who has power to hire you and showing them how your skills can help them. This best-seller is filled with practical aggressive methods to get the job of your choice.

———, and Victoria B. Zenoff. The Quick Job-Hunting Map Berkeley. Ten Speed Press, 1980. A brief approach to application of principles covered in detail in the book What Co/or Is your Parachute.

———. Tea Leaves: A New Look at Resumes. Berkeley Ten Speed Press, 1976 A biting commentary on resumes and their uses and abuses. Makes many sound recommendations to improve your efforts if you must write one.

Crystal, John D., and Richard N. Bolles. Where Do I Go From Here with My Life? New York: The Seabury Press, 1974. This workbook deals with a system invented by John Crystal. It is useful for job-seakers and non-job seekers alike who want to better establish their goals and increase effectiveness in use of their talents.

Irish, Richard K. Go Hire Yourself an Employer. Garden City: Anchor Press/Doubleday, 1978. The theme of the book is how to become competent in the job hunt and how to make that competence carry over on the job. It explains how to identify contributions you can make to employers and to act on that information. The point is to make the applicant self-aware, confident, poised, and prepared to hire himself an employer.

Johnson, Lynn Eric. Take Charge! 576 So. 490 W., Orem, Utah 84057: Johnson International 1984. A comprehensive textbook designed to help a person who is entering the job market, changing jobs, seeking advancement strategies, and conscientiously preparing now for later retirement. It is written particularly for BYU students but is adaptable for families, ward and stake employment specialists, and individuals.

Lathrop, Richard. Who's Hiring Who. Berkeley: Ten Speed Press, 1980. The author reports that in follow-up research, readers of this book claim to get more job offers and higher pay offers and take less time to find a job. The book explores the job market, conducts a self-inventory, and teaches how to make a qualifications brief, write effective letters, be effective in interviews, and negotiate salary and other benefits.

About the Author

Dr. Lynn Eric Johnson, associate professor of counseling and personal services at Brigham Young University, received his bachelor's degree at Brigham Young University and his master's degree and Ph.D. from the University of Utah in educational psychology. Since 1961, Dr. Johnson has counseled young people in career and educational matters both at Brigham Young University and in workshops and BYU Education Weeks throughout the Church. He has published several articles for the Ensign and the New Era. Since 1979, he has been instrumental in developing an upper-division course to help university juniors and seniors prepare for the world of work, for which he has recently published the text titled Take Charge!

In the Church, Dr. Johnson has served as a bishop twice and as a branch president at the Missionary Training Center in Provo. He is currently teaching a Blazer A class. His previous callings include bishop's counselor, high councilor, stake Sunday School superintendent, stake Young Men's president, and West German Mission servicemen's coordinator.

He and his wife, Judy, are the parents of seven children.
