Terrance D. Olson, R. Lanier Britsch, Counseling: A Guide to Helping Others, vol. 2 ( 1985)

24

Financial Counseling

Jerry Mason

Financial problems are generally acknowledged to be a major cause of divorce, suicide, and depression in our society. Often laymen and professionals assume that financial problems occur primarily because people are inadequately trained to manage money. Certainly many people would benefit by improving their money management skills, but often dysfunctional behaviors, more than inadequate money management skills, seem to contribute to peoples' financial problems. At times people find themselves in financial difficulties because of factors beyond their control, but in many situations problems can be prevented or reduced. The financial counselor is the "change agent" who helps individuals and families work through their financial problems as they make certain adjustments in the way they conduct their lives. Laymen, although lacking training and experience, can be effective in helping individuals and families resolve pressing financial concerns.

Effective financial counseling is commonly a three-part process. First, the counselor is concerned with helping the family arrest, at least temporarily, the financial crisis that has caused them to seek help. Until these pressures are at least partially relieved, the family will usually not be interested in anything else. Successful financial counseling, however, goes beyond crisis resolution. The second part focuses on identifying factors that contribute to the family's financial problems. The counselor helps the family clearly understand why their financial problems are occurring and helps them learn how to accept responsibility for their roles in creating them. The family members become aware of behaviors, attitudes, and financial practices that must be changed or modified if they are to adequately manage their resources. Planning is the third part of financial counseling and includes developing workable plans that will enable the family to gain control of their financial affairs. The family comes to realize that they can achieve realistic financial objectives as they learn to apply proven money management principles and practices.

Before discussing these financial counseling processes in detail, the following procedures or skills need to be mentioned. These recommendations may help you increase your effectiveness as a lay counselor.

Part 1: Resolving Urgent Financial Crises

The following steps provide a systematic approach to crisis counseling: (1) establish rapport; (2) identify the crisis; (3) generate possible solutions; (4) resolve the crisis; (5) follow through; and (6) evaluate results. Adapt as necessary. When a crisis confronts the family, time constraints will usually allow you to meet with the family only one or two times.

Step 1: Establish Rapport

Put the family at ease so that they feel comfortable discussing the crisis with you. Remember, people frequently need to tell you many things that may seem foolish and embarrassing to them. Attempt to create an environment that encourages them to open up, or the effectiveness of your counseling may be diminished. The first few minutes in the interview are critical in establishing an effective counseling relationship. Therefore, be as warm and friendly as possible, and let them know that for the duration of the session, you have no other concerns but theirs.

Step 2: Identify the Crisis

At this stage you are not as interested in causes as in identifying enough details to effectively resolve the crisis.

Although excessive note-taking maybe distracting, there is some specific information that is absolutely essential and that you must write down. For example, to whom money is owed; how much is owed; when it is due; expected consequences if payment is not made; and what attempts the family has made to try to resolve the problem.

As important as objective facts are, subjective information is just as essential. How do individual family members feel about what has happened? Your primary objective here is to gain an understanding of the problem as the family sees it. Let them describe the crisis. Make sure that you understand their view of the problem by restating it in your own words. Seek feedback until you clearly understand key aspects of the crisis. Try not to appear shocked by the circumstances that are presented. What they want and need is your help, not your criticism.

Even with the use of effective counseling skills, however, some families may resist exposing their private lives. There are many reasons why a family may not adequately explain their financial problems to you, reasons such as a lack of confidence in you as a counselor, their failure to understand their own problems, reticence to expose obvious individual shortcomings, and failure to take responsibility for the crisis. In addition, sometimes one spouse will resist revealing information that is as yet unknown to the other spouse. It is important to look for clues as to the hidden reasons why one partner may refuse to be open and fair in the discussions. But remember that at this stage in counseling you are still trying to understand the problem—you are not diagnosing the causes of the financial crisis. Be sure to mentally file useful bits of information for future use. By now you should have a pretty good idea of the parts of the crisis and how they fit together.

Step 3: Generate Possible Solutions

You are now ready to consider solutions. First of all, restate the crisis to make sure you have the big picture as the client sees it. Once the crisis has been adequately defined, a plan to resolve the crisis must be developed. Strategies that might be employed to resolve financial problems are of two types: quick fixes and term adjustments. Quick fixes are designed to defuse the present crisis but require no basic change in the way the family functions. As a result, problems are likely to occur again. On the other hand, term adjustments require the family to change certain behaviors and also to systematically perform certain procedures over an extended period of time. Term adjustments, sometimes employed in crises, are typically associated with helping the family deal with the basic causes of their financial problems and will be dealt with in greater detail in part 2 of this chapter. Quick fixes are usually more common in crisis situations and are therefore discussed here is detail.

A quick fix is needed when a family is faced with situations such as eviction from their apartment or home, loss of utility service, or repossession of a needed personal asset, such as a car or washing machine. Before selecting a quick-fix strategy, however, you should devote a few minutes to brainstorming other solutions. Write down all possible solutions mentioned by family members that may be useful. Some combination of the alternatives listed below could help reduce or eliminate the crisis:

a. Investments (stocks, bonds, and mutual funds)

b. Personal property

a. Get another job.

b. Seek assistance from extended family.

c. Seek assistance from Church and community organizations.

File for entitlement program benefits: disability, veterans, Medicare, Social Security, and so on.

a. Life insurance

b. Credit union

c. Bank

d. Relatives

e. Loan consolidation (not advised in most situations)

f. Second mortgage on home (not advised in most situations)

g. Pawnbrokers

a. Chapter 13

b. Chapter 7

Each alternative needs to be examined from a cost/benefit perspective. It is important to accurately assess what the family must give up in order to obtain the desired benefit. In some cases the suggested cures could be worse than the illness. Often lay counselors, instead of recommencing a solution, may be of more help by identifying several alternatives for the family to consider. The nonprofessional may have a limited knowledge of resources available to the family, but he can be effective in helping the family identify those resources. After all alternative solutions have been explored, work with the family to select the most desired ones. Help them identify which ones they think might be the wisest or most reasonable for them to employ. Try to obtain a consensus. Once the best solution has been identified, outline basic steps the family must follow to make it work.

Step 4: Resolve Me Crisis

Families need to gain control of their lives by working through their problems. Counselors usually prefer not to interfere any more than is absolutely necessary. To keep interference to a minimum, you should review with each family member his responsibilities in resolving the problem. In some cases you may wish to write out instructions for the person or family and request that they periodically report back to you. When the person encounters an unexpected problem while trying to implement a strategy, you must jointly decide if it is more advantageous to adjust the original plan or to try something else.

Creditors usually prefer dealing with their customers instead of with a third party, but a financial problem reaches the crisis stage when a creditor refuses to talk with the customer. In such cases, consider referring the family to a professional financial counselor such as a consumer credit counselor who can contact creditors, government agencies, and employers.

If a creditor refuses to work with the family, if a community service program cannot provide needed service, or if the family does not perform their responsibilities as promised, the crisis may not be averted. This usually happens when the family waits until the last moment to seek assistance and it is simply too late to implement any solutions. However, if the problem is caught soon enough, you may be able to guide the family through the crisis.

Step 5: Follow Through

In order for the problem-solving process to be effective, coordination and follow-through are essential. Remember, the family may have created this problem by behaving irresponsibly. In addition, people who have experienced financial problems often become easily discouraged; they may have grown accustomed to being defeated. Therefore you should not be too surprised if family members do not adequately complete all of the steps as agreed. Be prepared to closely monitor their performance and repeat Step 4 if necessary.

Step 6: Evaluate Results

If the crisis has been successfully averted, you may wish to evaluate the solution that was implemented to determine its relative long-term effectiveness. Has the crisis been resolved permanently or is this just a temporary solution? Specifically, what must the family continue to do to ensure that the crisis does not reoccur?

The crisis has been resolved, but without additional counseling most families will again find themselves in financial trouble. If you and the family can still meet together, you have an opportunity to examine fundamental causes of financial mismanagement and institute new financial procedures that can permanently solve financial problems.

Part 2: Diagnosing Causes of Financial Problems

The second stage in financial counseling focuses on discovering and identifying factors that have helped create financial problems for the family. Initially, you must collect and organize essential information from the family. If you have not already obtained such data, now is the time to record names, addresses, and ages of the family members, as well as financial information such as income and expenditures. You may wish to develop a specific form to gather such information. (Check the references in the back of the chapter for assistance.) Ask the family to bring items such as recent pay stubs, checkbooks, and bank statements. Have them compile a list of balances owed to each creditor, indicating the number of payments they are behind. A list of important family financial goals is also useful. If possible, provide the family with a list describing the various documents to bring to the next counseling session.

After the family has brought in their financial information, it is useful to quickly construct both a net worth and a cash flow statement. The net worth and cash flow statements are valuable in helping you and the family obtain a picture of their current financial position. A simple net worth statement will be similar to the one on the next page.

Assets should be listed at their current market value (what each one could be sold for today). Liabilities are listed by the balances presently owed creditors. The basic formula for examining the net worth statement is: total assets minus total liabilities equals net worth. Any family with a negative net worth owes more than it owns. The size of the net worth is important. A family with a negative net worth or a small positive net worth has limited assets to use in solving financial problems.

A cash flow statement (see the form in this chapter) once completed may be useful later in setting up a preliminary budget. You should ask all family members to realistically estimate income and expenditures for the previous twelve months. Referring to last year's bills, check registers, and income statements can be helpful.

When examining cash flow for the previous twelve months, use this formula: total income less total expenditures equals income available for saving or investing. Don't be surprised when income available for saving or investing is negative.

An examination of the cash flow statement holds many clues to the family's money problems. Discuss the following questions with the family: How adequate was total income [(A) on the cash flow statement]? What expenditures (B) appear to be excessive? Is too much income required to make debt payments? After the statements have been analyzed, you are ready to move on in the counseling process and learn about the family's basic financial problems.

Causes of Financial Problems

By now you know that the family is having financial problems in one or more of the following three areas: acquiring adequate income, controlling expenditures, or making debt payments. Now is the time to focus on all areas and to come up with possible factors that explain why problems are occurring in one or more specific areas.

By now you no doubt have some understanding of what the family does to contribute to their problems. As you review the procedures they follow in managing their money, be sure to identify things they do that appear to contribute to the family's financial problems. Such things as purchasing many items on time-payment contracts, overspending budget limits, and impulse buying are typical of the kinds of behaviors that lead to financial problems.

It is essential that family members assume personal responsibility for their financial mismanagement. If they are not willing to do this, you will probably find it extremely difficult to teach them sound money-management concepts. Typically, people will not change a behavior pattern unless they make a connection between their present actions and their current financial problems. Even so, recognition and acceptance alone are often not enough. In order for a money-management plan to be successful, each bad habit must be replaced with- a new appropriate behavior. Review how the family acquires and spends its income. Identity habits that seem to contribute to the family's financial problems. When examining each of the three problem areas (inadequate income, living expenses, and excessive debt), focus on replacing bad habits with new patterns of behavior that contribute to sound financial management.

If you identify problems that you are not trained to handle you should refer the person to a professional. In referring someone for more extensive counseling, it is preferable to first get the individual's permission. Strongly recommend to the person that he contact the agency as soon as possible, and be sure to give the person's name, address, and phone number to the agency. In many cases, you may still work with the individual or family.

Sometimes you must refer a person or family to a specific specialist, but in such cases it is usually a government or private agency offering a unique service. If you live in a large city you may refer them to the local Consumer Credit Counseling service (CCC), which is prepared to help them work out a debt repayment plan with their creditors. The local CCC office also teaches effective budgeting skills.

A referral to appropriate legal services may be required in certain situations. Sometimes a family has been wronged by a creditor and needs to seek redress through the courts. In many cases, families are defendants in court actions. Most people experiencing financial difficulties are not aware of their rights under the law and do not understand "due process." Since you too may be uninformed, be certain to refer the person for legal assistance when it may be beneficial. (In larger cities, legal aid may be available at no or low cost to low-income families.)

Inadequate Income

If the family's income is inadequate, it may be helpful to explore some of the reasons that this situation exists. For example, do adults in the family lack the experience, training, or education necessary to secure satisfactory employment? Many times you will find that one or more family members will need to improve basic reading and writing skills in order to earn an adequate wage. Others maybe unemployed or underemployed because they are disabled, retired, or have become a single parent with preschool children. Others may move from job to job and therefore lack seniority. Such people are highly vulnerable to financial stress, not only because of their low income levels, but also because they are usually the first ones let go during an economic downturn.

When income is low, retraining or additional education are often essential in helping a family become self-supporting. In the interim, however, many families may require assistance from relatives, the Church, or other social programs until they can support themselves. There are rarely easy, short-term solutions when a family's income is inadequate. Therefore, long-term planning should start as soon as possible.

Increasing Living Expenses

Inflation, moving expenses, purchase of a new home, and separation and divorce (which usually require supporting two households) can all contribute to increased living expenses. However, for many families, money problems are at least partially the result of poor budgeting and mismanagement in some areas. Perhaps one of the most common causes of overspending is impulse buying when purchases are based on spur-of-the-moment desires to acquire an asset or service. An even more serious spending habit is compulsive spending, when a person develops an almost obsessive need to make purchases. There are a variety of reasons behind such behavior, such as depression, feelings of inferiority, or revenge. People who are depressed sometimes make unneeded purchases in an attempt to lift their spirits. People with inferiority complexes often try to compensate for their perceived inadequacies by trying to "keep up with the Joneses." Revenge as a motivation often becomes manifest when one spouse attempts to "get even" by making a purchase in retaliation for a previously unplanned purchase made by the other spouse.

Other increased living expenses are the result of a lack of discipline with regard to saving for important future goals or for emergencies. This failure to defer compensation contributes to a variety of problems and is a major reason why many families lose control of their finances.

Often families simply do not realize what a high percentage of their income is already committed before it is even received. After subtracting taxes, payroll deductions, and debt payments from gross income, many families find that they have less then 40 percent of gross income remaining to cover living expenses. Part of what remains may also be committed to nonmonthly expenses such as car insurance and real-estate taxes, which are seldom budgeted for adequately. In some cases, the families do not have any particular plan for spending their income, and since their income and outgo are so closely matched, they often overspend. Budgeting can help people control where their money goes.

Excessive Debt

Many families find themselves in financial difficulty because they fail to determine if their budget can handle additional installment debt or credit card payments before making a purchase. As they increase the amount of debt payments they must make each month, a larger percentage of their paycheck is committed before it is received, making it increasingly difficult to balance the budget each month and almost impossible to save or invest.

Misuse of credit, especially the misuse of credit cards, is a major problem. Many families see credit as a source of money when they have exhausted other sources of income. Merchants encourage customers to charge. Many families ignore outstanding statement balances as they become accustomed to paying only the minimum due each month. As the outstanding balance on a credit card reaches its limit, they often request an increase in the limit, or they may apply for additional credit from new sources. Eventually payments to creditors exceed what the family can manage out of their income. This type of debt load, which can become excessive even when the income stream is maintained, can translate into a financial disaster should income be reduced.

As you have explored these three problem areas (inadequate income, increasing expenditures, and excessive debt) with those you counsel, it may have been easy for some people to readily identify their inappropriate behaviors, but for others, such insights were much more difficult, and some may not have had the slightest idea how they got into their financial difficulties. Once the causes of an individual or family's financial problems have been identified, you will need to shift your focus to changing their behaviors that seem to contribute to each problem.

Part 3: Teaching Sound Money-Management Concepts

This third section focuses on teaching sound money-management skills and will require family members to replace self-defeating behaviors with effective financial practices. An effective place to begin helping family members change their bad habits is to review the famines current financial decision-making process. For instance, have a family member recount how a recent important financial decision was made. Was the decision made on impulse? Was the decision's impact on other aspects of family life examined before the decision was implemented? were alternative ways to implement the decision considered? What did the family have to give up in order to make this purchase? Could the budget accommodate the spending required to implement the decision? Is it common for one or more family members to be unhappy with the decision-making process? Understanding how decisions are made and implemented can provide useful insight into poor money-management behaviors. Based on such insight, you may more easily recommend new procedures that, if properly implemented by the family, are most likely to improve the quality of their financial decisions.

Defining Goals

Poor decision-making ability is often associated with ineffective goal determination. Ask the family to bring a list of financial goals to the counseling session. (Perhaps the entire family should meet with the counselor during this session.) . If they fail to bring their goals, ask each family member present to make a list of goals; allow them two minutes to write them but ask them to not look at anyone else's list. Next, have them compare lists and try to reach a consensus on the most important family goals. Families who have never tried this exercise may be surprised at the contributions received from their children. The family who did not bring their children should go home and do this exercise again with all the family, and it should be repeated periodically, at least annually.

Most goals submitted will require revision. For a goal to be effective, it must contain three components: (1) a clearly defined target or end result; (2) the date when the goal is to be accomplished; (3) an action required to fund the goal. Compare the goal "buy a home" with "buy a $90,000 four-bedroom ranch-style home during the summer of 1990 by saving $250 each month starting next March." The first goal, "buy a home," is so vague that it is difficult to implement. However, the second goal clearly explains what it is the family wishes to achieve, when they wish to achieve it, and how they plan to fund it.

Funding future goals does not require that money be set aside today or even this year for any goal, but it does require that a plan be developed indicating when money can be set aside to fund important goals. Families who can see their way to start funding a goal in one, two, or even three years from now are a lot happier than those who think that they will never be able to achieve any important goals. Hope is an essential ingredient in money management. If a family cannot save, their financial future will seem, and often will be, bleak.

Developing Spending Plans

Families need to learn how to develop spending plans and perform necessary record-keeping functions in order to make sure that their expenditures are controlled and important goals are funded. However, family members often fail to consistently perform even the most basic budgeting procedures. For example, they are often not sure of the current balance in their checking account because they have failed to record checks in the check register. As a result, each month the bank statement is usually not reconciled with their check-register balance, which can, in some cases, lead to writing bed checks. This is just one example of the lack of an effective system for keeping track of a family's spending.

All families need to know how to develop and use spending plans. The following procedures are basic to any budgeting system:

In instructing the family, do not assume that there is only one effective money-management system. Actually there are many, with no two families following the same one.

There are several excellent books listed at the back of this chapter that offer sound instruction on developing budgets and financial statements. If you find yourself needing to teach the mechanics of money management, they can serve as useful reference guides.

Restructuring Debt Payments

Many families have a difficult time balancing their budgets because they have so many credit obligations. Restructuring existing debt payments maybe essential if some budgets are to balance. Adjusting debt payments requires the family, and possibly you, to contact the creditors. Before asking a creditor to modify a contractual repayment program, a financial counselor needs to become familiar with each creditor's policies; most laymen are not. You may wish to contact the various creditors for information on their policies, or if a Consumer Credit Counseling Service is available, you may wish to contact this service or merely refer the family to the agency. If one is not convenient, you or a member of the family will need to contact each creditor. Creditors are often willing to renegotiate payments if they understand the family problem. You may wish to refer to van Arsdale's book and the Credit Counselor Training Handbook listed at the end of this chapter, both of which provide excellent discussions on working with creditors.

This third stage in financial counseling will be successful if you have been able to motivate family members to replace their harmful behaviors with new actions and attitudes associated with sound money management principles and procedures. Although you may never see many of these families again, it is often useful to have a follow-up meeting after they have spent two or three months applying the principles and procedures you have taught them. Find out if they are gaining control of their financial affairs. Is there less pressure from creditors? Are they able to save for future goals? Do their budgeting procedures work? Does the budget balance at the end of each month? In what areas do they still need to improve? In most cases they should respond positively to most to these questions. You may not be successful with every person or family, but you should be reasonably helpful to many and extremely helpful to some.

Suggested Readings

Albrecht, W. Steven. Money Wise: Money Management for Latter-day Saints. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1983.

Ballard, Thomas; David Biehl; and Ronald Kaiser. Personal Money Management, 4th edition. Chicago: Science Research Associates, 1983.

Credit Counselor Training Handbook. Credit Counseling Centers, Inc., 17000 E. Eight Mile Road, Southfield, Michigan, 48075, 1981.

Pulvino, Charles, and James Lee. Financial Counseling: Interviewing Skills. Dubuque, Iowa: Kendall/Hunt Publishing, 1979.

VanArsdale, Mary. A Guide to Family Financial Counseling. Homewood, Illinois: Dow Jones-lrwin, 1982.

Weirich, Jean Luttrell. Personal Financial Management Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1983.

Williams, Flora. Guidelines to Financial Counseling. Agricultural Experiment Station, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana, 1980.

About The Author

Dr. Jerry Mason, assistant professor of family sciences at Brigham Young University, received his B.S. degree from BYU, his MBA from Stanford University, and his Ph.D. in family economics from the University of Missouri. He is a member of the International Association for Financial Planners.

He has served in many Church callings, including ward executive secretary. He and his wife, Joyce, are the parents of six children.

The author wishes to express his appreciation to his colleagues Bud Poduska and Virginia Langrehr for their critical reviews and helpful suggestions.
