After the Prophet Lehi had warned the people of Jerusalem of what was going to happen, the Lord told him in a dream to leave the city and take his family with him.

The people did not believe what he said would take place, and they were angry with him because he told them of their sins. They wanted to kill Lehi, so the Lord told him to leave them.

Lehi had lived in Jerusalem all his life up to this time. Besides having a home he had much gold and silver and other valuable things. But he left all these and with his family journeyed in the wilderness, as the Lord commanded him. What is meant by the wilderness is a desert or land that is not cultivated; where there are no houses for people to live in. The country south of Jerusalem was generally called the wilderness, as it was rough and uncultivated. Lehi and his family traveled south from Jerusalem until they came to this wilderness.

For three days they traveled in the wilderness, when they came to a valley by the shore of the Red Sea. In this valley was a river, and they camped by its side. They brought with them provisions, food and such things as they would need, and tents to live in.

As they expected to stay here for some time they pitched their tents. Lehi built an altar here and made an offering or sacrifice to the Lord, and thanked Him for His goodness. The Lord had told him to leave Jerusalem because the people wanted to take his life and he was thankful for being saved in this way.

LEHI AND HIS FAMILY IN THE WILDERNESS.

Lehi's wife was named Sariah. They had four sons at this time. The sons' names were Laman, Lemuel, Sam and Nephi. They also had daughters but their names are not told in the Book of Mormon.

The two older sons of Lehi, Laman and Lemuel, complained because their father left his house and land and all his riches and brought his family into the wilderness to die. They did not believe that Jerusalem would be destroyed; nor did they believe the Lord commanded him to leave Jerusalem for safety from the wicked people there. As they did not have faith in the Lord they were afraid they might die in the wilderness for want of food.

Nephi and Sam believed what their father had told them, and were more willing to obey him. Nephi especially had great faith in the Lord. He fully believed the Lord had spoken to his father, and he prayed to the Lord that he might know for himself the things of God which his father spoke about.

Nephi's prayers were answered. The Lord visited him and told him many wonderful things. He blessed Nephi, and said he would become the ruler of his brethren who were disobedient. The Lord also told Nephi that He would lead his father's family to a beautiful and rich country, called the Land of Promise.

The Lord is ever willing to answer prayers. Those who pray to Him for knowledge or wisdom or anything that is for their good will be sure to receive an answer, if they ask in faith, believing the Lord will hear them.

If Nephi's brothers, Laman and Lemuel had faith and prayed to the Lord they would know also that their father was a truthful man and was a prophet of God. But they were not willing to do this, and therefore they were not blest like their brother Nephi.

This story shows us that the Lord will protect and bless those who trust in Him. In the following stories about Lehi and his family we shall see how the Lord continued to bless them and provide for their needs, and how He led them to a far off land that was not known to other people in the world.

ARAB'S MODE OF TRAVELING IN THE DESERT.

Points to be remembered in this story: Lehi told in a dream to leave Jerusalem and go into the wilderness, that he and his family might be saved—They go south from Jerusalem and camp by a river near the Red Sea—Lehi's wife named Sariah, his sons named Laman, Lemuel, Sam and Nephi—Laman and Lemuel are not satisfied with their father's doings, and complain—They do not believe what he tells them—Nephi a faithful and obedient son—He prays to the Lord and receives an answer to his prayers—The Lord blesses him and tells him many things—The Lord always willing to answer prayers—The Lord protects those who trust in Him.
