While Lehi's family were living in their tents in the wilderness by the shore of the Red Sea the Lord told Lehi in a dream to send his sons back to Jerusalem.

There was a man in Jerusalem who had some plates of brass on which was written or engraved the record or history of Lehi's relatives, his father, grandfather, great-grandfather, and others. They gave an account of the Jews from the time they came to Jerusalem and for a long time before they came there. The record on the plates also told about the creation of the world, about Adam and Eve, our first parents, about Noah, and Abraham, and Moses, and many other people.

Lehi wanted these plates to take with him, that his family and those who lived with them might have an account of their forefathers, and the laws of the Lord which were given through Moses, which were also contained on these brass plates.

At the time when Lehi lived the people did not have books made of paper, like those we have. Instead of paper to write on they used skins of animals and other materials. Sometimes they used brass or gold plates, and cut the writing into the plates with a sharp knife or other tool.

Lehi sent his four sons back to Jerusalem to get these plates from Laban, the man who was taking care of them.

When Laman and Lemuel were told that they must go they again complained and found fault with their father; but when Nephi was spoken to about going he was very willing to do so and did not complain. Laman and Lemuel thought it was very hard for them to go back on such an errand, but Nephi said he knew the Lord would not want them to do anything they were not able to; and he believed the Lord would watch over them while on their journey. How much better it would have been for them all to be obedient like Nephi was will be seen from the following stories. So Nephi and his other brothers took their tents and started on their journey.

When they reached the city of Jerusalem they decided among themselves that Laman, the older one of the four, should go to Laban's house and ask for the plates. It was right that their father should have the plates, or the Lord would not have told him to send for them. But when Laman asked Laban to give the plates to him he became angry. He called Laman a robber, and said he would kill him. Laman then ran away, so the man did not catch him.

When Laman went back to where his brothers were waiting for him and told what had happened they all felt very sorry. The older brothers wanted to go back to their father; but Nephi was determined to get the plates for which he had been sent. He persuaded his brothers to stay with him, and they went to their father's old home and gathered up the gold and silver and other precious things which had been left there. These things they took to Laban and offered them to him if he would give them the brass plates that contained the writings or records.

When Laban saw they had so much gold and silver and other valuable things he wanted to get the things, but would not give up the plates. So he put Lehi's sons out of his house, then he sent his servants after them to slay them and take their property. When these servants of Laban came after Nephi and his brothers they had to leave their gold and silver and run for their lives. They got out of the city and hid in a cave or hole in a rock, and so the men who were after them could not find them.

After this Laman and Lemuel became angry with Nephi and Sam, and they whipped them with a rod. Then an angel from heaven appeared and told them to not harm their younger brother Nephi, but to go again to Laban and the Lord would help them in performing their errand. When the angel left them Laman and Lemuel again complained, and said they did not believe they could perform their errand. Nephi reasoned with them and persuaded them to go with him towards the city, although they were still dissatisfied and angry.

When they got to the gate of Jerusalem it was night. Nephi told his brothers to hide there while he crept into the city.

He went towards the house where Laban lived and on his way near the house he saw a man lying on the ground. The man was drunk. He looked at him and found it was Laban. Laban had a sword with him, which Nephi drew from its sheath. He examined it, and saw it was made of fine steel, with a beautiful handle made of pure gold.

While Laban lay before him on the ground the Spirit of the Lord told Nephi to kill him. Nephi did not like to do this. He was a good young man, and knew it was not right to kill. But the Lord commanded him to kill Laban, and he obeyed the Lord. Nephi then put Laban's clothes on himself and went into Laban's house. Here he found the servant who took care of Laban's treasures. Nephi told this man to go and get the plates of brass from the place where they were kept and follow him. The servant, whose name was Zoram, thought it was Laban who was talking to him. He therefore brought out the plates that contained the records and went with Nephi to where his brothers were outside the gates of the city.

NEPHI'S RETURN WITH THE BRASS PLATES.

When Laman, Lemuel and Sam saw Nephi coming they were very much frightened. They thought he was Laban, because he was dressed in Laban's clothes. They believed Nephi was killed and Laban was coming to kill them. So they began to run. Nephi called them, and they found it was their brother and not Laban.

By this time Zoram, who was with Nephi, became frightened and was going to run back into the city, but Nephi held him. Afterwards Nephi persuaded Zoram to go with him and promised him they would not hurt him.

This story shows us that the Lord does not ask His children to do anything that is impossible, or that they cannot do. He understands all things, and knows what His children are able to do. Nephi's doings teach us a very good lesson in perseverance and patience. We can see how, by trying again and not giving up, we can do things that seem impossible at first.

Points to be remembered in this story: Lehi sends his sons back to Jerusalem to get plates that contain an account or history of their forefathers—His older sons complain, but Nephi offers to go willingly—When the sons reach Jerusalem Laman goes to see Laban, the man who has the plates—Laban gets angry, calls Laman a robber, and says he will kill him—Laman runs away to save his life—The four brothers go to their father's old home and get the gold and silver and other precious things left there and offer them to Laban for the plates—Laban refuses to give up the plates, and sends his servants to kill Lehi's sons and take their property—Lehi's sons escape by hiding in a cave—They go the third time to get the plates—Nephi finds Laban drunk—Being commanded of the Lord, Nephi kills him and gets the plates from his servant==Nephi takes Zoram, Laban's servant, and the plates to where his brothers are outside the city.
