While Lehi's sons were away on their errand to Jerusalem to get the records, their mother was very uneasy about them. She feared they might get killed or might die in the wilderness. When they came back both their father and mother were filled with joy, and were thankful to the Lord for their safe return.

Sometime after the sons' return to the place where they camped in the wilderness, their father was told by the Lord to send again to Jerusalem.

The Lord desired to lead Lehi and those who were with him to a country where there were no people. There was a man named Ishmael, living in Jerusalem who had several sons and daughters. The Lord commanded Lehi to send for Ishmael and invite him to go with them to the new country.

Lehi's sons were not married, and by getting Ishmael and his family to go with them the sons of Lehi might take Ishmael's daughters for wives. This was the reason why the Lord desired Lehi to send for Ishmael.

Laman, Lemuel, Sam and Nephi were sent to Jerusalem for this family. When they reached Ishmael's house they told him what they had come for. Ishmael and his family were willing to go with them, and so they all traveled together into the wilderness.

While on their journey Nephi's two older brothers and some of Ishmael's sons and daughters rebelled against Nephi and the other members of Ishmael's family. That is, they refused to go with them. They wanted to return to Jerusalem. Nephi told them that if they did return they would be killed with the others who were there, as Jerusalem would surely be destroyed. Being blessed with the Spirit of the Lord, Nephi spoke with great power to his brethren. But this only made them angry. They became so angry that they took Nephi and bound him with cords. They wanted to kill him and leave him there in the wilderness to be eaten by wild beasts.

While Nephi was bound he prayed to the Lord to protect and save him from his wicked brothers. The Lord answered his prayers. The cords with which he was bound became loosened and he was set free.

Again, before they reached the end of their journey, Nephi's older brothers became angry and wanted to slay him. But this time Ishmael's wife and one of her sons and one daughter stopped them, and persuaded them to leave him alone.

Afterwards Laman and Lemuel felt very sorry for being so cruel to their brother. They asked him to forgive them for what they had done. Nephi at once forgave them, and was glad to see them repent of their wickedness. He loved his brothers even when they tried to take his life. Nephi told Laman and Lemuel to ask the Lord to forgive them and they did this. Then they all went on their journey and soon came to the place where Lehi and those who were with him were stopping.

This story shows again how the Lord watches over those who do right, and how he keeps them from harm when the wicked try to hurt them. Each time when Nephi was in danger the Lord saved him from all harm. This was because Nephi was a good man, and was obedient and faithful to the Lord. He was also obedient to his father Lehi, who loved him very much.

NEPHI'S BRETHREN SEEK HIS LIFE.

Points to be remembered in this story: Lehi's sons sent to Jerusalem a second time—Their errand is to invite a man named Ishmael and his family to join their father's family in the wilderness—As the Lord intended to lead Lehi and his family to a new country where there were no people, it was desirable that Ishmael go with them—Ishmael had several daughters, whom it was expected would become the wives of Lehi's sons—Ishmael and family agree to go into the wilderness—After starting Laman and Lemuel and some of Ishmael's family rebel and want to turn back—Nephi encourages them to keep on their journey—They become angry at Nephi and bind him with cords, intending to kill him—Nephi prays and the Lord loosens the cords and he gets free—Again Nephi's older brothers want to take his life, but Ishmael's wife and her son and daughter stop them and persuade them to leave him alone—Afterwards Laman and Lemuel are sorry and ask Nephi to forgive them—Nephi forgives his brothers and they all go on their journey and come to the place where Lehi is stopping—The Lord always takes care of those who obey Him.
