After arriving at the place which they called Bountiful, near the great ocean, Lehi and his company pitched their tents and rested for many days. Here the Lord spoke to Nephi and told him to go to a mountain. Nephi obeyed the voice of the Lord. When he was upon the mountain he prayed, and the Lord told him he was to build a ship that the people might be carried in it across the ocean, to the land of promise.

The Lord promised Nephi that He would show him how to build this ship. Nephi had no tools with which to make a ship, and he did not know how he should get along with the work. But the Lord showed him where he might find iron ore out of which to make tools.

Nephi then made out of the skins of animals a bellows, such as blacksmiths use to blow the fire. He then made a fire by striking two stones together. He did not have matches, such as we use to make a light.

While the company were traveling in the wilderness they did not make much fire. The Lord did not desire them to make much fire or light. He caused their food to taste sweet without cooking.

NEPHI AND HIS BRETHREN BUILDING A SHIP.

This the Lord did that they might know that He was their Leader, and that it was by His power they were fed and cared for.

After making a fire, Nephi melted the iron ore to get the iron out of it, and then he made tools from the iron.

When Nephi's brothers saw that he was going to build a ship and cross the ocean in it they made fun of him and called him foolish. They did not believe he could build a ship, nor did they think he could cross the great waters in the ship if he should build one. They were not willing to help him, as they did not believe he was instructed by the Lord.

Nephi reasoned with his brethren when he found they did not believe the Lord had instructed him to build the ship. He reminded them of how the Lord delivered their forefathers out of Egypt, and how He had led their father Lehi and family from Jerusalem, and cared for them on their way. Nephi also spoke to them about their wickedness and their unbelief. This made them angry again, and they wanted to throw him into the sea. As they were about to take hold of him Nephi commanded them in the name of the Lord to not touch him. He was filled with the Spirit of the Lord, and told them if they touched him the Lord would smite them, or strike them so that they would wither.

For several days after this they did not dare to touch Nephi. Then the Lord told him to stretch his arm out towards his brethren, and He would shake them. This Nephi did and the Lord shook them so much that they were willing to believe in Him. They then fell down and were going to worship Nephi, but he told them to worship the Lord and honor their father and mother.

The brothers were now willing to help Nephi build the ship.

From time to time, as He promised, the Lord instructed Nephi about how he should make the vessel, and Nephi and his brethren got out timber and worked it according to the instructions they received.

STYLES OF SHIPS USED IN OLDEN TIMES.

When the ship was finished they saw that it was good, and the work on it was very fine; and those who laughed at Nephi and said he could not build a ship were humble now, and they believed the Lord had guided and instructed him.

Now that the ship was built, the Lord told Lehi to take his family and all who were with him and get into it. So after preparing much fruit, and meat, and honey, and other provisions which they needed they all got into the ship, and started out on their journey or voyage.

They still had to be led by the Lord, as they did not know which way to travel. When the ship was launched or loosened from the shore the wind blew it in the direction of the land to which the Lord desired to take them.

We learn from this story that Lehi and his company were led in the wilderness much in the same way as the children of Israel were, when they left Egypt. The children of Israel were forty years in the wilderness going from Egypt to Jerusalem. The distance between these two places was not so very far. The reason they were so long in going was because the Lord desired to teach them certain lessons before they ended their journey, and it took all this time to prepare them to enter the land to which they were being led. Lehi and his company were eight years going from Jerusalem to the sea shore where they built the ship. They too, might have traveled faster, but some of them were disobedient and complained very much. They did not have patience enough and did not trust in the Lord as they should nor believe that He was leading them. The Lord wanted them to learn these things and so He caused them to remain a long time in the wilderness, where they received an experience which was valuable to them.

Points to be remembered in this story: Nephi is commanded by the Lord to build a ship, with which to cross the ocean—He melts ore and gets iron to make tools—His brothers call him foolish and refuse to help him—He reasons with them and they try to throw him into the sea—Nephi commands them to not touch him or the Lord will smite them—The Lord shakes them; they then believe what their brother has told them and are willing to help him build a ship—When the ship is finished all the people in the company go into it and they start on their voyage—The journey of Lehi and his company was like that of the children of Israel when they left Egypt.
