After sailing on the ocean for several days Nephi's brothers, Laman and Lemuel, and the sons of Ishmael, with their wives, began to make themselves merry. They sang, and danced, and spoke with much rudeness. They seemed by their actions to have forgotten how the Lord had cared for them and guided them through the wilderness.

Nephi was afraid their actions would offend the Lord, and he spoke to them about their behavior. But as before, this made them angry, and they said they would not be ruled over by their younger brother. Laman and Lemuel took Nephi and bound him with cords and treated him very cruelly. Nephi was bound so tightly that he could not move.

As soon as Nephi was bound the liahona, or brass ball, failed to direct them in the course they should take, and a great storm arose. The ship was driven backward for three days, and those on board began to be frightened, as they were in danger of being drowned.

But Laman and Lemuel were so wicked at heart that they would not release Nephi. Their father talked with them, but this did not soften their hearts. Lehi and Sariah his wife were getting old, and the troubles caused them by their older sons made them very sick. Their two younger sons, Jacob and Joseph, who were born in the wilderness, were much in need of their mother's care, and were grieved because of her sickness. Nephi's wife and children cried and prayed for him to be released, but this had no effect upon Laman and Lemuel. Nothing but the power of God would move them.

On the fourth day after Nephi was bound the storm became more severe, and it seemed as though the ship would sink. The storm was so terrible that Laman and Lemuel became fearful that they would be drowned. They then repented of their wicked acts and loosened the bands that held their brother.

Nephi's wrists and ankles, around which the cords were tied, were very much swollen and very sore; but he did not complain. He thanked the Lord and praised Him for His goodness.

After being released Nephi took the brass ball, or compass, as it was also called, and it began to work again. He prayed to the Lord and the storm ceased, and the ship was guided towards the promised land.

For many days they continued to sail, and at last they reached the shore of the land of promise. The place where they landed was in the country now called Chili, in South America.

Here they got out of the ship and put up their tents. They planted the seeds which they brought with them from Jerusalem. The seeds grew, and soon they were rewarded with abundant crops.

They found that there were animals of all kinds in the forests. There were cattle, and horses, and goats, and many other animals. They also found gold, and silver, and copper.

ARRIVAL ON THE PROMISED LAND.

This was indeed the choice land to which the Lord promised to lead Lehi and his colony. Here they could live in peace and happiness if they would keep the Lord's commandments. There were no other people in the country to disturb them.

This story shows us that the Lord is true to His promises. Everything He promised Lehi and Nephi was fulfilled. Laman and Lemuel, who were so full of unbelief in regard to the Lord's promises, could now see that they were all true.

They had no way of getting news from Jerusalem, and they could not tell what was happening there; but the Lord showed to Lehi in a vision the destruction of Jerusalem, which took place just about the time his colony reached the promised land.

Points to be remembered in this story: While in the ship Laman, Lemuel and Ishmael's sons with their wives act rude—Nephi was not pleased with their behavior and speaks to them—They get angry and bind Nephi with cords—A great storm arises and nearly sinks the ship—On the fourth day of the storm it becomes more terrible and Laman and Lemuel fear they will be drowned and release Nephi—Nephi prays to the Lord and the storm ceases—After sailing many days they reach the promised land—The country they arrive at is now called Chili, in South America—They plant the seed which they brought from Jerusalem and raise abundant crops—They find all kinds of animals in the forests, and gold, silver and copper in the earth—This is the choice land to which the Lord promised to lead them—The Lord fulfills all His promises—Lehi saw the destruction of Jerusalem in a vision.
