When the little colony of people led by Lehi arrived on the promised land Lehi was quite aged. He knew that he would not live very long. Before he died he wanted to speak to his children and grandchildren and all who came with him across the great ocean. He also desired to bless them, and as he was their father and a servant of the Lord, it was his right to do so.

Lehi was a great prophet. The Lord told him many things that would happen in years to come. When he called his people together to speak to them and bless them, he told them many things which the Lord showed unto him. He reminded them of the great mercy of God in leading them to such a beautiful land, and told them that if they and their children after them would be faithful in keeping the commandments of the Lord, they should possess the land forever.

The Lord had kept this land for a good people, and as long as they should serve Him they would prosper, but when they became wicked they would not be protected by the Lord. Other people would be led to their country and take possession of it.

Lehi told what should happen to his children or posterity down to the time in which we live. He also gave them some very good instructions. These instructions you can read in the Book of Mormon when you become older. The advice or counsel he gave them is good for others as well as his children, and should be read by everyone who is able to understand it.

LEHI BLESSING HIS FAMILY.

After telling them about these things, Lehi called his children to him one by one and blessed them.

In speaking to Laman and Lemuel, Lehi said he feared very much for them. On account of their disobedience he was afraid the Lord would cause a curse to come upon them and their children. He asked them to be obedient to Nephi, their younger brother, whom the Lord promised should be their leader on account of his faithfulness and obedience. If they would do as he desired them, Lehi promised they should not perish, but if they would not, the blessings he promised them would be taken from them.

In speaking to his other sons Lehi also instructed them to listen to and obey the counsel of Nephi, and promised that their children and Nephi's children should dwell together and be one people, and that they and their children should dwell in peace in the land for a long time.

Soon after blessing his children and giving them the instructions he desired they should receive, Lehi died, and his children buried him.

If Laman and Lemuel were not so rebellious and unwilling to believe they might have seen many things to prove that their father was indeed a true prophet. Everything he prophesied about came to pass just as he said; and many of his prophecies were fulfilled while Laman and Lemuel were living. They could see and understand that the Lord spoke to their father, but they were wicked and disobedient. In following stories we will learn what happened to them for their disobedience.

Points to be remembered in this story: Before Lehi dies he calls his family together to bless them and to tell them about what will happen in years to come—He instructs them to keep the commandments of the Lord and obey the teachings of Nephi—Lehi dies—Laman and Lemuel do not believe in their father's words because of their wickedness and rebellion.
