Not many days after the death of Lehi, Laman and Lemuel and the sons of Ishmael again became angry with Nephi. This was because he had counseled them as the Lord had told him, to be more faithful. Nephi desired his brethren to do better, and this was why he talked with them. He also prayed for them that their hearts might be softened. But their hearts were evil. They became more angry with Nephi and tried to take his life.

They said among themselves, "Our younger brother thinks to rule over us, and we have had much trial because of him; wherefore now let us slay him, that we may not be afflicted more because of his words. For behold we will not have him to be our ruler; for it belongs unto us who are the older brethren, to rule over this people."

They did not tell Nephi of their intention to kill him, that they might be rulers of the people. But the Lord warned him of what his brethren wanted to do, and instructed him to leave them and go into the wilderness. He was also to take with him all the people who were willing to follow him.

All those who believed in the revelations of the Lord listened to Nephi and obeyed his instructions, and they were willing to follow him into the wilderness. Among these were Nephi's family, Zoram and his family, Sam and his family and Nephi's sisters.

After traveling for many days they found a place suitable for them to dwell in, and there they pitched their tents. This place they named Nephi, after their leader whom they loved. The people also called themselves the people of Nephi. From this time on for many hundreds of years these people and their children were called Nephites, and those who remained with Laman and Lemuel were called Lamanites.

THE NEPHITES SEEKING A NEW HOME.

The place to which Nephi led his people when they left Laman and Lemuel is believed to be north of where they landed from the ship when they first came to the promised land. It was either in the country now called Ecuador or in Peru, in South America.

The Lord blessed the people who went with Nephi to build up a new home. They planted crops and raised an abundance of food. They also raised herds of cattle and other animals that were useful to them.

The Lord told Lehi that He would lead him and his children to a rich and choice land; and so it was. His promise was fulfilled, just as it always is.

When Nephi left his disobedient brethren he took with him the brass plates which they obtained from Laban in Jerusalem. The records on these plates were very valuable to him, and he desired to keep them for his children and all who should live after him. These records contained the laws and the commandments of the Lord, and Nephi and his people desired to obey these commandments.

Nephi also took with him the sword of Laban and the brass ball or liahona which his father found near his tent door while traveling in the wilderness, and which pointed out the way for him to travel. Nephi used the sword of Laban as a pattern to make other swords by. This was in order that his people might defend or protect themselves from Laman and Lemuel and those who were with them. Nephi knew that they hated him and his people and would try to kill them if they had the chance.

It was a wise thing for Nephi to have his people make swords to protect themselves with, for in less than forty years after the time they came across the sea to the promised land they had wars and contentions with the Lamanites.

We learn from this story that Laman and Lemuel wanted to rule the people, but the Lord had promised Nephi that he should be their leader on account of his faithfulness. The Lord also said that Laman and Lemuel and their children should be cut off from His presence, that is He would not speak to them or give them revelations if they did not obey Him. Nephi did become the leader of the people, and the Lamanites were shut out from receiving revelations from the Lord on account of their wickedness, showing that the Lord's words were fulfilled. We see by this that the Lord is very particular to keep every promise He makes to His servants. We should also be very careful to keep our promises to one another and to our Heavenly Father.

Points to be remembered in this story: Laman, Lemuel and Ishmael's sons get angry at Nephi and plan among themselves to kill him—The Lord warns Nephi of their intentions and tells him to leave them and go into another part of the country—Those who believe Nephi's words and teachings go with him into the wilderness to find a new home—They travel many days and settle at a place which they name Nephi after their leader—This people afterwards called Nephites, and those whom they left called Lamanites—Here they are greatly blessed of the Lord—They sow seeds and reap an abundance of food—The records on the brass plates, the brass ball and the sword of Laban taken by Nephi to his new home—Nephi makes swords for his people to defend themselves with—The Lord's promises to Nephi are fulfilled.
