Nephi was very particular to keep a record or history of his people, and to record the instructions he received from the Lord. This was in order that the people might know the many great things the Lord had done for them and their forefathers.

The Lord was very particular about Nephi taking a record of his forefathers with him when he left Jerusalem. You will remember that Nephi and his brothers were sent to Laban for the records, and Nephi was commanded of the Lord to kill Laban in order to get them. The Lord knew that by having the people keep a record of His dealings with them they would not be so apt to forget Him and His commandments.

The Book of Mormon tells about a company of people who left Jerusalem eleven years later than did Nephi and his colony. They brought no records with them. A little more than three hundred years later the children or descendants of these people were found by the people of Nephi. At this time their language was corrupted or changed so much that the two peoples could not understand each other. These people who were without records of any kind had also lost all knowledge of the Lord. They did not know there was a God. This shows how important it is that records should be kept so that the people may remember the commandments of the Lord, and not forget Him as these people did.

Nephi made some plates from metal on which he wrote or engraved an account of his people from the time they left Jerusalem until a short time before he died. On these plates he wrote a full history of the people. Afterwards the Lord told him to make other plates and engrave upon them certain instructions for the benefit of his people.

When Nephi became old he gave the plates which contained the records to his brother Jacob and instructed him about what to write on them. Jacob in turn when he grew old gave them to his son. In this way the history of the people was kept for many hundreds of years.

Next to the last man among the Nephites who had charge of the records was one named Mormon. Besides writing an account of what happened in his own time, Mormon made from these records which were on the plates a short history of the people from the days of Lehi to his own time. This history which he wrote is what was translated by Joseph Smith. It is called the Book of Mormon because it was written by Mormon. His son whose name was Moroni was the last man among the Nephites who wrote on the plates. He was also the last prophet that lived among them. When he finished the history the people were fighting and killing each other. They had become wicked and would not obey the commandments of the Lord nor listen to the instructions of His servants the prophets. On this account the Lord allowed them to destroy each other. His prophets Lehi and Nephi said they would be destroyed if they would not serve the Lord.

NEPHI MAKING PLATES.

When Moroni finished writing the history of the Nephites he placed the plates containing the records in a stone box and buried them in a hill. With the plates he also placed in the box the sword of Laban which Nephi took to slay Laban with and a gold breastplate such as the people used to protect themselves in war; also the urim and thummim, or interpreters.

This stone box and its contents remained in the ground where it was buried fourteen hundred years. On the 22nd day of September, 1827, this same man Moroni, who had died and was resurrected, or raised to life again, showed Joseph Smith the Prophet where this stone box was buried, and gave him permission to take the plates and other things out.

With the urim and thummim or interpreters, Joseph Smith translated or changed the writings on some of the plates into the English language. In this way the Book of Mormon was given to the people who live in our time. The urim and thummim was two precious stones fastened into a silver rim. They had been prepared by the Lord for the purpose of translating. By looking on these stones the Prophet Joseph Smith could see the English words to be written for the words which were engraved on the plates.

When Nephi became old and knew that he would soon die he anointed a man to be king to rule over the people. He had already appointed his brothers Jacob and Joseph as priests to instruct them in their duties to the Lord. He himself had taught them many things about religion and other matters, and now he was prepared to die. He lived a good life, having been faithful in doing everything the Lord commanded him.

Points to be remembered in this story: Nephi kept a record of his people so they might remember what the Lord had done for them—If they did not have the Lord's commandments written they would easily forget them—Nephi makes plates of metal on which to write the history of his people—These plates were given by one man to another to keep for many hundreds of years—Moroni the next to last man who wrote on the plates copied a short history of the people from them which is called the Book of Mormon—Moroni, Mormon's son finished the records and hid them in a stone box—Fourteen hundred years afterwards Moroni showed Joseph Smith where the plates were hidden, and gave him permission to take them out of the ground—With the urim and thummim Joseph Smith translated the writings on some of the plates—Before he died Nephi anointed a man to be king over the people.
