Heavenly Father has commanded His children to take good care of their bodies. We should eat nutritious food, exercise regularly, and get enough sleep. When we do these things, we remain free from addictions and have control over our lives. We gain the blessings of a healthy body, an alert mind, and the guidance of the Holy Ghost.

Alcohol and tobacco harm our bodies and our spirits. They are addictive and will damage our bodies, weaken our judgment and self-control, and shorten our lives. Because we want to be physically, mentally, and spiritually strong, we do not drink coffee or tea or abuse any drug or chemical.

Friendships are great, but dating too soon can lead to immorality, limit the number of other young people you meet, and deprive you of experiences that will help you to eventually find the person you will marry. Not all teenagers need to date or even want to. However, we can and should develop good friendships at every age.

When we do begin dating, we date in groups or go on double dates and plan activities that are positive, inexpensive, and help us get to know each other better. A young man and a young woman on a date should help each other maintain standards and protect each other’s honor and virtue.

One of the Ten Commandments says the Lord will not hold anyone guiltless who misuses His name, so we always use the names of God and Jesus Christ with reverence and respect. Profane, vulgar, or crude language or gestures, as well as dirty jokes, are offensive to the Lord and to others.

How you speak says a lot about who you are. Clean and intelligent language shows that you have a bright and wholesome mind. We use language that encourages and compliments others so that we can fulfill the commandment to love one another. We encourage others to use clean language too.

We believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God and the Creator. When Jesus lived on the earth, He led a perfect life and taught by word and example how we should live together in love. We believe that through Christ’s Atonement, we can be saved from our sins as we follow Him.

Each week at church as we partake of the sacrament, we renew our promise to always remember Him and keep His commandments.

We love Jesus Christ. We worship Jesus Christ. He is our Savior and Redeemer.
