Religious educators around the world have begun teaching new curriculum focused on the Restoration of the gospel. Inspired by the new course “Foundations of the Restoration,” this volume will support teachers and students as they study and teach key events and doctrines of the Restoration. Each article adds to our understanding of various aspects of the Restoration.

Robert L. Millet, former dean of Religious Education at Brigham Young University, who delivered the keynote address at the Sperry Symposium, introduces the Restoration and the Prophet Joseph Smith’s role in restoring plain and precious truths. Colleagues Gerrit J. Dirkmaat, Michael MacKay, and Anthony Sweat examine how we evaluate doctrine and propose a model to assist students in their study of doctrinal topics and challenges. Craig Ostler and Lloyd Newell address the historical development of sustaining Church leaders as prophets, seers, and revelators and how these good, yet imperfect individuals are inspired in directing the Lord’s Church.

Other chapters provide answers to questions such as the following: What can the First Vision teach us about the learning process? How do we apply the truths in the Articles of Faith? What did the work of translating the Bible contribute to the Prophet Joseph Smith’s understanding of the Restoration? How does the law of consecration continue today? What did early Saints understand regarding Adam-ondi-Ahman, Zion, the gathering of Israel, including the Jews, and their place regarding the Second Coming of Christ? What contributions did Church newspaper editor and hymn writer William W. Phelps, and Hyrum Smith, the Prophet’s brother, provide to our understanding of the Restoration? How did temples and temple ordinances develop in the Restoration? What correlations are found in historical understandings of Christian marriage and the doctrine of eternal family as we face new challenges to marriage in the culture of the twenty-first century? And how does restoration of true Sabbath worship affect our lives today?

We are happy to offer this volume to students of the Restoration. We trust that it will inspire and inform your understanding of the gospel of Jesus Christ and the history of the Saints that have accepted the Savior’s call to gather to his fold.

Craig James Ostler

Barbara Morgan

Michael MacKay

Patty Smith

Beverly Yellowhorse

2016 Sperry Symposium Committee