In 2018, Humanitarian Services of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints provided significant facility upgrades to the St. Theresa Secondary School in the Daggoreti suburb of Nairobi. St. Theresa is a community school whose 570 students come from challenging backgrounds in the Kabiria community. Simultaneous with the facility upgrades, a Church seminary program supported by members of the Nairobi West Stake was implemented at the school. Miracles have followed.

In 2018, three St. Theresa students enrolled in seminary. The number of participants has grown consistently from that humble beginning. Now, 118 St. Theresa students are enrolled. In the past three years, 73 of the seminary students have been baptized members of the Church. Twelve St. Theresa seminary graduates are currently serving missions, and one graduate, Stephen Kemboi, has recently returned from a full-time mission. These and many other miracles witnessed in the school and by its students are manifestations of the blessings of having seminary available to the students of St. Theresa School.

In February 2019, President Russell M. Nelson extended a personal invitation to participate in seminary and institute. Many of the blessings experienced by seminary students at St. Theresa are reflective of President Nelson’s invitation. The prophet said, “Graduating from seminary and institute will increase your ability to excel in the most important things you will ever do in life.” President Nelson made it clear that participating in seminaries and institutes would shield the participants from the storms of life and help them increase their love for the Lord and others. The significant number of St. Theresa seminary students who have made baptismal covenants, and of those serving or preparing to serve missions are a living testament of the prophet’ words—that love for the Lord and others will be increased.

Elder Chamala, who currently serves in the Uganda Kampala Mission and is a convert from the St. Theresa seminary program, shared how the seminary program has been a shield to him from the storms of life. “Seminary has helped me gain a love for God and an appreciation for His commandments. What I have learned from seminary has shielded me from the demands of the popular culture where I live. Seminary has provided me an escape from the possibility of addiction to drugs and involvement in violations of the Lord’s law of chastity which is very rampant in my community. We encourage each other on the righteous path as we stand together in holy places.”

Recently returned missionary Stephen Kemboi is an example of the positive impact of the seminary program on the lives of students. “I am a living example of what seminary and institute can do to one’s life when we receive and learn correct principles. The program strengthens testimonies and righteous choices are made.”

A St. Theresa School teacher and bishop, Simon Mukeku, of the Kabiria Ward, who helps oversee the seminary program, observed that the attitude of students has significantly changed for the better. Even though most students come from harsh economic backgrounds in the Nairobi suburb of Daggoreti, the students now demonstrate hope for the future. Additionally, the school has experienced significant academic achievements and improvements in discipline among students. These achievements are largely attributed to the aid offered by Humanitarian Services of The Church. The humanitarian efforts have transformed the dilapidated state of the school infrastructure by constructing modernized spaces thereby increasing the school’s capacity to offer quality education. From providing improved offices, better classrooms and laboratories, a modern library, and, most recently a feeding program, Church Humanitarian Services has helped to transform the school.

Over time, the graduates of seminary have demonstrated a hunger for spiritual things and their desire to have their feet planted firmly on the covenant path. Their active participation in Church programs and callings has necessitated the reshaping of the Kabiria Ward to become a gathering place for young people. Each day, these young people heed the prophet’s call to stand in holy places. The young adults meet for their family home evenings every Monday evening and participate in institute of religion classes at least twice a week.

The transformation of St. Theresa Secondary School exemplifies the far-reaching impacts of Church Humanitarian Services. Lives have been improved and souls converted. The achievements at St. Theresa offers just one example of the many completed and sustained efforts of the Church in partnering with schools to improve facilities and enhance the quality of education. Gratitude will be forever etched in the hearts of the beneficiaries of these Christlike acts of service rendered by the Church and the faithful Saints of the Nairobi West Stake of Zion.
