Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Book of Mormon ( 1976)

PREFACE

A Companion to Your Study of the Book of Mormon is exactly what the name indicates: It is designed to assist the reader as he studies the Book of Mormon.

The Book of Mormon has been presented to the world with special credentials. The Three Witnesses testified that the Book of Mormon was "translated by the gift and power of God" and that "the work is true." (See "The Testimony of Three Witnesses," in the introductory pages of the Book of Mormon.) The Prophet Joseph Smith stated that the Book of Mormon was "the most correct of any book on earth, and the keystone of our religion, and a man would get nearer to God by abiding by its precepts than by any other book." (History of the Church, 4:461.) The Book of Mormon itself claims to contain the precious truths of the gospel of Jesus Christ, written in plainness and simplicity. Thus, the Book of Mormon is probably one of the easiest scriptures to read and understand.

The Book of Mormon was written originally by persons far removed from us today not only by time, but also by language and culture. Thus, some of their expressions, idioms, manners, and customs might be difficult for the person of the twentieth century to understand. Many of these difficult passages, however, have been explained by modern prophets. Other possible confusing sections have been illuminated through research and study of Latter-day Saint scholars. Still other obscure passages have been clarified by perceptive and discerning teachers. The major portion of the Companion is a compilation of explanations concerning the more challenging and difficult verses.

The Companion is much more than this, however. The first two chapters (pages 1-55) provides background information on the Prophet Joseph Smith and on the events associated with the coming forth of the Book of Mormon. The materials in this section are largely arranged chronologically.

The next chapter (pages 56-59) discusses the major sets of plates associated with the Book of Mormon and describes their relationship to each other and to the present printed scripture.

Another chapter (pages 60-64) provides historical background to the biblical world where the Book of Mormon first began, and still another (pages 65-85) gives a brief review of the secular history of the peoples of the Book of Mormon.

The longest and perhaps the most helpful section, however, is the one which provides additional information on selected verses and topics (pages 88-339). This material is arranged consecutively according to the books, chapters, and verses in the Book of Mormon. A year's course of study in the Book of Mormon is required of all freshmen and other new students at colleges and universities sponsored by the Church. Thus, tens of thousands of students have taken courses in the Book of Mormon at Brigham Young University, and their questions have been compiled over the years by some of the BYU faculty. Such questions were anticipated in the preparation of this Companion, and possible answers and explanations are included. Thus, after a reader has read a chapter in the Book of Mormon, he might want to refer to the Companion to see if any helps are included for any of the material in that chapter.

Still another section includes a series of appendixes that provide additional information related to the purposes and the messages of the Book of Mormon (pages 340-78).

The Companion concludes with some charts, maps, and diagrams that help to provide overview information on such diverse topics as the possible movements and locations of these people, the various sets of plates, and a chronological listing of Book of Mormon prophets and major political leaders.

The Companion is designed to be used only with the Book of Mormon, and its greatest value will be when it is used as a companion to the study of this sacred record. If the goals and purposes of the compiler and the publisher are achieved, then this volume will truly be a companion to your study of the Book of Mormon.
