Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Book of Mormon ( 1976)

PART I:

INTRODUCTION TO THE BOOK OF MORMON

THE STORY OF THE COMING FORTH OF THE BOOK OF MORMON

The story of how the Book of Mormon came to be, as we have it today, is most fascinating and challenging. Following are some brief statements concerning the coming forth of the Book of Mormon as told by the Prophet Joseph Smith himself and by those who knew him and his story.

Family Background of Joseph Smith

It is difficult to understand fully the drama of the coming forth, translation, and publication of our present Book of Mormon without knowing something about Joseph Smith and his family. The story begins with his ancestors. An early Church historian, B. H. Roberts, lists one reason why it is important to become acquainted with the family background of Joseph Smith:

The study of his ancestry becomes important, since no pains are spared in making systematic pathological studies of that ancestry in the hope of finding some abnormalities that would justify the theory that the Prophet's revelations were but hallucinations, the product of a mind diseased. It may be well, therefore, to state what is known of the line of men from whom the Prophet descended, as also to inquire concerning his maternal ancestors. (A Comprehensive History of the Church, 1:1.)

The following statements have been selected to introduce the immediate ancestors of the Prophet and to indicate the type of people they were. Concerning his ancestors on his father's side of the family, Carter E. Grant has written:

The early coming of Joseph Smith's ancestors and associates to a new land of freedom planted indelibly within their hearts an unbounded determination to overthrow every tyrannical force that had dominated them in the Old World—coercions that were already beginning to chafe them in the New World.

The descent of the Smiths in America began with Robert, who in 1638, as a boy of fifteen, sailed into Boston Harbor. He later married Mary French and had ten children. Their son Samuel, Sen., born January 26, 1666, married Rebecca Curtis and became the father of nine children. Samuel, Jun., known sometimes as "Captain Samuel Smith," born January 26, 1714, married Priscilla Gould and had five children. After Samuel's first wife's death, he married her cousin by the same name.

During the decisive years of the Revolutionary conflict, Samuel Smith joined the colonial forces and became an ardent champion of freedom. Chief among the many offices that he held was chairman of the Committee of Safety, with headquarters at Concord, Massachusetts. He also had the honor of signing the orders that released to his countrymen the first muskets and ammunition used in the opening battles of the Revolution, April 19, 1775, at Lexington and Concord. Captain Smith fought under the command of General George Washington, and later became prominent in the affairs of his community.

Asael Smith, Samuel's son, who was the Prophet's grandfather, was a man of liberal views, far in advance of his time. He was born March 7, 1744 at Topsfield, Massachusetts; and at the age of thirty-two he joined his father's regiment. Together they struggled valiantly to obtain political and religious freedom in America.

Joseph Smith, Sen., son of Asael, was born at Topsfield, July 12, 1771. He was five years old when his father and grandfather marched off to war—a testing, seven-year conflict. . . .

Several of the major objectives obtained by the colonies during their decisive struggle for freedom are referred to in terms of gratitude in a letter January 14, 1796, written by Asael Smith to Mr. Jacob Town. "He (God) has conducted us through a glorious revolution and has brought us into the Promised Land of Peace and Liberty; and I believe he is about to bring all the world into the same beatitude in His own time and way." To his family, a year later, he wrote: "Bless God that you live in a land of Liberty, and bear yourselves dutifully . . . toward the authority under which you live. See God's providence in the appointment of the Federal Constitution, and hold union and order precious jewels. . . . As to your marriages, I do not think it worth while to say much about them, for I believe God hath created the persons for each other and that nature will find its own."

Upon another occasion the spirit of prophecy rested upon Joseph's grandfather, causing him to predict: "It has been borne in upon my soul that one of my descendants will promulgate a work to revolutionize the world of religious faith."

In Asael's old age he was converted to the restored gospel by his son Joseph Smith, Sen., and the Prophet's brother Don Carlos. These elders baptized the Prophet's grandmother but did not baptize the grandfather because of his age and ill health. (The Kingdom of God Restored [Deseret Book Co., 1965], pp. 12-13.)

The maiden name of the Prophet's mother was Lucy Mack. The following has been written concerning her father, Solomon, and other members on her side of the family:

Solomon, son of Ebenezer Mack, was born in Lyme, Conn., Sept. 26, 1735. At the age of twenty-one years he enlisted in the services of his country under the command of Captain Henry, and the regiment of Col. Whiting. He was engaged in the king's service with two teams carrying supplies to Fort Edwards. In 1748 he enlisted under Major Spenser and was engaged in several bloody engagements in which his life was spared miraculously. He served until the spring of 1759, when he received his honorable discharge at Crown Point. That same year he met a young schoolteacher, Lydia Gates, daughter of Nathan Gates, a wealthy citizen of East Haddam, Connecticut. The friendship of these young people ripened and they were married after a short acquaintance. In 1761 Solomon and his young wife moved to Marlow where they took up their residence in a wilderness. Only four other families resided within forty miles of them. It was while here he learned to fully appreciate the excellent virtues of his wife, "For," he writes, "as our children were deprived of schools she assumed charge of their education, and performed the duties of instructress as none, save a mother, is capable of. Precepts, accompanied with examples such as theirs, were calculated to make impressions on the minds of the young, never to be forgotten. She, besides instructing them in the various branches of an ordinary education, was in the habit of calling them together both morning and evening, and teaching them to pray, meanwhile urging upon them the necessity of love towards each other as well as devotional feelings towards Him who made them."

In this manner their children became confirmed in the virtues and were established in faith in their Redeemer.

In 1776, Solomon Mack enlisted in the American army. For some time he served in the land forces and later was transferred to the navy. With his two sons, Jason and Stephen, he was engaged in a privateering expedition commanded by Captain Havens. In this service they passed through some thrilling experiences, but escaped without great harm. His service in the war covered a period of about four years. After his discharge he went to Gilsum, New Hampshire, to make his home. Owing to the rigorous campaigns through two wars, he became broken in health and suffered considerably in his declining years. His son Stephen moved to Vermont and later to Detroit, where he engaged in mercantile pursuits and was one of the founders of Detroit. During the war of 1812 Stephen again entered the service of his country. He held the commission of a captain at the time of the siege of Detroit and was ordered by his superior officer to surrender, which he boldly refused to do. Breaking his sword across his knee he threw the parts into the lake and said he would not submit to such a disgraceful compromise while the blood of an American ran in his veins.

Such is the character of the forebears of Joseph Smith. (Joseph Fielding Smith, Essentials in Church History [Deseret Book Co., 1950], pp. 26-27.)

The Boyhood of Joseph Smith

The Prophet's account of his own birth and boyhood is brief but important. He writes:

I was born in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and five, on the twenty-third day of December, in the town of Sharon, Windsor county, State of Vermont . . . My father, Joseph Smith, Sen., left the State of Vermont, and moved to Palmyra, Ontario (now Wayne) county, in the State of New York, when I was in my tenth year, or thereabouts. In about four years after my father's arrival in Palmyra, he moved with his family into Manchester in the same county of Ontario—

His family consisting of eleven souls, namely, my father, Joseph Smith; my mother, Lucy Smith (whose name, previous to her marriage, was Mack, daughter of Solomon Mack); my brothers, Alvin (who died November 19th, 1824, in the 27th year of his age), Hyrum, myself, Samuel Harrison, William, Don Carlos; and my sisters, Sophronia, Catherine, and Lucy. (Pearl of Great Price, Joseph Smith 2:3-4.)

In connection with the family of Joseph Smith, Sr., B. H. Roberts has written the following:

During Joseph Smith's early childhood there were removals of the family from Sharon to Tunbridge, and thence to Royalton; but nevertheless these were years of prosperity. In 1811 the family settled in Lebanon, Grafton county, New Hampshire, just over the Vermont line, in the beautiful valley of the Connecticut river. Here the parents hoped for even larger prosperity than had come from their labors in the past. "Here we settled our selves down," says Lucy Smith, "and began to contemplate with joy and satisfaction the prosperity which had attended our recent exertions; and we doubled our diligence, in order to obtain more of this world's goods, with a view of assisting our children when they should need it; and, as is quite natural, we looked forward to the decline of life and were providing for its wants as well as striving to procure those things which contribute much to the comfort of old age."

Hyrum Smith, the second son, was sent to an academy in Hanover, a few miles north from Lebanon; and the other children of sufficient age, to the near common school in Lebanon. The affairs of the family were in this happy condition when an epidemic of typhus fever passed over the neighborhood. The Smiths were sorely afflicted by the fever. Hyrum was stricken while in school in Hanover, and brought home; and all the children one after the other fell victims to the scourge. Sophronia, a daughter, narrowly escaped dying; the mother attributes her recovery to the blessing of God obtained through prayer. Joseph recovered from the fever, but some two weeks after his recovery was suddenly seized with a severe pain in his shoulder. A wrong diagnosis by the physician attributed the trouble to a sprain, when in reality there had been none; but after two weeks of suffering there developed between the breast and shoulder a fever sore which, on being lanced, discharged large quantities of pus. The pain then shifted into the leg, causing great suffering; and so continued from bad to worse despite the efforts of physicians, until finally amputation was decided upon by the surgeons, and was only avoided by the protests and determination of the lad himself and the mother. An operation was performed, however, by a large piece of one of the bones between the knee and ankle being removed. Of course the operation was performed with the crude instruments of the times, without the use of anesthetics; and as the boy refused to take stimulants or to be tied down to the bed, the manner in which he passed through the trying ordeal was a rare exhibition of pluck and power of endurance. After the operation the lad quickly recovered, and was sent to Salem, Massachusetts, to the home of his uncle, Jesse Smith, in the hope that the sea air would help in his restoration to perfect health, a hope that was not disappointed. (A Comprehensive History of the Church, 1:29-30.)

Under the influence of the Lord, the Smith family moved from Vermont to the western part of New York state, where they located at Palmyra. Concerning these movements of the Smith family, B. H. Roberts has written:

Something like a year of sickness played havoc with the fortunes of the family of Joseph Smith, Sen., and they removed to Norwich in the state of Vermont—just over the state line, and some ten or twelve miles distant from Lebanon. Here three successive crop failures still further reduced the fortunes of the family. Meantime, Joseph Smith, Sen., having heard of the richer lands and milder climate of western New York, determined upon removing to that state. . . . After a painful separation from her mother at Royalton . . . Lucy Smith and her family made their way to Palmyra, New York, where they were welcomed by the father, and all rejoiced in the reunion of the family.

It was a serious condition that confronted this family on its arrival in Palmyra. More than a year of sickness, followed by three successive crop failures—not because of idleness or lack of skill in husbandry, but through drought or frosts, causes beyond their control—together with the necessary expense of removing from New Hampshire to Palmyra, a distance of some three hundred miles, had exhausted all their resources, and they were penniless. It need create no special wonderment that the elder Smith at this period is described as being "of gaunt and haggard visage," and wearing "rusty clothes." A family consultation resulted in the determination to unite their efforts in purchasing a tract of one hundred acres of land some two miles south of Palmyra, on the north border of Manchester township, belonging to minor heirs of the Everson estate, whose agent resided at Canandaigua, Ontario county. "In a year," says Lucy Smith, "we made nearly all of the first payment, erected a log house, and commenced clearing. I believe something like thirty acres of land were made ready for cultivation the first year." Meanwhile, to meet the immediate necessities of the family, the male members engaged in occasional day's work among the neighboring farmers or in the town; while the mother, skilled in hand-painting oil-cloth covers for tables and stands, etc., met a large part of the family expenses.

Finally the family moved from the town of Palmyra, to the new log house on the farm, in Manchester township. . . .

The amount of cleared land gradually increased from thirty to sixty acres, and there were from twelve to fifteen hundred sugar trees on the place from which sap was gathered in the spring and converted into molasses and sugar. The farm thus redeemed from a wilderness and a commodious house built upon it, attracted the attention of the covetous. . . . (A Comprehensive History of the Church, 1:30-34.)

After describing in considerable detail the usual conditions in many of these early settlements, Francis Kirkham adds these words, which pertain specifically to Joseph Smith and his family:

Such was the early life and environment of the youth chosen by our Heavenly Father to initiate His great latter-day work. The time had now come when "His Spirit was to be poured out upon all flesh." Joseph Smith grew to manhood among God's noblemen, men of faith, self reliance, initiative and determination. They worked twelve hours a day with hand tools to build their homes and supply food and clothing for their families. Travel for pleasure was unknown. The first railroad had not yet competed with the horse-drawn vehicle. Roads were poor and usually maintained by a tax or a toll. A journey of one hundred miles was an unusual event. Wheat that sold at seventy-five cents a bushel in Western New York, sold for two dollars and fifty cents a bushel at Albany on the Hudson River, because of the cost of transportation on the Erie Canal. Books were few. In addition to the Bible, one might find in the home the almanac, and a few books of travel. Children went to school for about three months a year, until they could "read, write and cipher."

Modern science was unknown. Persons suffering with fever were denied water, and people were bled when blood infusion would have saved their lives. Children died from communicable diseases, now prevented by inoculation.

People lived near to nature and believed in the love and mercies of God. They were kind, helpful and considerate to all. To them, Jesus was the Christ, and the Bible was the word of God to all men. It contained His commandments. These they accepted and sought to obey. (Francis W. Kirkham, A New Witness for Christ in America [Independence, Mo.: Zion's Printing and Publishing Co., 1942], 1:36-37.)

The mother of the Prophet wrote these brief words concerning the boyhood and family environment of her son:

. . . I shall say nothing respecting him until he arrived at the age of fourteen. However, in this I am aware that some of my readers will be disappointed, for I suppose, from questions which are frequently asked me, that it is thought by some that I shall be likely to tell many very remarkable incidents which attended his childhood; but, as nothing occurred during his early life, except those trivial circumstances which are common to that state of human existence, I pass them in silence. (Ibid., 1:62.)

The First Vision

Although the Prophet's early boyhood may not have contained "many very remarkable incidents," certainly the story of his life from the spring of 1820 to his death in 1844 at Carthage was "remarkable." Concerning his life during 1820 he wrote:

Some time in the second year after our removal to Manchester, there was in the place where we lived an unusual excitement on the subject of religion. It commenced with the Methodists, but soon became general among all the sects in that region of country. Indeed, the whole district of country seemed affected by it, and great multitudes united themselves to the different religious parties, which created no small stir and division amongst the people, some crying, "Lo, here!" and others, "Lo, there!" Some were contending for the Methodist faith, some for the Presbyterian, and some for the Baptist.

For, notwithstanding the great love which the converts to these different faiths expressed at the time of their conversion, and the great zeal manifested by the respective clergy, who were active in getting up and promoting this extraordinary scene of religious feeling, in order to have everybody converted, as they were pleased to call it, let them join what sect they pleased; yet when the converts began to file off, some to one party and some to another, it was seen that the seemingly good feelings of both the priests and the converts were more pretended than real; for a scene of great confusion and bad feeling ensued—priest contending against priest, and convert against convert; so that all their good feelings one for another, if they ever had any, were entirely lost in a strife of words and a contest about opinions.

I was at this time in my fifteenth year. My father's family was proselyted to the Presbyterian faith, and four of them joined that church, namely, my mother, Lucy; my brothers Hyrum and Samuel Harrison; and my sister Sophronia.

During this time of great excitement my mind was called up to serious reflection and great uneasiness; but though my feelings were deep and often poignant, still I kept myself aloof from all these parties, though I attended their several meetings as often as occasion would permit. In process of time my mind became somewhat partial to the Methodist sect, and I felt some desire to be united with them; but so great were the confusion and strife among the different denominations, that it was impossible for a person young as I was, and so unacquainted with men and things, to come to any certain conclusion who was right and who was wrong.

My mind at times was greatly excited, the cry and tumult were so great and incessant. The Presbyterians were most decided against the Baptists and Methodists, and used all the powers of both reason and sophistry to prove their errors, or, at least, to make the people think they were in error. On the other hand, the Baptists and Methodists in their turn were equally zealous in endeavoring to establish their own tenets and disprove all others.

In the midst of this war of words and tumult of opinions, I often said to myself: What is to be done? Who of all these parties are right; or, are they all wrong together? If any one of them be right, which is it, and how shall I know it?

While I was laboring under the extreme difficulties caused by the contests of these parties of religionists, I was one day reading the Epistle of James, first chapter and fifth verse, which reads: If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him. [^1]

Never did any passage of scripture come with more power to the heart of man than this did at this time to mine. It seemed to enter with great force into every feeling of my heart. I reflected on it again and again, knowing that if any person needed wisdom from God, I did; for how to act I did not know, and unless I could get more wisdom than I then had, I would never know; for the teachers of religion of the different sects understood the same passages of scripture so differently as to destroy all confidence in settling the question by an appeal to the Bible.

At length I came to the conclusion that I must either remain in darkness and confusion, or else I must do as James directs, that is, ask of God. I at length came to the determination to "ask of God," concluding that if he gave wisdom to them that lacked wisdom, and would give liberally, and not upbraid, I might venture.

So, in accordance with this, my determination to ask of God, I retired to the woods to make the attempt. It was on the morning of a beautiful, clear day, early in the spring of eighteen hundred and twenty. It was the first time in my life that I had made such an attempt, for amidst all my anxieties I had never as yet made the attempt to pray vocally.

After I had retired to the place where I had previously designed to go, having looked around me, and finding myself alone, I kneeled down and began to offer up the desire of my heart to God. I had scarcely done so, when immediately I was seized upon by some power which entirely overcame me, and had such an astonishing influence over me as to bind my tongue so that I could not speak. Thick darkness gathered around me, and it seemed to me for a time as if I were doomed to sudden destruction.

But, exerting all my powers to call upon God to deliver me out of the power of this enemy which had seized upon me, and at the very moment when I was ready to sink into despair and abandon myself to destruction—not to an imaginary ruin, but to the power of some actual being from the unseen world, who had such marvelous power as I had never before felt in any being—just at this moment of great alarm, I saw a pillar of light exactly over my head, above the brightness of the sun, which descended gradually until it fell upon me.

It no sooner appeared than I found myself delivered from the enemy which held me bound. When the light rested upon me I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. One of them spake unto me, calling me by name and said, pointing to the other—This is My Beloved Son. Hear Him!

My object in going to inquire of the Lord was to know which of all the sects was right, that I might know which to join. No sooner, therefore, did I get possession of myself, so as to be able to speak, than I asked the Personages who stood above me in the light, which of all the sects was right—and which I should join.

I was answered that I must join none of them, for they were all wrong; and the Personage who addressed me said that all their creeds were an abomination in his sight; that those professors were all corrupt; that: "they draw near to me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me, they teach for doctrines the commandments of men, having a form of godliness, but they deny the power thereof."

He again forbade me to join with any of them; and many other things did he say unto me, which I cannot write at this time. When I came to myself again, I found myself lying on my back, looking up into heaven. When the light had departed, I had no strength; but soon recovering in some degree, I went home. And as I leaned up to the fireplace, mother inquired what the matter was. I replied, "Never mind, all is well—I am well enough off." I then said to my mother, "I have learned for myself that Presbyterianism is not true." It seems as though the adversary was aware, at a very early period of my life, that I was destined to prove a disturber and an annoyer of his kingdom; else why should the powers of darkness combine against me? Why the opposition and persecution that arose against me, almost in my infancy?

Some few days after I had this vision, I happened to be in company with one of the Methodist preachers, who was very active in the before mentioned religious excitement; and, conversing with him on the subject of religion, I took occasion to give him an account of the vision which I had had. I was greatly surprised at his behavior; he treated my communication not only lightly, but with great contempt, saying it was all of the devil, that there were no such things as visions or revelations in these days; that all such things had ceased with the apostles, and that there would never be any more of them.

I soon found, however, that my telling the story had excited a great deal of prejudice against me among professors of religion, and was the cause of great persecution, which continued to increase; and though I was an obscure boy, only between fourteen and fifteen years of age, and my circumstances in life such as to make a boy of no consequence in the world, yet men of high standing would take notice sufficient to excite the public mind against me, and create a bitter persecution; and this was common among all the sects—all united to persecute me.

It caused me serious reflection then, and often has since, how very strange it was that an obscure boy, of a little over fourteen years of age, and one, too, who was doomed to the necessity of obtaining a scanty maintenance by his daily labor, should be thought a character of sufficient importance to attract the attention of the great ones of the most popular sects of the day, and in a manner to create in them a spirit of the most bitter persecution and reviling. But strange or not, so it was, and it was often the cause of great sorrow to myself.

However, it was nevertheless a fact that I had beheld a vision. I have thought since, that I felt much like Paul, when he made his defense before King Agrippa, and related the account of the vision he had when he saw a light, and heard a voice; but still there were but few who believed him; some said he was dishonest, others said he was mad; and he was ridiculed and reviled. But all this did not destroy the reality of his vision. He had seen a vision, he knew he had, and all the persecution under heaven could not make it otherwise; and though they should persecute him unto death, yet he knew, and would know to his latest breath, that he had both seen a light and heard a voice speaking unto him, and all the world could not make him think or believe otherwise.

So it was with me. I had actually seen a light, and in the midst of that light I saw two Personages, and they did in reality speak to me; and though I was hated and persecuted for saying that I had seen a vision, yet it was true; and while they were persecuting me, reviling me, and speaking all manner of evil against me falsely for so saying, I was led to say in my heart: Why persecute me for telling the truth? I have actually seen a vision; and who am I that I can withstand God, or why does the world think to make me deny what I have actually seen? For I had seen a vision; I knew it, and I knew that God knew it, and I could not deny it, neither dared I do it; at least I knew that by so doing I would offend God, and come under condemnation.

I had now got my mind satisfied so far as the sectarian world was concerned—that it was not my duty to join with any of them, but to continue as I was until further directed. I had found the testimony of James to be true—that a man who lacked wisdom might ask of God, and obtain, and not be upbraided. (Pearl of Great Price, Joseph Smith 2:5-26.)

The Prophet bore testimony many times of the sacred experience he had when he talked with the Father and the Son. Edward Stevenson recorded the following vivid description of his experience when he heard the Prophet bear his testimony of this incident:

The Prophet Joseph Smith (was) a plain but noble looking man of large frame and about six feet high. With him were his father, Joseph Smith, his brother, Hyrum, Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris whose sister, Sophia Kellogg lived in our settlement. A great stir was made in this settlement at so distinguished visitors. The meetings held were crowded to see and hear the testimonies given, which were very powerful. I will here relate my own experience on the occasion of a meeting in our old log schoolhouse. The Prophet stood at a table, for the pulpit, where he began relating his vision, and before he got through, he was in the midst of the congregation with uplifted hand. I do believe that there was not one person present who was not (convinced) of the truth of his vision of an angel (coming) to him. His countenance seemed to me to assume a heavenly whiteness and his voice was so piercing and forcible—for my part, it so impressed me as to become indelible imprinted on my mind.

. . . Here are some of the Prophet's words, as uttered in the schoolhouse. With uplifted hand he said, "I am a witness that there is a God, for I saw Him in open day, while praying in a silent grove, in the spring of 1820." He further testified that God, the Eternal Father, pointing to a separate personage, in the likeness of Himself, said, "This is my Beloved Son; hear ye Him." O how these words thrilled my entire system, and filled me with joy unspeakable—to behold one who, like Paul the apostle of olden time, could with boldness testify that he had been in the presence of Jesus Christ! (Joseph Grant Stevenson, Stevenson Family History [Provo: Joseph Grant Stevenson, 1955], 1:19-21.)

On another occasion, Edward Stevenson made the following statement concerning the testimony offered by the Prophet:

I first saw him in 1834 at Pontiac (Michigan). . . .

In that same year, 1834, in the midst of many large congregations, the Prophet testified with great power concerning the visit of the Father and the Son, and the conversation he had with them. Never before did I feel such power as was manifested on these occasions, and, although only a small percentage of those who saw and heard him accepted the restored gospel, there was not one who dared to refute it. (William E. Berrett and Alma H. Burton, Readings in L.D.S. Church History [Deseret Book Co., 1953], 1:17.)

In his letter of March 1, 1842, to John Wentworth, the editor of the Chicago Democrat, the Prophet wrote of his first vision as follows:

"They (the two Heavenly Personages,) told me that all religious denominations were believing in incorrect doctrines, and that none of them was acknowledged of God as His church and kingdom. And I was expressly commanded to 'go not after them' at the same time receiving a promise that the fulness of the gospel should at some future time be made known unto me." (Kirkham, A New Witness for Christ in America, 1:52.)

Appearance of the Angel Moroni

The vision of the Father and the Son eventually proved to be only the first of a series of heavenly manifestations that the Prophet received, but he did not receive his next instructions from a heavenly messenger for over three years. He records this dramatic event as follows:

I continued to pursue my common vocations in life until the twenty-first of September, one thousand eight hundred and twenty-three, all the time suffering severe persecution at the hands of all classes of men, both religious and irreligious, because I continued to affirm that I had seen a vision.

During the space of time which intervened between the time I had the vision and the year eighteen hundred and twenty-three—having been forbidden to join any of the religious sects of the day, and being of very tender years, and persecuted by those who ought to have been my friends and to have treated me kindly, and if they suppose me to be deluded to have endeavored in a proper and affectionate manner to have reclaimed me—I was left to all kinds of temptations; and, mingling with all kinds of society, I frequently fell into many foolish errors, and displayed the weakness of youth, and the foibles of human nature; which, I am sorry to say, led me into divers temptations, offensive in the sight of God. In making this confession, no one need suppose me guilty of any great or malignant sins. A disposition to commit such was never in my nature. But I was guilty of levity, and sometimes associated with jovial company, etc., not consistent with that character which ought to be maintained by one who was called of God as I had been. But this will not seem very strange to any one who recollects my youth, and is acquainted with my native cheery temperament.

In consequence of these things, I often felt condemned for my weakness and imperfections; when, on the evening of the abovementioned twenty-first of September, after I had retired to my bed for the night, I betook myself to prayer and supplication to Almighty God for forgiveness of all my sins and follies, and also for a manifestation to me, that I might know of my state and standing before him; for I had full confidence in obtaining a divine manifestation, as I previously had one.

While I was thus in the act of calling upon God, I discovered a light appearing in my room, which continued to increase until the room was lighter than at noonday, when immediately a personage appeared at my bedside, standing in the air, for his feet did not touch the floor.

He had on a loose robe of most exquisite whiteness. It was a whiteness beyond anything earthly I had ever seen; nor do I believe that any earthly thing could be made to appear so exceedingly white and brilliant. His hands were naked, and his arms also, a little above the wrist; so, also, were his feet naked, as were his legs, a little above the ankles. His head and neck were also bare. I could discover that he had no other clothing on but this robe, as it was open, so that I could see into his bosom.

Not only was his robe exceedingly white, but his whole person was glorious beyond description, and his countenance truly like lightning. The room was exceedingly light, but not so very bright as immediately around his person. When I first looked upon him, I was afraid; but the fear soon left me.

He called me by name, and said unto me that he was a messenger sent from the presence of God to me, and that his name was Moroni; that God had a work for me to do; and that my name should be had for good and evil among all nations, kindreds, and tongues, or that it should be both good and evil spoken of among all people.

He said there was a book deposited, written upon gold plates, giving an account of the former inhabitants of this continent, and the source from whence they sprang. He also said that the fulness of the everlasting Gospel was contained in it, as delivered by the Savior to the ancient inhabitants;

Also, that there were two stones in silver bows—and these stones, fastened to a breastplate, constituted what is called the Urim and Thummim—deposited with the plates; and the possession and use of these stones were what constituted "seers" in ancient or former times; and that God had prepared them for the purpose of translating the book.

After telling me these things, he commenced quoting the prophecies of the Old Testament. He first quoted part of the third chapter of Malachi; and he quoted also the fourth or last chapter of the same prophecy, though with a little variation from the way it reads in our Bibles. Instead of quoting the first verse as it reads in our books, he quoted it thus:

For behold, the day cometh that shall burn as an oven, and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly shall burn as stubble; for they that come shall burn them, saith the Lord of Hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch.

And again, he quoted the fifth verse thus: Behold, I will reveal unto you the Priesthood, by the hand of Elijah the prophet, before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord.

He also quoted the next verse differently: And he shall plant in the hearts of the children the promises made to the fathers, and the hearts of the children shall turn to their fathers. If it were not so, the whole earth would be utterly wasted at his coming.

In addition to these, he quoted the eleventh chapter of Isaiah, saying that it was about to be fulfilled. He quoted also the third chapter of Acts, twenty-second and twenty-third verses, precisely as they stand in our New Testament. He said that that prophet was Christ; but the day had not yet come when "they who would not hear his voice should be cut off from among the people," but soon would come.

He also quoted the second chapter of Joel, from the twenty-eighth verse to the last. He also said that this was not yet fulfilled, but was soon to be. And he further stated that the fulness of the Gentiles was soon to come in. He quoted many other passages of scripture, and offered many explanations which cannot be mentioned here.

Again, he told me, that when I got those plates of which he had spoken—for the time that they should be obtained was not yet fulfilled—I should not show them to any person; neither the breastplate with the Urim and Thummim; only to those to whom I should be commanded to show them; if I did I should be destroyed. While he was conversing with me about the plates, the vision was opened to my mind that I could see the place where the plates were deposited, and that so clearly and distinctly that I knew the place again when I visited it.

After this communication, I saw the light in the room begin to gather immediately around the person of him who had been speaking to me, and it continued to do so until the room was again left dark, except just around him; when, instantly I saw, as it were, a conduit open right up into heaven, and he ascended till he entirely disappeared, and the room was left as it had been before this heavenly light had made its appearance.

I lay musing on the singularity of the scene, and marveling greatly at what had been told to me by this extraordinary messenger; when, in the midst of my meditation, I suddenly discovered that my room was again beginning to get lighted, and in an instant, as it were, the same heavenly messenger was again by my bedside.

He commenced, and again related the very same things which he had done at his first visit, without the least variation; which having done, he informed me of great judgments which were coming upon the earth, with great desolations by famine, sword, and pestilence; and that these grievous judgments would come on the earth in this generation. Having related these things, he again ascended as he had done before.

By this time, so deep were the impressions made on my mind, that sleep had fled from my eyes, and I lay overwhelmed in astonishment at what I had both seen and heard. But what was my surprise when again I beheld the same messenger at my bedside, and heard him rehearse or repeat over again to me the same things as before; and added a caution to me, telling me that Satan would try to tempt me (in consequence of the indigent circumstances of my father's family), to get the plates for the purpose of getting rich. This he forbade me, saying that I must have no other object in view in getting the plates but to glorify God, and must not be influenced by any other motive than that of building his kingdom; otherwise I could not get them.

After this third visit, he again ascended into heaven as before, and I was again left to ponder on the strangeness of what I had just experienced; when almost immediately after the heavenly messenger had ascended from me for the third time, the cock crowed, and I found that day was approaching, so that our interviews must have occupied the whole of that night.

I shortly after arose from my bed, and, as usual, went to the necessary labors of the day; but, in attempting to work as at other times, I found my strength so exhausted as to render me entirely unable. My father, who was laboring along with me, discovered something to be wrong with me, and told me to go home. I started with the intention of going to the house; but, in attempting to cross the fence out of the field where we were, my strength entirely failed me, and I fell helpless on the ground, and for a time was quite unconscious of anything.

The first thing that I can recollect was a voice speaking unto me, calling me by name. I looked up, and beheld the same messenger standing over my head, surrounded by light as before. He then again related unto me all that he had related to me the previous night, and commanded me to go to my father and tell him of the vision and commandments which I had received.

I obeyed; I returned to my father in the field, and rehearsed the whole matter to him. He replied to me that it was of God, and told me to go and do as commanded by the messenger. I left the field, and went to the place where the messenger had told me the plates were deposited; and owing to the distinctness of the vision which I had had concerning it, I knew the place the instant that I arrived there. (Joseph Smith 2:27-50.) [^2]

Joseph Acquires the Plates

Convenient to the village of Manchester, Ontario county, New York, stands a hill of considerable size, and the most elevated of any in the neighborhood. On the west side of this hill, not far from the top, under a stone of considerable size, lay the plates, deposited in a stone box. This stone was thick and rounding in the middle of the upper side, and thinner towards the edges, so that the middle part of it was visible above the ground, but the edge all around was covered with earth.

Having removed the earth, I obtained a lever, which I got fixed under the edge of the stone, and with a little exertion raised it up. I looked in, and there indeed did I behold the plates, the Urim and Thummim, and the breastplate, as stated by the messenger. The box in which they lay was formed by laying stones together in some kind of cement. In the bottom of the box were laid two stones crossways of the box, and on these stones lay the plates and the other things with them.

I made an attempt to take them out, but was forbidden by the messenger, and was again informed that the time for bringing them forth had not yet arrived, neither would it, until four years from that time; but he told me that I should come to that place precisely in one year from that time, and that he would there meet with me, and that I should continue to do so until the time should come for obtaining the plates.

Accordingly, as I had been commanded, I went at the end of each year, and at each time I found the same messenger there, and received instruction and intelligence from him at each of our interviews, respecting what the Lord was going to do, and how and in what manner his kingdom was to be conducted in the last days.

As my father's worldly circumstances were very limited, we were under the necessity of laboring with our hands, hiring out by day's work and otherwise, as we could get opportunity. Sometimes we were at home, and sometimes abroad, and by continuous labor were enabled to get a comfortable maintenance.

At length the time arrived for obtaining the plates, the Urim and Thummim, and the breastplate. On the twenty-second day of September, one thousand eight hundred and twenty-seven, having gone as usual at the end of another year to the place where they were deposited, the same heavenly messenger delivered them up to me with this charge: that I should be responsible for them; that if I should let them go carelessly, or through any neglect of mine, I should be cut off; but that if I would use all my endeavors to preserve them, until he, the messenger, should call for them, they should be protected.

I soon found out the reason why I had received such strict charges to keep them safe, and why it was that the messenger had said that when I had done what was required at my hand, he would call for them. For no sooner was it known that I had them, than the most strenuous exertions were used to get them from me. Every stratagem that could be invented was resorted to for that purpose. The persecution became more bitter and severe than before, and multitudes were on the alert continually to get them from me if possible. But by the wisdom of God, they remained safe in my hands, until I had accomplished by them what was required at my hand. When, according to arrangements, the messenger called for them, I delivered them up to him; and he has them in his charge until this day, being the second day of May, one thousand eight hundred and thirty-eight. (Joseph Smith 2:51-55, 59-60.)

Concerning the important events of this period, the Prophet's mother adds the following incidents and descriptions to the record:

The plates were secreted about three miles from home, in the following manner: Finding an old birch log much decayed, excepting the bark, which was in a measure sound, he took his pocket knife and cut the bark with some care, then turned it back, and made a hole of sufficient size to receive the plates, and, laying them in the cavity thus formed, he replaced the bark; after which he laid across the log, in several places, some old stuff that happened to lay near, in order to conceal, as much as possible, the place in which they were deposited.

Joseph, on coming to them, took them from their secret place, and, wrapping them in his linen frock, placed them under his arm and started for home.

After proceeding a short distance, he thought it would be more safe to leave the road and go through the woods. Traveling some distance after he left the road, he came to a large windfall, and as he was jumping over a log, a man sprang up from behind it and gave him a heavy blow with a gun. Joseph turned around and knocked him down, then ran at the top of his speed. About half a mile further he was attacked again in the same manner as before; he knocked this man down in like manner as the former, and ran on again; and before he reached home he was assaulted the third time. In striking the last one, he dislocated his thumb, which, however, he did not notice until he came within sight of the house, when he threw himself down in the corner of the fence in order to recover his breath. As soon as he was able, he arose and came to the house. He was still altogether speechless from fright and the fatigue of running.

After resting a few moments, he desired me to send Carlos for my husband [Joseph Smith, Sen.], Mr. Knight, and his friend Stoal, and have them go immediately and see if they could find the men who had been pursuing him. And after Carlos had done this, he wished to have him sent to Hyrum's, to tell him to bring the chest.

I did as I was requested, and when Carlos arrived at Hyrum's, he found him at tea, with two of his wife's sisters. Just as Hyrum was raising a cup to his mouth, Carlos touched his shoulder. Without waiting to hear one word from the child, he dropped the cup, sprang from the table, caught the chest, turned it upside down, and emptying its contents on the floor, left the house instantly with the chest on his shoulder.

The young ladies were greatly astonished at his singular behavior, and declared to his wife—who was then confined to her bed, her eldest daughter, Lovina, being but four days old—that he was certainly crazy.

His wife laughed heartily, and replied, "Oh, not in the least; he has just thought of something which he has neglected; and it is just like him to fly off in a tangent when he thinks of anything in that way."

When the chest came, Joseph locked up the Record, then threw himself upon the bed, and after resting a little, so that he could converse freely, he arose and went into the kitchen, where he related his recent adventure to his father, Mr. Knight, and Mr. Stoal, besides many others, who had by this time collected, with the view of hearing something in regard to the strange circumstance which had taken place. . . .

After bringing home the plates, Joseph commenced working with his father and brothers on the farm, in order to be as near as possible to the treasure which was confided to his care.

Soon after this, he came in from work, one afternoon, and after remaining a short time, he put on his great coat, and left the house. I was engaged at the time, in an upper room, in preparing some oilcloths for painting. When he returned, he requested me to come down stairs. I told him that I could not leave my work just then, yet, upon his urgent request, I finally concluded to go down and see what he wanted, upon which he handed me the breast-plate spoken of in his history.

It was wrapped in a thin muslin handkerchief, so thin that I could feel its proportions without any difficulty.

It was concave on one side, and convex on the other, and extended from the neck downwards, as far as the center of the stomach of a man of extraordinary size. It had four straps of the same material, for the purpose of fastening it to the breast, two of which ran back to go over the shoulders, and the other two were designed to fasten to the hips. They were just the width of two of my fingers, (for I measured them) and they had holes in the end of them, to be convenient in fastening. After I had examined it, Joseph placed it in the chest with the Urim and Thummim.

Shortly after this circumstance, Joseph came to the house in great haste, and inquired, if there had been a company of men about. I told him, not a single individual had come to the house since he left. He then said, that a mob would be there that night, if they did not come before that time, to search for the Record, and that it must be removed immediately. . . .

In view of this, it was determined that a portion of the hearth should be taken up, and that the Record and breast-plate should be buried under the same, and then the hearth be relaid, to prevent suspicion.

This was done as speedily as possible, but the hearth was scarcely relaid when a large company of men well armed came rushing up to the house. Joseph threw open the doors, and taking a hint from the stratagem of his grandfather Mack, halloed as if he had a legion at hand, in the meanwhile, giving the word of command with great emphasis; while all the male portion of the family, from the father down to little Carlos, ran out of the house with such fury upon the mob, that it struck them with terror and dismay, and they fled before the little Spartan band into the woods, where they dispersed themselves to their several homes.

In a short time Joseph received another intimation of the approach of a mob, also of the necessity of removing the Record and breast-plate from the place wherein they were secreted, consequently he took them out of the box in which they were placed, and wrapping them in clothes, carried them across the road to a cooper's shop, and laid them in a quantity of flax which was stowed in the shop loft. After which he nailed up the box again, then tore up the floor of the shop, and put it under the same.

As soon as night came, the mob came also, and commenced ransacking the place. They rummaged round the house, and all over the premises, but did not come into the house. After making satisfactory search, they went away. (History of Joseph Smith by His Mother, Lucy Mack Smith [Bookcraft, 1958 ed.], pp. 107-9, 111-13.) [^3]

Joseph Begins Translating

As soon as Joseph acquired the plates he desired to begin translating, but because of the severe persecution he was forced to leave New York. His brief account of this trying period follows:

The excitement, however, still continued, and rumor with her thousand tongues was all the time employed in circulating falsehoods about my father's family, and about myself. If I were to relate a thousandth part of them, it would fill up volumes. The persecution, however, became so intolerable that I was under the necessity of leaving Manchester, and going with my wife to Susquehanna county, in the State of Pennsylvania. While preparing to start—being very poor, and the persecution so heavy upon us that there was no probability that we would ever be otherwise—in the midst of our afflictions we found a friend in a gentleman by the name of Martin Harris, who came to us and gave me fifty dollars to assist us on our journey. Mr. Harris was a resident of Palmyra township, Wayne county, in the State of New York, and a farmer of respectability.

By this timely aid was I enabled to reach the place of my destination in Pennsylvania; and immediately after my arrival there I commenced copying the characters off the plates. I copied a considerable number of them, and by means of the Urim and Thummim I translated some of them, which I did between the time I arrived at the house of my wife's father, in the month of December, and the February following. (Joseph Smith 2:61-62.)

Martin Harris Visits Professor Anthon

The word that Joseph had started translating the record was evidently conveyed back to the Smith family at Palmyra. At any rate, Martin Harris heard of the Prophet's work and soon followed the Prophet to Harmony, Pennsylvania.

Sometime in this month of February, the aforementioned Mr. Martin Harris came to our place, got the characters which I had drawn off the plates, and started with them to the city of New York. For what took place relative to him and the characters, I refer to his own account of the circumstances, as he related them to me after his return, which was as follows:

"I went to the city of New York, and presented the characters which had been translated, with the translation thereof, to Professor Charles Anthon, a gentleman celebrated for his literary attainments. Professor Anthon stated that the translation was correct, more so than any he had before seen translated from the Egyptian. I then showed him those which were not yet translated, and he said that they were Egyptian, Chaldaic, Assyriac, and Arabic; and he said they were true characters. He gave me a certificate, certifying to the people of Palmyra that they were true characters, and that the translation of such of them as had been translated was also correct. I took the certificate and put it into my pocket, and was just leaving the house, when Mr. Anthon called me back, and asked me how the young man found out that there were gold plates in the place where he found them. I answered that an angel of God had revealed it unto him.

"He then said to me, 'Let me see that certificate.' I accordingly took it out of my pocket and gave it to him, when he took it and tore it to pieces, saying that there was no such thing now as ministering of angels, and that if I would bring the plates to him he would translate them. I informed him that part of the plates were sealed, and that I was forbidden to bring them. He replied, 'I cannot read a sealed book.' I left him and went to Dr. Mitchell, who sanctioned what Professor Anthon had said respecting both the characters and the translation." (Joseph Smith 2:63-65.)

Following his visit to the East, Martin Harris seemed to be satisfied with the Prophet's story of the gold plates. Thus, he became the first scribe for the Prophet Joseph in the translation of the Book of Mormon. This service was short lived, however, because of the following event.

The impression made on the mind of Martin Harris by this interview, resulted in his removal to Harmony to give further aid to Joseph Smith. He arrived about the 12th of April, 1828, and immediately commenced to write as the Prophet dictated his translation of the record. Martin continued in this work until the 14th of June, at which time one hundred and sixteen pages of manuscript on foolscap paper had been prepared. Some time after Martin Harris commenced to write he importuned the Prophet for the privilege of taking the manuscript home and showing it to some skeptical friends, who had sorely criticized him for the part he was taking in the work. He was desirous of convincing them; and they had, without doubt, pleaded with him to do this thing. Especially had his wife implored him for a look at the manuscript.

The Prophet inquired by Urim and Thummim, and the request of Martin was denied. However, he was not satisfied and importuned and pleaded with Joseph again to inquire of the Lord. This he did, but the answer was the same as before. Still Martin implored, and so insistent and prolonged were his pleadings that Joseph Smith again, the third time, inquired of the Lord. This time the answer was favorable. The request was granted on certain positive conditions. Martin was to show the manuscript to his brother, Preserved Harris, his wife, his father and mother and his wife's sister, Mrs. Cobb. No other person was to see the writings. In a most solemn covenant Martin bound himself to this agreement. When he arrived home, and pressure was brought to bear upon him, he forgot his solemn oath and permitted others to view the manuscript, with the result that by stratagem it passed out of his hands.

The Lord was displeased with Joseph Smith for his constant importuning, and took from him the Urim and Thummim after the departure of Martin Harris with the partial translation from the plates. When the fact was known that Martin had lost the manuscript, the Prophet suffered the torments of the damned. He found no rest; there was no peace of conscience. In the bitterness of his soul he feared to approach the Lord. This condition continued for some time until one day the angel appeared to him, and returned the Urim and Thummim, that he might through them receive a revelation from the Lord. (Doc. and Cov. Sec. 3.) In this revelation it was made known that the purposes of the Lord were not frustrated, but the designs of men. Joseph was soundly rebuked and warned against yielding to temptation. Nevertheless the mercy of the Lord was extended to him because of his severe punishment and sore repentance. After the revelation was received, both the Urim and Thummim and the plates were taken from him, but in a few days were restored again. This was the most bitter lesson Joseph Smith ever received. It seemed necessary to prepare him for the great responsibilities yet before him.

In May of 1829 Joseph received another revelation (Doc. and Cov. Sec. 10) in which he was forbidden again to translate the portion of the record which had been lost. Satan had put it into the hearts of wicked men, the revelation declared, to alter the writings of the manuscript and then, if Joseph Smith should translate again, they would say that he could not do it twice alike, and thus they would catch him in his words which he had pretended to translate.

The lost manuscript contained the abridgment made by Mormon of the record of [Lehi], from the time Lehi left Jerusalem down to the reign of King Benjamin, or to the words of Mormon, in the Book of Mormon. When Mormon made his abridgment of the records of the Nephites, the Lord directed him to attach also the small plates of Nephi, which contained the record of the people covering the same period of time as the abridgment down to the reign of King Benjamin. In this manner there were two accounts of that history, the abridgment and the original. Now the translation of the abridgment was lost; but the better account could still be translated, and the designs of Satan be defeated. Thus the "wise purpose" of the Lord, in directing Mormon to include Nephi's plates, was made known to Joseph Smith. (Joseph Fielding Smith, Essentials in Church History, pp. 55-56.)

Joseph Resumes Translating with Emma Smith as Scribe

The Prophet was now without the services of Martin Harris. He resumed translating the record at this time with his wife Emma acting as scribe until the Lord provided another full-time scribe. Emma later told her son of her experience as a scribe:

My belief is that the Book of Mormon is of divine authenticity—I have not the slightest doubt of it. I am satisfied that no man could have dictated the writing of the manuscript unless he was inspired: for, when [I was acting] as his scribe, your father would dictate to me hour after hour; and when returning after meals, or after interruptions, he would at once begin where he had left off, without either seeing the manuscript or having any portion of it read to him. It would have been improbable that a learned man could do this; and, for one so . . . unlearned as he was, it was simply impossible. (Kirkham, A New Witness for Christ in America, 1:195-96.)

However, the wife of the Prophet was so involved in her housework that she was not able to spend much time assisting her husband in writing as he continued the translation. The Prophet's mother makes the following comment concerning this period:

Joseph had been so hurried with his secular affairs, that he could not proceed with his spiritual concerns so fast as was necessary for the speedy completion of the work; there was also another disadvantage under which he labored; his wife had so much of her time taken up with the care of her house, that she could write for him but a small portion of the time. On account of these embarrassments, Joseph called upon the Lord, three days before the arrival of Samuel and Oliver, to send him a scribe. (Ibid., p. 212.)

Oliver Cowdery Meets Joseph Smith and Becomes His Scribe

The Prophet evidently felt the work of translation must go more rapidly than it was going with his wife acting as scribe. Therefore, he asked the Lord to send someone to assist him, as is noted in this quotation:

For a time the Prophet was without assistance. For several months he was under the necessity of "laboring with his hands" on his small farm in Harmony and otherwise seeking employment. The work of the Lord was lagging. He must be about his mission. He prayed to the Lord for help. On the 5th of April, 1829, a young school teacher, Oliver Cowdery, came to Harmony to inquire of Joseph Smith regarding his work. Oliver Cowdery had been teaching school near the home of the Smiths in Manchester, and part of the time boarded with that family. From them he learned of the Prophet's vision, the coming of Moroni, and of the plates. He had a feeling that these stories were true and desired to investigate at close quarters. He was convinced of the truth of Joseph's story, and two days after his arrival in Harmony, commenced to write as the Prophet translated from the record. Later in the month of April the Lord gave to Oliver a revelation through Joseph Smith in which he was called to the work. In that revelation things were revealed that only Oliver Cowdery knew. From that time forth he continued to act as the amanuensis for Joseph Smith, until the Book of Mormon was finished. (Joseph Fielding Smith, Essentials in Church History, pp. 56-57.)

Oliver Cowdery himself has left the following record of his first meeting the Prophet and starting to act as his scribe.

Near the time of the setting of the sun, Sabbath evening, April 5th, 1829, my natural eyes for the first time beheld this brother. He then resided in Harmony, Susquehanna County, Pennsylvania. On Monday, the 6th, I assisted him in arranging some business of a temporal nature and on Tuesday, the 7th, commenced to write the Book of Mormon. These days were never to be forgotten—to sit under the sound of a voice dictated by the inspiration of heaven, awakened the utmost gratitude of this bosom. Day after day I continued, uninterrupted, to write from his mouth, as he translated with the Urim and Thummim, or, as the Nephites would have said, "Interpreters," the history or record called the "Book of Mormon." (Kirkham, A New Witness for Christ in America, 1:81.)

Although Oliver Cowdery left the Church for a few years, he came back into full membership before his death. On the occasion of his reentering the Church, he addressed about two thousand Latter-day Saints at Council Bluffs, Iowa; he then recalled his early work as a scribe to the Prophet:

My name is Cowdery, Oliver Cowdery. In the early history of this Church I stood identified with her, and one in her councils. True it is that the gifts and callings of God are without repentance; not because I was better than the rest of mankind was I called; but, to fulfill the purposes of God, he called me to a high and holy calling.

I wrote, with my own pen, the entire Book of Mormon (save a few pages) as it fell from the lips of the Prophet Joseph Smith, as he translated it by the gift and power of God, by the means of the Urim and Thummim, or, as it is called by that book "Holy Interpreters." I beheld with my eyes, and handled with my hands, the gold plates from which it was transcribed. I also saw with my eyes and handled with my hands the "Holy Interpreters." That book is true. Sidney Rigdon did not write it; Mr. Spaulding did not write it. I wrote it myself as it fell from the lips of the Prophet. It contains the everlasting gospel, and came forth to the children of men in fulfillment of the revelations of John, where he says he saw an angel come, with the everlasting gospel to preach to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people. It contains principles of salvation; and if you, my hearers, will walk by its light and obey its precepts, you will be saved with an everlasting salvation in the Kingdom of God on high. . . . (Kirkham, A New Witness for Christ in America, 1:71.)

The Prophet Continues the Translation

Joseph Smith did not provide the world with very much information concerning the actual process of translating the plates. In fact, he specifically said it was not expedient for him to relate such things, as is indicated in Francis Kirkham's commentary and Joseph Smith's answer to the following questions:

"How and where did you obtain the Book of Mormon?" . . . "I am answering these questions," wrote the Prophet, "by publication for the reason they are asked me thousands of times.

"Moroni, the person who deposited the plates from whence the Book of Mormon was translated, in a hill in Manchester, Ontario County, New York, being dead, and raised again therefrom, appeared unto me, and told me where they were; and gave me directions how to obtain them. I obtained them and the Urim and Thummim with them, by the means of which I translated the plates and thus came the Book of Mormon."

In recording the first visit of Moroni, the immortal messenger, to him, the Prophet writes, "That God had prepared them [the Urim and Thummim] for the purpose of translating the book."

Another short statement by the Prophet of the origin and translation of the Book of Mormon is a letter dated Nauvoo, Illinois, March 1, 1842, addressed to John Wentworth, editor and proprietor of the Chicago Democrat. This letter was published at Nauvoo, May 1, 1842. Speaking of the visit to him of Moroni, the immortal messenger, on September 21, 1823, the Prophet writes:

"I was also told where there were deposited some plates, on which was engraved an abridgment of the records of the ancient peoples that had existed on this continent. The angel appeared to me three times the same night and unfolded the same things. After having received many visits from the angel of God, unfolding the majesty and glory of the events that should transpire in the last days, on the morning of the 22nd of September, A.D. 1827, the angel of the Lord delivered the records into my hands."

"These records were engraven on plates which had the appearance of gold: each plate was six inches wide and eight inches long, and not quite so thick as common tin. They were filled with engravings in Egyptian characters and bound together in a volume as the leaves of a book, with three rings running through the whole. The volume was something over six inches in thickness, part of which was sealed. The characters on the unsealed part were small and beautifully engraved. The whole book exhibited many marks of antiquity in its construction, and much skill in the art of engraving. With the records was found a curious instrument which the ancients called 'Urim and Thummim,' which consisted of two transparent stones set in the rim of a bow fastened to a breastplate. Through the medium of the Urim and Thummim I translated the record, by the gift and power of God. ". . .

About a year and a half after the publication of the Book of Mormon, forty-four elders, ten priests and ten teachers were in conference at the home of Brother Sirenes Burnett, at Orange, Cuyahoga County, Ohio, (Oct. 25, 1831). In the minutes of this conference the following appears:

"Brother Hyrum Smith said, 'That he thought best that the information of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon be related by Joseph himself, to the elders present, that all might know for themselves.'

"Brother Joseph Smith, Jr., said, 'That it was not intended to tell the world all the particulars of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon,' and also said, 'that it was not expedient for him to relate these things, etc.' ". . .

A careful reading of the writings of the Prophet and Oliver Cowdery, his scribe, reveals no information regarding the manner of translating the Book of Mormon, except that "It was translated by the gift and power of God by the aid of the Urim and Thummim." This is also the conclusion of Brigham H. Roberts.

After a lapse of forty years of time, both David Whitmer and Martin Harris attempted to give the method of the translation. Evidently the Prophet did not tell them the method, for he states positively it was not expedient "for him to relate these things."

The conclusion is that no one knows the procedure or exact method of the translation. All that is known is contained in these words, "It was translated by the gift and power of God, with the aid of the Urim and Thummim." Beyond this statement, it is only conjecture. The dictation was continuous without correction. It was not human. It was divine. (Kirkham, A New Witness for Christ in America, 1:190-91, 194, 196.)

Restoration of the Priesthood

While the Prophet and Oliver were translating at Harmony, the subject of baptism was introduced, and the two young men wondered what should be done. B. H. Roberts reviews the events surrounding their decision:

The subject of Christian baptism was much discussed among the rival sects in the early decades of the 19th century. The purpose of it; the proper subjects to receive it; the effects of it; the manner in which it should be administered; by whom it could be administered, by any Christian who understood its significance, or only by ordained ministers? By pouring, or sprinkling, or by immersion only? All these questions were subjects of intense controversy in the period named.

When, therefore, in the course of translating the Book of Mormon, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery came to a passage making reference to "baptism for the remission of sins," it is not surprising that they held divergent views upon the subject; but instead of resorting to argument on the matter they agreed to inquire of the Lord, through prayer, for the knowledge essential to a right understanding of the subject. It was while thus engaged, according to the testimony of both these men, that a heavenly messenger appeared unto them and announced himself to be John, the same that in the New Testament is called "the Baptist." He was now raised from the dead and had been sent to confer upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery the Aaronic priesthood, which he did in these words:

"Upon you my fellow servants, in the name of Messiah, I confer the Priesthood of Aaron, which holds the keys of the ministering of angels, and of the gospel of repentance, and of baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; and this shall never be taken again from the earth, until the sons of Levi do offer again an offering unto the Lord in righteousness."

The messenger directed that Joseph Smith should baptize Oliver Cowdery, and afterwards that Oliver should baptize Joseph; which when done Joseph proceeded to ordain Oliver to the Aaronic priesthood, and afterwards received ordination at Oliver's hands—"for so were we commanded," says the Prophet, in his narration of the circumstance. Both experienced great exaltation of spirit on this occasion. "No sooner had I baptized Oliver Cowdery," says the Prophet, "than the Holy Ghost fell upon him, and he stood up and prophesied many things which should shortly come to pass. And again, so soon as I had been baptized by him, I also had the spirit of prophecy . . . I prophesied concerning the rise of this church, and many other things connected with the church and this generation of the children of men.". . .

The exact date upon which was fulfilled the promise of John the Baptist that the greater priesthood should be restored is not known. But beyond all doubt it was between the 15th of May, 1829, and the month of April, 1830; for in the revelation directing the manner of organizing the church, given early in April of the year last named, the ordination of the Prophet and of Oliver Cowdery to the "apostleship"—and consequently to the higher priesthood, since the office of an apostle is an office of that higher priesthood—referred to as an accomplished fact. (Roberts, A Comprehensive History of the Church, 1:177-79, 183.)

This event naturally had a profound influence and effect upon the two young men. Oliver Cowdery recorded the glorious incidents in the following words:

After writing the account given of the Savior's ministry to the remnant of the seed of Jacob upon this continent, it was easily to be seen, that amid the great strife and noise concerning religion, none had authority from God to administer the ordinances of the gospel. For the question might be asked, have men authority to administer in the name of Christ, who deny revelations, when His testimony is no less than the spirit of prophecy and His religion based, built, and sustained by immediate revelations in all ages of the world, when He has had a people on earth! If these facts were buried and carefully concealed by men whose craft would have been in danger if once permitted to shine in the faces of men, they were no longer to us; and we only waited for the commandment to be given, "Arise and be baptized."

This was not long desired before it was realized. The Lord, who is rich in mercy, and ever willing to answer the consistent prayer of the humble, after we had called upon Him in a fervent manner, aside from the abodes of men, condescended to manifest to us His will. On a sudden, as from the midst of eternity, the voice of the Redeemer spake peace to us, while the veil was parted and the angel of God came down clothed with glory, and delivered the anxiously looked for message, and the keys of the gospel of repentance. What joy! What wonder! What amazement! While the world was racked and distracted—while millions were groping as the blind for the wall, and while all men were resting upon uncertainty, as a general mass, our eyes beheld—our ears heard. As in the "blaze of day"; yes, more—above the glitter of the May sunbeam, which then shed its brilliancy over the face of nature! Then his voice, though mild, pierced to the center, and his words, "I am thy fellow-servant," dispelled every fear. We listened, we gazed, we admired! 'Twas the voice of an angel from glory—'twas a message from the Most High, and as we heard we rejoiced, while His love enkindled upon our souls, and we were rapt in the vision of the Almighty! Where was room for doubt? Nowhere; uncertainty had fled, doubt had sunk, no more to rise, while fiction and deception had fled forever. . . .

I was present with Joseph when an holy angel from God came down from heaven and conferred on us, or restored, the lesser or Aaronic Priesthood, and said to us at the same time, that it should remain upon the earth while the earth stands.

I was also present with Joseph when the higher or Melchizedek Priesthood was conferred by the holy angel on high. This Priesthood we then conferred on each other, by the will and commandment of God. This Priesthood, as was then declared, is also to remain upon the earth until the last remnant of time. This Holy Priesthood, or authority, we then conferred upon many, and is just as good, and valid as though God had done it in person. (Kirkham, A New Witness for Christ in America, 1:82,72.)

Completion of the Translation

After receiving the priesthood from the angel of God, the Prophet and Oliver continued their translation and writing of the plates. However, as Joseph Fielding Smith indicates below, the final work of the translation did not take place at Harmony, Pennsylvania.

It was not destined that the work of translation should go on in Harmony, without interruption. Opposition finally made itself manifest and became so strong that even Isaac Hale—a man who believed in justice, law and order, but who did not express much faith in the mission of Joseph Smith—became somewhat bitter in his feelings. The necessity of a change of residence was apparent. Oliver Cowdery wrote to a young friend, David Whitmer of Fayette, New York, with whom he had previously corresponded regarding the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, desiring that he would come and take Joseph and himself to the Whitmer home in Fayette. This David Whitmer consented to do, and the removal was made in June, 1829.

When David was on the journey to Harmony on this mission, he was met some distance from the town of Harmony by Joseph and Oliver. In referring to this circumstance some years later, David Whitmer wrote: "Oliver told me that Joseph had informed him when I started from home, where I stopped the first night, how I read the sign at the tavern, where I stopped the next night, etc., and that I would be there that day for dinner, and this is why they had come out to meet me. All of which was exactly as Joseph had told Oliver, at which I was greatly astonished." (Millennial Star, 40:769-74; also quoted by Joseph Fielding Smith, Essentials in Church History, pp. 59-60.)

The translation was finally completed at the Whitmer farm in Fayette, New York. Concerning the actual date of the completion of the translation, Francis Kirkham has written:

It appears that the entire copy might have been prepared before the printing began for the reason that the original copy would be kept at a separate place to guard against loss or destruction. In any event, one month to six or seven weeks would be no more than sufficient time to prepare the manuscript, arrange for, and actually begin the printing which, from the evidence presented below, began in August, 1829.

The conclusion is this:

The translation and writing of the Book of Mormon commenced April 7, 1829, at page sixteen or a little before and were completed about July 1, 1829. . . .

The evidence appears complete, that the printing of the Book of Mormon began in August, 1829, and was completed not later than March 26, 1830, at the printing press of E. B. Grandin at Palmyra, New York.

From the above sources, it is clear that the Book of Mormon was dictated by Joseph Smith in the relatively short period of seventy-five working days. There were many witnesses both at his home at Harmony, Pennsylvania, and at Fayette, New York. Many persons knew all the facts. No one has attempted to deny them. The physical facts concerning time, place and scribes of the writing of the translation and the publishing of the Book of Mormon are attested by both believers and non-believers in the divine origin of the book. There was no incentive for deception or misrepresentation of these facts by the persons who willingly gave their time to this effort. No wealth, honor, power or influence was to come to any one of them from this achievement only the privilege to serve. The reward was joy in this life and in eternity by helping to lead "save it be but one soul" into the way of divine love and eternal progress. (A New Witness for Christ in America, 1:224-25, 227.)

In March and again in June of 1829 Joseph Smith received by revelation commandments of the Lord to have three witnesses view the plates of the Book of Mormon. Concerning the fulfillment of these commandments, Joseph writes:

Not many days after the above commandment [Doctrine and Covenants 17] was given, we four, viz., Martin Harris, David Whitmer, Oliver Cowdery and myself, agreed to retire into the woods, and try to obtain, by fervent and humble prayer, the fulfilment of the promises given in the above revelation—that they should have a view of the plates. We accordingly made choice of a piece of woods convenient to Mr. Whitmer's house, to which we retired, and having knelt down, we began to pray in much faith to Almighty God to bestow upon us a realization of these promises.

According to previous arrangement, I commenced by vocal prayer to our Heavenly Father, and was followed by each of the others in succession. We did not at the first trial, however, obtain any answer or manifestation of divine favor in our behalf. We again observed the same order of prayer, each calling on and praying fervently to God in rotation, but with the same result as before.

Upon this, our second failure, Martin Harris proposed that he should withdraw himself from us, believing, as he expressed himself, that his presence was the cause of our not obtaining what we wished for. He accordingly withdrew from us, and we knelt down again, and had not been many minutes engaged in prayer, when presently we beheld a light above us in the air, of exceeding brightness; and behold, an angel stood before us. In his hands he held the plates which we had been praying for these to have a view of. He turned over the leaves one by one, so that we could see them, and discern the engravings thereon distinctly. He then addressed himself to David Whitmer, and said, "David blessed is the Lord, and he that keeps His commandments;" when, immediately afterwards, we heard a voice from out of the bright light above us, saying, "These plates have been revealed by the power of God, and they have been translated by the power of God. The translation of them which you have seen is correct, and I command you to bear record of what you now see and hear."

I now left David and Oliver, and went in pursuit of Martin Harris, whom I found at a considerable distance, fervently engaged in prayer. He soon told me, however, that he had not yet prevailed with the Lord, and earnestly requested me to join him in prayer, that he also might realize the same blessings which we had just received. We accordingly joined in prayer, and ultimately obtained our desires, for before we had yet finished, the same vision was opened to our view, at least it was again opened to me, and I once more beheld and heard the same things; whilst at the same moment, Martin Harris cried out, apparently in an ecstasy of joy, " 'Tis enough; 'tis enough; mine eyes have beheld; mine eyes have beheld;" and jumping up, he shouted, "Hosanna," blessing God, and otherwise rejoiced exceedingly. (Joseph Smith, History of the Church, 1:54-55.)

The Prophet's mother adds the following interesting information concerning the manifestation to the special witnesses:

The next morning (i.e. following the arrival of the party from Palmyra), after attending to the usual services, namely, reading from the scriptures, singing, and praying, Joseph arose from his knees, and approaching Martin Harris with a solemnity that thrills through my veins to this day, when it occurs to my recollection, said: "Martin Harris, you have got to humble yourself before your God this day, that you may obtain a forgiveness of your sins. If you do, it is the will of God that you should look upon the plates, in company with Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer."

Joseph, Oliver and David, repaired to a grove, a short distance from the house, where they commenced calling upon the Lord, and continued in earnest supplication, until he permitted an angel to come down from his presence and declare to them that all Joseph testified of concerning the plates was true. When they returned to the house, it was between three and four o'clock in the afternoon. Mrs. Whitmer, Mr. Smith and myself were sitting in a bedroom at the time. On coming in Joseph threw himself down beside me, and exclaimed: "Father, mother, you do not know how happy I am; the Lord has now caused the plates to be shown to three more besides myself. They have seen an angel, who has testified to them, and they will have to bear witness to the truth of what I have said, for now they know for themselves that I do not go about to deceive the people, and I feel as if I was relieved of a burden which was almost too heavy for me to bear, and it rejoices my soul, that I am not any longer to be entirely alone in the work." Upon this Martin Harris came in: He seemed almost overcome with joy, and testified boldly to what he had both seen and heard. And so did David and Oliver, adding, that no tongue could express the joy of their hearts, and the greatness of the things which they had both seen and heard. (Berrett and Burton, Readings in L.D.S. Church History, 1:58-59.)

None of these men ever denied their testimony of the Book of Mormon, although some of them were later separated from the Church. For example, Oliver Cowdery left the Church in 1838 but returned and was rebaptized in 1848. During the period he was away from the Church, the following incident happened to him, according to a report published by Berrett and Burton:

. . .a Mr. Barrington, a successful farmer of that state related to him the following incident in the career of Oliver Cowdery that happened in the state of Michigan, when Mr. Barrington was about twenty years of age. A murder trial was in progress in the town where Mr. Barrington then lived, and walking along the main street one day Mr. B. noticed a great many people walking up to the county court house, and not knowing what was going on there, he says, "I became inquisitive, and made up my mind to go there also, and on entering the court room I found that the same was crowded to overflowing, but being young and strong I soon made my way up to the railing in front of the bench and jury box, and I then learned from a friend that it was a murder trial on before the court, and that the young attorney who was then addressing or making his opening argument to the jury was the county attorney, Oliver Cowdery; as soon as Mr. Cowdery closed his opening argument the attorney for the prisoner arose, and, in a sneering way, said: 'May it please the Court, and gentlemen of the jury, I challenge Mr. Cowdery, since he seems to know so much about this poor defendant, to tell us something about his connection with Joe Smith, and the digging out of the hill of the Mormon Bible, and how Mr. Cowdery helped Joe Smith to defraud the American people out of a whole lot of money by selling the Mormon Bible and telling them that an angel appeared to them from heaven, dressed in white clothes.' After having kept on for a while in this way, abusing Mr. Cowdery, he (attorney for the defendant) began to argue the case to the jury; but all interest was shifted from the prisoner and his case and directed towards Oliver Cowdery; everybody was wondering in what manner he would reply to the accusation just made. The people did not believe, or know before this, that they had elected a county prosecutor who had been an associate of the "Mormon Prophet," Joseph Smith. Finally, when the defendant's attorney had completed his argument, Oliver Cowdery's turn came to reply, and everybody in the court room strained their necks to catch a glimpse of Mr. Cowdery.

He arose as calm as a summer morning, and in a low but clear voice which gradually rose in pitch and volume as he proceeded, said:

"If your honor please, and gentlemen of the jury, the attorney of the opposite side has challenged me to state my connection with Joseph Smith and the Book of Mormon; and as I cannot now avoid the responsibility, I must admit to you that I am the very Oliver Cowdery whose name is attached to the testimony, with others, as to the appearance of the angel Moroni; and let me tell you that it is not because of my good deeds that I am here, away from the body of the Mormon church, but because I have broken the covenants I once made, and I was cut off from the church; but, gentlemen of the jury, I have never denied my testimony, which is attached to the front page of the Book of Mormon and I declare to you here that these eyes saw the angel, and these ears of mine heard the voice of the angel, and he told us his name was Moroni; that the book was true, and contained the fulness of the gospel, and we were also told that if we ever denied what we had heard and seen that there would be no forgiveness for us, neither in this world nor in the world to come." (Berrett and Burton, Readings in L.D.S. Church History, 1:60-61.)

Oliver Cowdery remained true to his death to his testimony of the Book of Mormon. Concerning his death, Kirkham writes:

In the year 1878, David Whitmer said to Elders Orson Pratt and Joseph F. Smith concerning his departure: "Oliver died the happiest man I ever saw. After shaking hands with the family and kissing his wife and daughter, he said, 'Now I lay me down for the last time; I am going to my Savior'; and he died immediately, with a smile on his face." (A New Witness for Christ in America, 1:248.)

David Whitmer always maintained his testimony of the Book of Mormon also, even though he was excommunicated from the Church in 1838.

After his separation from the Church, David Whitmer located at Richmond, Mo., where he resided until he passed away, January 25, 1888. In that place he was honored and respected, as a citizen and a Christian gentleman. This is evident from the following statement, which appeared in the Richmond Conservator of March 25, 1881:

"We, the undersigned citizens of Richmond, Ray Co., Mo. where David Whitmer, Sr., has resided since the year 1838, certify that we have been long and intimately acquainted with him and know him to be a man of the highest integrity and of undoubted truth and veracity."

This public acknowledgment of the trustworthiness of Mr. Whitmer was signed by twenty-one prominent business and professional men of Richmond. Among them were judges, lawyers, a bank president, the post-master, a doctor, and many other prominent citizens. Such was his reputation in a place where he had lived for half a century.

David Whitmer, in 1881, as reported in the Richmond Conservator, of March 25, that year, made this statement:

"Those who know me best know well that I have always adhered to that testimony. And that no man may be misled or doubt my present views in regard to the same, I do again affirm the truth of all my statements as then made and published. . . .

"In the spirit of Christ, who hath said, 'Follow thou me, for I am the Life, the Light, and the Way,' I submit this statement to the world; God in whom I trust being my judge as to the sincerity of my motives and the faith and hope that is in me of eternal life."

On Sept. 7, 1878, David Whitmer, in the presence of Elder Joseph F. Smith, Elder Orson Pratt, and a number of other persons, including his eldest son, a grandson, and a son, Jacob Whitmer, bore this testimony:

"He (the angel) stood before us. Our testimony, as recorded in the Book of Mormon, is strictly and absolutely true."

In 1886, David Whitmer said to Elder Edward Stevenson:

"As sure as the sun shines and I live, just so sure did the angel appear unto me and Joseph Smith and I heard his voice and did see the angel standing before us." (Kirkham, A New Witness for Christ in America, 1:248-49.)

Martin Harris always bore a strong testimony of the Book of Mormon, and although he left the Church for a number of years he was a member in good standing at the time of his death. Concerning the last years of Harris's life, Francis Kirkham has written:

Martin Harris passed the last five years of his earthly career at Clarkston, Cache County, Utah. While he lived there, visitors came from far and near to see and hear him, and he was never happier than when he had an opportunity to bear his testimony.

Among his visitors was Elder Ole Jensen, then a resident of Clarkston, but later of Fairview, Wyoming. One day in the month of July, 1875, he and others heard the venerable witness relate his wonderful story. After having stated the circumstances attending the appearance of the angel with the plates, he said:

"The angel stood before me and said, 'Look!' When I gazed upon him, I fell to the earth, but I rose to my feet again and saw the angel turn the golden leaves over and over, and I said, 'That is enough, my Lord and my God.' Then I heard the voice of God say, 'The book translated from these plates is true and translated correctly.' "

Martin Harris added solemnly:

"As sure as you are standing here and see me, just as sure did I see the angel with the gold plates in his hand as he showed them to me. I have promised that I will bear witness of this both here and hereafter."

In a letter to President George A. Smith, dated July 9, 1875, the day before the death of Martin Harris, the writer, Martin Harris, Jr., says of his father:

"He was taken ill a week ago yesterday with some kind of a stroke. . . . He has continued to talk about and testify to the truth of the Book of Mormon, and was in his happiest mood when he could get somebody to listen to his testimony. . . . The last audible words he has spoken were something about the three witnesses of the Book of Mormon."

Among those who heard Martin Harris bear his testimony was Elder William Waddoups, second counselor in the Benson Stake Presidency. He was introduced to Martin Harris in Salt Lake City. To him Harris said:

"Young man, I had the privilege of being with the Prophet Joseph Smith, and with these eyes of men, (pointing to his eyes) I saw the angel of the Lord, and I saw the plates and the Urim and Thummim and the sword of Laban, and with these ears (pointing to his ears), I heard the voice of the angel, and with these hands (holding out his hands), I handled the plates containing the record of the Book of Mormon, and I assisted the Prophet in the translation thereof. I bear witness that this testimony is true." (Kirkham, A New Witness for Christ in America, 1:249-50.)

David Whitmer was the last of the three witnesses to pass away, and in a statement published less than a year before his death he reaffirmed that all three of the special witnesses had remained true to their testimony of the Book of Mormon. His statement is as follows:

It is recorded in the American Encyclopaedia and the Encyclopaedia Brittanica, that I, David Whitmer, have denied my testimony as one of the three witnesses to the divinity of the Book of Mormon, and that the other two witnesses, Oliver Cowdery and Martin Harris, denied their testimony of that book. I will say once more to all mankind, that I have never at any time denied that testimony or any part thereof. I also testify to the world, that neither Oliver Cowdery nor Martin Harris ever at any time denied their testimony. They both died reaffirming the truth of the divine authenticity of the Book of Mormon. (Berrett and Burton, Readings in L.D.S. Church History, 1:62.)

Eight Witnesses and Their Testimonies

A second group of witnesses saw the plates a few days following the manifestation to the three witnesses. B. H. Roberts reviews this important event as follows:

A few days after the three witnesses obtained their view of the Book of Mormon plates, said plates were shown to the eight witnesses by the Prophet himself. Lucy Smith gives the most detailed account of the attendant circumstances. The day following the one on which the three witnesses received their testimony, the Palmyra party, consisting of the Prophet's father and mother and Martin Harris returned home; and now Lucy Smith's statement:

"In a few days we were followed by Joseph, Oliver and the Whitmers, who came to make us a visit, and make some arrangements about getting the book printed. Soon after they came, all the male part of the company, with my husband, Samuel and Hyrum, retired to a place where the family were in the habit of offering up their devotions to God. They went to this place because it had been revealed to Joseph that the plates would be carried thither by one of the ancient Nephites. Here it was that those eight witnesses, whose names are recorded in the Book of Mormon, looked upon them and handled them . . . After these witnesses returned to the house, an angel again made his appearance to Joseph, at which time Joseph delivered up the plates into the angel's hands." . . .

In the evening of the day that the eight witnesses saw and examined the Nephite plates, according to Lucy Smith, they held meeting at the Smith residence, "in which all the witnesses bore testimony to the facts as stated above", that is, to the facts stated in their testimony as here given and which appeared in the first and in all subsequent editions of the Book of Mormon. . . .

. . . They saw the plates; they handled them; they turned the leaves of the old Nephite record, and saw and marveled at its curious workmanship. No brilliant light illuminated the forest or dazzled their vision; no angel was there to awe them by the splendor of his presence; no soul-piercing voice of God from the midst of a glory to make them tremble by its power. All these supernatural circumstances present at the view of the plates by the three witnesses were absent at the time when the eight witnesses saw them. In this latter event all was natural, matter-of-fact, plain. Nothing to inspire awe, or fear, or dread; nothing uncanny or overwhelming, but just a plain, straightforward proceeding that leaves men in possession of all their faculties, and self-consciousness; all of which renders such a thing as deception, or imposition entirely out of the question. They could pass the plates from hand to hand, guess at their weight—doubtless considerable, that idea being conveyed in their testimony—"we have seen and hefted, and know of a surety, that the said Smith has got the plates." They could look upon the engravings, and observe calmly how different they were from everything modern in the way of record-making known to them, and hence the conclusion that the workmanship was not only curious but ancient.

Of these eight witnesses five of them, viz: Christian Whitmer, Peter Whitmer, Jun., Joseph Smith, Sen., Hyrum Smith, and Samuel Smith, all remained true throughout their lives, not only to their testimony, but faithful to the church also, and were honorable, upright men. While the three of the eight witnesses who left the church, or were excommunicated from it, viz: John Whitmer, Hirum Page, and Jacob Whitmer, not one of them ever denied the truth of his testimony; a circumstance of some weight in helping one to determine the value of the testimony to which, with those who remained faithful to the church, they subscribed their names when the Book of Mormon was first given to the world. (Roberts, A Comprehensive History of the Church, 1:147-49.)

Other incidents concerning the lives and testimonies of these men have been related by Francis Kirkham as follows:

The eight witnesses, as well as the three, maintained their testimonies to the last. Joseph Smith, Sr., who was the first to receive the message of his chosen son as from God, passed away Sept. 18, 1840, after having endured faithfully all trials and hardships for the sake of the gospel. He was, at the time of his death, the Patriarch to the Church.

Hyrum Smith sealed his faithful testimony with his blood, June 27, 1844, the day of the martyrdom of the prophet, his brother, and the two, united in life, were not separated in death.

In December, 1839, the Patriarch wrote:

"I had been abused and thrust into a dungeon, and confined for months on account of my faith and the testimony of Jesus Christ. However, I thank God that I felt a determination to die, rather than deny the things which my eyes had seen, which my hands had handled, and which I had borne testimony to, wherever my lot had been cast; and I can assure my beloved brethren that I was enabled to bear as strong a testimony, when nothing but death presented itself, as ever I did in my life."

Samuel Smith also passed away in 1844, faithful to the last.

Of the Whitmers, Christian died in 1835, and Peter, Jr., in 1836, both in full fellowship with the Church. Jacob Whitmer and John Whitmer were separated from the Church in 1838, but neither retracted his testimony at any time. The latter died forty years later at Far West, maintaining to the last the truth of his testimony.

Hiram Page was one of the prominent men of the Church, who fell by the wayside in 1838. But he never denied what he had testified to. He died in 1852, rejoicing that he had been privileged to see the plates of the Book of Mormon.

The facts presented . . . prove that honest men of sound mind and body were given objective evidence of the divine power manifested in Joseph Smith in the "coming forth" and the translation of the Book of Mormon. Eight witnesses, besides Joseph Smith, together and in the day time, saw and handled the plates. Three witnesses, beside Joseph Smith, also together and in the daytime, were shown the plates by Moroni, the immortal messenger from God, and heard a voice from above them declare the translation of the Book of Mormon was correct. Illusion or hallucination is impossible to two persons at the same time and place. Motives for fraud were absent. The only reward that awaited these witnesses was service to their fellow men. They realized they must meet opposition, persecution, loss of friends, and loss of opportunities for personal advancement and income. Their testimony would be admissable before a jury and the members of that jury alone would determine its credibility. (A New Witness for Christ in America, 1:254-56.)

Publication of the Book of Mormon

As soon as the translation was completed, the Prophet and his associates immediately started to make plans to have the translation published. Joseph Fielding Smith summarizes the major events of this period in the following pertinent words:

After the completion of the translation of the Book of Mormon in 1829, the angel again appeared to Joseph Smith and received back the plates into his keeping. Of this circumstance the Prophet wrote in 1838: "By the wisdom of God, they [the plates] remained safe in my hands, until I had accomplished by them what was required at my hand. When, according to arrangement, the messenger called for them, I delivered them up to him, and he has them in his charge until this day."

The question of printing the manuscript now confronted Joseph Smith. Not only was he without the necessary means, but printers were scarce and those who were approached were either prejudiced through bigotry, or unwilling for fear of the opposition of customers. Martin Harris, who possessed the means, came to the rescue with a promise to pay for the printing of the book. Finally a contract was entered into with Mr. Egbert B. Grandin, of Palmyra, who consented to print five thousand copies of the Book of Mormon for three thousand dollars. In the meantime the copyright to the book had been secured. The appearance of the words "Author and Proprietor," which appear on the title page of the first edition of the Book of Mormon, [had caused] some ridicule by enemies of Joseph Smith. This expression was printed in the book in accord with the law governing copyrights, and in no way detracts from the validity of the story of the translation of the record.

Soon after the completion of the translation and the securing of the copyright, the Lord commanded that Oliver Cowdery should transcribe the entire manuscript, and that in furnishing copy to the printer, the second copy should be used, and that only sheet by sheet, as the type should be set up. It was further provided that in going to and from the printing office, there should always be a guard to protect the manuscript, and that a guard should be placed at the home constantly to watch and protect the translation from evil disposed persons. These precautions were necessary because of the malicious opposition which prevailed in and about Palmyra, where the work was done. At times attempts were made to get the manuscript from the possession of Joseph and those who, with him, had the work in charge.

One man, named Cole, more cunning than the others who opposed the work, devised the plan of anticipating the publication of the book. Cole, an ex-justice of the peace, was printing a paper which he called The Reflector. . . . He had announced to his subscribers that he would furnish them weekly installments of the Book of Mormon in his paper. Having access to the Grandin printing office, he commenced his publication by working on Sundays when the office was closed. In this manner he was able to publish a number of issues containing extracts from the printed sheets of the Book of Mormon. As the copyright was secured, he was warned and finally stopped from this method of stealing. The work of printing the book continued, but not without interruption, for great pressure was brought to bear upon the printer who was threatened by enemies of the latter-day work with a withdrawal of trade that would ruin his business. This came near breaking the contract. However, after some delays, the book was finished some time in the spring of 1830, and made ready to go forth, as the Nephite prophets had foretold, to the Gentiles and then to the house of Israel as a voice speaking out of the dust. (Essentials in Church History, pp. 68-71.)

Major Editions of the Book of Mormon

The Book of Mormon has been translated and published in many languages since 1830. The first edition was printed in 1830 by Egbert B. Grandin at Palmyra, New York. The edition consisted of 5,000 copies and the cost was $3,000.

The second edition was published at Kirtland, Ohio, by Parley P. Pratt and John Goodson. In the preface to this edition the publishers stated that they had "obtained leave to issue 5,000 copies of the same, from those holding the copyright."

The third edition was published in Nauvoo, Illinois, in 1840 by Don Carlos Smith and Ebenezer Robinson. Another edition was printed from these plates in 1842, also in Nauvoo.

The first European edition was published in 1841 by Brigham Young and the apostles who were then in England. In this edition the testimonies of the three and the eight special witnesses were published in the front of the book; previous to that edition they had been published in the back of each copy.

The second European edition was published in 1849 by Orson Pratt, and in 1852 the third European edition was published by Franklin D. Richards. In this edition Brother Richards numbered the verses in the various chapters.

Orson Pratt divided the book into further chapters and verses and added some footnote references in the electrotyped edition published in 1879.

The current edition is essentially the same as the edition of 1920 in which the Book of Mormon was "first issued in double-column pages, with chapter headings, chronological data, revised foot-note references, pronouncing vocabulary, and index." (See the copyright page in the Book of Mormon.) These changes in format and explanatory material were the result of the recommendations of a committee headed by Elder James E. Talmage of the Council of the Twelve.

---
Notas:
[^1] Loss of 116 Pages of Manuscript
