Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Book of Mormon ( 1976)

MAJOR PURPOSES OF THE BOOK OF MORMON

Many purposes can be and have been listed for the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, but the ones that will be emphasized here are those that are mentioned by the original writers of the book themselves and those listed by the Lord in revelations to the Prophet Joseph Smith.

After a rather extensive analysis of all the statements in both the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants concerning the purposes for which the Book of Mormon was written, B. H. Roberts lists the following seven major reasons:

First, to show unto the remnant of the house of Israel what great things the Lord has done for their fathers.

Second, to teach them the covenants of the Lord made with their fathers, that the remnants may know that they are not cast off forever.

Third, to convince both Jews and Gentiles that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God, and that he manifests himself to all nations.

Fourth, to bring the knowledge of a Savior to the remnants of the house of Israel on the western hemisphere, through the testimony of the Nephites and Lamanites as well as through the testimony of the Jews, that they might more fully believe the gospel.

Fifth, to bring to the Jews the testimony of the Nephites that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the living God; that they might have the testimony of the Nephites as well as that of their fathers that Jesus is their Messiah.

Sixth, to be a witness for the truth of the Bible, to establish its authenticity, and its credibility by bringing other witnesses than those of the Eastern world to testify to the same great truths that are contained in the sacred pages of the Bible.

Seventh, to restore to the knowledge of mankind many plain and precious truths concerning the gospel which men have taken out of the Jewish Scriptures, or obscured by their interpretations; by the absence of which passages, or misleading interpretations, many have stumbled and fallen into unbelief. In a word, it is the mission of the Book of Mormon to be a witness for Jesus, the Christ; for the truth of the gospel is the power of God unto salvation; for that purpose it was written, preserved from destruction, and has now come forth to the children of men through the goodness and mercy and power of God. (New Witnesses for God [Deseret News Press, 1911], 2:45-46.)

Of course, other scholars of the Book of Mormon have prepared lists of purposes for the coming forth of the Book of Mormon in a somewhat different order than those of B. H. Roberts, and some of them have also listed additional reasons for the publication of this scripture, including (a) to help the people of this dispensation to solve their problems, (b) to convince mankind that every person must be judged of his works, (c) to prepare the faithful for the second coming of Jesus Christ and the millennial reign, (d) to test the faith of this generation and to help the faithful, and (e) to provide mankind with secrets of national survival. Although there may be some slight overlapping between these various purposes as listed here, they will each be considered briefly with a few pertinent quotations from the Book of Mormon and other sources.

A. To Be a Witness for the Divinity of Jesus Christ and to Bring to the Jews the Testimony of the Nephites that Jesus Is the Christ.

These are undoubtedly some of the most important reasons for the coming forth of the Book of Mormon; the Lord has stated this himself, as have some of the original writers of this sacred record.

In a revelation given to Joseph Smith in July 1828, the Lord gives the following reason as to why the Book of Mormon must be translated and published:

. . . My work shall go forth, for inasmuch as the knowledge of a Savior has come unto the world, through the testimony of the Jews, even so shall the knowledge of a Savior come unto my people . . . through the testimony of their fathers. (Doctrine and Covenants 3:16-17.)

Nephi, the first writer in our present Book of Mormon, also lists this as a reason for his writing the record:

. . . as the Lord liveth, there is none other name given under heaven save it be this Jesus Christ, of which I have spoken, whereby man can be saved.

Wherefore, for this cause hath the Lord God promised unto me that these things which I write shall be kept and preserved, and handed down unto my seed, from generation to generation, that the promise may be fulfilled unto Joseph, that his seed should never perish as long as the earth should stand.

Wherefore, these things shall go from generation to generation as long as the earth shall stand. . . . (2 Nephi 25:20-22.)

The story of the Book of Mormon itself also testifies amply that Jesus is indeed the Christ, the Savior and Redeemer of the world. In 3 Nephi is found this stirring account of the appearance of the resurrected Jesus Christ to the righteous survivors of the Lehite nation (the resurrected Savior is speaking):

Arise and come forth unto me, that ye may thrust your hands into my side, and also that ye may feel the prints of the nails in my hands and in my feet, that ye may know that I am the God of Israel, and the God of the whole earth, and have been slain for the sins of the world.

And it came to pass that the multitude went forth, and thrust their hands into his side, and did feel the prints of the nails in his hands and in his feet; and this they did do, going forth one by one until they had all gone forth, and did see with their eyes and did feel with their hands, and did know of a surety and did bear record, that it was he, of whom it was written by the prophets, that should come.

And when they had all gone forth and had witnessed for themselves, they did cry out with one accord. . . . (3 Nephi 11:14-16.)

Many other scriptures could be listed to indicate that the Book of Mormon does testify of the divinity of Jesus Christ (2 Nephi 25:13, 16; 33:8-11; 3 Nephi 17:25; 29:4-6; Ether 12:38-41; Moroni 10:32-34), but the final one quoted here is from Moroni, the last writer in the Book of Mormon, and it appears on the title page of the Book of Mormon. In listing several reasons why he wrote his record Moroni states: "And also to the convincing of the Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God, manifesting himself unto all nations."

B. To Fulfill Biblical Prophecy and to Be a Witness for the Bible.

In his farewell address to us, Mormon—the great prophet, historian, and military leader—gives this message:

Therefore repent, and be baptized in the name of Jesus, and lay hold upon the gospel of Christ, which shall be set before you, not only in this record [the Book of Mormon] but also in the record which shall come unto the Gentiles from the Jews, which record [the Bible] shall come from the Gentiles unto you.

For behold, this [the Book of Mormon] is written for the intent that ye may believe that [the Bible]; and if ye believe that [the Bible] ye will believe this also. (Mormon 7:8-9.)

Mormon was not the only writer in the Book of Mormon who claimed that one purpose of his writing was for "the intent that ye may believe" the Bible. Nephi, the first writer in our present Book of Mormon, also testifies of these things as is indicated in the thirteenth chapter of 1 Nephi and in the following quotation:

And now, my beloved brethren, and also Jew, and all ye ends of the earth, hearken unto these words and believe in Christ; and if ye believe not in these words believe in Christ. And if ye shall believe in Christ ye will believe in these words, for they are the words of Christ, and he hath given them unto me; and they teach all men that they should do good.

And if they are not the words of Christ, judge ye—for Christ will show unto you, with power and great glory, that they are his words, at the last day; and you and I shall stand face to face before his bar; and ye shall know that I have been commanded of him to write these things. . . . (2 Nephi 33:10-11.)

The coming forth of the Book of Mormon also fulfills biblical prophecy, as is indicated in the following analysis by Eldin Ricks:

Genesis 11:1-9. People spread over "the face of all the earth" at the fall of the tower of Babel—This prophecy assumes added significance in view of the fact that one of the three groups which the Book of Mormon tells about, the Jaredites, left the Middle East and arrived in the Western world soon after the fall of the tower of Babel. (Ether 1:3-5, 33.)

Genesis 49:22-26. Joseph's branches to "run over the wall."—The obscure prophecy that the posterity of Jacob's son, Joseph, should extend beyond the garden wall becomes meaningful in the Book of Mormon. The Book deals mainly with the history of a branch of Joseph's descendants who broke away from their home ties in Jerusalem and migrated to American shores. (1 Nephi 5:14; 6:2; 2 Nephi 3:4-5; Ether 13:8.)

Isaiah 29:4. "And thou shalt be brought down, and shalt speak out of the ground." —What at first looks like a prophecy about Jerusalem's downfall is seen, in the light of Book of Mormon history, to include the remnant of Jerusalem's children that settled in early America. The more highly civilized faction of this remnant met destruction in desolating wars in the fourth century A.D. Their unearthed record, the Book of Mormon, is their voice speaking "out of the ground" today.

Isaiah 29:9-12. "The vision of all is become as the words of a book that is sealed."—Isaiah pursues the subject of a people speaking out of the ground and observes how in a day when men would be (spiritually) asleep, a book should come forth. The reference to its being "sealed" again points to the Book of Mormon, for a considerable number of the plates of the metal book that Joseph Smith received were sealed with some substance of a strong cement-like quality. This part he was not permitted to translate. (Ether 5:1; Pearl of Great Price, Smith 2:63-65; Orson Pratt, Remarkable Visions, p. 6.) In the same passage Isaiah speaks of the words of the book being delivered to a learned man who would protest he could not read a sealed book. The fulfillment of this figures prominently in the account of Joseph Smith's translation of the record.

Isaiah 29:13-14. In time of spiritual darkness a "marvellous work and a wonder" to be performed by God.—This prediction follows Isaiah's discussion of a book that should come forth in an age of apostasy. A few verses further (v. 18) he again refers to the book. Believers in the Book of Mormon point to the miraculous events attending the coming forth of this volume as part of the "marvellous work and a wonder" alluded to by Isaiah.

Ezekiel 37:15-21. The stick of Judah and the stick of Joseph to be united.—The union of Judah's scroll with Joseph's appears to be suggested by Ezekiel's prophecy. Since the Bible is the record of Judah's descendants and the Book of Mormon is a record of Joseph's, students of the latter volume see the fulfillment of Ezekiel's prophecy in the coming together of the two books.

John 10:15-16. Jesus to lay down His life and visit "other sheep . . . which are not of this fold. —The meaning of Jesus' announcement becomes clear through the Book of Mormon's thrilling story of Christ's appearance, after His resurrection, to the Josephite branch in America. He told them they were His "other sheep." (3 Nephi 15:13-24.)

Revelation 14:6-7. An angel to bring again the "everlasting gospel" and a warning that "the hour of God's judgment is come."—"Mormonism" declares that this heavenly messenger has come in fulfillment of John's prophecy, that he has given the promised warning of impending judgments, and that the Book of Mormon, which he revealed, unfolds "the everlasting gospel" to the inhabitants of the earth. (Doctrine and Covenants 133:36ff; Pearl of Great Price, Smith 2:34.) (Eldin Ricks, Book of Mormon Commentary [Deseret News Press, 1953], 1:10-12.)

C. To Convince the Lamanites that They Are of the House of Israel; to Show unto the Remnant of the House of Israel What Great Things the Lord Has Done for Their Fathers; to Teach the Remnant of Israel the Covenants of the Lord Made with Their Fathers, that They May Know They Are Not Cast Off Forever; to Bring the Knowledge of a Savior unto the Remnants of the House of Israel through the Testimony of the Nephites as well as the Jews.

Although these might well be considered separate and distinct purposes for which the Book of Mormon was written, they will all be considered together in this section inasmuch as the statements of the Lord and the original writers of the Book of Mormon generally mention them together.

For example, the Lord revealed to Joseph Smith:

Nevertheless, my work shall go forth, for inasmuch as the knowledge of a Savior has come unto the world, through the testimony of the Jews, even so shall the knowledge of a Savior come unto my people—

And to the Nephites, and the Jacobites, and the Josephites, and the Zoramites, through the testimony of their fathers—

And this testimony shall come to the knowledge of the Lamanites, and the Lemuelites, and the Ishmaelites, who dwindled in unbelief because of the iniquity of their fathers, whom the Lord has suffered to destroy their brethren the Nephites, because of their iniquities and their abominations.

And for this very purpose are these plates preserved, which contain these records—that the promises of the Lord might be fulfilled, which he made to his people;

And that the Lamanites might come to the knowledge of their fathers, and that they might know the promises of the Lord, and that they may believe the gospel and rely upon the merits of Jesus Christ, and be glorified through faith in his name, and that through their repentance they might be saved. Amen. (Doctrine and Covenants 3:16-20.)

Also, Mormon testified in these words that his writings were intended primarily for the remnant of the house of Israel:

Now these things are written unto the remnant of the house of Jacob; and they are written after this manner, because it is known of God that wickedness will not bring them forth unto them; and they are to be hid up unto the Lord that they may come forth in his own due time.

And this is the commandment which I have received; and behold, they shall come forth according to the commandment of the Lord, when he shall see fit, in his wisdom.

And behold, they shall go unto the unbelieving of the Jews; and for this intent shall they go—that they may be persuaded that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the living God; that the Father may bring about, through his most Beloved, his great and eternal purpose, in restoring the Jews, or all the house of Israel, to the land of their inheritance, which the Lord their God hath given them, unto the fulfilling of his covenant;

And also that the seed of this people may more fully believe his gospel, which shall go forth unto them from the Gentiles. . . . (Mormon 5:12-15.)

This same writer, Mormon, addresses himself to the remnants of the house of Israel when he says, "Know ye that ye must come to the knowledge of your fathers, and repent of all your sins and iniquities, and believe in Jesus Christ, that he is the Son of God. . . ." (Mormon 7:5.) The remainder of his plea (Mormon 7:5-10) lists additional reasons why his record must come forth to the remnant of Israel.

Nephi. the first writer on the small plates of Nephi, also lists several reasons why these records were being preserved for the remnant of the house of Israel (1 Nephi 22:3-14; 2 Nephi 3:6-9, 15), as does the resurrected Jesus Christ in his teachings (3 Nephi 20:10-18, 22, 24-25, 29-31). And finally, Moroni lists most of these same reasons in the section that now comprises the title page of the Book of Mormon:

Wherefore, it is an abridgment of the record of the people of Nephi, and also of the Lamanites—Written to the Lamanites, who are a remnant of the house of Israel; and also to the Jew and Gentile—Written by way of commandment, and also by the spirit of prophecy and of revelation—Written and sealed up, and hid up unto the Lord, that they might not be destroyed—To come forth by the gift and power of God unto the interpretation thereof—Sealed by the hand of Moroni, and hid up unto the Lord, to come forth in due time by way of the Gentile—The interpretation thereof by the gift of God.

An abridgment taken from the Book of Ether also, which is a record of the people of Jared, who were scattered at the time the Lord confounded the language of the people, when they were building a tower to get to heaven—Which is to show unto the remnant of the House of Israel what great things the Lord hath done for their fathers; and that they may know the covenants of the Lord, that they are not cast off forever—And also to the convincing of the Jew and Gentile that JESUS is the CHRIST, the ETERNAL GOD, manifesting himself unto all nations—And now, if there are faults they are the mistakes of men; wherefore, condemn not the things of God, that ye may be found spotless at the judgment-seat of Christ.

D. To Restore to the Knowledge of Mankind Many Plain and Precious Truths Concerning the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

Nephi, the first writer in our present Book of Mormon, saw in a vision nearly 600 B.C. that many parts of the gospel "which are plain and most precious" were to be taken out of the Jewish scripture—the Bible. (1 Nephi 13:2-26.) Later in his vision, he was told the words of the Lord by an angel, that "after the Gentiles do stumble exceedingly, because of the most plain and precious parts of the gospel of the Lamb which have been kept back . . . I will be merciful unto the Gentiles in that day, insomuch that I will bring forth unto them, in mine own power, much of my gospel, which shall be plain and precious, saith the Lamb." (1 Nephi 13:34.) Nephi beheld further that these precious truths would be restored through written records, including the one he was then writing, and that these records would "make known the plain and precious things which have been taken away . . . and shall make known to all kindreds, tongues, and people, that the Lamb of God is the Son of the Eternal Father, and the Savior of the world; and that all men must come unto him, or they cannot be saved." (1 Nephi 13:40.)

To illustrate how the Book of Mormon has restored some of these "plain and precious truths," consider the first ordinances of the gospel. The two most basic ordinances that are prevalent and quite widely practiced among both Protestant and Catholic groups are (1) baptism and (2) holy communion—the sacrament of the Lord's Supper. Yet, there are important and significant differences of opinions among Protestant and Catholic theologians concerning the fundamentals of these ordinances, such as the purpose of the ordinance, who should receive the ordinance, the mode or method of performing the ordinance, and whether or not priesthood authority is necessary to perform the ordinance. The Book of Mormon clearly teaches these and other principles and ordinances of the gospel; thus it is a means by which plain and precious truths have been restored.

E. To Convince Mankind that Every Person Must Be Judged of his Works; to Test the Faith of This Generation; to Help the Faithful.

Mormon, the great prophet and historian after whom the Book of Mormon is named, listed the following major reasons for writing his record:

And these things doth the Spirit manifest unto me; therefore I write unto you all. And for this cause I write unto you, that ye may know that ye must all stand before the judgment-seat of Christ, yea, every soul who belongs to the whole human family of Adam; and ye must stand to be judged of your works, whether they be good or evil;

And also that ye may believe the gospel of Jesus Christ, which ye shall have among you; . . .

And I would that I could persuade all ye ends of the earth to repent and prepare to stand before the judgment-seat of Christ. (Mormon 3:20-22.)

Several other prophets in the Book of Mormon have also emphasized the importance that every man should realize he is to be held accountable for all of his actions, words, and even thoughts. (See particularly 1 Nephi 10:20-21; 12:8-10; 2 Nephi 9:15-16; Alma 12:14-18; 40:25-26; Mormon 9:3-5; and Moroni 10:34.)

Eldin Ricks has written the following concerning the purpose of the Book of Mormon as a test of faith.

A prominent nineteenth century Protestant churchman states: "Were a parchment discovered in an Egyptian mound, six inches square, containing fifty words which were certainly spoken by Jesus, this utterance would count more than all the books which have been published since the first century. If a veritable picture of the Lord could be unearthed from a catacomb, and the world could see with its own eyes what like he was, it would not matter that its colors were faded, and that it was roughly drawn, that picture would have at once a solitary place amid the treasures of art." [B. H. Roberts, New Witness for God, 2:18-19.]

The Book of Mormon is offered to the world as just such a "find," the actual translation of an ancient record. But instead of fifty words spoken by Jesus (through prophets and in person), it contains many thousand; and instead of being discovered by an explorer in Egypt it was found by a young man in western New York, to whom its hiding place was divinely revealed.

Since the publication of this remarkable record in 1830, tens of thousands of missionaries have carried it to the far corners of the civilized world, announcing it to be a new revelation from God; and nearly two million people, living and dead, have accepted the truth of that claim. This fact, however, does not prove the book to be true. The discovery of its truth is made by each reader who studies it in harmony with "the inspiration of the Almighty [that] giveth . . . understanding." [Job 32:8.] It is the goal of the book's adherents that in time every living soul shall have the chance of forming his own prayerful and studied conclusion as to its divinity.

In a large sense, however, the Book of Mormon is not on trial; the world is. The ancient abridger and compiler, Mormon, who lived in the fourth century A.D., affirmed this challenging thought when he said the Lord revealed to him that in the day of its coming forth it would serve as a means of testing the faith of His people. [3 Nephi 26:8-11.] It is a test by virtue of the fact that from age to age they who are "his sheep hear his voice" and recognize it, while they who are spiritually asleep reject it and, in so doing, are rejected of Him. This is the doctrine of the New Testament. [John 10:3-4; 26:29; Matthew 10:33.] And because His voice speaks forth anew to the modern world through the Book of Mormon, this scripture of ancient America keenly tests the spiritual perception and quality of faith of the present generation. (Ricks, Book of Mormon Commentary, 1:2-3.)

F. To Help the People of This Generation Solve Their Problems; to Provide Mankind with Secrets of National Survival; to Prepare the Faithful for the Second Coming of Jesus Christ and the Millennial Reign.

Too many readers of the Book of Mormon overlook the fact that the book was written for them. Although the actual writers of the Book of Mormon lived hundreds of years ago, they knew their writings would not be published during their own lifetimes. Thus they did not write primarily for the people of their own day; rather, they wrote their materials to help those living in the last days who would read their records.

Through the spirit of prophecy and the power of revelation, the prophet-writers of the Book of Mormon knew a great deal concerning the people of the last days. Therefore, they were able to include in their records those truths which would help the people living on the earth in the last days to solve their problems. Concerning his knowledge of the events of the last days, Moroni, the last writer on the plates of Mormon, wrote the following:

Behold, the Lord hath shown unto me great and marvelous things concerning that which must shortly come, at that day when these things shall come forth among you.

Behold, I speak unto you as if ye were present, and yet ye are not. But behold, Jesus Christ hath shown you unto me, and I know your doing. (Mormon 8:34-35.)

Then he listed some of the serious conditions that he saw would exist during and after the time his record would be published:

And I know that ye do walk in the pride of your hearts; and there are none save a few only who do not lift themselves up in the pride of their hearts, unto the wearing of very fine apparel, unto envying, and strifes, and malice, and persecutions, and all manner of iniquities; and your churches, yea, even every one, have become polluted because of the pride of your hearts.

For behold, ye do love money, and your substance, and your fine apparel, and the adorning of your churches, more than ye love the poor and the needy, the sick and the afflicted.

O ye pollutions, ye hypocrites, ye teachers, who sell yourselves for that which will canker, why have ye polluted the holy church of God? Why are ye ashamed to take upon you the name of Christ? Why do ye not think that greater is the value of an endless happiness than that misery which never dies—because of the praise of the world?

Why do ye adorn yourselves with that which hath no life, and yet suffer the hungry, and the needy, and the naked, and the sick and the afflicted to pass by you, and notice them not?

Yea, why do ye build up your secret abominations to get gain. . . . (Mormon 8:36-40.)

Speaking specifically of the secret combinations that led to the destruction of both the Jaredite and Nephite nations, and which he saw would exist among the nations of the last days, Moroni gave the following warning and explanation:

And whatsoever nation shall uphold such secret combinations, to get power and gain, until they shall spread over the nation, behold, they shall be destroyed; for the Lord will not suffer that the blood of his saints, which shall be shed by them, shall always cry unto him from the ground for vengeance upon them and yet he avenge them not.

Wherefore, O ye Gentiles, it is wisdom in God that these things should be shown unto you, that thereby ye may repent of your sins, and suffer not that these murderous combinations shall get above you, which are built up to get power and gain. . . .

Wherefore, the Lord commandeth you, when ye shall see these things come among you that ye shall awake to a sense of your awful situation, because of this secret combination which shall be among you; . . .

For it cometh to pass that whoso buildeth it up seeketh to overthrow the freedom of all lands, nations, and countries; and it bringeth to pass the destruction of all people, for it is built up by the devil, . . .

Wherefore, I, Moroni, am commanded to write these things that evil may be done away, and that the time may come that Satan may have no power upon the hearts of the children of men, but that they may be persuaded to do good continually, that they may come unto the fountain of all righteousness and be saved. (Ether 8:22-26.)

And finally, another purpose of the Book of Mormon is to prepare people to be worthy to live with Jesus Christ at the time of his second coming. In fact, the Prophet Joseph Smith has indicated that one of the major purposes of the restoration of the gospel in the last days was to prepare people to be worthy to live with Jesus Christ when he comes on the earth to reign. The Book of Mormon is uniquely constructed to help achieve this purpose of helping a people to live with Christ inasmuch as it contains a detailed account of the circumstances that surround the appearances of the resurrected, glorified, celestialized Jesus Christ to the righteous Nephites.
