Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Book of Mormon ( 1976)

HISTORICAL BACKGROUND LEADING TO THE PERIOD OF THE BOOK OF MORMON

It is difficult to place the Book of Mormon in its proper historical perspective for two major reasons: (1) biblical scholars sometimes disagree as to the exact dates of the early events in the Bible, and (2) the Book of Mormon contains the accounts of two major groups of people—the Lehite colony and the Jaredites—and no date is given in the Book of Mormon for the beginning of the Jaredite journey. Therefore, the dates listed here are suggested dates only.

From Adam to Abraham

The account in the Bible from Adam to Abraham occupies only eleven chapters in the book of Genesis; yet these chapters cover a time period of approximately 2,000 years. Thus it is evident we do not know very much detail concerning the people of this period. Marginal notes of the King James Version of the Bible usually list the date of the fall of Adam and Eve as about 4000 B.C. Using the chronological data provided within the first chapters of the book of Genesis, Noah would be dated somewhere around 2400-2300 B.C. Thus the tower of Babel, which occurred after the great flood in the days of Noah, would probably date about 2200 B.C. This, then, would be a possible approximate date for the departure of the Jaredites from the Old World. However, some biblical and Book of Mormon scholars place the date of the flood back to nearly 3000 B.C. and the date of the tower of Babel to approximately 2600 B.C.

Most biblical scholars agree, however, that Abraham lived approximately 2000-1900 B.C. The story of Abraham is told in chapters 11 through 25 of Genesis.

The Patriarchs Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob

Probably most members of the Church are descendants of the patriarch Abraham through the loins of his son Isaac and his grandson Jacob (Israel). Although the dates of these patriarchs are not exact, most biblical scholars believe that Abraham lived approximately 2000-1900 B.C. This would place Isaac's birth shortly after 1900 B.C. and Jacob's birth at about 1850 B.C. Abraham became known as the first Hebrew. Thus his descendants are frequently referred to as Hebrews. The descendants of these three patriarchs are referred to as the "covenant people" because of the promises the Lord made to them.

Origin of the House of Israel

Jacob, the son of Isaac and the grandson of Abraham, was given the name Israel. (Genesis 32:28.) He had twelve sons: Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah, Zebulun, Issachar, Dan, Gad, Asher, Naphtali, Joseph, and Benjamin. Joseph, who was sold into Egypt, had two sons—Manasseh and Ephraim. Although Ephraim was the younger son, he received the greater blessing and was also given the birthright over all the sons of Israel. (Genesis 48:18-20; 1 Chronicles 5:1-2.) Manasseh, however, was also listed as one of the "sons" of Israel. (Genesis 48:5.) The tribes of Israel were called after the names of the sons of Jacob, except that Levi was not given land as a separate tribe, and Joseph's two sons were given land in the place of Levi and their father. (Numbers 1:5-10.)

From Bondage in Egypt to the United Kingdom

The descendants of Israel were in bondage in Egypt from approximately 1700 B.C. to 1490 B.C. During this period they were greatly influenced by the cultural life of Egypt, and many of them learned to speak and write Egyptian. Finally they were delivered by the power of God through Moses. (Exodus 13 and 14.) After 40 years in the wilderness (c. 1490-1450 B.C.) they were governed by at least thirteen judges, with Samuel being the last judge. (1 Samuel 8:5-10.) Then the people demanded a king and the United Kingdom was established, which lasted for approximately 120 years (c. 1095-975 B.C.). Three kings reigned during this period—Saul, David, and Solomon.

The Divided Kingdom and the Conquest of Israel

Dissension developed in the kingdom, and about 975 B.C. the kingdom was divided. The northern kingdom (kingdom of Israel), led by descendants of Ephraim, consisted of most of the tribes of Israel. The southern kingdom of Judah, ruled over by descendants of Judah, consisted of the tribe of Judah and most of the tribe of Benjamin, plus many descendants of Levi and a few individuals from most or all of the other tribes. (Note: Judah controlled the southern part of the land, including the city of Jerusalem; thus individuals from all of the tribes undoubtedly lived in Jerusalem among the tribe of Judah, particularly if they were merchants, temple workers, traders, etc. See also 2 Chronicles 15:9.)

Events in Judah Immediately Before 600 B.C.

For more than a century the southern kingdom continued a troubled and uncertain existence. Then in the year 608 B.C.—which marks the era immediately preceding the opening of the Book of Mormon—Judah faced its crucial hour. Necho, Pharaoh of Egypt, had dispatched an army against Assyria, and the path of the Egyptian advance lay through Palestine. Josiah, king of Judah, resolved to resist the approaching army and went out to meet it at the head of a plucky little Judean force. In the battle that followed, the Hebrews were beaten and King Josiah was slain. The Jews then chose one of Josiah's sons, Jehoahaz, for their king; but after a three-month term of office the Egyptians replaced him with another of Josiah's sons, whose name was Jehoiakim. For three years the Pharaoh of Egypt exercised political control of the kingdom of Judah through the puppet Jehoiakim. Then in the memorable year 605 B. C. the Babylonians marshalled a mighty army and crushed the Pharaoh's cohorts in the battle of Carchemish and, in so doing, took the Jewish nation out of Egypt's grasp. (The biblical account of this era is found in 2 Kings, chaps. 23-25; 2 Chronicles, chap. 36; Jeremiah, chaps, 26-39.)

But the Jewish people did not gain their freedom. Instead of Egyptian foreigners ruling their country, Babylonian foreigners took their place. Southern Palestine became a Babylonian vassal state. Unfortunately for all concerned, they allowed the quisling Jehoiakim, Jewish appointee of Egypt, to retain his throne. Before long the new monarch and his subjects were in revolt. In response, King Nebuchadnezzar moved an army to Jerusalem and laid siege against the rebellious city. About this time Jehoiakim either died or was taken captive by the enemy, for Jehoiachin, his son, is spoken of in the biblical account as surrendering to the Babylonians.

The Period at the Time of the Departure of Lehi from Jerusalem

These struggles between Assyria, Babylonia, and Egypt took place before the Book of Mormon record opens but during the lifetime of its early leading characters. When the account commences, twenty-one-year-old Zedekiah, the well-meaning but utterly weak uncle of the ill-fated King Jehoiachin, is spoken of as being in the first year of his reign. According to the book of 2 Kings, he was appointed to the throne by Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon. It was a time of great wickedness. Immorality and corruption were rampant. Dishonesty, false swearing, and idolatry were common vices of the day. As if the sins of the people were not already enough to invite God's judgments, Zedekiah chose to follow the disastrous course of Jehoiakim in seeking an alliance with Egypt and scheming a break from Babylonia. It was at this point that the prophet Jeremiah, whose gloomy prophecies had already brought him notoriety in Jehoiakim's day, thundered forth anew the ominous pronouncement that Jerusalem and its temple were doomed for destruction and the entire nation would be led into captivity if they did not repent and heed the admonitions of the Lord. But the declaration that God would turn against his chosen people and allow his sacred temple and his holy city to be destroyed was considered an outrage. To the incensed priests and princes the prophecy was traitorous and bordered on blasphemy. Jeremiah's arrest and imprisonment were ordered.

Postscript to Subsequent History of the House of Israel

Although the following events took place after Lehi's departure from Jerusalem, they are listed here to complete this brief summary of the origin and scattering of the house of Israel.

At length, on the promise of support from Egypt, Zedekiah revolted; but before Egyptian help materialized, Nebuchadnezzar's army invaded Jerusalem. Ruthlessly the Babylonians burned out Zedekiah's eyes and enslaved his people. Nebuchadnezzar also removed the treasures of the temple and the palace and carried them to his own capital, and thus the words of the prophets of God were fulfilled.

However, the prophets had also prophesied concerning the restoration of the people of Judah, and some fifty years later (c. 538 B.C.), after Babylonia had been conquered by Persia, they were allowed to return to their lands by Cyrus, king of Persia. They rebuilt the temple and lived in the Holy Land for over five hundred years under the rule of four separate groups: Persians, Greeks, Asmonaeans, and Romans. Finally, about A.D. 71 the Romans destroyed the city of Jerusalem, tore down the temple, and took the people of the kingdom of Judah to Rome. These people were later scattered among the nations of the world.
