Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Book of Mormon ( 1976)

PART II:

A COMPANION TO YOUR STUDY OF THE BOOK OF MORMON

FIRST NEPHI

1 NEPHI 1:2-3

The language of the plates translated by Joseph Smith

In considering the problem of the language of the plates translated by Joseph Smith it is well to keep these facts in mind: (1) the word language has several different meanings and includes both spoken and written concepts, such as grammatical constructions, thought patterns, and exact phraseology; (2) Joseph Smith translated from two different records (the small plates of Nephi and the plates of Mormon); these plates were prepared and written nearly 1,000 years apart, and the language of one well might not be the language of the other.

Thus several possible interpretations exist of Nephi's statement, "I make a record in the language of my father, which consists of the learning of the Jews and the language of the Egyptians." First of all, what is the antecedent of the pronoun which: record or language? Then what do the terms "language of my father" and "language of the Egyptians" mean? Is Nephi referring to the spoken words, the written script, the grammatical constructions, the thought patterns, the exact phraseology, or what?

One scholar of the Book of Mormon concludes from this quotation that "Nephi wrote in the Hebrew language but used Egyptian characters or script in the same sense that a stenographer uses Gregg characters to express English words" (Sidney B. Sperry, Our Book of Mormon [Bookcraft, 1950], p. 31), whereas another scholar believes that Nephi "is not telling us what language his father spoke, but giving notice that he is . . . going to quote or paraphrase a record actually written by his father" (Hugh Nibley, Lehi in the Desert [Bookcraft, 1952], p. 14). The fact that the experts honestly disagree on the interpretation of these verses should not concern us unduly; their interpretations are given here primarily to illustrate the complexity of the problem.

If this statement by Nephi does not give us a hint as to the actual language (or script) characters written on the small plates of Nephi, then we are left almost completely in the dark concerning this question, as the matter is not mentioned again by Nephi or the other writers on the small plates of Nephi. However, we are given some help as to the written script of characters of the plates of Mormon by the following statement made by Moroni about A.D. 400.

And now, behold, we have written this record according to our knowledge, in the characters which are called among us the reformed Egyptian, being handed down and altered by us, according to our manner of speech.

And if our plates had been sufficiently large we should have written in Hebrew; but the Hebrew hath been altered by us also; and if we could have written in Hebrew, behold, ye would have had no imperfection in our record.

But the Lord knoweth the things which we have written, and also that none other people knoweth our language. . . . (Mormon 9:32-34.)

Moroni, writing approximately 1,000 years later than Nephi but having access to the small plates of Nephi, can see that their written characters have been altered during the 1,000-year period; thus the written characters on the plates of Mormon are called "reformed" Egyptian because they have been "altered" by the Nephites.

1 NEPHI 1:4

The date of "The first year of the reign of Zedekiah, King of Judah"

Lehi and his family apparently fled from Jerusalem in "the first year of the reign of Zedekiah, king of Judah" (1 Nephi 1:4, 2:1-4). According to the Bible (2 Chronicles 36:11), Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when he was made king over the kingdom of Judah by Nebuchadnezzar, the leader of the Babylonian empire. However, the exact date of Zedekiah's ascension to the throne is not mentioned in the Bible, although nearly all of the scholars agree it must have been within a few years of 600 B.C. The Book of Mormon seems to indicate that the year 600 B.C. is correct for the departure of Lehi from Jerusalem. (See 1 Nephi 10:4 and 19:8.)

1 NEPHI 1:4

"There came many prophets, prophesying unto the people"

Several prophets are mentioned in the biblical account, which covers approximately the same time period as the beginning of the Book of Mormon (2 Kings 23-25; Jeremiah 1-52; and the Lamentations of Jeremiah 1-5). Among these prophets is Jeremiah. The Book of Mormon would indicate that another prophet in Jerusalem during this period was Lehi. Jeremiah was evidently a descendant of Judah, and his writings are found in the Bible—the "stick of Judah." Lehi was a descendant of Joseph who was sold into Egypt (see 1 Nephi 5:14), and the writings of Lehi are contained in the Book of Mormon—the "stick of Joseph."

1 NEPHI 1:15

The lack of quotation marks in the Book of Mormon

No quotation marks are used in the Book of Mormon; apparently the original writers of these records were not acquainted with these marks of punctuation. Frequently, however, the writers indicate they are quoting directly by the use of such terms as "after this manner was the language of my father" (1 Nephi 1:15), or "my father . . . spake . . . saying . . . " (1 Nephi 2:9).

1 NEPHI 1:16-17

Nephi's abridgment of his father's record

In verse 17 Nephi states that he is going to make an abridgment of his father's record upon his own plates (apparently the small plates of Nephi), and "then will I make an account of mine own life." Chapters 1 through 8 of 1 Nephi seem to be a synopsis by Nephi of the record of Lehi; chapter 9 is an explanatory and transitional chapter; and finally at the beginning of chapter 10 Nephi states that he is now going "to give an account upon these plates of my proceedings" (1 Nephi 10:1).

1 NEPHI 1:20

The life of Lehi is threatened

In order to understand why the people threatened the life of Lehi when he prophesied concerning the impending destruction of Jerusalem, it might be necessary to review briefly the historical situation in the Near East about 600 B.C. When the Book of Mormon record begins in Jerusalem about 600 B.C., the kingdom of Judah is a vassal state of Babylonia and is ruled by a twenty-one-year-old puppet king, Zedekiah. The great military and economic powers in the Near East at this time are: (1) Babylonia, which just a few years before had defeated the Egyptians at the Battle of Carchemish and had thus "earned" the right to control the small kingdom of Judah ("southern" kingdom), which is located between these two great powers; (2) Egypt, which had passed the peak of her military power but still had great cultural and economic influence; and (3) Assyria, which had conquered the kingdom of Israel ("northern" kingdom) about 722 B.C. and was awaiting further opportunities for conquest.

Zedekiah does not want his kingdom to be under the control of Babylonia, however, and he and some of his advisers are considering forming an alliance with Egypt in an attempt to throw off the Babylonian yoke. Jeremiah and the other prophets of the Lord are warning against such an alliance. The position of the prophets is not a popular one with the political and economic leaders of Judah, however. Hence the prophet Jeremiah is persecuted and frequently thrown into prison (the references in the Bible that refer to this period are 2 Kings 23-25; 2 Chronicles 36; Jeremiah 26-39). Lehi, another prophet, is warned by the Lord to flee from Jerusalem to escape the destruction that the prophets state will surely result from an alliance with Egypt (1 Nephi 1:12; 2 Nephi 2:14). The Book of Mormon opens with the flight of Lehi and his colony from Jerusalem, and thereafter it is primarily concerned with their trip to a promised land and with the history of their descendants over a 1,000-year period.

1 NEPHI 2:2-6; 9:1

The distance between Jerusalem and the Valley of Lemuel

The exact distance of the Valley of Lemuel from Jerusalem is not made clear in the Book of Mormon. The superscription to 1 Nephi (wherein Nephi states that Lehi "taketh three days' journey into the wilderness with his family" from the land of Jerusalem) seems to indicate a distance between the two locations that can be covered in a three-day journey. However, some students of the Book of Mormon interpret 1 Nephi 2:4-6 to mean that Lehi and his group traveled an indefinite number of days until they arrived "in the wilderness in the borders which are nearer the Red Sea"; then they traveled through that wilderness for three days to the Valley of Lemuel.

1 NEPHI 2:4

Possible meaning of the word "wilderness"

The word wilderness seems to be used in the Book of Mormon to refer to an uninhabited area or at least to an area only sparsely settled. Thus wilderness could either refer to a desert area (as it apparently does in 1 Nephi 2:4) or to a fertile area but one that is relatively uninhabited (as in 1 Nephi 18:6, 24-25; 2 Nephi 5:7).

1 NEPHI 2:4-6; 16:9-14, 33-34; 17:1-6

The travels of Lehi's colony in the wilderness

The exact route followed by Lehi and his colony as they fled from Jerusalem is not given in the Book of Mormon. However, the general direction of their travel is given in the references listed above. Evidently Lehi's colony first traveled south from Jerusalem until they met the Red Sea (1 Nephi 2:4-6), then south-southeast until after they had stayed at Shazer and Nahom (1 Nephi 16:9-14, 33-34) and then "nearly eastward from that time forth" until they arrived at the sea (1 Nephi 17:1-6). The following statement, if true, would throw additional light on the possible route of Lehi's colony, but the authenticity of this statement has not been completely substantiated:

Lehi Travels.—Revelation to Joseph the Seer. The course that Lehi and his company traveled from Jerusalem to the place of their destination:

They traveled nearly a south-southeast direction until they came to the nineteenth degree of north latitude; then, nearly east to the Sea of Arabia. . . . (Franklin D. Richards and James A. Little, A Compendium of the Doctrines of the Gospel, 1925, p. 272.)

1 NEPHI 2:5

A possible meaning of the name "Sariah"

According to George Reynolds and Janne Sjodahl, the name of Lehi's wife, Sariah, is probably a compound of two Hebrew words: "Sarah-Jah" meaning literally "Princess of the Lord." (Commentary on the Book of Mormon [Deseret News, 1955], 1:25.) The "Jah" suffix often appears as "iah" and was frequently used by the Hebrews to refer to the name of God. This suffix is found in such biblical names as Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Zedekiah.

1 NEPHI 2:6

"River of water"

Although the term "river of water" probably seemed foreign to Joseph Smith (who was born in Vermont and reared in New York, where rivers are naturally composed of water), the use of the term in the Book of Mormon is consistent with both modern and ancient Hebrew and with other Semitic languages of the Middle East. Different words are used in these languages to differentiate between (1) a riverbed that has water flowing in it and (2) a dry riverbed.

This is one of many examples that prove the Book of Mormon is translation literature. It was not written by Joseph Smith; rather it was translated by him from ancient records.

1 NEPHI 2:7

"Altar of stones"

The Book of Mormon uses the term "altar of stones" to refer to the sacrificial altar prepared by Lehi rather than the term "stone altar." There could be considerable difference between the two. An altar of stones could consist of a pile of uncut, separate, individual stones, whereas a stone altar could denote the use of cut rock, mortar, etc. In this connection it is of interest to note that in Exodus 20:25 the Lord said to Moses: "And if thou wilt make me an altar of stone, thou shalt not build it of hewn stone: for if thou lift up thy tool upon it, thou hast polluted it."

1 NEPHI 2:8, 10

Why different names for the valley and the river?

In the background of Joseph Smith it was customary for the river and the valley through which the river flowed to carry the same name; hence, the Mississippi River and the Mississippi Valley, the Missouri River and the Missouri Valley. However, this is not necessarily the practice in the Middle East, and it evidently was not the practice there 600 years B.C., as is indicated by the fact that Lehi named the river after his son Laman and the valley through which the river flowed after his son Lemuel. Concerning this practice of giving different names to valleys and rivers in the Middle East, Dr. Hugh Nibley has written:

By what right do these people rename streams and valleys to suit themselves? By the immemorial custom of the desert, to be sure. Among the laws "which no Bedouin would dream of transgressing" the first, according to Jennings-Bramley, is that "any water you may discover, either in your own territory or in the territory of another tribe is named after you." So it happens that in Arabia a great wady (valley) will have different names at different points along its course. . . .

This confusing custom of renaming everything on the spot seems to go back to the earliest times. . . . Yet in spite of its undoubted antiquity, only the most recent explorers have commented on this strange practice, which seems to have escaped the notice of travelers until explorers in our own times started to make official maps.

Even more whimsical and senseless to a westerner must appear the behavior of Lehi in naming a river after one son and its valley after another. But the Arabs don't think that way, for Thomas reports from the south country that "as is commonly the case in these mountains, the water bears a different name from the wadi." Likewise the Book of Mormon follows the Arabic system of designating Lehi's camp not by the name of the river by which it stood (for rivers may easily dry up), but rather by the name of the valley. (An Approach to the Book of Mormon [Deseret Book Co., 1964], pp. 65-66.)

1 NEPHI 2:10

A "firm and steadfast, and immovable" valley

Another expression that must have seemed strange to Joseph Smith as he translated the Book of Mormon was Lehi's statement to Lemuel, "O that thou mightest be like unto this valley, firm and steadfast, and immovable in keeping the commandments of the Lord." (1 Nephi 2:10.) Surely everything in the background of Joseph Smith would have caused him to think of a mountain, not a valley, as being "firm and steadfast, and immovable." Yet, as Dr. Nibley has indicated, the use of this construction in referring to a valley is authentic to the Middle East, in which this event is supposed to have occurred:

As to this valley, firm and steadfast, who, west of Suez, would ever think of such an image? We, of course, know all about everlasting hills and immovable mountains . . . but who ever heard of a steadfast valley? The Arabs to be sure. For them the valley, and not the mountain, is the symbol of permanence. It is not the mountain of refuge to which they flee, but the valley of refuge. The great depressions that run for hundreds of miles across the Arabian peninsula pass for the most part through plains devoid of mountains. It is in these ancient riverbeds alone that water, vegetation, and animal life are to be found when all else is desolation. They alone offer men and animals escape from their enemies and deliverance from death by hunger and thirst. The qualities of firmness and steadfastness, of reliable protection, refreshment, and sure refuge when all else fails, which other nations attribute naturally to mountains, the Arabs attribute to valleys. (Ibid., pp. 223-24.)

1 NEPHI 2:13

Who were the "Jews" of 600 B.C.?

The term "Jew" is used in the Book of Mormon with two possible meanings: (1) a descendant of Judah, the son of Jacob (or, perhaps in a more general vein, a member of the house of Israel), and (2) a citizen of the kingdom of Judah of this particular period.

Lehi and his descendants are definitely not descendants of Judah (see 1 Nephi 5:14), but they might be considered Jews in the sense that they were citizens of the kingdom of Judah. Thus Nephi states, "I have charity for the Jew—I say Jew, because I mean them from whence I came" (2 Nephi 33:8). Also, the Lord refers to the Lamanites of our day as "a remnant" of the Jews. (D&C 19:27.)

1 NEPHI 3:3

The plates of brass

In many of the Semitic languages (from which we get the thought patterns contained in the Book of Mormon) it is not customary to have the adjective precede the noun. Thus the Book of Mormon mentions the "plates of brass" of Laban but never refers to the "brass plates of Laban."

1 NEPHI 3:11

Casting of lots

The "casting of lots" was practiced extensively by the Hebrews of Old Testament times. This authentic and typical use of the custom in the Book of Mormon would indicate again that this part of the story in the Book of Mormon is concerned with a group of people with a Hebrew background and that the Book of Mormon is a translation of an ancient record. (If you want to review some of the examples in the Bible where the casting of lots was used, see Leviticus 16:8; 1 Samuel 14:42; 1 Chronicles 26:13; Psalms 22:18; Isaiah 34:17; Joel 3:3; Obadiah 11; Jonah 1:7; Nahum 3:10; Matthew 27:35; Mark 15:24; John 19:24; Acts 1:26.)

1 NEPHI 3:15

"As the Lord liveth "

Another Hebrew custom illustrated in the Book of Mormon is the importance and binding effect of "taking of an oath." When Nephi said, "As the Lord liveth, and as we live" (1 Nephi 3:15), he was making a promise before the Lord that he would fulfill the other part of the oath that was to follow. That the taking of an oath was binding upon all the parties concerned is indicated later in the Book of Mormon when Nephi and Zoram give their promises or oaths to each other. (See 1 Nephi 4:32-37.)

1 NEPHI 4:6-18

A brief thought concerning the killing of Laban by Nephi

The Lord protects the free agency of his children and the rights of the righteous. Thus, when the wicked (either an individual or a nation) become so "steeped in iniquity" that they obstruct the righteous purposes of God, he removes them from the earth. Such was apparently the case at the time of the flood, and several times since then the Lord has commanded that the wicked should be destroyed. (See Deuteronomy 7:2; 9:4; Joshua 6:21.)

Laban had already attempted murder for his private gain (1 Nephi 3:13, 24-26) and was evidently a very wicked person; thus he apparently fully deserved the fate that befell him. Also, as we shall discover later in the Book of Mormon (Omni, verses 15-19), the brass plates did keep part of the Lehite nation from dwindling and perishing "in unbelief" for many hundreds of years, just as the Spirit had prophesied.

1 NEPHI 4:32-37

The importance of an oath

Notice again the importance of an oath among these people; when they give their word to do something, they do it! Concerning the binding effect of an oath upon the desert people and their descendants, Dr. Hugh Nibley has written:

. . . when he [Zoram] saw the brethren and heard Nephi's real voice he got the shock of his life and in a panic made a break for the city. In such a situation there was only one thing Nephi could possibly have done, both to spare Zoram and to avoid giving alarm—and no westerner could have guessed what it was. Nephi, a powerful fellow, held the terrified Zoram in a vice-like grip long enough to swear a solemn oath in his ear, "as the Lord liveth, and as I live", that he would not harm him if he would listen. Zoram immediately relaxed, and Nephi swore another oath to him that he would be a free man if he would join the party: "Therefore, if thou wilt go down into the wilderness to my father thou shalt have place with us."

The Oath of Power: What astonishes the western reader is the miraculous effect of Nephi's oath on Zoram, who upon hearing a few conventional words promptly becomes tractable, while as for the brothers, as soon as Zoram "made an oath unto us that he would tarry with us from that time forth . . . our fears did cease concerning him."

The reaction of both parties makes sense when one realizes that the oath is the one thing that is most sacred and inviolable among the desert people and their descendants: "Hardly will an Arab break his oath, even if his life be in jeopardy," for "there is nothing stronger, and nothing more sacred than the oath among the nomads," and even the city Arabs, if it be exacted under special conditions. "The taking of an oath is a holy thing with the Bedouins," says one authority, "Wo to him who swears falsely; his social standing will be damaged and his reputation ruined. No one will receive his testimony, and he must also pay a money fine."

But not every oath will do. To be most binding and solemn an oath should be by the life of something, even if it be but a blade of grass. The only oath more awful than that "by my life" or (less commonly) "by the life of my head," is the wa hayat Allah " by the life of God," or "as the Lord Liveth," the exact Arabic equivalent of the ancient Hebrew hai Elohim . . .

So we see that the only way that Nephi could possibly have pacified the struggling Zoram in an instant was to utter the one oath that no man would dream of breaking, the most solemn of all oaths to the Semite: "As the Lord liveth, and as I live!" (An Approach to the Book of Mormon, pp. 103-5.)

1 NEPHI 5:9

Hebrew elements in the Book of Mormon

Lehi and his colony were "Hebrews" in the sense that they were descendants of Abraham, the father of the Hebrews, through his son Isaac, his grandson Jacob (Israel), and his great-grandson Joseph. (1 Nephi 5:14; 15:18.)

Several characteristics and customs of the Hebrews are found in the Book of Mormon, including the following mentioned in the first seven chapters of 1 Nephi:

1 NEPHI 5:10-16

A record for the descendants of Joseph

In Ezekiel 37 the word of the Lord came unto Ezekiel, saying:

Moreover, thou son of man, take thee one stick, and write upon it, For Judah, and for the children of Israel his companions: then take another stick, and write upon it, For Joseph, the stick of Ephraim, and for all the house of Israel his companions:

And join them one to another into one stick; and they shall become one in thine hand. (Ezekiel 37:16-17.)

The "sticks" mentioned here evidently refer to books, since in those days books were written on long scrolls of parchment, which were then rolled on a stick.

The Bible is commonly understood to be the "stick of Judah" referred to by the Lord in his promise to Ezekiel. Latter-day Saints believe the Book of Mormon is part of the "stick of Joseph" mentioned by the Lord. It is possible that a portion of the original stick of Joseph was the brass plates of Laban, and still other portions might be the records of the Nephites as contained on the large and the small plates of Nephi. In this sense, then, our present Book of Mormon would be only an abridgment or condensation of the parts making up the original "stick of Joseph."

Lehi and Laban were both descendants of Joseph who was sold into Egypt. Thus, they had the right to include their writings on the "stick of Joseph."

1 NEPHI 5:11-13

How could the American Indians have known of biblical teachings before the coming of the Spaniards?

The brass plates obtained from Laban contained the five books of Moses (apparently similar to the first five books of the Bible—the Pentateuch: Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy), a record of the Jews from the beginning down to Zedekiah, and the prophecies of the prophets from the beginning down to Jeremiah. (1 Nephi 3:3-20; 5:11-13.) This would explain how the biblical stories were known by the American Indian groups even before the arrival of the Catholic fathers and their Bibles after the time of Columbus. Historians have concluded the American Indians knew of the story of the creation, the flood, etc., before the time of Columbus, although they have not been able to explain how the Indians came into possession of this knowledge.

In volume 4 of his Antiquities of Mexico, Lord Kingsborough found so many evidences of biblical stories among the Indians that he concluded:

It is unnecessary to attempt in this place to trace out any further scriptural analogies in the traditions and mythology of the New World, since the coincidences which have already been mentioned are sufficiently strong to warrant the conclusion that the Indians, at a period long antecedent to the arrival of the Spaniards in America, were acquainted with a portion at least of the Old Testament. (London: Robert Havell, 1831-1848, p. 409.)

1 NEPHI 5:14

The genealogy of Lehi

Although the complete genealogy of Lehi is not included in our present Book of Mormon, it is clear that Lehi was a descendant of Jacob (Israel) through his son Joseph who was sold into Egypt. (1 Nephi 5:14; 6:1-2.) A later prophet in the Book of Mormon tells us that Lehi was a descendant of Joseph through Joseph's son Manasseh. (Alma 10:3.)

1 NEPHI 7:1-5

Possible relationship of the family of Lehi to the family of Ishmael

After the Lord counseled Lehi "that his sons should take daughters to wife, that they might raise up seed unto the Lord in the land of promise" (1 Nephi 7:1), Lehi immediately sent back to Jerusalem for Ishmael and his family. Our present Book of Mormon does not indicate exactly why Ishmael's family was selected (except that it included at least five unmarried women!), but perhaps the following statement provides additional important reasons for this selection:

Whoever has read the Book of Mormon carefully will have learned that the remnants of the house of Joseph dwelt upon the American continent; and that Lehi learned by searching the records of his fathers that were written upon the plates of brass, that he was of the lineage of Manasseh. The Prophet Joseph informed us that the record of Lehi, was contained on the 116 pages that were first translated and subsequently stolen, and of which an abridgment is given us in the first Book of Nephi, which is the record of Nephi individually, he himself being of the lineage of Manasseh; but that Ishmael was of the lineage of Ephraim, and that his sons married into Lehi's family, and Lehi's sons married Ishmael's daughters, thus fulfilling the words of Jacob upon Ephraim and Manasseh in the 48th chapter of Genesis, which says: "And let my name be named on them, and the name of my fathers Abraham and Isaac; and let them grow into a multitude in the midst of the land." Thus these descendants of Manasseh and Ephraim grew together upon this American continent. . . . (Erastus Snow, Journal of Discourses, 23:184-85. Italics added.)

1 NEPHI 8:8

The dream of Lehi was in answer to prayer

In several places in the scriptures the Lord has indicated that if we want an answer to our prayers we should first of all ask him. In 3 Nephi 18:20, the Lord has said: "And whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, which is right, believing that ye shall receive, behold it shall be given unto you." The Lord evidently wanted to reveal some great spiritual truths to Lehi in this dream, but first of all he wanted Lehi to get into an inquiring (and thus a learning) attitude. Finally, after traveling "for the space of many hours in darkness," Lehi began to pray unto the Lord; then the remainder of the dream or vision was unfolded unto him.

1 NEPHI chapters 8-15

The dream or vision of Lehi and its interpretation

The dream of Lehi (1 Nephi 8) and the subsequent vision of Nephi in which he is given the interpretation of his father's dream comprise one of the most remarkable spiritual experiences recorded in all scripture. As you read this material, watch for the interpretation of the major symbols in the dream and also for the examples shown to Nephi to illustrate and clarify the interpretation. Most of these examples relate to the future events of the Lehite colony and to the scattering and gathering of other remnants of the house of Israel.

The following brief and incomplete outline might help you to understand better some of the symbols, interpretations, and examples.

Symbol Interpretation Examples Given

dark and dreary waste

(8:7)

large and spacious field

(8:9, 20)

tree (8:10); also called love of God (11 :21-22) the coming of the Son "tree of life" (11:25; of God (11: 13-22)

15:21-22)

the fruit of the tree

(8:11-12)

river of water (8: 13); hell and the depths wickedness and war

also called "fountain thereof (12:16;

of filthy water" (12:16) 15:26-36)

rod of iron (8:19) the word of God the ministry of the Son

(11:25; 15:23-25) of God (11:24-25)

mist of darkness temptations of the apostasy, wickedness, devil (12:17) war, the great abominable church, plain and precious things removed from the scriptures (12:19-23; 13:1-9, 20-29)

great and spacious the pride, wisdom, the persecution of the

building (8:26) and vain imaginations Son of God and those

of the world (11:35- who followed him

36; 12:18) (11:26-36)

1 NEPHI 9:2

The plates of Nephi

Evidently Nephi made two sets of plates upon which he wrote the history of his people. During his lifetime and for several generations following, the religious history of the people was written upon the small plates of Nephi and the secular or nonreligious history was written upon the large plates of Nephi. After approximately 130 B.C., however, the small plates of Nephi were discontinued; then both the religious and secular histories were recorded on the large plates of Nephi. Nephi evidently made the large plates of Nephi soon after his arrival in the promised land. (See 1 Nephi 19:1-5.) However, he did not make the small plates of Nephi until approximately 570 B.C., some thirty years after his father had left Jerusalem. (See 2 Nephi 5:28-33.)

1 NEPHI 10-15

The foretelling of events and the foreknowledge of God

The teachings in the chapters listed above clearly mark the Book of Mormon first and foremost as a book concerned with the "foretelling" aspect of prophecy. Several hundred years before the events actually occurred, Lehi and Nephi knew (and saw in vision) major events that were going to happen to their descendants. This foretelling aspect of prophecy is, of course, impossible without the foreknowledge of God—that is, God must know essentially what is going to happen before it happens; otherwise he cannot tell his servants of these things. The crucial question is: Does the fact that God knows something is going to happen cause it to happen? If God's foreknowledge causes something to happen, this is essentially predestination inasmuch as the free agency of man is destroyed.

Concerning this question, James E. Talmage has written the following:

Respecting the foreknowledge of God, let it not be said that divine omniscience is of itself a determining cause whereby events are inevitably brought to pass. A mortal father, who knows the weaknesses and frailties of his son, may by reason of that knowledge sorrowfully predict the calamities and sufferings awaiting his wayward boy. He may foresee in that son's future a forfeiture of blessings that could have been won, loss of position, self-respect, reputation and honor; even the dark shadows of a felon's cell and the night of a drunkard's grave may appear in the saddening visions of that fond father's soul; yet, convinced by experience of the impossibility of bringing about that son's reform, he foresees the dread developments of the future, and he finds but sorrow and anguish in his knowledge. Can it be said that the father's foreknowledge is a cause of the son's sinful life? The son, perchance, has reached his maturity; he is the master of his own destiny; a free agent unto himself. The father is powerless to control by force or to direct by arbitrary command; and, while he would gladly make any effort or sacrifice to save his son from the fate impending, he fears for what seems to be an awful certainty. But surely that thoughtful, prayerful, loving parent does not, because of his knowledge, contribute to the son's waywardness. To reason otherwise would be to say that a neglectful father, who takes not the trouble to study the nature and character of his son, who shuts his eyes to sinful tendencies, and rests in careless indifference as to the probable future, will by his very heartlessness be benefiting his child, because his lack of forethought cannot operate as a contributory cause to dereliction.

Our Heavenly Father has a full knowledge of the nature and disposition of each of His children, a knowledge gained by long observation and experience in the past eternity of our primeval childhood; a knowledge compared with which that gained by earthly parents through mortal experience with their children is infinitesimally small. By reason of that surpassing knowledge, God reads the future of child and children, of men individually and of men collectively as communities and nations; He knows what each will do under given conditions, and sees the end from the beginning. His foreknowledge is based on intelligence and reason. He foresees the future as a state which naturally and surely will be; not as one which must be because He has arbitrarily willed that it shall be. . . .

The Father of souls has endowed His children with the divine birthright of free agency; He does not and will not control them by arbitrary force; He impels no man toward sin; He compels none to righteousness. Unto man has been given freedom to act for himself; and, associated with this independence, is the fact of strict responsibility and the assurance of individual accountability. (Jesus the Christ [Deseret Book, 1976], pp. 28-29.)

1 NEPHI 10:4

The date of Lehi's departure from Jerusalem in relationship to the birth of Jesus Christ

It had been revealed to Nephi in a vision that the Savior or Messiah was to be born among the Jewish people, and 1 Nephi 10:4 indicates that even the exact year in which the Savior was to be born was revealed to him. If Nephi is talking in specific rather than general terms, then Lehi left Jerusalem in 600 B.C. on the Christian calendar. That Nephi intends his time reference to be taken literally is indicated by the information contained in the following references: (1) 1 Nephi 19:8: "according to the words of the angel" the Messiah cometh "in six hundred years from the time my father left Jerusalem"; (2) 2 Nephi 25:19: "according to the words of the prophets, the Messiah cometh in six hundred years from the time that my father left Jerusalem"; and (3) 3 Nephi 1:1, 13: "it was six hundred years from the time that Lehi left Jerusalem" and the Savior said "on the morrow come I into the world."

1 NEPHI 11:1

Nephi's vision on "an exceeding high mountain"

Although it is not absolutely clear exactly what happened to Nephi when he was "caught away in the Spirit of the Lord, yea, into an exceeding high mountain" (1 Nephi 11:1), other prophets have referred to their visions and heavenly manifestations in a similar manner. Ezekiel states that the Spirit "lifted" him up "between the earth and the heaven, and brought me in the visions of God to Jerusalem." (Ezekiel 8:3; see also Ezekiel 3:12-27 and 37:1.) Also, Moses was "caught up into an exceedingly high mountain" (Moses 1:1); the Savior was shown the glory of the world from the heights of a mountain (Matthew 4:8); Paul was caught up "to the third heaven" (2 Corinthians 12:2-4); and the apostle John was "in the Spirit" when he saw and heard the great visions he recorded in Revelation (Revelation 1:10).

1 NEPHI 11:27

Use of the term "form of a dove"

Biblical scholars disagree as to whether or not the Holy Ghost really descended in the "form of a dove" at the time of the baptism of Jesus Christ. In the accounts in Matthew, Mark, and John, the translators have used the construction "like a dove," which could mean that the Holy Ghost descended in the manner of a dove or a bird; however, the account in Luke reads, "And the Holy Ghost descended in a bodily shape like a dove upon him." (Luke 3:22.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith has explained that these terms all mean that the Spirit descended "in the sign of the dove." His inspired statement is as follows:

The sign of the dove was instituted before the creation of the world, a witness for the Holy Ghost, and the devil cannot come in the sign of a dove. The Holy Ghost is a personage, and is in the form of a personage. It does not confine itself to the form of a dove, but in sign of the dove. The Holy Ghost cannot be transformed into a dove; but the sign of a dove was given to John to signify the truth of the deed, as the dove is an emblem or token of truth and innocence. (History of the Church, 5:261.)

1 NEPHI 11:29; 12:8-10

Two groups of church leaders to be on the earth at the same time

Nephi saw in his vision that there were to be two sets of church leaders on the earth at the same time shortly after the death and resurrection of the Savior. (1 Nephi 11:29, 33; 12:1, 8-10.) However, the Lord had already provided that the apostles on the eastern continent (headed by Peter, James, and John) were to preside over the twelve Nephite disciples in the day of judgment. (1 Nephi 12:9.) Concerning this prophecy by Nephi outlining the relationship between these two groups of church leaders, President Joseph Fielding Smith has written:

In fulfillment of this prophecy [3 Nephi 12:8-10], when the Savior came to the Nephites, he chose twelve men and gave them authority to minister in his name among the Nephites on this American continent in all the ordinances essential to their salvation. These twelve went forth healing the sick, performing many miracles, and administering the ordinances as they had been commanded to do. The fulness of the gospel, with the power and the authority of the Melchizedek Priesthood, was given to the Nephites the same as it was to the Church on the Eastern Hemisphere. Moreover, the Lord informed the Nephites that the law that had been given to Moses, including the offering of sacrifices by the shedding of blood, had been done away in him.

While in every instance the Nephite Twelve are spoken of as disciples, the fact remains that they had been endowed with divine authority to be special witnesses for Christ among their own people. Therefore, they were virtually apostles to the Nephite race, although their jurisdiction was, as revealed to Nephi, eventually to be subject to the authority and jurisdiction of Peter and the Twelve chosen in Palestine.

According to the definition prevailing in the world, an apostle is a witness for Christ, or one who evangelizes a certain nation or people, "a zealous advocate of a doctrine or cause." Therefore, in this sense the Nephite Twelve became apostles, as special witnesses, just as did Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in the dispensation of the fulness of times. (Doctrines of Salvation [Bookcraft, 1954], 3:158-59.)

1 NEPHI 13:4-9, 28; 14:9-17

Possible meanings of the terms "church of the devil" and "great and abominable church"

The terms "church of the devil" and "great and abominable church" are apparently used with two senses in the Book of Mormon.

Elder Bruce R. McConkie has defined these terms:

The titles church of the devil and great and abominable church are used to identify all churches or organizations of whatever name or nature—whether political, philosophical, educational, economic, social, fraternal, civic, or religious—which are designed to take men on a course that leads away from God and his laws and thus from salvation in the kingdom of God.

Salvation is in Christ, is revealed by him from age to age, and is available only to those who keep his commandments and obey his ordinances. These commandments are taught in, and these ordinances are administered by, his Church. There is no salvation outside this one true Church, the Church of Jesus Christ. There is one Christ, one Church, one gospel, one plan of salvation, one set of saving ordinances, one group of legal administrators, "One Lord, one faith, one baptism." (Eph. 4:5.)

Any church or organization of any kind whatever which satisfies the innate religious longings of man and keeps him from coming to the saving truths of Christ and his gospel is therefore not of God.

Hence we find our Lord saying, "He that is not with me is against me; and he that gathereth not with me scattereth abroad." (Matt. 12:30.) And hence we find Alma inviting the wicked to repent and join the true Church of Christ and become the sheep of the Good Shepherd. "And now if ye are not the sheep of the good shepherd, of what fold are ye?" he asks. "Behold, I say unto you, that the devil is your shepherd, and ye are of his fold; and now, who can deny this? Behold, I say unto you, whosoever denieth this is a liar and a child of the devil." (Alma 5:39; Jos. Smith 2:19.)

Iniquitous conditions in the various branches of the great and abominable church in the last days are powerfully described in the Book of Mormon. (2 Ne. 28; Morm. 8:28, 32-33, 36-38; D. & C. 10:56.) Nephi saw the "church which is most abominable above all other churches" in vision. He "saw the devil that he was the foundation of it"; and also the murders, wealth, harlotry, persecutions, and evil desires that are part of this organization. (1 Ne. 13:1-10.)

He saw that this church took away from the gospel of the Lamb many covenants and many plain and precious parts; that it perverted the right ways of the Lord; that it deleted many teachings from the Bible; that it was "the mother of harlots"; and finally that the Lord would again restore the gospel of salvation. (1 Ne. 13:24-42.)

Similar visions were given to John as recorded in the 17th and 18th chapters of Revelation. He saw this evil church as a whore ruling over peoples, multitudes, nations and tongues; as being full of blasphemy, abominations, filthiness, and fornication; as having the name, "MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT. THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH"; as drunken with the blood of the saints; as revelling in wealth and the delicacies of the earth; as making merchandise of all costly items and of "slaves, and souls of men." And then John, as did Nephi, saw the fall and utter destruction of this great church whose foundation is the devil.

In this world of carnality and sensuousness, the great and abominable church will continue its destructive course. But there will be an eventual future day when evil shall end, "and the great and abominable church, which is the whore of all the earth, shall be cast down by devouring fire." (D. & C. 29:21; Ezek. 38; 39; 1 Ne. 22:23; Rev. 18.) Before that day, however, desolations will sweep through the earth and the various branches of the great and abominable church "shall war among themselves, and the sword of their own hands shall fall upon their own heads, and they shall be drunken with their own blood." (1 Ne. 22:13-14; 14:3.)

The resurrected Christ gave to the Nephites this test whereby they might distinguish the true Church from any other: 1. It would be called in his name, for "how be it my church save it be called in my name?" he said. 2. It would be built upon his gospel, that is, the eternal plan of salvation with all its saving powers and graces would be had in it. 3. The Father would show forth his works in it, meaning that miracles, righteousness, and every good fruit would abound in it. 4. It would not be hewn down and cast into the fire as must surely come to pass with the great and abominable church. "If it be not built upon my gospel, and is built upon the works of men, or upon the works of the devil, verily I say unto you they have joy in their works for a season, and by and by the end cometh, and they are hewn down and cast into the fire, from whence there is no return." (3 Ne. 27:4-12.) (Mormon Doctrine [Bookcraft, 1966], pp. 137-39.)

1 NEPHI 13:12

The man "wrought upon" by the Spirit of God

This prophecy apparently refers to the coming of Christopher Columbus to the continent that was later called the American continent. Abundant evidences exist that indicate Columbus was "wrought upon" by the Spirit of God as was shown unto Nephi. In his book Columbus, Don Quixote of the Seas, Jacob Wasserman quotes directly from the writings of Columbus as follows:

From my first youth onward, I was a seaman, and have so continued until this day. . . . The Lord was well disposed to my desire, and he bestowed upon me courage and understanding. . . . Our Lord with provident hand unlocked my mind, sent me upon seas, and gave me fire for the deed. Those who heard of my emprise called it foolish, mocked me, and laughed. But who can doubt but that the Holy Ghost inspired me? (Boston: Little, Brown, and Co., 1930, p. 18.)

Later in his book, Wasserman quotes from a letter written to King Ferdinand by Columbus wherein he said, "I came to your majesty as the emissary of the Holy Ghost." (Page 46.)

1 NEPHI 13:20-23

The record of the Jews

The book that Nephi beheld in vision and which "proceedeth out of the mouth of a Jew" and contained "a record of the Jews" (1 Nephi 13:23) is evidently our present Old Testament. Reynolds and Sjodahl indicate in the following statement the appropriateness of these terms in referring to the Old Testament.

The prophet is here speaking of the Old Testament, as it was to appear through the labors of Ezra and his associates and successors.

When Lehi left Jerusalem, the so-called canon of the Old Testament, as we know it, was not yet completed. The five books of Moses, undoubtedly, had been collected and written on one roll, numerous copies of which must have been in existence. The writings of the prophets, such as Joshua, the Judges, Samuel, Kings down to the reign of Zedekiah, and the prophecies of Isaiah, Hosea, Amos, Micah, and parts of Jeremiah, and their contemporaries, Joel, Amos and Jonah, must have existed in separate volumes, and individual collectors may have owned more or less complete sets. The Book of Job, some of the Psalms, the Proverbs, the Song of Solomon, and Ecclesiastes were also known, even if not generally accepted as sacred scripture. There were also books by authors whose names are mentioned in the Bible, but whose writings have not come down to us. The collection of Laban, known in the Book of Mormon as the Brass Plates, must have been unusually complete, judging from the contents. It must have been a very valuable library. Such libraries must have been owned by prominent individuals.

Ezra undertook the work of collecting all the sacred writings that existed at his time. This work included not only the discovery of copies in various places, the rejection of those that were not authentic and the copying of manuscripts the contents of which could not otherwise be secured, but also the correction of the text, after careful examination of the variations that must have been found. It was this work that was shown to Nephi in his vision of the Old Testament, and therefore, he, very properly, says he beheld it coming "out of the mouth of a Jew."

This expression appears still more significant when we recall the fact that Ezra, after the completion of the Pentateuch, gathered the people and read it to them and expounded it for seven days, and submitted it to them for their acceptance (Nehemiah 8:1-18; 9:3). Then it, literally, proceeded out of the mouth of a Jew. This took place about 445 B.C., about 150 years after the exodus of Lehi.

The canon was gradually completed by the addition of the writings of Ezra, Nehemiah, and the prophets who lived during and after the exile, Ezekiel, Daniel, Obadiah, Habakkuk, Zephaniah, Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi. The canon as thus completed was accepted by our Lord Himself, and it is, in this remarkable vision, called, on that account, "The Book of the Lamb of God" (1 Nephi 13:38). (Commentary on the Book of Mormon, 4:262-63.)

1 NEPHI 13:23

The Old Testament is not complete

Nephi, who was acquainted with the writings contained on the brass plates of Laban, was permitted to see the contents of the latter-day Old Testament, and he concluded that it did not contain as many promises and covenants as were contained on the brass plates. Thus it should not be surprising to hear of prophets whose writings appeared on the brass plates (such as Zenos, Zenock, Neum and Ezias—see 1 Nephi 19:10 and Helaman 8:19-20) but which are not found in our Old Testament.

Scholars of the Bible have long been aware that the Bible was not a complete book in and of itself. Concerning the incompleteness of the Bible, Elder Mark E. Petersen has said:

. . . the Bible itself admits that it is an incomplete record and does not contain all of God's word. It mentions other books of scripture which are not within its covers and therefore are not available for study by anyone seeking the full truth of the gospel.

Moses spoke of the "Book of the Covenant," which we do not have. He also mentions the "Book of the Wars of Israel," which has never been found. . . .

The "Book of Jasher," referred to by Joshua, is not in the Bible. The same is true of the "Book of the Acts of Solomon," referred to in First Kings.

The books of Nathan and Gad, both of whom were prophets and seers, are missing. . . .

Ahijah and Iddo were prophets and seers likewise. Would their works not inspire modern people if they were available? But where are they? Can we say that our Bible is actually complete without them?

The "Book of Jehu" is mentioned in the Old Testament but is not included in it. Isaiah wrote a second book known as the "Acts of Uzziah," but where is it? . . .

" The Sayings of the Seers," another book of sacred writings, is referred to in the Bible. Where is it now? . . .

Paul wrote letters, in addition to those we have in our Bible, and speaks of them. He wrote a third letter to the Corinthians, and at least another one to the Ephesians. Where are they? He also wrote an Epistle to the Laodiceans, but it is not in our possession. Is the Bible then complete? Does it contain all of God's word?

Jude wrote another Epistle in addition to the one in the New Testament. He also mentions a volume of scripture known as the "Prophecies of Enoch" to which he evidently had access, but which we do not have today.

Then there is the matter of the Savior's teachings. He lived an intensive and full life during the three years of his public ministry. He preached to multitudes repeatedly. He conversed with individuals almost constantly, and gave many intimate instructions to the Twelve.

Can anyone say that his three years of instruction are contained in the Bible? May they be read in the few hours it takes to peruse what he said in the four Gospels? Can three years of the Savior's eloquent teachings be condensed into three hours of reading material? The Apostle John says twice in his Gospel that not a fraction of the Savior's ministry is recorded.

Much as we love it, sincerely as we believe it, can we in all truth say that the Bible is complete, that it contains all of God's word, or even the full text of the Savior's instructions? (Conference Report, April 1964, pp. 18-19.)

1 NEPHI 13:24-28

Plain and precious truths taken from the Bible

The angel clearly teaches Nephi that the book that "proceedeth out of the mouth of a Jew" (the Bible) contained the plainness of the gospel until after it came into the hands of a great and abominable church. In fact, the angel seems to indicate that this church is called an abominable church because it has taken away "from the gospel of the Lamb many parts which are plain and most precious." (1 Nephi 13:26.)

Thus, apparently the first part of our present Bible (the Old Testament) is incomplete because of deletions and changes made by some of the wicked "pastors" of the house of Israel (see 1 Nephi 21:1), and the second part of our Bible (the New Testament) has been altered and changed because of the influence of "a great and abominable church." One purpose for the coming forth of the Book of Mormon is to restore these plain and precious truths that have been deleted or altered in the "stick of Judah."

1 NEPHI 13:40

Definition of "gentiles"

The word gentile has been used with varying meanings, as indicated in this statement by Elder Bruce R. McConkie:

In the days of Abraham, the term [gentile] was used to refer to those nations and peoples who had not descended from him, with the added assurance that all Gentiles who should receive the gospel would be adopted into the lineage of Abraham and be accounted his seed. (Abra. 2:9-11.) The Prophet taught that those so adopted became literally of the blood of Abraham. (Teachings, pp. 149-150.) In the days of ancient Israel, those not of the lineage of Jacob were considered to be Gentiles, although the Arabs and other races of Semitic origin who traced their lineage back to Abraham would not have been Gentiles in the strict Abrahamic use of the word.

After the Kingdom of Israel was destroyed and the Ten Tribes were led away into Assyrian captivity, those of the Kingdom of Judah called themselves Jews and designated all others as Gentiles. It is this concept that would have been taught to Lehi, Mulek and the other Jews who came to the Western Hemisphere to found the great Nephite and Lamanite civilizations. It is not surprising, therefore, to find the Book of Mormon repeatedly speaking of Jew and Gentile as though this phrase marked a division between all men; to find the United States described as a Gentile Nation (1 Ne. 13; 3 Ne. 21); and to find the promise that the Book of Mormon would come forth "by way of the Gentile." (Title page of Book of Mormon; D. & C. 20:9.)

Actually, of course, the house of Israel has been scattered among all nations, and Joseph Smith (through whom the Book of Mormon was revealed) was of the Tribe of Ephraim. At the same time the Prophet was of the Gentiles, meaning that he was a citizen of a Gentile nation and also that he was not a Jew. Members of the Church in general are both of Israel and of the Gentiles. Indeed, the gospel has come forth in the last days in the times of the Gentiles and, in large measure, will not go to the Jews until the Gentile fulness comes in. (D. & C. 45:28-30.)

Having in mind the principle that Gentiles are adopted into the lineage of Israel when they accept the gospel, and that those who fail to believe the truths of salvation (no matter what their lineage) lose any preferential status they may have had, it is not inappropriate in our day to speak of members of the Church as Israelites and unbelievers as Gentiles. (Mormon Doctrine, pp. 310-11.)

1 NEPHI 13:40

The "last records"

The "last records" referred to in 1 Nephi 13:40 would include the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, the Pearl of Great Price, and any future scriptures that are yet to come forth from the true church of Jesus Christ. One purpose of the coming forth of these latter-day scriptures is to "establish the truth of the first" records referred to by the angel—our present Bible. This is one reason why Latter-day Saints refer to the Book of Mormon as a "second witness of the Bible" that helps to restore many of the essential doctrines and ordinances of the gospel.

1 NEPHI 14:20-22, 27

The apostle John seen by Nephi

The apostle John referred to here is the same apostle in the New Testament who is also known as John the Beloved (John 21:20) and John the Revelator. He is the author of the Gospel of John (John 21:24), the book of Revelation (Revelation 1:19), and the three epistles of John, which appear shortly before Revelation in the New Testament.

1 NEPHI 15:8

"Have ye inquired of the Lord?"

Nephi gives a clue here as to how we can arrive at a knowledge of spiritual things. Lehi had told Nephi, Laman, and Lemuel of his dream. All three of them were evidently intrigued and interested in the possible interpretation of the symbols in their father's dream. Laman and Lemuel attempted to find their answers through the power of their own reasoning. Nephi, however, asked the Lord for the interpretation of these symbols, and as a result he received the great vision recorded in 1 Nephi 11-14. Nephi's question "Have ye inquired of the Lord?" teaches the same principle as that taught later by the resurrected Jesus Christ to the righteous Nephites of about A.D. 34: ". . . whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, which is right, believing that ye shall receive, behold it shall be given unto you." (3 Nephi 18:20.)

1 NEPHI 15:12-17

The house of Israel is compared to an olive tree

In several places in the Book of Mormon the house of Israel is likened to an olive tree. In this analogy, some of the natural branches of the olive tree (the direct descendants of the house of Israel) are grafted or planted in other parts of the vineyard (in other words, they are led to other parts of the earth). However, Nephi prophesies that in the last days these natural branches of the house of Israel "shall be grafted in, being a natural branch of the olive-tree, into the true olive-tree." (1 Nephi 15:16. Italics added.) This evidently means that the direct descendants of Israel are going to be brought to a knowledge of the true covenants that the Lord made anciently with the house of Israel.

Essentially this same idea is expressed in 1 Nephi 10:14, where Nephi says that in the last days "the natural branches of the olive-tree, or the remnants of the house of Israel, should be grafted in, or come to the knowledge of the true Messiah, their Lord and their Redeemer." (1 Nephi 10:14.)

1 NEPHI 16:10

The "Liahona"—a round brass ball

The "round ball of curious workmanship" that was made of "fine brass" is later known in the Book of Mormon as the Liahona. (Alma 37:38.) This name is evidently a transliteration from the original language of Lehi, and Reynolds and Sjodahl have suggested the following meaning for it:

LIAHONA. This interesting word is Hebrew with an Egyptian ending. It is the name which Lehi gave to the ball or director he found outside his tent the very day he began his long journey through the "wilderness," after his little company had rested for some time in the Valley of Lemuel. (1 Nephi 16:10; Alma 37:38)

L is a Hebrew preposition meaning "to," and sometimes used to express the possessive case. Iah is a Hebrew abbreviated form of "Jehovah," common in Hebrew names. On is the Hebrew name of the Egyptian "City of the Sun." . . . L-iah-on means, therefore, literally, "To God is Light"; or, "of God is Light." That is to say, God gives light, as does the Sun. The final a reminds us that the Egyptian form of the Hebrew name On is Annu, and that seems to be the form Lehi used . . .

Lehi gave the metal ball a name commemorative of one of the great experiences of his life . . . And, furthermore, he gave it a name that no one but a devout Hebrew influenced by Egyptian culture would have thought of. (Commentary on the Book of Mormon, 4:178-79.)

1 NEPHI 16:13

Possible meaning of the word "Shazer"

The place name "Shazer," referring to the location where Lehi and his group rested for a while, is another possible transliteration of an original term used by Lehi and his group. Dr. Hugh Nibley has suggested the following possible meaning of this word:

The first important stop after Lehi's party had left their base camp was at a place they called Shazer. The name is intriguing. The combination shajer is quite common in Palestinian place names; it is a collective meaning "trees," and many Arabs (especially in Egypt) pronounce it shazher. It appears in Thoghret-as-Sajur (the Pass of Trees), which is the ancient Shaghur, written Segor in the sixth century. It may be confused with Shaghur "seepage," which is held to be identical with Shihor, the "black water" of Joshua 19:36. This last takes in western Palestine the form Sozura, suggesting the name of a famous water hole in South Arabia, called Shisur by Thomas and Shisar by Philby. . . . So we have Shihor, Shaghur, Sajur, Saghir, Segor (even Zoar), Shajar, Sozura, Shisur, and Shisar, all connected somehow or other and denoting either seepage—a weak but reliable water supply—or a clump of trees. Whichever one prefers, Lehi's people could hardly have picked a better name for their first suitable stopping place than Shazer. (Lehi in the Desert [Bookcraft, 1952], p. 90.)

1 NEPHI 16:34-35

Possible meaning of the word "Nahom"

The place names used by Lehi and his group provide readers of the Book of Mormon with some of the best means of testing the authenticity of the Book of Mormon from a linguistic viewpoint. Apparently most of these names were transliterated by Joseph Smith, and it should be remembered that the Prophet had not studied Semitic languages before his translation of the Book of Mormon. Yet, as Dr. Nibley indicates in the following quotation, the place names given by Lehi evidently came from a Semitic source:

When Ishmael died on the journey, he "was buried in the place which was called Nahom." (1 Nephi 16:34.) Note that this is not "a place which we called Nahom," but the place which was so called, a desert burial ground. Jaussen reports (Rev. Biblique X, 607) that though Bedouins sometimes bury the dead where they die, many carry the remains great distances to bury them. The Arabic root NHM has the basic meaning of "to sigh or moan," and occurs nearly always in the third form, "to sigh or moan with another." The Heb. Nahum, "comfort," is related, but that is not the form given in the Book of Mormon. At this place, we are told, "the daughters of Ishmael did mourn exceedingly," and are reminded that among the desert Arabs mourning rites are a monopoly of the women. (Ibid., pp. 90-91.)

1 NEPHI 17

The miracles of the exodus of Israel under Moses

The so-called higher critics of the Bible have raised the question as to whether or not the miracles of the exodus of Israel under Moses actually happened as they are recorded in the Old Testament. (See Exodus 14:19-20, 26-31; 16:4, 15; 17:5-6; Numbers 21:6-9.) However, the Book of Mormon substantiates the actuality of these miraculous events. (1 Nephi 17:23, 26, 28, 29, 30, 41.) Inasmuch as Nephi's knowledge of these miracles came from the authentic account on the brass plates of Laban (1 Nephi 5:11), Latter-day Saints should have no question concerning the reliability of the biblical account. Once again the Book of Mormon serves as a witness to its companion scripture, the Bible.

1 NEPHI 18:9

Did the progenitors of the American Indians come "dancing" in their ships?

Brother Eldin Ricks has the following interesting statement in his Book of Mormon Commentary, vol. 1, pp. 218-19:

There is a French translation by Brasseur de Bourbourg of a Mexican tradition that runs as follows: "Here is the beginning of the accounts of the arrival of the Mexicans from the place named Aztlan. It was through the midst of the water that they made their way to this locality, being four tribes. And in coming they were rowing in their ships." Bourbourg, who records this tradition in his Ancient Monuments of Mexico, explains that the word in the original language that he translated "rowing" actually is the native word for "dancing." But because he could make no sense out of "dancing" in reference to ships, he had translated it "rowing"!

Is it possible that the originators of this tradition knew more than the French scholar concerning the coming of the Mexicans to this continent? The Book of Mormon says absolutely nothing concerning the coming of the people rowing in their ships (apparently they were driven by the winds and currents—1 Nephi 18:8, 13, 21-23), but it does say something concerning their dancing in their ships.

1 NEPHI 18:10

The law of primogeniture

Several experiences in the Book of Mormon indicate that the law of primogeniture (where the first-born son has special rights and privileges) was part of the belief and tradition of Lehi and his colony. Note particularly the following references in this regard: 1 Nephi 18:10; 2 Nephi 5:3; Mosiah 10:11-15. In only one chapter of 1 Nephi 18, we find at least three examples of the practice of this law.

1 NEPHI 18:21

Use of the word "compass"

The word compass as used here does not refer to the magnetic instrument of the mariner (the magnetic compass was apparently not known in the western world until about the twelfth century A.D.), but refers to the Liahona or "director ball" given to Lehi by the Lord to show him the way whither they should travel. (1 Nephi 16:9-10; Alma 37:38.)

George Reynolds has explained the differences between these two "compasses":

In the days of Moses, when he led the children of Israel out of Egypt a pillar of cloud by day and of fire by night moved in front of them. This the Hebrews followed. But to Lehi he gave this Liahona, or compass, as the ball was called and it pointed the way they should travel. It had one strange peculiarity, which was that it worked according to their faith and diligence. When they kept God's law it showed them much more clearly the way they should go than when they were careless or rebellious. Some people have confused this ball, because it is called a compass, with a mariner's compass, that sailors use at sea to direct the course of their ships. But there is a great difference between the two. The Liahona pointed the way that Lehi's company should travel while the needle in the mariner's compass points to the north. The one showed the way Lehi should go, the other informs the traveler which way he is going. The one was especially prepared by the Lord for Lehi and his companions and was used through faith only; the other can be used by all men, whether believers in the true God, pagans or infidels. (A Dictionary of the Book of Mormon [Salt Lake City: Hyrum Parry, 1891], p. 170.)

1 NEPHI 18:25

The "horse" on the American continent

If Joseph Smith had been writing the Book of Mormon instead of translating it from ancient records, he would have been very foolish to have included references to horses on the American continent in Book of Mormon times. (1 Nephi 18:25; Enos 21.) In 1830, nearly all the historians and scholars were convinced there had been no horses on the American continent before the coming of Columbus. After the Book of Mormon was published, however, archaeological discoveries were made that clearly indicate that horses were in the Americas before Columbus arrived. In the asphalt deposits of Rancho LaBrea in southern California, numerous fossil remains of horses have been found that antedate Book of Mormon times. Although these discoveries do not absolutely prove horses were in the Americas in the time period covered by the Book of Mormon (about 2600 B.C. to A.D. 421), they do prove horses were there before the coming of Columbus.

Some scientists have now accepted the possibility that horses and men lived concurrently in the Americas before the coming of Columbus. Franklin S. Harris, Jr., quotes the zoologist Ivan T. Sanderson as saying: "There is a body of evidence both from the mainland of Central America and even from rock drawings in Haiti itself tending to show that the horse may have been known to man in the Americas before the coming of the Spaniards." (The Book of Mormon Message and Evidences [Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1953], pp. 88-89.)

1 NEPHI 19:22

A brief history of the house of Israel

In a sense, the Book of Mormon is of, by, and for the house of Israel. The book was written by the descendants of Israel (Jacob), "to the Lamanites, who are a remnant of the house of Israel," and for the purpose of showing "unto the remnant of the House of Israel what great things the Lord hath done for their fathers; and that they may know the covenants of the Lord, that they are not cast off forever." (Title page of the Book of Mormon.)

Thus it is only natural that the writers in the Book of Mormon should be vitally concerned with the origin, scattering, and gathering of the house of Israel. Although the story of the origin of the house of Israel is told primarily in the Bible (the stick of Judah), a great deal of information on the scattering and gathering of Israel is contained in the Book of Mormon (the stick of Joseph). The following references are concerned almost entirely with these topics: 1 Nephi 10:12-14; 12:15; 19:14-17; 22:3-4, 7-14; 2 Nephi 10:7-8; 25:30; 30:7; Jacob 5 and 6; 3 Nephi 16:1-5; 20:20-46.

A brief history of the house of Israel is found in the chapter "Historical Background Leading to the period of the Book of Mormon." It is presented to help in the interpretation of statements in the Book of Mormon concerning the various scatterings and gatherings of Israel. For example, Isaiah lived about 700 B.C. while Nephi lived in 600 B.C.; thus, when Nephi says in interpreting the writings of Isaiah, "And the Lord will set his hand again the second time to restore his people from their lost and fallen state" (2 Nephi 25:17), it is quite clear that he is talking about the gathering of Israel in the dispensation of the fulness of times, because this is the second major gathering of Israel since the times of Nephi and Isaiah.

The scattering of the house of Israel: About 721 B.C. the kingdom of Israel was conquered by Shalmaneser of Assyria, and the ten tribes of the kingdom of Israel were led away into captivity (2 Kings 17). According to tradition, about a year after this these tribes mysteriously escaped and fled toward the north. Since then, they have been referred to as the "Ten Lost Tribes" of Israel. The kingdom of Judah was preserved until about 587 B. C. when it was conquered by Nebuchadnezzar of Babylonia. (The Lord warned Lehi about 600 B.C. to flee from Jerusalem so that he would escape before the war took place— 1 Nephi 1:4, 13; 2 Nephi 1:4.) The people were taken away captive into the land of Babylonia (2 Kings 25), but some fifty years later (about 538 B.C.), after Babylonia had been conquered by Persia, they were allowed to return to their land by Cyrus, king of Persia. They rebuilt the temple and lived in the Holy Land for over five hundred years under the rule of four separate groups: Persians, Greeks, Asmonaeans, and Romans. Finally about A.D. 70 the Roman legions destroyed the city of Jerusalem and the temple. The people of the kingdom of Judah were later scattered among the nations of the world.

The gathering of the house of Israel: On September 21, 1823, the angel Moroni appeared to Joseph Smith and quoted the eleventh chapter of Isaiah to him and emphasized that it was soon to be fulfilled. (See Isaiah 11:10-12.) On April 6, 1830, the church of Jesus Christ was restored to the earth, and soon missionaries were sent to proclaim the glad tidings. On April 3, 1836, Moses appeared in the Kirtland Temple and restored the "keys of the gathering of Israel." (See Doctrine and Covenants 110:11.) On October 24, 1841, Elder Orson Hyde dedicated the Holy Land for the return of the Jews. In May 1948 the state of Israel was created and was officially recognized by the leading countries of the world.

The scriptures indicate there are to be three main aspects of the gathering: (1) the gathering of the dispersed of Israel from the nations of the earth to Zion; (2) the return of the Jews (tribe of Judah) to Jerusalem and the ancient promised land; and (3) the restoration of the lost tribes of Israel to the true fold of the Shepherd.

The following references in the Book of Mormon discuss the various aspects of the gathering of Israel and of the building of the New Jerusalem on the American continent: 1 Nephi 19:14-17; 2 Nephi 10:7-8; 2 Nephi 25; 3 Nephi 20:20-33, 46 (these verses are now in the process of fulfillment); 3 Nephi 21:20-25; 3 Nephi 29:8-9; Ether 3:1-12.

1 NEPHI 19:1

The origin of the "large" and the "small" plates of Nephi

The part of our present Book of Mormon that is found in the books of 1 Nephi, 2 Nephi, Jacob, Enos, Jarom, and Omni came from the small plates of Nephi. Much of the remainder of the Book of Mormon (the books of Mosiah, Alma, Helaman, 3 Nephi, 4 Nephi, and Mormon) came from Mormon's abridgment of the large plates of Nephi. The large plates of Nephi were evidently made first. First Nephi 10:1-2 would seem to indicate that Nephi made the large plates of Nephi soon after his arrival in the promised land (about 588 B.C.). However, Nephi did not make the small plates of Nephi until approximately 570 B.C. (2 Nephi 5:28-33.)

1 NEPHI 19:10, 13

The "three days of darkness" as a sign of the crucifixion of Jesus Christ

A careful reading of these words of Zenos seems to indicate that the "three days of darkness" that were to accompany the crucifixion of Christ were not to be a sign to those of the house of Israel around Jerusalem but only to those who lived away from Jerusalem or on "the isles of the sea." (1 Nephi 19:10.) The sign to be given to those at Jerusalem is listed later by Zenos wherein he states, "And as for those who are at Jerusalem . . . they shall be scourged by all people, because they crucify the God of Israel." (1 Nephi 19:13.)

1 NEPHI 20:1

Origin of the term "or out of the waters of baptism"

The term "or out of the waters of baptism" did not appear in the first edition of the Book of Mormon. It first appeared in the edition of 1840 on page 53, and the sentence in which it appeared was punctuated as follows: "Hearken and hear this, O house of Jacob, who are called by the name of Israel, and are come forth out of the waters of Judah, (or out of the waters of baptism) who swear by the name of the Lord," etc. It is not absolutely clear who was responsible for the insertion of this phrase, although the title page of this edition indicates that it was the "Third Edition, Carefully Revised by the Translator" and was published in Nauvoo, Illinois.

In the "Committee Copy" of the Book of Mormon that was used by Elder James E. Talmage and his committee in making the changes for the 1920 edition, the words "or out of the waters of baptism" were not printed in the text although they had been inserted in red ink in parentheses. However, the parentheses were crossed out by red pencil. These words are printed in the current edition of the Book of Mormon without the parentheses.

1 NEPHI 21:1

An addition of the Book of Mormon to the Isaiah text of the Bible

The following part of 1 Nephi 21:1 has been entirely left out of the Old Testament account: "And again: Hearken, O ye house of Israel, all ye that are broken off and are driven out, because of the wickedness of the pastors of my people; yea, all ye that are broken off, that are scattered abroad, who are of my people, O house of Israel." It is entirely possible that one of the "wicked pastors" of Israel objected to this statement and deleted it from the record of the scriptures that remained in Jerusalem.

1 NEPHI 21:1, 8; 22:4

The term "isles of the sea" as used by the Hebrews

According to a quotation by Reynolds and Sjodahl, "Sir Isaac Newton observes that to the Hebrews the continents of Asia and Africa were 'the earth,' because they had access to them by land, while the parts of the earth to which they sailed over the sea were 'the isles of the sea.' " (Commentary on the Book of Mormon, 1:214.)

Thus, Nephi not only refers to the isles of the sea as the location of other remnants of the house of Israel, but he also indicates that he and his people were then living upon an "isle of the sea" when he quite clearly is referring to the great land mass known as the American continent. (2 Nephi 10:20-21.) The following quotation is of interest:

The Indians almost universally believed the dry land they knew, to be part of a great island, everywhere surrounded by wide waters whose limits were unknown. Many tribes had vague myths of a journey from beyond this sea; many placed beyond it the home of the sun and of light, and the happy hunting grounds of the departed souls. (Quoted from "Library of Aboriginal American Literature," 5:134, in Reynolds and Sjodahl, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, 1:319.)

1 NEPHI 22:7

The gentile nation to be raised up on "this land"

The "mighty nation among the Gentiles" which the Lord was to raise up "even upon the face of this land" evidently refers to the great nation of the United States of America. The early pilgrims and other colonizers of the U.S. were largely those who scattered the seed of Nephi, as he prophesied.

1 NEPHI 22:8

". . . being nourished by the Gentiles"

President Spencer W. Kimball has indicated that the taking of the Book of Mormon to the modern Lamanites is in partial fulfillment of 1 Nephi 21:8:

My Lamanite brothers and sisters, we love you. Our bringing the gospel to you is "likened unto their being nourished by the Gentiles and being carried in their arms and upon their shoulders. . . " (1 Nephi 22:8.) Your God has performed many miracles to get the story written by his prophets, to preserve the records against threats of enemies and the ravages of nature, and to get them translated into a language you can understand, and bring to you this second witness of Christ. Your Book of Mormon record is as a voice from the dust, messages from the dead, warnings from the Lord:

"Return unto me and I will return unto you, saith the Lord of Hosts." (3 Nephi 24:7.)

Our Lord cries, "Wo unto him that spurneth at the doings of the Lord; yea, wo unto him that shall deny the Christ and his works!" (Ibid., 29:5.)

You have been preserved to this epochal day, and the gospel is available to you now. Wash your souls in the blood of the Lamb. Cleanse your lives, study the scriptures, accept the gospel and ordinances.

These predictions can be fulfilled and come to you through one channel only, the path of righteousness and faith; else all these promises are but empty, unfulfilled dreams.

May God bless you that you may accept the truths now revealed to you. (Conference Report, October 1959, pp. 61-62.)

1 NEPHI 22:16-17

Conditions in the last days

Elder Mark E. Petersen has offered the following explanation on conditions in the world as outlined in 1 Nephi 22:16-17:

. . . in these, the last days, the Lord has predicted that there shall be two simultaneous movements. One of these movements is the great tribulation that shall come upon the world. The wicked will destroy the wicked.

The other great movement which will be going forward simultaneously is that there shall be a stone cut out of the mountain without hands, and it shall roll forth and eventually fill the whole earth. The Church to which you and I belong is that stone. It has been cut out of the mountain without hands, and your destiny and mine is to help roll it forth. (D&C 65:2.)

Now do you suppose for one moment that the judgments of God are going to interfere with the progress of his work? He is consistent, isn't he? Although he will pour out his tribulations upon the wicked, he nevertheless will carry forward his work, and his people, under divine protection, will roll forth that stone until eventually it fills the whole earth.

And so says the Book of Mormon:

"For the time soon cometh that the fulness of the wrath of God shall be poured out upon all the children of men; for he will not suffer that the wicked shall destroy the righteous.

"Wherefore, he will preserve the righteous by his power, even if it so be that the fulness of his wrath must come, and the righteous be preserved, even unto the destruction of their enemies by fire. Wherefore, the righteous need not fear; for thus saith the prophet, they shall be saved, even if it so be as by fire." (1 Nephi 22:16-17.)

I believe that. In the midst of all these tribulations God will send fire from heaven, if necessary, to destroy our enemies while we carry forward our work and push that stone until it fills the whole earth!

Your destiny is to do that very thing, and this is the kind of protection you will have. You do not need to fear about world conditions. You do not need to fear about anybody. Just serve the Lord and keep his commandments and build the kingdom, and as you do so you will be protected in these last days. God will have his hand over you, and you can plan your lives in confidence. (Conference Report, October 1960, pp. 81-83.)

1 NEPHI 22:31

Nephi's closing signature to his first book

It is quite evident that Nephi intended that the concluding verse of 1 Nephi should close a major part of his literary efforts. Thus, he concludes this section with the construction "And thus it is. Amen." Dr. Hugh Nibley has indicated that Nephi frequently closed the major sections of his writing with such a phrase; he also indicates that Nephi may have gotten this idea from the Egyptians: "Egyptian literary writings regularly close with the formula iw-f-pw, 'Thus it is,' 'and so it is.' Nephi ends the main sections of his book with the phrase, 'And thus it is. Amen.' (9:6; 14:30; 22:31.)" (Lehi in the Desert, p. 18.)
