Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Book of Mormon ( 1976)

SECOND NEPHI

2 NEPHI 1:4

Lehi's vision that Jerusalem had been destroyed

The destruction of Jerusalem referred to in 2 Nephi 1:4 is recorded in the Bible in 2 Kings 25. Lehi and his group had been warned by the Lord to flee from the land of Jerusalem so that they would escape this destruction. Most biblical scholars date the destruction of Jerusalem by the Babylonians somewhere between 586 B.C. and 590 B.C. Thus in his chronological footnotes in this section of the Book of Mormon, Brother Talmage suggests that the events following Lehi's vision of the destruction of Jerusalem took place sometime after about 588 B.C.

2 NEPHI 1:8

Other nations kept from a knowledge of the promised land

One of the great mysteries of history is how the existence of the great north and south American continents could be kept from the knowledge of the inhabitants of the Old World (Europe, Asia, and Africa). However, with the Lord all things are possible, and the Lord revealed to Lehi that it was wisdom in Him that the existence of this land should be kept from the knowledge of other nations; otherwise "many nations would overrun the land, that there would be no place for an inheritance" for Lehi and his descendants. (2 Nephi 1:8.)

2 NEPHI 1:14

Did Joseph Smith quote from Shakespeare?

Anti-Mormon critics claim that Joseph Smith received from Shakespeare the idea of referring to death as "the cold and silent grave, from whence no traveler can return." (2 Nephi 1: 14.) Shakespeare's quotation, which critics say is too similar to the statement by Lehi, reads as follows: "But that the dread of something after death, The undiscovered country from whose bourn no traveller returns." (Hamlet, Act 3, scene 1.) Such critics overlook other possibilities for the explanation of the similarity between this statement by Joseph Smith and the one by Shakespeare. In the first place, the idea of referring to death in such a manner is not unique to either of these men. In the book of Job in the Old Testament, we find such statements as: "Before I go whence I shall not return, even to the land of darkness and the shadow of death" (Job 10:21), and "When a few years are come, then I shall go the way whence I shall not return" (Job 16:22). Also, the Roman poet Catulus (who lived in the first century B.C.) included a similar thought in his "Elegy on a Sparrow": "Now having passed the gloomy bourne/From whence he never can return."

Also, Joseph Smith, as the translator of the Nephite record, naturally had to include in his translation those words and expressions with which he was familiar. Therefore, if he had ever heard the grave referred to as a place "from whence no traveler can return" it would be logical for him to translate the similar statement by Lehi in essentially these same words.

2 NEPHI 2:4

Jacob saw the Redeemer

Apparently Jacob, the son of Lehi and the brother of Nephi, is one of the select few persons who was visited by the pre-earthly Savior. In 2 Nephi 2:4 Nephi says concerning Jacob, "Thou hast beheld in thy youth" the glory of the Redeemer. In a later statement Nephi mentioned that Isaiah had seen "my Redeemer, even as I have seen him. And my brother, Jacob, also has seen him as I have seen him." (2 Nephi 11:2-3.)

2 NEPHI 2:11-27

The necessity of an "opposition in all things"

Notice the major points in Lehi's argument as to why there must be opposition before a man can be truly free and before he can experience real joy: (1) Every law has both a punishment and a blessing attached to it. (2) Disobedience to law requires a punishment which results in misery. (3) Obedience to law provides a blessing which results in happiness (joy). (4) Without law there can be neither punishment nor blessing, neither misery nor happiness—only innocence. (5) Thus happiness (or joy) can exist only where the possibility of the opposite (unhappiness or misery) also exists. (6) In order to exercise free agency a person must have the possibility (and the freedom) of choice; in a world without law—and thus without choice—there could be no freedom of choice and thus no true exercise of free agency. (2 Nephi 2:15-16; see also Alma 12:31-32 and Alma 42:17-25.)

Lehi does not say it is necessary to choose evil in order to recognize good from evil, but he does make it quite clear that a choice of opposites is necessary for growth.

The major points in Lehi's explanation of the necessity of opposition might be diagramed as follows:

law

obedience (righteousness) disobedience (wickedness)

blessing punishment

happiness (joy) unhappiness (misery)

The teachings of Lehi are consistent with statements of the Lord in the Doctrine and Covenants:

There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated—

And when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated. (D&C 130:20-21.)

For all who will have a blessing at my hands shall abide the law which was appointed for that blessing, and the conditions thereof, as were instituted from before the foundation of the world. (D&C 132:5.)

2 NEPHI 2:22-25

The Book of Mormon concept of the "fall" of Adam

A correct concept of the fall of Adam is necessary to an understanding of the basic claims of Christianity. The churches of the world, however, have largely lost sight of the essential differences in the status of Adam and Eve before and after the fall. Lehi provides a wealth of information on this important subject in 2 Nephi 2:14-27. The general conditions of Adam and Eve before the fall are listed on the left side of the chart which follows; the corresponding general conditions of Adam and Eve after the fall are listed on the right side of the chart.

Status of Adam and Eve Status of Adam and Eve after

before the fall the fall

of God. presence of God—that is,

they suffered a spiritual

death.

that is, they were not sub- ject to physical death).

ject to physical death. (2

Nephi 2:22.)

nocence—that is, they did evil.

not know the difference

between good and evil. (2

Nephi 2:23.)

children." (2 Nephi 2:23.)

Thus, Lehi makes two major conclusions from these teachings: (1) the fall was necessary in order for "men to be"—that is, in order for Adam and Eve to have children. (2) A major purpose of man's existence is for him to have "joy." True joy was not possible for Adam and Eve before the fall.

These truths are stated clearly by Lehi in 2 Nephi 2:22-23: "And now, behold, if Adam had not transgressed he would not have fallen . . . and they (Adam and Eve) would have had no children; wherefore they would have remained in a state of innocence, having no joy, for they knew no misery; doing no good, for they knew no sin." (Italics added.)

Once Adam and Eve knew the difference between good and evil and had been taught the gospel by an angel, they realized the necessity of the fall in order for them to have joy and to have increase (children). Adam then said: "Blessed be the name of God, for because of my transgression my eyes are opened, and in this life I shall have joy, and again in the flesh I shall see God. And Eve, his wife, heard all these things and was glad, saying: Were it not for our transgression we never should have had seed, and never should have known good and evil, and the joy of our redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedient." (Moses 5:10-11. Italics added.)

A careful examination of the status of Adam and Eve after the fall indicates there were two desirable effects of the fall (they knew good from evil and they had children), but also two undesirable effects so far as eternity is concerned (they suffered spiritual death because of their disobedience and they also became subject to physical death). The atonement of Jesus Christ, however, makes it possible to overcome both of the undesirable effects: spiritual death of an individual can be overcome through sincere repentance and obedience to God's commandments, and physical death has been overcome through the breaking of the bands of death by Jesus Christ through the resurrection. Thus, when the fall of Adam and the atonement of Jesus Christ are considered together, it is seen that both are part of God's plan of eternal progression for man.

2 NEPHI 2:26-27

The freedom of choice

As Lehi indicates, it is only through the atonement of Jesus Christ that men are made free. Because the atonement redeems men from the fall of Adam, they "become free forever, knowing good from evil; to act for themselves and not to be acted upon, save it be by the punishment of the law." (2 Nephi 2:26.) Although the Savior freed us from the effects of the fall and thus gave us the freedom to choose either good or evil, we remain free only as we keep the commandments and "choose liberty and eternal life"; if we choose "captivity and death," then we become "miserable like unto" the devil. (2 Nephi 2:27.)

2 NEPHI 3:1-25

The four "Josephs"

Four different men named Joseph are referred to in 2 Nephi 3 as follows: (1) Joseph who was sold into Egypt; he is also known as Joseph the son of Jacob (Israel)—verses 4-22; (2) Joseph the son of Lehi—verses 1-3, 22-25; (3) Joseph Smith, Sr., the father of the Prophet—verse 15, and (4) Joseph Smith, Jr., the Prophet—verses 7-9, 11, 14-15, 18-19.

2 NEPHI 3:3

The seed of Joseph to be preserved

The descendants of Joseph, the son of Lehi, were known as Nephites during much of the period covered by the Book of Mormon. However, when the Book of Mormon records the destruction of the Nephite nation (Mormon 6-8), this does not mean that all of the descendants of Joseph were destroyed. Joseph is specifically promised in this patriarchal blessing that his "seed shall not utterly be destroyed." (2 Nephi 3:3.) That this promise was literally fulfilled is indicated by the Lord when he said to Joseph Smith in 1828 that the Book of Mormon had to be translated and published so that it might go forth unto the "Josephites." (See D&C 3:17.)

2 NEPHI 3:12

The records of Judah and Joseph

The statement of the Lord to Joseph who was sold into Egypt concerning the writings of Judah and "the fruit of thy loins" (2 Nephi 3:12) is very similar to the statement of the Lord to Ezekiel concerning the "sticks" of Judah and Joseph (Ezekiel 37:15-22). When these two references are read together, it is clear that the "stick of Judah" is the Bible, whereas the "stick of Joseph" is the Book of Mormon.

In connection with the Book of Mormon's being the stick of Joseph, it is important to note that Lehi was a direct descendant of Joseph through Manasseh, Joseph's son. (Alma 10:3.) It is also reported by Erastus Snow that Joseph Smith said Ishmael was a descendant of Joseph through his other son, Ephraim. (Journal of Discourses, 23:184-85.) Thus the people of Lehi's colony were pure Josephites, and their record rightfully qualifies as part of the "stick of Joseph."

2 NEPHI 3:18

The "spokesman" to be raised up by the Lord

Many members of the Church believe that Sidney Rigdon is the "spokesman" referred to in this prophecy. (2 Nephi 3:18.) It appears that Joseph Smith is the prophet mentioned in this verse, and the Lord promised Sidney Rigdon that he should "be a spokesman to my servant Joseph." (D&C 100:9.) Elder George Q. Cannon explained as follows why he believed the calling of Sidney Rigdon as a spokesman for Joseph Smith was in direct fulfillment of this prophecy:

He [Sidney Rigdon] was baptized in the town of Kirtland, and the foundation of a great work was laid there. God afterwards revealed that this man was to be a spokesman, and he became the spokesman to this people and to the world for the prophet Joseph. Those who knew Sidney Rigdon, know how wonderfully God inspired him, and with what wonderful eloquence he declared the word of God to the people. He was a mighty man in the hands of God, as a spokesman, as long as the prophet lived, or up to a short time before his death. Thus you see that even this which many might look upon as a small matter, was predicted about 1,700 years before the birth of the Savior, and was quoted by Lehi 600 years before the same event, and about 2,400 years before its fulfillment, and was translated by the power of God, through his servant Joseph, as was predicted should be the case, and at a time, as I have said, when there was not a man upon the earth who was a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The church had not yet been organized, and Joseph did not know, unless he knew by the spirit of revelation, whether any man would receive the Gospel. (Journal of Discourses, 25:126-27.)

2 NEPHI 4:2

The prophecies of Joseph who was sold into Egypt

Nephi mentions the prophecies of Joseph that were written on the brass plates of Laban, and, he concludes, "there are not many greater." (2 Nephi 4:2.) But where are these great prophecies of Joseph? Why do they not appear in the Old Testament? We do not know the answers to these questions, but the following observations might give some clues as to possible answers.

In the first place, Joseph's prophecies would logically be written most completely on the "stick" or record of Joseph; thus, they were probably included in detail on the brass plates of Laban. However, Joseph's prophecies are not found presently in the "stick" or record of Judah—the Bible. Again, this would indicate that the records on the brass plates of Laban were more comprehensive and complete than the records from which we get our Old Testament.

In the second place, evidently some of the writings of Joseph are still in existence but have not been published to the world. Joseph Smith said that he received some papyri scrolls that contained the record of Abraham and Joseph at the same time he obtained the Egyptian mummies from Michael Chandler. Concerning this record, Joseph Smith has written: "The record of Abraham and Joseph, found with the mummies, is beautifully written on papyrus, with black, and a small part red, ink or paint, in perfect preservation." (History of the Church, 2:348.) The Prophet next describes how the mummies and the record came into his possession and then concludes: "Thus I have given a brief history of the manner in which the writings of the fathers, Abraham and Joseph, have been preserved, and how I came in possession of the same—a correct translation of which I shall give in its proper place." (Ibid., 2:350-51.)

The record of Abraham translated by the Prophet was subsequently printed, and it is now known as the book of Abraham in the Pearl of Great Price. However, the translation of the book of Joseph has not yet been published. Evidently the record of Joseph was translated by the Prophet, but perhaps the reason it was not published was because the great prophecies therein were "too great" for the people of this day.

2 NEPHI 4:11

The descendants of Sam to be numbered with the seed of Nephi

Although Nephi's brother Sam evidently had children (2 Nephi 4:11), there are no "Samites" mentioned in the Book of Mormon. Perhaps Lehi's promise to Sam that his seed would be numbered with the seed of Nephi (2 Nephi 4:11) helps to explain why the record does not refer to "Samites," whereas the descendants of the other sons of Lehi are referred to as Lamanites, Lemuelites, Nephites, Jacobites, and Josephites (Jacob 1:13).

2 NEPHI 5:6

The sisters of Nephi

This is the only specific reference in the Book of Mormon that Nephi had sisters as well as brothers. How many sisters there were, whether they were older or younger than Nephi, or what their names may have been are questions not answered in our present Book of Mormon. However, the following statement by Erastus Snow may provide information on some of the sisters of Nephi:

The Prophet Joseph informed us that the record of Lehi, was contained on the 116 pages that were first translated and subsequently stolen, and of which an abridgment is given us in the first Book of Nephi, which is the record of Nephi individually, he himself being of the lineage of Manasseh; but that Ishmael was of the lineage of Ephraim, and that his sons married into Lehi's family, and Lehi's sons married Ishmael's daughters . . . (Journal of Discourses, 23:184.)

The words that Ishmael's sons "married into Lehi's family" would seem to indicate that the two sons of Ishmael (see 1 Nephi 7:6) were married to Lehi's daughters (and thus to two of the sisters of Nephi). However, the sisters referred to in 2 Nephi 5:6 are evidently still other sisters, because the sisters mentioned here follow Nephi when the schism with Laman occurs, whereas the sisters of Nephi who were married to the sons of Ishmael evidently stayed with their husbands and joined with Laman. (See Alma 3:7 and 47:35.)

2 NEPHI 5:21-23

The "mark of the curse" of the Lamanites

The mark of the curse that came upon the Lamanites was that "a skin of blackness" came upon them. A major purpose of this mark was that the Lamanites "might not be enticing" unto the Nephites. (2 Nephi 5:21.) The Lord stated further that the "seed of him that mixeth" with the unrighteous Lamanites "shall be cursed even with the same cursing." (2 Nephi 5:23.)

This is the only reference in the entire Book of Mormon where a definite color adjective is used to refer to this mark. All other references call it, a "skin of darkness" or a "dark skin." It is of interest to note that the terms "blackness" and "darkness" are interchangeable in the Hebrew. Even in modern Hebrew it is not unusual for some skilled translator to render a word black whereas other equally skilled translators select dark as the best translation.

2 NEPHI 5:26; 6:2

The priesthood of the Nephites

Many references in the Book of Mormon indicate that the Nephites held the priesthood—that is, they had the power and authority to act in the name of God. However, the Book of Mormon does not refer specifically to the two major divisions in the priesthood, the Aaronic Priesthood and the Melchizedek Priesthood. Thus the question has frequently arisen as to exactly what priesthood was held by the Nephites. Joseph Fielding Smith gives his answer in the following comprehensive statement:

The Nephites were descendants of Joseph. Lehi discovered this when reading the brass plates, He was a descendant of Manasseh, and Ishmael, who accompanied him with his family, was of the tribe of Ephraim. Therefore there were no Levites who accompanied Lehi to the Western Hemisphere. Under these conditions the Nephites officiated by virtue of the Melchizedek Priesthood from the days of Lehi to the days of the appearance of our Savior among them. It is true that Nephi "consecrated Jacob and Joseph" that they should be priests and teachers over the land of the Nephites, but the fact that plural terms priests and teachers were used indicates that this was not a reference to the definite office in the priesthood in either case, but it was a general assignment to teach, direct, and admonish the people. Otherwise the terms priest and teacher would have been given, in the singular. Additional light is thrown on this appointment showing that these two brothers of Nephi held the Melchizedek Priesthood, in the sixth chapter, second verse of 2 Nephi, where Jacob makes this explanation regarding the priesthood which he and Joseph held: "Behold, my beloved brethren, I, Jacob, having been called of God, and ordained after the manner of his holy order, and having been consecrated by my brother Nephi, unto whom ye look as a king or a protector, and on whom ye depend for safety, behold ye know that I have spoken unto you exceeding many things."

This seems to be a confirmation of the ordinations that he and his brother Joseph received in the Melchizedek Priesthood. All through the Book of Mormon we find references to the Nephites officiating by virtue of the Higher Priesthood after the holy order. Alma, discoursing on the subject before the people of the city of Ammonihah, said: "And again, my brethren, I would cite your minds forward to the time when the Lord God gave these commandments unto his children; and I would that ye should remember that the Lord God ordained priests, after his holy order, which was after the order of his Son, to teach these things unto the people." (Alma 13:1. See also D&C 107:1-4.)

In the opening verses of Alma, Chapter 43, Mormon records the following: "And now it came to pass that the sons of Alma did go forth among the people . . . and . . . they preached the word, and the truth, according to the spirit of prophecy and revelation; and they preached after the holy order of God by which they were called."

From these and numerous other passages we learn that it was by the authority of the Melchizedek Priesthood that the Nephites administered from the time they left Jerusalem until the time of the coming of Jesus Christ. By the power of this priesthood they baptized, confirmed, and ordained. During these years they also observed the law of Moses. They offered sacrifice and performed the duties which in Israel had been assigned to the priests and Levites. They observed in every detail the requirements of the law. When the Savior came to them, he fulfilled the carnal law and did away with the sacrifice by the shedding of blood of animals. He informed the Nephites that in him the law of Moses was fulfilled.

When the Savior came to the Nephites, he established the Church in its fulness among them, and he informed them that former things had passed away, for they were all fulfilled in him. He gave the Nephites all the authority of the priesthood which we exercise today. Therefore we are justified in the belief that not only was the fulness of the Melchizedek Priesthood conferred, but also the Aaronic, just as we have it in the Church today; and this Aaronic Priesthood remained with them from this time until, through wickedness, all priesthood ceased. We may be assured that in the days of Moroni the Nephites did ordain teachers and priests in the Aaronic Priesthood; but before the visit of the Savior they officiated in the Melchizedek Priesthood. (Answers to Gospel Questions, 1:124-26.)

2 NEPHI 5:28-31

Beginning of the small plates of Nephi

All of the material so far in the Book of Mormon has come from the small plates of Nephi. Although the account in First Nephi evidently begins around 600 B.C., it is quite clear from 2 Nephi 5:28-33 that the small plates were not prepared until thirty years after Lehi left Jerusalem, or approximately 570 B.C. Thus, when Nephi started to write on the small plates in 570 B.C., he evidently started listing events in his earlier life, dating from the time his father left Jerusalem. This might be somewhat analogous to your starting this year a life history but writing first in your history some of the events of your childhood.

2 NEPHI 6-9

Jacob's quotation of Isaiah

The prophet Isaiah lived near Jerusalem and was one of the leading prophets of Israel during approximately 760-700 B.C. His present writings occupy sixty-six chapters in the Old Testament, and they also appear on the brass plates of Laban. The words of Isaiah that are quoted here were taken from the account on the brass plates. In 2 Nephi, chapter 6, Jacob quotes a few verses from the material contained in chapter 49 of Isaiah (Isaiah 49:22-26); then Jacob explains what these scriptures mean concerning his descendants and the future of his people. He next quotes the material found in Isaiah chapters 50 and 51 (2 Nephi 7-8); and then, beginning with chapter 9, he provides us with his commentary on these writings of Isaiah.

2 NEPHI 6:6

The "standard" to be raised up by the Lord in the last days

The Lord prophesied through Isaiah that in the last days he would set up his standard to the people of the earth. This "standard" evidently refers to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, as is indicated in this statement by President Marion G. Romney:

This Church is the standard which Isaiah said the Lord would set up for the people in the latter days. This Church was given to be a light to the world and to be a standard for God's people and for the Gentiles to seek to. This Church is the ensign on the mountain spoken of by the Old Testament prophets. It is the way, the truth, and the life. (Conference Report, April 1961, p. 119.)

2 NEPHI 8:24-25

Interpretation of some of Isaiah's writings

In his concluding quotation from Isaiah, Jacob includes the two verses that now appear as Isaiah 52:1-2. These verses include several idiomatic expressions, and their meaning has been widely disputed by biblical scholars. In March 1838 the Prophet Joseph Smith was asked questions concerning these two verses, and his answers follow:

Questions by Elias Higbee: What is meant by the command in Isaiah, 52d chapter, 1st verse, which saith: Put on thy strength, O Zion—and what people had Isaiah reference to?

He had reference to those whom God should call in the last days, who should hold the power of priesthood to bring again Zion, and the redemption of Israel; and to put on her strength is to put on the authority of the priesthood, which she, Zion, has a right to by lineage; also to return to that power which she had lost.

What are we to understand by Zion loosing herself from the bands of her neck; 2d verse?

We are to understand that the scattered remnants are exhorted to return to the Lord from whence they have fallen; which if they do, the promise of the Lord is that he will speak to them, or give them revelation. See the 6th, 7th, and 8th verses. The bands of her neck are the curses of God upon her, or the remnants of Israel in their scattered condition among the Gentiles. (D&C 113:7-10.)

2 NEPHI 9:6-9

The "infinite" atonement of Jesus Christ

The atonement of Jesus Christ met fully the demands of justice in regard to the original transgression of Adam. Thus, the atonement is "infinite" because it applies to everyone in (1) removing the permanent effects of physical death for everyone by providing for the resurrection, and (2) giving every person the opportunity of having the effects of spiritual death (alienation from the Spirit of God through sin) removed through the repentance of individual sins.

2 NEPHI 9:6-12

The nature of "spiritual death"

The term "spiritual death" is used in the Book of Mormon to refer to a spiritual alienation from God; according to Alma, it occurs when one dies "as to things pertaining unto righteousness." (Alma 12:16.) One definition of the word spiritual is "of or pertaining to the spirit or things of the spirit"; the definition of death includes the idea of separation. Thus spiritual death rightfully refers to a state of spiritual separation from God; it may or may not have anything to do with a physical separation from God.

The very first spiritual death on this earth occurred when Adam and Eve transgressed one of the commandments of God. By becoming subject to sin, they were cast out of God's presence because no sinful or unclean thing can dwell with God. Inasmuch as Adam and Eve were in the physical presence of God when they transgressed, they had to be expelled from his presence physically as well as spiritually.

The first spiritual death of Adam and Eve was fully atoned for by the Savior and Redeemer of mankind. Because of the atonement of Jesus Christ, a newborn child on this earth is not spiritually dead but is alive "in Christ, even from the foundation of the world." (Moroni 8:12.) However, when a person arrives at the age of accountability, learns the difference between good and evil, and then commits sin, he suffers his first individual spiritual death. He becomes spiritually dead because he alienates himself from the Spirit of God. This type of spiritual death is referred to in the scripture as the first spiritual death. If a person fully repents of his sins, accepts the atonement of the Savior, and is baptized of water and of the Spirit, he can be spiritually born again through the cleansing action of the Holy Ghost and thus can regain God's presence. If he does not meet the requirements of this rebirth, he cannot regain the presence of God. (John 3:5.)

President Joseph F. Smith has explained the first spiritual death and related it to the people in the world today in the following words:

When Adam, our first parent, partook of the forbidden fruit, transgressed the law of God, and became subject unto Satan, he was banished from the presence of God and was thrust out into outer spiritual darkness. This was the first death. Yet living, he was dead—dead to God, dead to light and truth, dead spiritually; cast out from the presence of God; communication between the Father and the son cut off. He was as absolutely thrust out from the presence of God as was Satan and the hosts that followed him. That was spiritual death. But the Lord said that He would not suffer Adam nor his posterity to come to the temporal death until they should have the means by which they might be redeemed from the first death, which is spiritual. Therefore angels were sent unto Adam, who taught him the Gospel, and revealed to him the principle by which he could be redeemed from the first death, and be brought back from banishment and outer darkness into the marvelous light of the Gospel. He was taught faith, repentance and baptism for the remission of sins, in the name of Jesus Christ, who should come in the meridian of time and take away the sin of the world, and was thus given a chance to be redeemed from the spiritual death before he should die the temporal death. Now, all the world today, I am sorry to say, with the exception of a handful of people who have obeyed the new and everlasting covenant, are suffering this spiritual death. They are cast out from the presence of God. They are without God, without Gospel truth, and without the power of redemption; for they know not God nor His Gospel. In order that they may be redeemed and saved from the spiritual death which has spread over the world like a pall, they must repent of their sins, and be baptized by one having authority, for the remission of their sins, that they may be born of God. (Conference Report, October 1899, p. 72.)

Another type of spiritual death mentioned in the scriptures is the "second spiritual death." This more serious spiritual death occurs when a person commits the sin against the Holy Ghost—"Having denied the Holy Spirit after having received it, and having denied the Only Begotten Son of the Father, having crucified him unto themselves and put him to an open shame. . . . And the only ones on whom the second death shall have any power." (D&C 76:35, 37.) The effects of this sin are eternal, for the sinner never can make full payment for the law he has broken. Indeed, by denying the atonement of Jesus Christ and the cleansing power of the Holy Ghost, the sinner has denied the very power upon which forgiveness and redemption are based. These sinners become sons of perdition, and they "shall be chained down to an everlasting destruction" (Alma 12:17) and become "the only ones who shall not be redeemed in the due time of the Lord" (D&C 76:38).

2 NEPHI 9:20

God "knoweth all things"

The prophets, both ancient and modern, have clearly taught that God knows everything. Psalm 147:5 reads: "Great is our Lord, and of great power: his understanding is infinite." In Doctrine and Covenants 38:1-2, Jesus Christ introduces himself in these words: "Thus saith the Lord your God, even Jesus Christ, the Great I AM . . . The same which knoweth all things." (See also Alma 26:35.) The Prophet Joseph Smith also clearly taught this doctrine, as is indicated in his "Lectures on Faith" which appeared in the early editions of the Doctrine and Covenants:

. . . God is the only supreme governor and independent being in whom all fulness and perfection dwell; who is omnipotent [all powerful], omnipresent [everywhere present] and omniscient [all knowing]; without beginning of days or end of life; and that in him every good gift and every good principle dwell. . . .

. . . Without the knowledge of all things, God would not be able to save any portion of his creatures; for it is by reason of the knowledge which he has of all things, from the beginning to the end, that enables him to give the understanding to his creatures by which they are made partakers of eternal life; and if it were not for the idea existing in the minds of men that God had all knowledge it would be impossible for them to exercise faith in him. ("Lectures on Faith," Lecture 2, paragraph 2; Lecture 4, paragraph 11.)

Joseph Fielding Smith quotes his grandfather, Hyrum Smith, as having said: "I would not serve a God that had not all wisdom and all power." Then Joseph Fielding Smith continues, "Do we believe that God has all 'wisdom'? If so, in that, he is absolute. If there is something he does not know, then he is not absolute in 'wisdom,' and to think such a thing is absurd." (Doctrines of Salvation, 1:5.) President Smith indicates possible areas in which God is progressing (glory, honor, etc.), and then concludes, "Do you not see that it is in this manner that our Eternal Father is progressing? Not by seeking knowledge which he does not have, for such a thought cannot be maintained in the light of scripture. It is not through ignorance and learning hidden truth that he progresses, for if there are truths which he does not know, then these things are greater than he, and this cannot be." (Doctrines of Salvation, 1: 7).

2 NEPHI 9:23-24

Baptism among the Nephites

The teachings of Jacob clearly indicate that the early Nephites considered baptism an essential ordinance of the gospel. (2 Nephi 9:23-24.) Nephi also taught the necessity of baptism (2 Nephi 31:5-13), and then, referring to the baptism of the Savior, he counseled his followers to "do the things which I have told you I have seen that your Lord and your Redeemer should do; for, for this cause have they been shown unto me, that ye might know the gate by which ye should enter. For the gate by which ye should enter is repentance and baptism by water" (2 Nephi 31:17).

Concerning baptisms by the early Nephites, Joseph Fielding Smith has written:

The Book of Mormon teaches us that baptism for the remission of sins was a fundamental principle of the gospel among the Nephites from the time of Lehi all through their history. . . .

All through the Book of Mormon there are references to baptism as an ordinance for the remission of sins. What their word for baptism was is not revealed, but in the translation the Prophet Joseph Smith used the familiar expression of our time. (Answers to Gospel Questions, 2:66.)

The Lord indicates in the Pearl of Great Price that baptism has been practiced as an ordinance of the gospel since the fall of Adam (Moses 5:58; 6:52), with Adam himself being baptized (Moses 6:64-65). The purpose and necessity of baptism is clearly and beautifully explained by the Lord in this scripture. (Moses 6:52-63.)

The following statement provides additional information on the baptisms performed before the birth of Christ:

In the former ages of the world, before the Savior came in the flesh, "the saints" were baptized in the name of Jesus Christ to come, because there never was any other name whereby men could be saved; and after he came in the flesh and was crucified, then the saints were baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, crucified, risen from the dead and ascended into heaven, that they might be buried in baptism like him, and be raised in glory like him, that as there was but one Lord, one faith, one baptism, and one God and father of us all, even so there was but one door to the mansions of bliss. Amen. (Times and Seasons, 3:905.)

2 NEPHI 9:41

The "keeper of the gate"

The inspired prophet Jacob maintains that the "keeper of the gate" of heaven is "the Holy One of Israel; and he employeth no servant there." (2 Nephi 9:41.) The "Holy One of Israel" is Jesus Christ; thus the tradition in Christianity that Peter is the keeper of the gate of heaven is apparently false and without scriptural foundation.

2 NEPHI 9:53

The "covenants of the Lord"

A covenant is sometimes defined as "a solemn contract between two parties who agree to bind themselves to certain requirements"; thus a covenant is sort of a two-way promise. The "covenants of the Lord" refer to certain conditions or requirements that the Lord has set down; if the person keeps these requirements, certain blessings must follow, but if he does not meet the specified conditions, the Lord is no longer bound by the covenant. The Lord has described his role in the covenant as follows: "I, the Lord, am bound when ye do what I say; but when we do not what I say, ye have no promise." (D&C 82:10.)

2 NEPHI 10:3

The crucifixion of Jesus Christ

In order for Jesus Christ fully to atone or pay for the transgression of Adam, it was evidently necessary for his life to be taken so that the demands of justice could be fully met. Thus it was necessary for him to live upon the earth at a time when the people would be wicked enough to take his life. Jacob mentions it was necessary that the Savior come "among those who are the more wicked part of the world" as "there is none other nation on earth that would crucify their God." (2 Nephi 10:3.)

2 NEPHI 11:2-3

Witnesses of the Redeemer

God has said through his prophets, "In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established." (2 Corinthians 13:1.) Nephi was apparently aware of this system of witnesses when he introduced three great pre-Christian witnesses of the coming of Jesus Christ: Isaiah, Nephi himself, and Nephi's brother Jacob. Nephi then continues: "Wherefore, by the words of three, God hath said, I will establish my word." (2 Nephi 11:3.)

2 NEPHI chapters 12-24

The so-called "Isaiah problem" of the Book of Mormon

The early prophets of the Book of Mormon frequently quoted from the writings of Isaiah that appeared on the brass plates of Laban. (1 Nephi 5:11-13; 19:21-23.) Of the 433 verses of Isaiah quoted in the Book of Mormon, 199 verses are word-for-word the same as the corresponding verses in the King James Version of the Old Testament. The so-called Isaiah problem is this: How do Latter-day Saints account for this striking similarity in nearly half of the verses and the differences in the remainder of the verses?

In order to attempt an explanation of this problem, a person should consider the following points. Joseph Smith did not explain in great detail the process used in translating the Book of Mormon; he merely stated, "through the medium of the Urim and Thummim I translated the record by the gift and power of God." (Millennial Star, 18:118.) However, it is quite evident that the process of translation was not automatic; Joseph Smith not only had to exercise faith in the translation procedure, but he also had to put forth mental and spiritual effort. Oliver Cowdery's unsuccessful attempt to translate indicates clearly that the translation of the Book of Mormon was more than a mechanical process. (See D&C 8:1-3, 10-11; 9:7-9.)

Also, translation is frequently concerned with general ideas rather than specific words; even the best translators do not translate the same material from one language into another word-for-word the same. There appears to be only one answer to explain the word-for-word similarities between the verses of Isaiah in the Bible and the same verses in the Book of Mormon. When Joseph Smith translated the Isaiah references from the small plates of Nephi, he evidently opened his King James Version of the Bible and compared the impression he had received in translating with the words of the King James scholars. If his translation was essentially the same as that of the King James Version, he apparently quoted the verse from the Bible; then his scribe, Oliver Cowdery, copied it down. However, if Joseph Smith's translation did not agree precisely with that of the King James scholars, he would dictate his own translation to the scribe. This procedure in translation would account for both the 234 verses of Isaiah that were changed or modified by the Prophet Joseph and the 199 verses that were translated word-for-word the same. Although some critics might question this procedure of translation, scholars today frequently use this same procedure in translating the biblical manuscripts among the Dead Sea Scrolls.

2 NEPHI 15:26-29

Possible interpretation of Isaiah 5:26-29

In Isaiah 2:2 also 2 Nephi12:2) the prophet Isaiah indicates that he is going to talk about those things which are to "come to pass in the last days." The material Isaiah gives us in Isaiah 5 (2 Nephi 15) evidently pertains to this same time period; thus the events enumerated here are to take place primarily in the dispensation of the fulness of times. Concerning the possible fulfillment of this prophecy by Isaiah, Elder LeGrand Richards has written:

In fixing the time of the great gathering, Isaiah seemed to indicate that it would take place in the day of the railroad train and the airplane:

"And he will lift up an ensign to the nations from far, and will hiss unto them from the end of the earth: and, behold, they shall come with speed swiftly:

"None shall be weary nor stumble among them; none shall slumber nor sleep; neither shall the girdle of their loins be loosed, nor the latchet of their shoes be broken:

"Whose arrows are sharp, and all their bows bent, their horses' hoofs shall be counted like flint, and their wheels like a whirlwind:

"Their roaring shall be like a lion, they shall roar like young lions: yea, they shall roar, and lay hold of the prey, and shall carry it away safe, and none shall deliver it." (Isaiah 5:26-29.)

Since there were neither trains nor airplanes in that day, Isaiah could hardly have mentioned them by name. However, he seems to have described them in unmistakable words. How better could "their horses' hoofs be counted like flint, and their wheels like a whirlwind" than in the modern train? How better could "their roaring . . . be like a lion" than in the roar of the airplane? Trains and airplanes do not stop for night. Therefore, was not Isaiah justified in saying: "none shall slumber nor sleep; neither shall the girdle of their loins be loosed, nor the latchet of their shoes be broken"? With this manner of transportation the Lord can really "hiss unto them from the end of the earth," that "they shall come with speed swiftly." Indicating that Isaiah must have foreseen the airplane, he stated: "Who are these that fly as a cloud, and as the doves to their windows?" (Isaiah 60:8) (Israel! Do You Know? [Deseret Book Co., 1954], p. 182.)

2 NEPH1 16:9-11

Help in understanding Isaiah 6

The prophet Isaiah was quoted extensively not only by the Book of Mormon prophets but also by the writers of the New Testament and by the Savior himself. In fact, in our present New Testament the Savior quoted Isaiah more than all the other Old Testament prophets combined. Concerning the essential idea expressed in Isaiah 6:9-11 (and also in 2 Nephi 16:9-11), the Savior said the following concerning the people of his day:

Therefore speak I to them in parables: because they seeing see not; and hearing they hear not, neither do they understand.

And in them is fulfilled the prophecy of Esaias, which saith, By hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand; and seeing ye shall see, and shall not perceive:

For this people's heart is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes they have closed; lest at any time they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and should understand with their heart, and should be converted, and I should heal them. (Matthew 13:13-15.)

Also, the author of Acts quotes Paul as having said the following concerning Isaiah's words:

Well spake the Holy Ghost by Esaias the prophet unto our fathers, Saying, Go unto this people, and say, Hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand; and seeing ye shall see, and not perceive:

For the heart of this people is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes have they closed; lest they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and should be converted, and I should heal them. (Acts 28:25-27.)

2 NEPHI 21

The importance of Isaiah chapter 11

The eleventh chapter of Isaiah (which is quoted in 2 Nephi 21) is evidently one of the most important chapters in all scripture. Not only does Jacob quote it here from the brass plates of Laban, but on September 21, 1823, the resurrected angel Moroni quoted this chapter to Joseph Smith and said it was about to be fulfilled. Also, a section of the Doctrine and Covenants (section 113) is devoted primarily to an explanation of this chapter.

2 NEPHI 21:1-10

The meanings of some of the terms used by Isaiah

The following questions and answers that relate to Isaiah 11:1-10 (and thus to 2 Nephi 21:1-10) are included in section 113 of the Doctrine and Covenants:

Who is the Stem of Jesse spoken of in the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th verses of the 11th chapter of Isaiah?

Verily thus saith the Lord: It is Christ.

What is the rod spoken of in the first verse of the 11th chapter of Isaiah, that should come of the Stem of Jesse?

Behold, thus saith the Lord: It is a servant in the hands of Christ, who is partly a descendant of Jesse as well as of Ephraim, or of the house of Joseph, on whom there is laid much power.

What is the root of Jesse spoken of in the 10th verse of the 11th chapter?

Behold, thus saith the Lord, it is a descendant of Jesse, as well as of Joseph, unto whom rightly belongs the priesthood, and the keys of the kingdom, for an ensign, and for the gathering of my people in the last days.

2 NEPHI 21:10-12

A "second" gathering of Israel

A careful reading of these verses would seem to indicate they pertain to a time in the distant future from the days of Isaiah when the remnants of Israel are to be gathered together again. Concerning a possible interpretation of these verses, Elder LeGrand Richards has written:

From this scripture we learn that the events described were to be in the future: "The Lord shall set his hand again the second time to recover the remnant of his people." There could not be a "second time" unless there had been a first. The first time was when the Lord led Israel out of Egyptian bondage and captivity. When did the Lord set his hand the "second time" to recover the remnant of his people? This we will now consider. From the above scripture we learn that three important events were to transpire: (1) He shall set up an ensign for the nations; (2) he shall assemble the outcasts of Israel; (3) he shall gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth.

It is clear there are to be two gathering places—one for Israel and one for Judah. . . .

When speaking of Israel, most people have the Jews in mind; and when referring to the gathering of Israel, they have in mind the return of the Jews to the land of Jerusalem. It should be remembered that the Jews, the descendants of Judah, represent but one of the twelve branches, or tribes, of the house of Israel—the family of Jacob.

The twelve tribes of Israel were divided under two great heads—Judah, comprising the smaller group, and Israel, the larger group. (A Marvelous Work and a Wonder, 1976 ed., revised and enlarged, pp. 202-3.)

2 NEPHI 24:8

Meaning of the word "feller" in Isaiah

The word feller as it is used in Isaiah 14:8 (and in 2 Nephi 24:8) refers to a person who fells or cuts down trees. Thus, literally, a feller is "one who fells" or "one who cuts off."

2 NEPHI 24:12-13

Who is Lucifer?

The term Lucifer is apparently the title or name of the personage in the pre-earthly existence who is now referred to as Satan or the devil. The fact that Isaiah refers to Lucifer and his role in the pre-earthly existence would seem to indicate that the Old Testament prophets were acquainted with the doctrine of a pre-earthly existence. It may be that Isaiah and others of the ancient prophets had access to the writings of Moses that are not in our present Old Testament but which were revealed anew to the Prophet Joseph Smith in December 1830. These writings of Moses include the following statement concerning Lucifer and his role in the pre-earthly councils:

Wherefore, because that Satan rebelled against me, and sought to destroy the agency of man, which I, the Lord God, had given him, and also, that I should give unto him mine own power; by the power of mine Only Begotten, I caused that he should be cast down;

And he became Satan, yea, even the devil, the father of all lies, to deceive and to blind men, and to lead them captive at his will, even as many as would not hearken unto my voice. (Moses 4:3-4.)

2 NEPHI 25:20-30

The relationship between the law of Moses and the atonement of Jesus Christ

The Book of Mormon prophets clearly understood that the law of Moses did not contain the fulness of the saving principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ. They realized the law of Moses was given to prepare the people for the greater truths which were to be revealed. In 2 Nephi 25:24, Nephi writes: "And, notwithstanding we believe in Christ, we keep the law of Moses, and look forward with steadfastness unto Christ, until the law shall be fulfilled." Unfortunately, some of the people subsequently misunderstood this prophecy of Nephi and assumed that the law of Moses was fulfilled when the Savior was born upon the earth. However, it was made clear to them that the law of Moses was not to be fulfilled until after the resurrection of the Savior. (See 3 Nephi 1:24-25.)

2 NEPHI 25, 29

For a discussion of the major points in these chapters, see the material listed after 1 Nephi 19-22.

2 NEPHI 26:16

The voice "out of the dust" which "shall be as one that hath a familiar spirit"

Nephi is evidently quoting from a statement found in Isaiah 29:4 when he refers to a destroyed people whose record shall come "out of the ground, and their speech shall be low out of the dust, and their voice shall be as one that hath a familiar spirit." (2 Nephi 26:16.) Some biblical scholars have maintained that witchcraft is being referred to in that portion of Isaiah 29:4 which says that the voice shall be "as one that hath a familiar spirit." These scholars evidently arrived at this interpretation because of similar wording in other parts of the Bible. For example, in Leviticus we read: "Regard not them that have familiar spirits, neither seek after wizards, to be defiled by them" (Leviticus 19:31), and "A man also or woman that hath a familiar spirit, or that is a wizard, shall surely be put to death" (Leviticus 20:27). (For further biblical references indicating that the term "familiar spirits" might sometimes refer to witches, see 1 Samuel 28:7; 2 Kings 21:6; 1 Chronicles 10:13; Isaiah 8:19 and 19:3.)

However, a careful reading of this scripture, particularly when read together with Nephi's explanation, would indicate that the term it "hath a familiar spirit" means that this record (the Book of Mormon) would speak with a "familiar voice" to those who already have the Bible. In other words, Nephi is evidently saying here that the doctrinal teachings of the Book of Mormon would seem familiar to people who had already read and accepted the Bible.

2 NEPHI 26:29

Definition of "priestcraft"

The word priestcraft is used in the Book of Mormon to refer to the teachings of those people who would make a craft (or business) out of being a priest (or religious leader) to the people. Nephi indicates one danger of priestcraft is that such professional religious leaders would be more concerned with teaching those things which were popular and acceptable unto the people than they would in preaching the word of God. Thus they seek to "get gain and praise of the world; but they seek not the welfare of Zion." (2 Nephi 26:29.)

Priestcraft should not be confused with priesthood. There is a great deal of difference between the two, as is indicated in the following statement by George Q. Cannon: "There is a difference between priestcraft and Priesthood. Priestcraft builds up itself, it is not authorized of God. Priestcraft oppresses the people; but the Priesthood of God emancipates men and women and makes them free." (Journal of Discourses, 13:55.)

In defining priestcraft and explaining why it must eventually be destroyed, Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written:

. . . false priests, professing ministers, those claiming but not possessing priesthood, are engaged, to a greater or lesser degree, in the iniquitous practice of priestcraft. Priesthood and priestcraft are two opposites; one is of God, the other of the devil.

Apostasy is born of priestcrafts (2 Ne. 10:5; 3 Ne. 16:10; D. & C. 33:4), for those who engage in them follow vain things, teach false doctrines, love riches, and aspire to personal honors. (Alma 1:12, 16.) Men are commanded to repent of their priestcrafts (3 Ne. 30:2), and eventually, in the millennial day, these great evils will be done away. (3 Ne. 21:19.) (Mormon Doctrine [Bookcraft, 1958], p. 534.)

2 NEPHI 27:9, 15-18

The words of the book to be taken to one who is learned

Nephi's prophecy concerning the words of the book which the translator shall "deliver . . . to another, that he may show them unto the learned" (2 Nephi 27:15) apparently refers (1) to Joseph Smith's giving a copy of some of the characters to Martin Harris and (2) to the subsequent visit of Martin Harris with Professor Charles Anthon. Sometime between December 1827 and February 1828, Joseph Smith copied a number of the characters from the plates in his possession and translated some of them by means of the Urim and Thummim. In February 1828, Martin Harris visited the Prophet in Pennsylvania, obtained a transcript of the characters, and took it to Professor Charles Anthon of New York City. For an account of what occurred, we have the following statement made by Martin Harris to Joseph Smith:

I went to the city of New York, and presented the characters which had been translated, with the translation thereof, to Professor Charles Anthon, a gentlemen celebrated for his literary attainments. Professor Anthon stated that the translation was correct, more so than any he had before seen translated from the Egyptian. I then showed him those which were not yet translated, and he said that they were Egyptian, Chaldaic, Assyriac, and Arabic; and he said they were true characters. He gave me a certificate, certifying to the people of Palmyra that they were true characters, and that the translation of such of them as had been translated was also correct. I took the certificate and put it into my pocket, and was just leaving the house, when Mr. Anthon called me back, and asked me how the young man found out that there were gold plates in the place where he found them. I answered that an angel of God had revealed it unto him.

He then said to me, "Let me see that certificate." I accordingly took it out of my pocket and gave it to him, when he took it and tore it to pieces, saying that there was no such thing now as ministering of angels, and that if I would bring the plates to him he would translate them. I informed him that part of the plates were sealed, and that I was forbidden to bring them. He replied, I cannot read a sealed book." I left him and went to Dr. Mitchell, who sanctioned what Professor Anthon had said respecting both the characters and the translation. (Joseph Smith 2:64-65.)

This experience apparently convinced Martin Harris that Joseph Smith was a prophet and that he had the gold plates. Thus he later served as a scribe for Joseph Smith during the translation of part of the Plates of Mormon, was privileged to be one of the three special witnesses, and was willing to mortgage his farm to raise money for the first edition of the Book of Mormon.

2 NEPHI 27:12-13

The special witnesses of the Book of Mormon

The Lord allowed Joseph Smith to have two sets of special witnesses to the Book of Mormon: (1) the three witnesses—Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris, and (2) the eight witnesses—Christian Whitmer, Jacob Whitmer, Peter Whitmer, Jr., John Whitmer, Hiram Page, Joseph Smith, Sen., Hyrum Smith, Samuel H. Smith.

In 2 Nephi 27:12 the three persons who should behold the record "by the power of God" evidently are the three special witnesses. In their testimony they declared they had seen an angel, had heard the voice of the Lord, and had been shown the plates "by the power of God, and not of man."

In 2 Nephi 27:13, the few other witnesses who should view the record "according to the will of God, to bear testimony of his word unto the children of men" evidently include the eight special witnesses.

(For further information on this topic, see the section on the witnesses in the first chapter, "The Story of the Coming Forth of the Book of Mormon.")

2 NEPHI 28:3-4

Contention among the so-called Christian churches

Nephi's prophecy concerning the contention that would exist among Christian churches at the time the Book of Mormon was to be translated is amply demonstrated by the words of the Prophet Joseph Smith regarding the situation in New York when he was approximately fourteen years of age.

Some time in the second year after our removal to Manchester, there was in the place where we lived an unusual excitement on the subject of religion. It commenced with the Methodists, but soon became general among all the sects in that region of country. Indeed, the whole district of country seemed affected by it, and great multitudes united themselves to the different religious parties, which created no small stir and division amongst the people, some crying, "Lo, here!" and others, "Lo, there!" Some were contending for the Methodist faith, some for the Presbyterian, and some for the Baptist.

For, notwithstanding the great love which the converts to these different faiths expressed at the time of their conversion, and the great zeal manifested by the respective clergy, who were active in getting up and promoting this extraordinary scene of religious feeling, in order to have everybody converted, as they were pleased to call it, let them join what sect they pleased; yet when the converts began to file off, some to one party and some to another, it was seen that the seemingly good feelings of both the priests and the converts were more pretended than real; for a scene of great confusion and bad feeling ensued—priest contending against priest, and convert against convert; so that all their good feelings one for another, if they ever had any, were entirely lost in a strife of words and a contest about opinions. (Joseph Smith 2:5-6.)

2 NEPHI 28:7-8

The teachings of modern theology concerning sin

Any person who has carefully studied the teachings of modern theologians recognizes that many of them now teach there is no such thing as "sin against God"; they claim sin is simply doing wrong against oneself. In such a philosophy, the person can rationalize whether or not he is committing sin. Nephi's prophecy concerning the false teachings of the last days seems to be literally fulfilled in this modern theology, which even questions the existence of God and of life after death. The philosophy that "God is dead" comprises a significant part of modern theology. Concerning the inherent weakness of a philosophy of "Eat, drink, and be merry, for tomorrow we die" (2 Nephi 28:7), President John Taylor has written:

If I am a being that came into the world yesterday, and leaves it again tomorrow, I might as well have one religion as another, or none at all; "let us eat and drink; for to-morrow we die." If I am an eternal being, I want to know something about that eternity with which I am associated. I want to know something about God, the devil, heaven, and hell. If hell is a place of misery, and heaven a place of happiness, I want to know how to escape the one, and obtain the other. If I cannot know something about these things which are to come in the eternal world, I have no religion. . . . If there is a God, I want a religion that supplies some means of certain and tangible communication with Him. If there is a heaven, I want to know what sort of a place it is. If there are angels, I want to know their nature, and their occupation, and of what they are composed. If I am an eternal being, I want to know what I am to do when I get through with time. . . . (Journal of Discourses, 1:151.)

2 NEPHI 28:21

Is everything well in Zion?

Nephi's warning against teaching that "all is well in Zion" evidently refers to a situation in which people say everything is well when actually it is not. Concerning such a condition, President Wilford Woodruff has warned:

Can we fold our arms in peace and cry "all is peace in Zion," when, so far as we have the power of the priesthood resting upon us, we can see the condition of the world? Can we imagine that our garments will be clean without lifting our voice before our fellowmen and warning them of the things that are at their doors? No, we cannot. There never was a set of men since God made the world under a stronger responsibility to warn this generation, to lift up our voices long and loud, day and night so far as we have the opportunity and declare the words of God unto this generation. We are required to do this. This is our calling. It is our duty. It is our business. (Journal of Discourses, 21:122.)

2 NEPHI 28:22

Is there a devil?

Students of comparative Christianity are well aware that many Christian churches today do not teach the actual existence of a devil. This condition was prophesied by Nephi wherein he stated that in the last days the devil would say to the people, "I am no devil, for there is none." (2 Nephi 28:22.) The Book of Mormon and other latter-day scriptures clearly and definitely teach the existence of the devil as a personage of spirit. Concerning some of these teachings of the Church, James E. Talmage has written:

Now, I know that it is not quite in accord with the advanced thought of the day, according to certain cults, to believe that there is a devil, a personage, a reality. Many who pose as super-thinkers seek to dismiss, with the old ideas, the old stories, fables they call them, that form the bulk of the very word of God recorded as sacred writ, the fact of Satan's existence.

But there is a personage known as Satan. Before he was cast out from heaven he was called Lucifer. He is just as truly a personage as are you or am I, though he is not embodied. He is in that unembodied state in which we existed prior to our birth into the flesh. And we read, as the Revelator tells us [Rev. 12:7-9], as Jude attests [Jude 6], that he was cast out from heaven because of his rebellion and all his angels or followers were cast out with him; numbering a third of the spirit-hosts of that particular class in heaven. (Rev. 12:4; D&C 29:36.] So they were many, and they are many . . .

Satan foresaw what would come to pass, and the prophet Nephi realized fully the claims that would be set up in the last days, these days. Read what goes before that which I shall read to you, and you will see that the prophet is referring to the time in which we live. He tells us that it will be necessary in this day that the kingdom of the devil shall shake, and he foretells that the devil will "rage in the hearts of the children of men, and stir them up to anger against that which is good."

"And others will he pacify, and lull them away into carnal security, that they will say: All is well in Zion; yea, Zion prospereth, all is well—and thus the devil cheateth their souls, and leadeth them away carefully down to hell.

"And behold, others he flattereth away, and telleth them there is no hell; and he saith unto them: I am no devil, for there is none—and thus he whispereth in their ears, until he grasps them with his awful chains, from whence there is no deliverance." (2 Nephi 28:21-22.) (Vitality of Mormonism [Boston: Richard G. Badger, 1919], pp. 123-24.)

2 NEPHI 28:30

Those who reject the additional word of God will have taken away even that which they have

One of the principles upon which God operates is to give his children only as much of the law as they are able to live. Otherwise, if he gives laws to his children that they are not able to keep, then they would come under condemnation. God has said, "I will give unto the children of men line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little; and blessed are those who hearken unto my precepts, and lend an ear unto my counsel, for they shall learn wisdom; for unto him that receiveth I will give more; and from them that shall say, We have enough, from them shall be taken away even that which they have." (2 Nephi 28:30. Italics added.)

In relationship to the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, this principle of the Lord works somewhat as follows:

2 NEPHI 29:11-14

The three scriptural witnesses

"In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established." (2 Corinthians 13:1.) The Bible, which contains the preceding statement, is one of the scriptural witnesses in which the word of God is established. But where are the second or the third witnesses? Latter-day Saints believe that the Book of Mormon is a second witness for the gospel of Jesus Christ; and in 2 Nephi 29:11-14 the Lord mentions a third scriptural witness that is yet to come forth: the record of the lost tribes of Israel. Thus the great "triple combination" of the last days will evidently consist of three great scriptural witnesses that testify of each other and will also witness of the divinity of Jesus Christ and his gospel.

2 NEPHI 30:4-7

The blessings of the Lamanites

When read in context, these verses concerning the eventual blessings of the Lamanites quite clearly refer to the last days. Concerning the future destiny of the Lamanites as they come into the Church, President Spencer W. Kimball has written:

The Lamanites must rise in majesty and power. We must took forward to the day when they will be "white and delightsome," [2 Nephi 30:6], sharing the freedoms and blessings which we enjoy; when they shall have economic security, culture, refinement, and education; when they shall be operating farms and businesses and industries and shall be occupied in the professions and in teaching; when they shall be organized into wards and stakes of Zion, furnishing much of their own leadership; when they shall build and occupy and fill the temples, and serve in them as the natives are now serving in the Hawaiian Temple where I found last year the entire service conducted by them and done perfectly. And in the day when their prophet shall come, one shall rise . . . mighty among them . . . being an instrument in the hands of God, with exceeding faith, to work mighty wonders. . . . (2 Nephi 3:24.)

Brothers and sisters, the fluorescence of the Lamanites is in our hands. (Conference Report, October 1947, p. 22.)

2 NEPHI 31:5-21

The baptism of Jesus Christ

The New Testament mentions the baptism of Jesus Christ, but the exact reasons why the Savior submitted to baptism are not made clear in the Bible except in his statement that he was being baptized in order "to fulfil all righteousness." (Matthew 3:15.)

The Book of Mormon lists several reasons for the baptism of the Christ, including the one given by the Savior himself on the eastern continent: (1) "to fulfil all righteousness" (2 Nephi 31:5); in other words, the Savior was baptized in order to keep the commandments of the Lord. (2) "He humbleth himself before the Father." (2 Nephi 31:7.) (3) He "witnesseth unto the Father that he would be obedient unto him in keeping his commandments." (2 Nephi 31:7.) (4) "It showeth unto the children of men the straightness of the path, and the narrowness of the gate, by which they should enter, he having set the example before them." (2 Nephi 31:9.)

When we partake of the sacrament we renew the covenants we made at the time of baptism. In this regard, it is interesting to compare the major promises enumerated in the sacramental prayers with the reasons listed above as to why the Savior was baptized. The wording of the sacramental prayers also indicates that we should humble ourselves and witness unto the Father that we are willing to take upon us the name of his Son, and always remember him and keep his commandments. (Moroni 4 and 5.)

Although Nephi lived over five hundred years before the birth of the Savior, he knew by the power of revelation that the Savior was going to be baptized. Furthermore, he counseled his people to "do the things which I have told you I have seen that your Lord and your Redeemer should do; for, for this cause have they been shown unto me, that ye might know the gate by which ye should enter." (2 Nephi 31:17.) This scripture indicates clearly that baptism was practiced, at least among the Nephites, hundreds of years before the Savior was born.

Other evidence exists, in the scriptures and elsewhere, that baptism was also performed by other groups before the birth of Christ. The Jewish Encyclopedia indicates that baptism was a common practice in ancient Israel: "Baptism was practiced in ancient Judaism (Hasidic or Essene), first as a means of penitence . . . to receive the spirit of God, or to be permitted to stand in the presence of God, man must undergo baptism." (Vol. 2, p. 499.) Concerning the mode of baptism, the Encyclopedia says ". . . this [baptism] is only valid when performed by immersion in a natural fountain or stream or in a properly constructed [vessel]. This rule was, of course, also preserved in the temple at Jerusalem." (Vol. 1, pp. 68-69.)

The fact that baptism was practiced in ancient Israel might help explain why the Savior was not criticized by the orthodox Jewish people when he was baptized. The Pharisees were quick to criticize the Savior whenever he did anything contrary to their law. However, not a single word of criticism concerning the baptism of Jesus Christ is found in the entire New Testament!

(If you desire additional information on the topic of baptism among the Nephites, see the discussion following 2 Nephi 9:23-24.)

2 NEPHI 33:10-11

If you believe in the words of Christ, you will believe in the Book of Mormon

In his farewell address, Nephi warns us as future readers of his record that we have the responsibility to decide whether or not we believe the things he has written. He also informs us that if we truly believe in Christ we will believe in his words, "for they are the words of Christ." (2 Nephi 33:10.) In conclusion, he warns: "And if they are not the words of Christ, judge ye—for Christ will show unto you, with power and great glory, that they are his words, at the last day." (2 Nephi 33:11.)
