Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Book of Mormon ( 1976)

JACOB

JACOB 1:11

The new king called "Second Nephi"

It is not clear who succeeded Nephi as king over the Nephites. Some Book of Mormon scholars have surmised that Nephi's successor was probably Jacob; they say Jacob failed to mention this here because of his modesty. However, other scholars feel that Nephi was probably succeeded as king by one of his sons.

JACOB 1:14

Meaning of the terms "Nephites" and "Lamanites"

In general, the terms "Nephites" and "Lamanites" are used with the same meaning for the first 500 years of Nephite history. The term Nephites refers to all those who followed after Nephi and to their descendants. The term Lamanites refers to those who followed after Laman and to their descendants. However, it is mentioned later in the Book of Mormon that there were no "ites" of any kind during the 200-year Golden Age immediately after the appearance of the resurrected Jesus Christ. (See 4 Nephi 17.)

After this 200-year period of righteousness, the terms "Lamanites" and "Nephites" are used again, but with somewhat different meanings than those used earlier in the Book of Mormon.

(For further information on the later use of these terms, see the material listed after 4 Nephi 20, 36-39.)

JACOB 1:19

The responsibility of leadership

The righteous leaders of the Nephites on the American continent apparently had the same keen sense of responsibility as was held by the righteous Hebrew leaders on the eastern continent. Jacob mentions that he and his brother Joseph, in becoming the religious leaders of the people, had taken upon themselves "the responsibility, answering the sins of the people upon our own heads if we did not teach them the word of God with all diligence." (Jacob 1:19.)

Ezekiel was one of the leaders of Israel on the eastern continent at about this same period. Concerning the responsibility of the leader to the people, Ezekiel recorded the following instructions from the Lord:

Again the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

Son of man, speak to the children of thy people, and say unto them, When I bring the sword upon a land, if the people of the land take a man of their coasts, and set him for their watchman:

If when he seeth the sword come upon the land, he blow the trumpet, and warn the people;

Then whosoever heareth the sound of the trumpet, and taketh not warning; if the sword come, and take him away, his blood shall be upon his own head.

He heard the sound of the trumpet, and took not warning; his blood shall be upon him. But he that taketh warning shall deliver his soul.

But if the watchman see the sword come, and blow not the trumpet, and the people be not warned; if the sword come, and take any person from among them, he is taken away in his iniquity; but his blood will I require at the watchman's hand.

So thou, O son of man, I have set thee a watchman unto the house of Israel; therefore thou shalt hear the word at my mouth, and warn them from me. (Ezekiel 33:1-7.)

JACOB 2:18-19

Legitimate use of riches

The Book of Mormon does not teach that riches per se are evil. It does, however, indicate that the love of riches is evil, because then the craving for wealth is motivated by the wrong reasons.

However, Jacob promises here that if a person truly seeks the kingdom of God first and then desires riches, he will seek wealth for the right reasons: to clothe the naked, to feed the hungry, etc.

JACOB 2:23

Jacob's teachings on whoredoms

Jacob clearly taught that whoredoms are an abomination before the Lord. (Jacob 2:23, 28.) The word whoredom as used here by Jacob could refer either to the sin of fornication or to the sin of adultery.

The leaders of the Church in this dispensation have been strong in condemning these types of sins. Following is an official statement published over the signatures of the First Presidency of the Church concerning this matter:

To us of this Church, the Lord has declared that adulterers should not be admitted to membership (D&C 42:76); that adulterers in the Church, if unrepentant, should be cast out (D&C 42:75), but if repentant should be permitted to remain (D&C 42:74, 42:25) and, He said, "By this ye may know if a man repenteth of his sins—behold, he will confess them and forsake them." (D&C 58:43)

In the great revelation on the three heavenly glories, the Lord said, speaking of those who will inherit the lowest of these, or the telestial glory: "These are they who are liars, and sorcerers, and adulterers, and whoremongers, and whosoever loves and makes a lie." (D&C 76:103)

The doctrine of this Church is that sexual sin—the illicit sexual relations of men and women—stands, in its enormity, next to murder.

The Lord has drawn no essential distinctions between fornication, adultery, and harlotry or prostitution. Each has fallen under His solemn and awful condemnation.

You youths of Zion, you cannot associate in non-marital, illicit sex relationships, which is fornication, and escape the punishments and the judgments which the Lord has declared against this sin. The day of reckoning will come just as certainly as night follows day. They who would palliate this crime and say that such indulgence is but a sinless gratification of a normal desire, like appeasing hunger and thirst, speak filthiness with their lips. Their counsel leads to destruction; their wisdom comes from the Father of Lies.

You husbands and wives who have taken on solemn obligations of chastity in the holy temples of the Lord and who violate those sacred vows by illicit sexual relations with others, you not only commit the vile and loathsome sin of adultery, but you break the oath you yourselves made with the Lord Himself before you went to the altar for your sealing. You become subject to the penalties which the Lord has prescribed for those who breach their covenants with Him. . . .

But they who sin may repent, and, they repenting, God will forgive them, for the Lord has said, "Behold, he who has repented of his sins, the same is forgiven, and I, the Lord, remember them no more." (D&C 58:52)

By virtue of the authority in us vested as the First Presidency of the Church, we warn our people who are offending, of the degradation, the wickedness, the punishment that attend upon unchastity; we urge you to remember the blessings which flow from the living of the clean life; we call upon you to keep, day in and day out, the way of strictest chastity, through which only can God's choice gifts come to you and His Spirit abide with you.

How glorious is he who lives the chaste life. He walks unfearful in the full glare of the noon-day sun, for he is without moral infirmity. He can be reached by no shafts of base calumny, for his armor is without flaw. His virtue cannot be challenged by any just accuser, for he lives above reproach. His cheek is never blotched with shame, for he is without hidden sin. He is honored and respected by all mankind, for he is beyond their censure. He is loved by the Lord, for he stands without blemish. The exaltations of eternities await his coming. (Heber J. Grant, J. Reuben Clark, Jr., David O. McKay, Conference Report, October 1942, pp. 11-12.)

Also, Hyrum M. Smith reminds us that the law against adultery was one of the Ten Commandments and it is still binding upon the world:

"Thou shalt not commit adultery." Another soul destroying crime which is very rare among the Latter-day Saints. There is no other sin, save murder only, that will so soon destroy the spiritual and moral life of men—why, it is spiritual suicide to participate in any such deadly crime. We do not sustain it; we do not suffer it; we do not tolerate it; and we do not commit it, as a people. (Hyrum M. Smith, Conference Report, October 1906, pp. 44-45.)

JACOB 2:24-30

Jacob's teachings on polygamy

Jacob indicates that if the Lord commands people to practice polygamy in order to "raise up seed" unto himself, then the people should practice polygamy. (Jacob 2:30.) However, if the Lord does not command the people to practice polygamy, then a man should not have more than one wife. (Verse 27.) Jacob makes it clear that the Nephites were not to practice polygamy. (Jacob 2:25-27.)

JACOB 3:10

The responsibility of parents

The doctrine that parents are at least partially responsible for the acts of their children is clearly taught in latter-day scriptures. In fact, as is indicated in the following scripture, parents are responsible for the sins of their children if the parents do not teach them the gospel:

And again, inasmuch as parents have children in Zion, or in any of her stakes which are organized, that teach them not to understand the doctrine of repentance, faith in Christ the Son of the living God, and of baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of the hands, when eight years old, the sin be upon the heads of the parents. . . .

And they shall also teach their children to pray, and to walk uprightly before the Lord. (D&C 68:25, 28.)

JACOB 3:14

The "plates of Jacob"

Apparently the "plates of Jacob" referred to here are the same set of plates referred to elsewhere as the small plates of Nephi. Jacob admits these plates were "made by the hand of Nephi." (Jacob 3:14.) Evidently they are now called the plates of Jacob because the historian who is writing on the plates is now Jacob.

JACOB 4:14-17

The blindness of the Jews

In trying to explain why the Jewish people did not accept the Savior when he came, Jacob said it was because of the blindness of the Jews "which blindness came by looking beyond the mark." (Jacob 4:14.) Although the meaning of this idiomatic expression is not absolutely clear, some Book of Mormon scholars have suggested that the Jewish people were "looking beyond the mark" insofar as they expected the Savior to do at his first coming those things which it was prophesied he should do at his second coming. Thus, when the Savior did not lead the Jewish people to victory over their enemies during his earthly existence, he was largely rejected by the Jews. Jacob, however, prophesies that in the last days the Jews will once again build upon the sure foundation of Jesus Christ.

JACOB chapter 5

The allegory of Zenos concerning the tame and wild olive tree

The remarkable allegory or parable of Zenos contained in the fifth chapter of Jacob makes up the longest single chapter in the Book of Mormon. One of the difficulties of the allegory—and of all allegories—is to know how literally it should be interpreted. The dictionary defines an allegory as "the veiled presentation, in a figurative story, of a meaning metaphorically implied but not expressly stated." In other words, an allegory is the description of one thing under the image of another. The images (or symbols) used by Zenos in his allegory together with their possible meanings are as follows:

These identical symbols were used by Paul in his letter to the Romans (see Romans 11:17-24), which might indicate Paul was acquainted with the allegory by Zenos. The ten "lost" tribes of Israel and the Lehite and Mulekite colonies could all be included among the various graftings (plantings) of the natural branches of the tame olive tree into the "nethermost part" of the vineyard. The last planting referred to (in Jacob 5:25, 40, 43-44) evidently refers to the Nephite-Lamanite groups that descended from the Lehite colony.

Concerning the importance of this parable by Zenos, Joseph Fielding Smith has written:

The parable of Zenos, recorded by Jacob in chapter five of his book, is one of the greatest parables ever recorded. This parable in and of itself stamps the Book of Mormon with convincing truth. No mortal man, without the inspiration of the Lord, could have written such a parable. . . . It is simple and very clear to the minds of those who earnestly seek to know the truth. . . .

In brief, it records the history of Israel down through the ages, the scattering of the tribes to all parts of the earth; their mingling with, or being grafted in, the wild olive trees, or in other words the mixing of the blood of Israel among the Gentiles. . . .

This remarkable parable portrays how, . . . branches of the olive tree (Israelites) were carried to all parts of the earth (the Lord's vineyard) and grafted into the wild olive trees (the Gentile nations). . . .

Today Latter-day Saints are going to all parts of the world as servants in the vineyard to gather this fruit and lay it in store for the time of the coming of the Master. This parable is one of the most enlightening and interesting in the Book of Mormon. How can any person read it without feeling the inspiration of this ancient prophet? (Answers to Gospel Questions, 4:141-42.)

JACOB 7:1-20

The teachings of Sherem, the anti-Christ

Sherem is one of the first avowed anti-Christs in the Book of Mormon. It might be profitable, therefore, to review his teachings, because later anti-Christs (Nehor, Korihor, etc.) teach essentially these same things. Sherem (1) preached those things which were flattering unto the people (Jacob 7:2); (2) claimed that no man can tell of things to come (Jacob 7:7); (3) claimed to believe in the scriptures, but clearly did not understand them (Jacob 7:10-11); (4) denied the existence of Christ (Jacob 7:9); (5) would not accept evidence unless it could be perceived through the physical senses, and thus asked for a sign he could feel (Jacob 7:13).

JACOB 7:19

The unpardonable sin

When Sherem admitted he had been deceived by the devil, he feared lest he had committed "the unpardonable sin," for he had lied unto God and had denied the Christ. Although it is not clear in the Book of Mormon whether or not Sherem was guilty of committing the unpardonable sin, the Lord has explained in other scriptures the characteristics of those who do commit this sin. In the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord has said:

Thus saith the Lord concerning all those who know my power, and have been made partakers thereof, and suffered themselves through the power of the devil to be overcome, and to deny the truth and defy my power—

They are they who are the sons of perdition, of whom I say that it had been better for them never to have been born;

For they are vessels of wrath, doomed to suffer the wrath of God, with the devil and his angels in eternity;

Concerning whom I have said there is no forgiveness in this world nor in the world to come—

Having denied the Holy Spirit after having received it, and having denied the Only Begotten Son of the Father, having crucified him unto themselves and put him to an open shame.

These are they who shall go away into the lake of fire and brimstone, with the devil and his angels—

And the only ones on whom the second death shall have any power. (D&C 76:31-37.)

Orson Pratt has explained the meaning of the term "second death," which is used in this scripture and which comes upon the sons of perdition:

Second death, What is that? After you have been redeemed from the grave, and come into the presence of God, you will have to stand there to be judged; and if you have done evil, you will be banished everlastingly from His presence—body and spirit united together; this is what is called the second death. Why is it called the second death? Because the first is the dissolution of body and spirit, and the second is . . . a banishment—a becoming dead to the things of righteousness. . . . (Journal of Discourses, 1:288.)

JACOB 7:27

The use of the word "adieu"

Some anti-LDS critics of the Book of Mormon have raised the question as to how Jacob could possibly have used such a word as adieu when this word clearly comes from the French language, which was not developed until hundreds of years after the time of Jacob. Such critics evidently overlook the fact that the Book of Mormon is translation literature, and Joseph Smith felt free in his translation to use any words familiar to himself and his readers that would best convey the meaning of the original author. It is interesting to note that there is a Hebrew word Lehitra 'ot, which has essentially the same meaning in Hebrew as the word adieu has in French. Both of these words are much more than a simple farewell; they include the idea of a blessing. Would it be unreasonable to remind these critics that none of the words contained in the English translation of the book of Jacob were used by Jacob himself? These words all come from the English language, which did not come into existence until long after Jacob's time!
