Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Book of Mormon ( 1976)

ENOS

ENOS 1-10

One means of receiving revelation

Although small in number of verses, the book of Enos teaches some important concepts. For example, Enos tells us something concerning one way in which revelation can be received when he says "there came a voice unto me, saying" (verse 5) and "the voice of the Lord came into my mind again, saying" (verse 10). Concerning this type of revelation, President Harold B. Lee said:

Another way by which we receive revelation is the way that the Prophet Enos spoke of. After he'd gone up and received the great commission to carry on the work and to write the record, he pens this very significant statement in his record in the Book of Mormon. "And while I was thus struggling in the spirit, the voice of the Lord came into my mind saying—." In other words, sometimes we hear the voice of the Lord coming into our minds and when it comes the impressions are just as strong as though he were talking as with a trumpet into our ear. Jeremiah says something like that in the first chapter of the Book of Jeremiah: "Then the words of the Lord came unto me saying—." He was having the voice of the Lord into his mind, as Enos said. In the story of the Book of Mormon we have Nephi upbraiding his brothers, calling them to repentance and in his statement to them he gives voice to the same thought when he says, "And he hath spoken unto you in a still, small voice, but ye were past feeling, so that ye could not feel his words." Thus the Lord, by revelation, brings into our mind as though a voice were speaking. May I bear humble testimony, if I may be pardoned, to that fact? I was once in a situation where I needed help. The Lord knew I needed help and I was on an important mission. I was awakened in the hours of the morning as though someone had wakened me to straighten me out on something that I had planned to do in a contrary course, and there was clearly mapped out before me as I lay there that morning, just as surely as though someone had sat on the edge of my bed and told me what to do. Yes, the voice of the Lord comes into our minds and we are directed thereby. (Brigham Young University Speeches of the Year, October 15, 1952.)

ENOS 11-18

The eternal nature of a covenant with the Lord

Another important principle taught in the book of Enos is that the Lord will keep all the covenants he has made with his people. In verse 16, Enos tells us that the Lord covenanted with him that the records of the Nephites would come forth unto the Lamanites in the Lord's own due time. That this covenant of the Lord was literally fulfilled is made clear in the Doctrine and Covenants wherein the Lord said to Joseph Smith:

Nevertheless, my work shall go forth, for inasmuch as the knowledge of a Savior has come unto the world, through the testimony of the Jews, even so shall the knowledge of a Savior come unto my people—

And to the Nephites, and the Jacobites, and the Josephites, and the Zoramites, through the testimony of their fathers—

And this testimony shall come to the knowledge of the Lamanites, and the Lemuelites, and the Ishmaelites, who dwindled in unbelief because of the iniquity of their fathers, whom the Lord has suffered to destroy their brethren the Nephites, because of their iniquities and their abominations.

And for this very purpose are these plates preserved, which contain these records—that the promises of the Lord might be fulfilled, which he made to his people. (D&C 3:16-19.)

Another principle taught in this account is that our prayers are not necessarily answered immediately. That the Lord will answer our prayers if we keep our covenants and are worthy is made clear by George Q. Cannon in the following statement:

And, if they (the saints) will exercise their faith aright, there is no good thing, which they can desire, that will be withheld from them. Because you do not get all your prayers answered and your desires granted immediately, you must not therefore be disheartened. Remember the instruction upon this point imparted by Jesus through the parable of the importunate widow, and remember, also, that though your prayers may not be answered immediately, if they are offered in the name of Jesus and in faith, nothing being left undone by you that is required, they will live on the records of heaven and in the remembrance of the Lord, and yet bear fruit. The ancient fathers asked for blessings in their prayers, which are even now being granted—thousands of years after the death of their mortal bodies. And many centuries ago the servants of the Lord among the Nephites made known to the Lord the desires of their hearts respecting their brethren in their prayers, and they yet await their fulfilment; but they know the promise of the Lord is sure and cannot fail. . . . Though heaven and earth pass away, not one word that the Lord has spoken, not one promise that he has made, can pass away or remain unfulfilled. If they have waited thus patiently for the fulfilment of their prayers, cannot we, if necessary, do so also? (Millennial Star, 25:74-75.)
