Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Book of Mormon ( 1976)

OMNI

OMNI 1-3, 4-8, 9, 10-11, 12-30

Why five writers in the Book of Omni?

The first five books in our present Book of Mormon (1 Nephi, 2 Nephi, Jacob, Enos, and Jarom) comprise 129 pages, cover a period of approximately 239 years, and are written by four men. The brief book of Omni comprises less than three pages, covers a possible time period of 231 years, and is written by five different writers.

Although some of the five writers in the book of Omni attempt to explain why their writings are not more extensive, perhaps we should examine again the purpose of the small plates of Nephi and then relate this purpose to the reasons given by these men. The small plates of Nephi were to contain the religious history of the Nephite people. Thus the record on these plates primarily consisted of the prophecies and religious teachings of the Nephite leaders. The fact that the writings of five men occupy such a small segment as the book of Omni would indicate this was a period of great apostasy—thus there were no new prophecies or religious teachings to be added to the record.

The first three verses in this book were written by Omni, and he admits he was a wicked man. Verses 4-8 were written by Amaron, who states that the "more wicked part of the Nephites were destroyed" because of the judgments of God; this statement also indicates a period of apostasy and wickedness. The next writer, Chemish, wrote only one verse. Abinadom, the son of Chemish, wrote twice as much as his father—two verses! In these verses Abinadom states that he knows of no revelation nor prophecy except those that were written (verse 11); again this would indicate a period of great apostasy and wickedness. The final 19 verses (verses 12-30) were written by Amaleki, the son of Abinadom. His writings also indicate that he lived in a time of apostasy; in fact, it was during his lifetime that the Lord warned Mosiah to lead a small righteous group of people away from the wicked Nephites.

OMNI 12-19

The people of Zarahemla

Most Latter-day Saints refer to the people of Zarahemla as the "Mulekites," although the word Mulekite does not appear a single time in the Book of Mormon. The people of Zarahemla were descendants of a colony of people who left Jerusalem about 589 B.C. at the time of the Babylonian captivity. (Omni 15.) Included in this colony was Mulek (the ancestor of Zarahemla and one of the sons of Zedekiah, the king of Judah—Mosiah 25:2 and Helaman 8:21). Inasmuch as only descendants of Judah could serve as the rulers of the kingdom of Judah, Mulek and his descendants were of the tribe of Judah. Of course, representatives of some of the other tribes of Israel might have been included among the people of Zarahemla.

It is interesting to note that although the progenitors of Mosiah's group and of the people of Zarahemla left Jerusalem within about twelve years of each other, and evidently spoke the same language then, yet about four hundred years later their descendants could not even understand each other. The reason for this is that the language of the people of Zarahemla "had become corrupted" because they "had brought no records with them; and they denied the being of their Creator." (Omni 17.) Thus the earlier counsel to Nephi seems to be substantiated that "it is better that one man should perish" in order to obtain records and scriptures than "that a nation should dwindle and perish in unbelief." (1 Nephi 4:13.)

OMNI 13

The land of Zarahemla is "down" from the land of Nephi

The concept of going "up" when you go north and of going "down" when you go south is of relatively recent origin, and thus was not used by the Nephites. When the Nephites stated they went from Nephi down to Zarahemla, they were referring to elevation and not to direction. Zarahemla was definitely lower in elevation than Nephi because the river Sidon had its head in the land of Nephi but flowed down through the center of the land of Zarahemla. (Alma 16:6-7; 22:27-29.)

OMNI 20-22

Coriantumr, the last of the Jaredites

The Coriantumr who lived with the people of Zarahemla for a short period was the last military leader of the Jaredite nation. (Ether 12:1; 13:20-22.) The Book of Mormon does not specifically state when Coriantumr lived with the people of Zarahemla, but it would have to be sometime after 589 B.C. (when the colony of Mulek first left Jerusalem) and before about 200 B.C. (when Mosiah and his group first came into the land of Zarahemla). The twentieth verse of Omni tells of a large stone that was brought to Mosiah and which contained an account of Coriantumr. However, this does not necessarily indicate that Coriantumr was still alive in the days of Mosiah; his stay of "nine moons" among the people of Zarahemla could have occurred decades or even centuries before the time of Mosiah.

OMNI 25, 30

The end of the small plates of Nephi

The first 132 pages in the current edition of the Book of Mormon came from the first-person account of the nine writers on the small plates of Nephi. These writers were Nephi, Jacob, Enos, Jarom, Omni, Amaron, Chemish, Abinadom, and Amaleki. Inasmuch as Amaleki did not have any children to whom he could give the plates, he delivered them to King Benjamin (Omni 25). Thus the same man, King Benjamin, came into control of both the small plates of Nephi and the large plates of Nephi, and apparently he decided to discontinue the small plates. Mormon did not abridge the writings on the small plates of Nephi; in fact, he had virtually nothing to do with these plates except that he put them "with the remainder" of his records. (Words of Mormon 5-6.)
