Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Book of Mormon ( 1976)

MOSIAH

MOSIAH 1:1-2

The beginning of Mormon's abridged record

Note that the main story in the book of Mosiah is told in the third person rather than in the first person as was the custom in the earlier books of the Book of Mormon. The reason for this is that someone else is now telling the story, and that "someone else" is Mormon. With the beginning of the book of Mosiah we start our study of Mormon's abridgment of various books that had been written on the large plates of Nephi. (3 Nephi 5:8-12.) The book of Mosiah and the five books that follow—Alma, Helaman, 3 Nephi, 4 Nephi, and Mormon—were all abridged or condensed by Mormon from the large plates of Nephi, and these abridged versions were written by Mormon on the plates that bear his name, the plates of Mormon. These are the same plates that were given to Joseph Smith by the angel Moroni on September 22, 1827.

MOSIAH 1:1-5

Were the brass plates written in Egyptian?

The statement that "Lehi . . . having been taught in the language of the Egyptians therefore he could read" the engravings on the brass plates of Laban quite clearly indicates these plates were written in the Egyptian language. Thus they were almost certainly not started until after the flood and the tower of Babel, as there was no Egyptian language before those events. The brass plates were probably not started until after the Israelites went down into Egypt in the days of Joseph, although the writers on these plates may have had access to records that had been written earlier.

Two other evidences supporting this thesis are: (1) Laban "was a descendant of Joseph, wherefore he and his fathers had kept the records" (1 Nephi 5:16), and (2) the great prophecies "of Joseph, who was carried into Egypt . . . are written upon the plates of brass" (2 Nephi 4:1-2), as these records contained "the five books of Moses" (1 Nephi 5:11). Other writers continued recording on these plates "even down to the commencement of the reign of Zedekiah, king of Judah" (1 Nephi 5:12)—the very year Lehi left Jerusalem (1 Nephi 1:4).

MOSIAH 1:18

The temple in the land of Zarahemla

This is the first reference to a temple in the land of Zarahemla. The building of a temple mentioned earlier in the Book of Mormon (2 Nephi 5:16) refers to the temple in the land of Nephi. Our present Book of Mormon does not provide any additional information concerning when or by whom this temple in Zarahemla was constructed.

MOSIAH 2:17

Benjamin's statement on service

One of the most widely quoted scriptures in the entire Book of Mormon is the statement of King Benjamin: "when ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are only in the service of your God." (Mosiah 2:17.) In this statement Benjamin includes the essence of the two great commandments that were later enunciated by the Savior: (1) that we should love God with all our heart, soul, and mind, and (2) that we should love our neighbors as ourselves. (Matthew 22:37-40.)

If we truly love God and keep his commandments, we will serve our brothers because he has commanded us to love them. Therefore, as King Benjamin indicates, when we are in the service of our fellow beings we are only in the service of our God.

MOSIAH 2:38 and 3:27

Hell is "like" an unquenchable fire

The major Christian churches that believe in a place called hell refer to it as a place of endless burnings and punishment. The leaders of these churches evidently get this belief partially from their interpretation of such scriptures as Luke 16:28 (where hell is referred to as a "place of torment") and from Matthew 13:42 (where hell is referred to as a "furnace of fire," where there will be "wailing and gnashing of teeth"). However, the exact wording that hell is a place "where people are continually burning but are never consumed" is not found in the scriptures; largely this concept comes from false interpretations by men. In the Doctrine and Covenants the Lord has explained what is meant by the terms "endless torment" and "eternal damnation":

Nevertheless, it is not written that there shall be no end to this torment, but it is written endless torment.

Again, it is written eternal damnation; wherefore it is more express than other scriptures, that it might work upon the hearts of the children of men, altogether for my name's glory.

Wherefore, I will explain unto you this mystery, for it is meet unto you to know even as mine apostles.

I speak unto you that are chosen in this thing, even as one, that you may enter into my rest.

For, behold, the mystery of godliness, how great is it! For, behold, I am endless, and the punishment which is given from my hand is endless punishment, for Endless is my name. Wherefore—Eternal punishment is God's punishment.

Endless punishment is God's punishment. (D&C 19:6-12. Italics added.)

The Book of Mormon indicates that hell as a place is not a place of eternal fire. However, the feeling of guilt, pain, and anguish that the sinner feels is "like an unquenchable fire" (Mosiah 2:38), and his torment is "as a lake of fire and brimstone" (Mosiah 3:27).

MOSIAH 3:11, 16-18

Jesus Christ atones for the sins of children and those who have died without law

Most of the so-called Christian churches today teach the doctrine of original sin. Essentially, this doctrine is that all of us are born sinful onto this earth because of the original transgression of Adam and Eve. One church has explained the doctrine of original sin as follows:

On account of their sin Adam and Eve lost sanctifying grace, the right to heaven, and their special gifts; they became subject to death, to suffering, and to a strong inclination to evil. . . .

On account of the sin of Adam, we, his descendants, come into the world deprived of sanctifying grace and inherit his punishment, . . .

This sin in us is called original sin. It is the state in which every descendant of Adam comes into the world, totally deprived of grace, through inheriting the punishment, not of Adam's personal sin, but of his sin as head of the human race. . . .

Because of original sin, heaven was closed to all men until the death of Our Lord Jesus Christ. Our Lord instituted the sacrament of Baptism in order to restore to us the right to heaven that Adam had lost.

. . . only Baptism can remit original sin; no one with any taint can enter heaven. (Louis LaVoire Morrow, My Catholic Faith [Kenosha, Wisc.: My Mission House, 1963], pp. 48-49, 269.)

As indicated in the last sentence of the above statement, the many churches that believe in the doctrine of original sin also usually teach that original sin can be removed only through baptism. Such teachings deny the right of unbaptized people, including unbaptized infants, to gain the presence of God (heaven). However, the Book of Mormon prophets clearly and definitely teach that the atonement of Jesus Christ fully atones: (1) for the original transgression of Adam and Eve, (2) for the sins of unbaptized infants who die before they are accountable, and (3) for the sins of all people who die without having an opportunity to receive the "will of God concerning them." In his famous discourse on the atonement, King Benjamin says concerning the Savior: ". . . his blood atoneth for the sins of those who have fallen by the transgression of Adam, who have died not knowing the will of God concerning them, or who have ignorantly sinned." (Mosiah 3:11.)

MOSIAH 3:15-27

The relationship of the laws of justice and mercy to the atonement of Jesus Christ

The law of justice works in relationship to the other laws of God in the moral realm. In essence, the law of justice might be explained as follows: (1) every law has both a punishment and a blessing attached to it; (2) whenever the law is transgressed (broken), a punishment (or suffering) must be inflicted; (3) whenever a law is kept (obeyed), a blessing (or reward) must be given.

The law of justice requires that God must be a God of order and that he must be just and impartial. Because of the law of justice, God can make such statements as these: "I the Lord, am bound when ye do what I say; but when ye do not what I say, ye have no promise" (Doctrine and Covenants 82:10); "There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated—And when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated" (Doctrine and Covenants 130:20-21).

The law of mercy agrees entirely with the law of justice. However, the law of mercy introduces the possibility of vicarious payment of the laws that have been transgressed. In essence, the law of mercy might be paraphrased as follows: Whenever a law is transgressed (or broken), a payment (or suffering or atonement) must be made; however, the person who transgressed the law does not need to make payment if he will repent and if he can find someone else who is both able and willing to make payment. Note that the law of mercy insists that the demands of the law of justice be met fully. As Alma stated, . . . "justice exerciseth all his demands, and also mercy claimeth all which is her own; and thus, none but the truly penitent are saved. What, do ye suppose that mercy can rob justice? I say unto you, Nay; not one whit. If so, God would cease to be God." (Alma 42:24-25.)

The law of justice made the atonement of Jesus Christ necessary. When Adam fell, he transgressed a law that had physical and spiritual death as its punishment. Thus the law of justice demanded payment (or atonement) for the broken (or transgressed) law.

The law of mercy made the atonement of Jesus Christ possible. In order for Jesus Christ to pay fully for the law Adam had transgressed, it was necessary that the Savior be both able and willing to make atonement. He was willing to make payment because of his great love for mankind, and he was able to make payment because he lived a sinless life and because he was actually, literally, biologically the Son of God in the flesh. Thus he had the power to atone for the spiritual and physical deaths introduced by the fall of Adam and Eve. Because of this atonement (or payment), he is rightfully referred to as the Savior and Redeemer of all mankind.

Every person benefits unconditionally from two major aspects of the atonement: (1) the resurrection, and (2) the full payment for the original transgression of Adam and Eve. However, as Mosiah indicates, there are also some conditional aspects of the atonement, and in order to benefit from these a person must repent of his sins. Otherwise, "mercy . . . could have claim" upon the person "no more forever," for the law of mercy is made active in the life of a person only upon the conditions of repentance. (Mosiah 3:25-27.)

MOSIAH 3:19 and 4:2

Why is the natural man "an enemy to God"?

One of the most disputed issues among so-called Christian theologians has been the question of the basic nature of man. Some of these theologians have argued that man is born evil into this world as an infant; thus the only way this evil can be removed is by receiving the sacrament of baptism. Still other theologians have argued that man is born innocent and remains basically good; some of them thus conclude that inasmuch as man is basically good he has no need for a redeemer to atone for his sins.

It should be clear to students of the Book of Mormon that the prophets definitely reject both the doctrine of the natural depravity of man and the doctrine that man is so good by nature he has no need for a redeemer. Benjamin, the prophet and king of the Nephites, said that "an angel from God" taught him that although infants are born in a state of innocence, after they become accountable they can become enemies to God if they do not accept the saving principles and ordinances of the gospel.

In explaining how man can be born innocent but yet can become an enemy to God, David H. Yarn has written:

In a modern revelation the Lord said:

"Every spirit of man was innocent in the beginning; and God having redeemed man from the fall, men became again, in their infant state, innocent before God. And that wicked one cometh and taketh away light and truth, through disobedience, from the children of men, and because of the tradition of their fathers." (Doctrine and Covenants 93:38, 39.)

Thus, from the beginning of man's mortal existence the wicked one, the devil, has engaged in taking away "light and truth." He has done this through men, individually and collectively—individually through disobedience and collectively through the tradition of their fathers.

Fundamentally the revelation teaches us that infants are innocent, but that they are born in a mortal world where men are agents unto themselves; where various factors influence decisions; and where, through the exercise of agency, men individually and in varying degrees have chosen to acknowledge or to deny God, to accept and practice His principles or to reject them. Consequently, although babies are innocent, by the time they reach the age of accountability they have become acquainted, through their own weaknesses and those of others, with a fallen world. Although not comprehending these words, they no doubt quite adequately understand that man has his failings. Perhaps this is in part what King Benjamin had in mind when he said:

"For the natural man is an enemy to God, and has been from the fall of Adam, and will be, forever and ever, unless he yields to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, and putteth off the natural man and becometh a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord, and becometh as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his father." (Mosiah 3:19.)

Other scriptural passages speak of the natural man as carnal, sensual, and devilish. (See Alma 42:10; Moses 5:13.) These words may seem harsh, but it is probably impossible for us even to guess what the corrupt state of man would be had there not been periodic restorations of the Gospel in man's history and some glimmer of spiritual knowledge trickling down through the centuries.

It is important that the teaching of King Benjamin be distinguished from the apostate doctrine of depravity. Man is not born evil, but innocent. He is innocent until he reaches the age of accountability, but he grows up in a world of sin and as an agent makes choices from among a vast complex of enticements; and when he becomes accountable and refuses to make his will submissive to God by accepting Him and making covenants with Him, he is "carnal, sensual, and devilish."

An explanation of the matter suggests, however, that the words carnal, sensual, and devilish, must not be limited to their more narrow and specific connotations, but that they are accurately, though more broadly, interpreted by the scriptural phrase "enemy to God." That is to say, not all men who have not made the covenants with the Christ are given to indulging in degrading practices which are appropriately designated carnal, sensual, and devilish in a dictionary sense. Yet all men, regardless of how moral and how pure they may be with reference to such practices, are enemies to God until they yield to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, accept the Atonement of the Lord, and are submissive to His will. A significant point here is that what we conventionally call basic personal and social morality are not enough. In addition to these things one must do other things which are binding upon him by virtue of his covenantal relationship with the Father and the Son. Or, putting it in another way, for one not to be an enemy to God he must endeavor to do all things whatsoever the Lord his God shall command him. (See Abraham 3:25.)

Summarily put, the natural man (he who is carnal, sensual, and devilish, he who is an enemy to God) is the man who has not humbled himself before God and made covenants with God by receiving the revealed ordinances at the hands of God's authorized servants; or the man who, having done these things, has failed to live according to the covenants made in baptism and to the injunction given when he was confirmed a member of the Church—"Receive the Holy Ghost." (Gospel Living in the Home [Deseret Sunday School Union], pp. 50-51.)

MOSIAH 4:6-11

The teachings of Benjamin on salvation

When the people heard Benjamin's discourse and asked him how they could "apply the atoning blood of Christ that we may receive forgiveness of our sins, and our hearts may be purified" (Mosiah 4:2), Benjamin told them they (1) must believe in the goodness of God and in the atonement of Jesus Christ, (2) must repent of their sins and forsake them, and (3) must humble themselves before God and ask in sincerity of heart for forgiveness. (Mosiah 4:6-10.)

Although Benjamin did not specifically mention baptism by water and by the Holy Ghost, it seems reasonable to assume that the people whom Benjamin was addressing had already received these ordinances for the following reasons: (1) the Nephites had authority to baptize (2 Nephi 6:2); (2) they plainly understood that baptism was essential to salvation (2 Nephi 9:23-24); (3) apparently the righteous Nephites had practiced baptism from the beginning of the Book of Mormon (2 Nephi 31:17).

MOSIAH 7:17

The temple in the land of Lehi-Nephi

This is the first reference to a temple in the land of Lehi-Nephi. The two earlier temples mentioned in the Book of Mormon were located in the land of Nephi (2 Nephi 5:16) and in the land of Zarahemla (Mosiah 1:18). No further information is provided in our present Book of Mormon concerning when or by whom this temple in the land of Lehi-Nephi was first constructed.

MOSIAH 7:26

The prophet of the land who was killed

The prophet who is mentioned in this verse as having been killed because of the wickedness and abominations of the people is the prophet Abinadi. The teachings of Abinadi are found in Mosiah, chapters 11-17.

MOSIAH 8:7-12

The land of destruction discovered by the scouts of Limhi

The evidences of destruction that were discovered by the forty-three scouts sent out by King Limhi are the remains of the great Jaredite civilization of which we will read in the book of Ether.

MOSIAH 8:13-17

Definition of a "seer"

The word seer literally means one who sees: a see-er. Ammon says a seer is a person who has the right to use the "interpreters" or the Urim and Thummin. (Mosiah 8:13-17; see also Mosiah 28:10-16.) He states further: "a seer is a revelator and a prophet also; and a gift which is greater can no man have." (Mosiah 8:16.) Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints regularly sustain the members of the First Presidency, the Council of the Twelve Apostles, and the Patriarch to the Church as "Prophets, Seers, and Revelators."

MOSIAH 9:1

The record of Zeniff

Chapters 9 and 10 of Mosiah are evidently taken verbatim from a record originally prepared by Zeniff. Note that these two chapters are written in the first person: "I, Zeniff," etc. Beginning with chapter 11, the account is written in the third person, although these materials also evidently come from the record of Zeniff.

MOSIAH 9:9

The crops of the Nephites

Although the equivalent of the word corn is used in some Semitic languages to refer to various types of cereals, including wheat, Joseph Smith would probably translate it here so it would be clear to the understanding of his readers in the United States. Thus, the "corn" here is probably maize, which is frequently called corn in the Americas. It is not clear what crops are referred to by the titles of "neas" and "sheum."

MOSIAH 10:6

The king of the Lamanites

Evidently the Lamanites have used the same procedure as the Nephites did in their early history of naming their kings after their earliest leader. Jacob 1:11 mentions that the kings who succeeded Nephi were known as "second Nephi, third Nephi, and so forth, according to the reigns of the kings." Thus it should not be too surprising to discover that the king of the Lamanites in approximately 178 B.C. was still known as "King Laman" (Mosiah 10:6), although the original leader after whom the king was named had lived some four hundred years before. Also, later in the Book of Mormon we discover that the son who succeeded this king is also known as Laman. (See Mosiah 24:3.)

MOSIAH 10:12-17

False traditions of the Lamanites

False traditions had been handed down by the Lamanites from generation to generation, and, with the passage of time, some of these false teachings were apparently accepted by many of the Lamanites as being true. Some of these false teachings were:

Because of these false traditions the Lamanites had taught their children that they should hate, rob, and murder the Nephites; therefore, the Lamanites had "an eternal hatred towards the children of Nephi." (Mosiah 10:17.)

MOSIAH 11:1

The wicked King Noah

Mormon evidently now begins abridging the original record of Zeniff. Note that chapter 11 is primarily written in the third person, whereas chapters 9 and 10 were written in the first person. Note also how Mormon tells us in one brief statement of the wicked character of King Noah: "he did not walk in the ways of his father."

MOSIAH 13:5

A clarification of a biblical text

Notice the following interesting reference concerning Abinadi as he made his defense before Noah and the wicked priests: "the Spirit of the Lord was upon him; and his face shone with exceeding luster, even as Moses' did while in the mount of Sinai, while speaking with the Lord." (Italics added.) This statement is of particular interest because of the controversy among biblical scholars and translators concerning the facial appearance of Moses after he had talked with the Lord on the mount of Sinai. The King James Version renders Exodus 34:30 as follows: "And when Aaron and all the children of Israel saw Moses, behold, the skin of his face shone; and they were afraid to come nigh him." However, the Catholic translators of the Douay Version followed the pattern of the Septuagint Bible by translating the same verse as follows: "And he knew not that his face was horned from the conversation with the Lord. And Aaron and the children of Israel seeing the face of Moses horned, were afraid to come near." Because of this faulty interpretation, the great sculptor Michelangelo put horns on his famous statue of Moses! The Book of Mormon again comes to the support of its companion scripture, the Bible, and clarifies an area of controversy; the face of Moses "shone" when he came off the mount.

MOSIAH 14:1-12

Isaiah's prophecy of the Savior

Biblical scholars have long disputed whether or not chapter 53 of Isaiah really pertained to the life and mission of Jesus Christ. The fact that Abinadi quotes this chapter (Mosiah 14) in an attempt to convince the people of the coming of the Messiah would indicate that these particular writings of Isaiah definitely do pertain to Jesus Christ.

MOSIAH 15:1-4

Jesus Christ as the "Father" and the "Son"

Jesus Christ is referred to several times in the Book of Mormon as both the Father and the Son. (Mosiah 15:1-4; Ether 3:14.) The question might well be asked: In what way (or in what sense) is Jesus Christ both the "Father" and the "Son"? The words Father and Son are titles rather than names; thus they may be used to refer to more than one person. The term Father may rightfully be used to refer to Jesus Christ in the following areas:

(1) Jesus Christ is the Father of those who accept the gospel because it is through his atonement that the gospel is made active on this earth. (Mosiah 5:7; 15:10-13; see also D&C 25:1; 39:1-4; and Ether 3.)

(2) Jesus Christ is the Father of this earth in the sense that he created this earth under the direction of his Father. (Mosiah 15:4; 16:15; see also Alma 11:38-39; 3 Nephi 9:15; Ether 4:7; D&C 45:1.)

(3) Jesus Christ is the Father because of divine investiture of power—that is, Jesus Christ has been given the power to act for and represent his Father on this earth. (Read particularly D&C 93:2-4, 17.)

(4) Other dictionary definitions of Father that might be used to refer to Jesus Christ are as follows: "one to whom respect is due"; "one who cares as a father might"; "an originator, source, or prototype"; "one who claims or accepts responsibility."

The term Son also has varied meanings. Jesus Christ is rightfully referred to as the Son in the following senses: (1) Jesus Christ is the firstborn of God in the spirit (Colossians 1:15-19; D&C 93:21); (2) Jesus Christ is the Only Begotten Son of God in the flesh (Jacob 4:5, 11; Alma 12:33-34; 13:5; John 1:18, 3:16); (3) Jesus Christ submitted his will to the will of his Father (Mosiah 15:2-7).

President Joseph Fielding Smith made the following observations concerning these verses:

The statement of Abinadi [indicates] . . . that Jesus Christ is both Father and Son to us [Mosiah 15:1-4]. . .

What's wrong with that scripture? What is a father? One who begets or gives life. What did our Savior do? He begot us, or gave us life from death, as clearly set forth by Jacob, the brother of Nephi. If it had not been for the death of our Savior, Jesus Christ, the spirit and body would never have been united again. As Jacob states:

And our spirits must have become like unto him, and we become devils, angels to a devil, to be shut out from the presence of our God, and to remain with the father of lies, in misery, like unto himself; yea, to that being who beguiled our first parents, who transformeth himself nigh unto an angel of light, and stirreth up the children of men unto secret combinations of murder and all manner of secret works of darkness.

O how great the goodness of our God, who prepareth a way for our escape from the grasp of this awful monster; yea, that monster, death and hell, which I call the death of the body, and also the death of the spirit.

And because of the way of deliverance of our God, the Holy One of Israel, this death, of which I have spoken, which is the temporal, shall deliver up its dead; which death is the grave.

And this death of which I have spoken, which is the spiritual death, shall deliver up its dead which spiritual death is hell; wherefore, death and hell must deliver up their dead, and hell must deliver up its captive spirits, and the grave must deliver up its captive bodies, and the bodies and the spirits of men will be restored one to the other; and it is by the power of the resurrection of the Holy One of Israel.

O how great the plan of our God! For on the other hand, the paradise of God must deliver up the spirits of the righteous and the grave deliver up the body of the righteous; and the spirit and the body is restored to itself again, and all men become incorruptible, and immortal, and they are living souls, having a perfect knowledge like unto us in the flesh, save it be that our knowledge shall be perfect. [2 Nephi 9:9-13.]

If there had been no redemption from death our spirits would have been taken captive by Satan and we would have become subject to Satan's will forever.

What did our Savior do? He begot us in that sense. He became a father to us because he gave us immortality or eternal life through his death and sacrifice upon the cross. I think we have a perfect right to speak of him as Father.

King Mosiah put his people under covenant to take upon them the name of Christ. And this was 124 years before the birth of Christ. I want to read a verse or two from this pledge.

And now, because of the covenant which ye have made ye shall be called the children of Christ, his sons, and his daughters; for behold, this day he hath spiritually begotten you; for ye say that your hearts are changed through faith on his name; therefore, ye are born of him and have become his sons and his daughters. [Mosiah 5:7.]

Is there anything wrong in our calling Jesus Christ our spiritual Father?

And under this head [this wonderful king said] ye are made free and there is no other head whereby ye can be made free. There is no other name given whereby salvation cometh; therefore I would that ye should take upon you the name of Christ, all you that have entered into the covenant with God that ye should be obedient unto the end of your lives.

And it shall come to pass whosoever does this shall be found at the right hand of God, for he shall know the name by which he is called; for he shall be called by the name of Christ.

And now it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall not take upon him the name of Christ must be called by some other name; therefore, he findeth himself on the left hand of God [Mosiah 5:8-10.]

The Son of God has a perfect right to call us his children, spiritually begotten, and we have a perfect right to look on him as our Father who spiritually begot us.

Now if these critics would read carefully the Book of Mormon they would find that when the Savior came and visited the Nephites he told them that he had been sent by his Father. He knelt before them and he prayed to his Father. He taught them to pray to his Father, but that did not lessen in the least our duty and responsibility of looking upon the Son of God as a Father to us because he spiritually begot us. (Answers to Gospel Questions [Deseret Book Co., 1957-66] 4:177-80.)

MOSIAH 15:11-19

Who are "they who have published peace"?

When the wicked priests of King Noah started to question Abinadi, they asked him to interpret the following words of Isaiah: "How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that bringeth good tidings; that publisheth peace; that bringeth good tidings of good; that publisheth salvation; that saith unto Zion, Thy God reigneth." (Mosiah 12:21; Isaiah 52:7.) The possible interpretation of this scripture has been debated by many biblical scholars, because this verse of Isaiah is frequently quoted. Who are they who bring "good tidings," who publish peace, who publish salvation? Abinadi gives the answer in Mosiah 15:11-19: those who are heirs of the kingdom of God including "all the holy prophets ever since the world began." (Mosiah 15:12-13.) Abinadi mentions specifically "the founder of peace, yea, even the Lord." (Mosiah 15:18.)

MOSIAH 16:1-5

The wicked remain as though there had been no redemption made

Abinadi's teaching that the wicked remain "as though there was no redemption made" (Mosiah 16:5) should not be interpreted to mean that the wicked are not resurrected. It is made abundantly clear elsewhere in the Book of Mormon that everyone who has lived on this earth will be resurrected from the dead, regardless of whether or not they keep the commandments of God. (See 2 Nephi 9:22; Alma 11:41; 33:22.)

However, Abinadi realizes that in order to be fully redeemed, a person must be worthy to return to the presence of our Heavenly Father. Thus, if a person "persists in his own carnal nature, and goes on in the ways of sin and rebellion against God" (Mosiah 16:5), then he cannot be worthy to return to God's presence. He remains "as though there was no redemption made" so far as regaining the presence of God is concerned.

MOSIAH 16:6-7

Abinadi's testimony of the Savior's mission

Although he lived nearly 150 years before the birth of Christ, Abinadi was so certain Jesus Christ was going to be born on the earth that he sometimes referred to the life of the Savior in the past tense. He was aware, of course, that he was doing this. In Mosiah 16:6 he states: ". . . and now if Christ had not come into the world, speaking of things to come as though they had already come, there could have been no redemption." (Italics added.)

MOSIAH 17:2-4

The introduction of Alma

One of the wicked priests of King Noah is a man named Alma, who is a descendant of Nephi. When first introduced in the Book of Mormon, Alma is a young man in the process of being converted by Abinadi. (Mosiah 17:2.) Much of the religious history of the Nephite nation for the next three hundred years is concerned with this man and his descendants. Alma not only begins a religious revival among his own people, but later he is given power by King Mosiah to establish churches throughout all the land of Zarahemla. (See Mosiah 25:19.)

Still later we read that Alma's son (also called Alma) succeeds his father as the religious leader of the people and also becomes the first chief judge over the Nephite nation. Other descendants of Alma the elder who become great religious leaders of the Nephites include his grandson (Helaman); great-grandson (Helaman, the son of Helaman); great-great-grandson (Nephi, the son of Helaman who is the son of Helaman); and great-great-great-grandson (Nephi the second, who is also the chief disciple of the resurrected Jesus Christ). Abinadi may have felt that he had failed as a missionary; so far as the record indicates, his only convert was Alma. However, as mentioned above, the missionary efforts of Abinadi affected the religious life of the Nephites for hundreds of years.

MOSIAH 18:4

The land called Mormon

The word Mormon is used chronologically for the first time in Mosiah 18:4. Although the word appears earlier than this in the Book of Mormon it has always referred to the name of the great prophet, historian, and military leader who lived several hundred years after the time of Christ. The place called "Mormon" referred to in Mosiah 18:4 received its name "from the king." No further information is given concerning this king.

MOSIAH 18:12-18

The baptism of Alma and his authority to baptize

The Book of Mormon does not specifically state whether or not Alma had been baptized before or how he got his authority to baptize. The record merely says that Alma immersed himself in the water when he baptized Helam (Mosiah 18:14-15) and that "Alma, having authority from God, ordained priests." (Mosiah 18:18.) Alma may have been ordained by Abinadi, but the record is not clear on this point. Joseph Fielding Smith feels that Alma held the priesthood before he became involved with King Noah. (Answers to Gospel Questions, 3:203-4.)

MOSIAH 19:20

The death of King Noah

When the followers of King Noah "caused that he should suffer, even unto death by fire" (Mosiah 19:20), they were fulfilling the prophecy of Abinadi made to King Noah that "ye shall suffer, as I suffer, the pains of death by fire" (Mosiah 17:18).

MOSIAH 22:14

The records possessed by the Nephites

The early history contained in the Book of Mormon is obtained from three sets of plates: the brass plates of Laban, the small plates of Nephi, and the large plates of Nephi. However, when Limhi's people join with the people of King Mosiah in the land of Zarahemla they bring with them two additional sets of plates: (1) their own records, which are known as the record of Zeniff, and (2) the "records which had been found by the people of Limhi," which are later identified as the records of Ether. (See Ether 1:1-2.) When Alma and his people come into the land of Zarahemla, they also evidently bring their own records with them. (See Mosiah 25:6 and also the superscription before Alma, chapter 23.)

MOSIAH 23:3; 24:25

The distance from the land of Nephi to the land of Zarahemla

The story of the flight of Alma and his people gives us the best clue in the Book of Mormon to the distance between the lands of Nephi and Zarahemla. It takes Alma and his group eight days to go from the waters of Mormon (in the borders of the land of Nephi—Mosiah 18:4) to the land of Helam (Mosiah 23:3). Then when they finally leave Helam, it takes them an additional twelve days of travel to go to the land of Zarahemla. (Mosiah 24:25.) Thus approximately twenty days are spent in travel by Alma and his group in going from the borders of the land of Nephi to the land of Zarahemla.

MOSIAH 23:8

The value of a monarchy

The Book of Mormon gives several valuable principles concerning different types of government. Mosiah 23:8 indicates that a monarchy would be a good system of government "if it were possible that ye could always have just men to be your kings." Thus, apparently nothing is inherently wrong with a monarchal system of government. In fact, the scriptures indicate that when Jesus Christ comes on the earth during the Millennium he will rule as King of kings; this evidently means we will then have a monarchal system of government.

MOSIAH 23:16-17

Was Alma the elder the "founder" of the church among the Nephites?

In the part of the Book of Mormon where we first read that Alma was the "founder of their church," the pronoun their refers only to the people who were with Alma in the wilderness; it does not refer to the entire Nephite nation. Thus when the statement is read in context, the true meaning is clear; this meaning is also clarified later in the record when it states that King Mosiah gave authority to Alma over the churches in Zarahemla. (Mosiah 26:8.) A brief historical setting of this period is provided by Joseph Fielding Smith in his answer to the question "Did the Nephites Have a Church Organization before the Days of Alma?"

It should be remembered that Alma had been one of the priests of King Noah in the land of Lehi-Nephi. It should also be taken into consideration that the colony in that land separated themselves from the main body of the Church in Zarahemla. In the days of Amaleki, who kept the Nephite record, a company of Nephites under Zeniff desired to occupy the land which was first settled by the Nephites, and entered into an agreement with the Lamanites to possess that land. There they established an independent kingdom which they possessed for many years, however in constant war and bondage to the Lamanites. In course of time, under King Noah, they became very wicked. It was at this time that the prophet Abinadi was murdered, and Alma, having accepted the teachings of Abinadi, gathered around him all who were willing to keep the commandments of the Lord, and doing so he brought upon himself and his followers the wrath of the wicked king, and they had to flee from their homes into the wilderness, with the intention of making their way back to the land of Zarahemla. The story of their flight, suffering, and blessings from the hand of the Lord were recorded in the Book of Mosiah. While in the wilderness Alma organized his group of believers into a branch of the Church and is spoken of as their founder.

The main body of the Nephites, under the second King Mosiah, was still intact in the land of Zarahemla. The reference stating that Alma was the founder of their church has reference only to the refugees who were fleeing from the land of the Nephites' first inheritance. In course of time they found their way back to the main body of the Church and Alma was consecrated as the high priest over the Church in all of the lands occupied by the Nephites. (Answers to Gospel Questions, 3:39-40.)

MOSIAH 24:3-4

The language of the Nephites is taught to the Lamanites

During the hundreds of years when the Nephites and Lamanites had lived apart, their languages had changed to such an extent that it was difficult for them to communicate with each other. During the period of history between 145 and 123 B.C., however, the king of the Lamanites "appointed teachers of the brethren of Amulon" (the wicked priests of King Noah who were Nephites by birth) to teach the Nephite language "among all the people of the Lamanites." (Mosiah 24:4.) Thus the two groups evidently start speaking the same language again. This fact takes on added significance later in the Book of Mormon when we read about the missionary efforts between these two groups.

MOSIAH 25:13

The manner of naming the people

The Book of Mormon peoples evidently had the custom of taking upon themselves the name of their leader. Thus the two early groups were known as the Nephites and Lamanites because the names of their first leaders were Nephi and Laman. Later, when a small group of Nephites headed by Mosiah came down into the land of Zarahemla, they discovered that the people there were called "the people of Zarahemla" after the name of their leader. (Omni 14.) Now when the two peoples of Zarahemla and Nephi combined together, they become known as Nephites "because the kingdom had been conferred upon none but those who were descendants of Nephi." (Mosiah 25:13.)

MOSIAH 27:11-17

The appearance of an angel

Although angels from God have appeared to righteous people, President Wilford Woodruff indicated that God always has a purpose in sending such messages:

One of the Apostles said to me years ago, "Brother Woodruff, I have prayed for a long time for the Lord to send me the administration of an angel. I have had a great desire for this, but I have never had my prayers answered." I said to him that if he were to pray a thousand years to the God of Israel for that gift, it would not be granted, unless the Lord had a motive in sending an angel to him. I told him that the Lord never did nor never will send an angel to anybody merely to gratify the desire of the individual to see an angel. If the Lord sends an angel to anyone, He sends him to perform a work that cannot be performed only by the administration of an angel. I said to him that those were my views. The Lord had sent angels to men from the creation of the world, at different times, but always with a message or with something to perform that could not be performed without. I rehearsed to him different times when angels appeared to men. Of course, I referred to the angel visiting Joseph Smith. The Revelator John said that in the last days an angel would fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting Gospel to preach to them that dwelt on the earth. The reason it required an angel to do this work was, the Gospel was not on the earth. The Gospel and the Priesthood had been taken from among men. Hence God had to restore it again.

Now, I have always said, and I want to say it to you, that the Holy Ghost is what every Saint of God needs. It is far more important that a man should have that gift than he should have the ministration of an angel, unless it is necessary for an angel to teach him something that he has not been taught. (Address given at Weber Stake Conference, Ogden, Utah, October 19, 1896, and published in Deseret Weekly, 53:641.)

MOSIAH 27:14-16

Power of the prayers of the righteous

The Lord has promised that if we ask in faith for that which is right, we shall receive. (3 Nephi 18:20.) However, he has not promised the manner or the time in which the prayer will be answered. When the angel appeared to Alma the younger and the four sons of Mosiah, the angel made it clear that he had not appeared to them because of their own worthiness. Rather, he said, "for this purpose have I come to convince thee of the power and authority of God, that the prayers of his servants might be answered according to their faith." (Mosiah 27:14. Italics added.) Also the angel pled with them to repent of their sins and "seek to destroy the church no more" that the prayers of the righteous members of the church might be answered. (Mosiah 27:16. Italics added.) Evidently it was primarily because of the faithful prayers of Alma the elder and the other members of the church that the angel appeared to Alma the younger and the four sons of Mosiah.

MOSIAH 27:34

The sons of King Mosiah

The order of the birth of the four sons of Mosiah is never made clear in the Book of Mormon. The listing in Mosiah 27:34 would indicate that Ammon was the first born followed by Aaron, then Omner, and Himni. Also, the fact that Ammon was the leader on their missionary journey to the Lamanites would seem to indicate that Ammon was the eldest. (See Alma, chapters 17-26.) However, when King Mosiah asked his people to select his successor, they first desired that Aaron should be their king and their ruler. (Mosiah 29:1-2.) In this single instance it appears as though Aaron may have been the eldest son.

MOSIAH 28:11-13

The holy interpreters

The "two stones" that were used by Mosiah in translating the records written on the gold plates found by the people of Limhi were evidently the Urim and Thummim. (Mosiah 28:11-13.)

MOSIAH 28:11-19

The records of Ether

Mosiah's translation of the gold plates discovered by the people of Limhi was evidently made available to the people of Mosiah (Mosiah 28:11, 18), and Mormon promises that an account of this record "shall be written hereafter; for behold, it is expedient that all people should know the things which are written in this account" (Mosiah 28:19). Mormon's son Moroni later abridges the account contained in these records, and his abridgment appears in our present Book of Mormon as the book of Ether.

MOSIAH 29:25-27

The strength—and weakness—of a democracy

Among the principles of government contained in the Book of Mormon is that a monarchy is a good system of government if the people can be assured they will always have good and righteous kings. (Mosiah 23:8.) However, the weakness of a monarchy is that "ye cannot dethrone an iniquitous king save it be through much contention, and the shedding of much blood." (Mosiah 29:21.)

Thus, because his people could not be assured of always having righteous kings, Mosiah proposes to them a system of judges who would be chosen "by the voice of this people." (Mosiah 29:25.) He indicates that the value of this system of democratic government is that "it is not common that the voice of the people desireth anything contrary to that which is right." (Mosiah 29:26.) However, he also warns that this type of democracy has a weakness: "if the time comes that the voice of the people doth choose iniquity, then is the time that the judgments of God will come upon you." (Mosiah 29:27.)
