Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Book of Mormon ( 1976)

ALMA

ALMA 1:2-16

Nehor, the advocator of priestcraft

Nephi, the son of Lehi, had warned his people against the evils of priestcraft, which he defined as "men preach and set themselves up for a light unto the world, that they may get gain and praise of the world; but they seek not the welfare of Zion." (2 Nephi 26:29.) The warning of Nephi concerning the evils of priestcraft is amply demonstrated by Nehor, who taught that "every priest and teacher ought to become popular; and they ought not to labor with their hands, but . . . they ought to be supported by the people." (Alma 1:3.)

Alma the younger, the chief judge of the people, accuses Nehor not only of being guilty of preaching priestcraft but also of endeavoring to enforce it by the sword. Furthermore, he warns the Nephites that if priestcraft were to be enforced among them "it would prove their entire destruction." (Alma 1:12.) Alma was very concerned about this matter because the Lord had warned the Nephites they were to keep the commandments of the Lord or they would be destroyed.

ALMA 2:1-31

Amlici, who desired to be king

Soon after the establishment of a system of elected judges among the Nephites, several revolts take place against this type of government. The first of these revolts is headed by Amlici, who, in addition to being an avowed kingman, is also a follower of the order of Nehor and thus advocates priestcraft. (Alma 2:1.) Although Amlici is not successful in his desire to obtain the kingship, he precipitates a civil war that results in the deaths of over 19,000 people. (Alma 2:19.)

ALMA 3:4-9

The Amlicites mark themselves "with red in their foreheads"

The Amlicites who escaped from Alma and his armies joined with the attacking Lamanite armies. Evidently they soon felt the need of marking themselves so their new allies, the dark-skinned Lamanites, could identify them as these two groups battled against the Nephites. Thus the Amlicites "marked themselves with red in their foreheads after the manner of the Lamanites." (Alma 3:4.)

This statement has two possible interpretations: (1) the Lamanites had red skin so the Amlicites marked themselves with red, or (2) the Lamanites marked themselves with red, and the Amlicites imitated them by marking themselves with red. Regardless of which interpretation is correct, this statement may provide a clue concerning the origin of painted war faces among this people, which continued to the coming of the white man some 1600 years later.

ALMA 5:14, 21

Have all members of the church been spiritually reborn?

The baptism of water which qualifies one for membership in the church does not assure one of the spiritual rebirth necessary to regain the presence of God. The "right" to receive the Holy Ghost is bestowed upon a person when he is confirmed a member of the Church and after he has been baptized by water. But unless a person fully repents of his sins and actually receives the Holy Ghost, he cannot be sanctified and be born again spiritually. (See Alma 7:14, 21; 3 Nephi 27:19-20; and John 3:5.) Thus Alma correctly asked his brethren of the Church, "have ye spiritually been born of God?" (Alma 5:14.) (See also material listed after Alma 7:14.)

ALMA 6:1

The ordaining of "priests" and "elders"

Alma ordained "priests" and "elders" to "preside and watch over the church." (Alma 6:1.) However, it is not clear whether this quotation means he was ordaining them to specific offices in the priesthood; the words priests and elders are sometimes used in a general way to denote religious leaders. Concerning whether or not these terms referred to specific offices in the priesthood, Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written:

In general terms a priest is a minister. One so designated (if he is a true priest) must in fact hold the priesthood; yet the designation priest, when so used, has no reference to any particular office in the priesthood. Thus among the Nephites it was the practice to consecrate priests and teachers, give them administrative responsibility, and send them out to preach, teach, and baptize. (Mosiah 23:17; 25:19; 26:7; Alma 4:7; 15:13; 23:4.) These priests and teachers held the Melchizedek Priesthood. (Doctrines of Salvation, vol. 3, p. 87.) . . .

Book of Mormon prophets gave the title priest to officers known in this dispensation as high priests. That is, they were priests of the Melchizedek Priesthood, or as Alma expressed it, "the Lord God ordained priests, after his holy order, which was after the order of his Son." (Alma 13:1-20.) Since there was no Aaronic Priesthood among the Nephites in Alma's day (there being none of the lineage empowered in pre-meridian times to hold that priesthood), there was no need to distinguish between priests of the lesser and greater priesthoods. (Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed., pp. 598-99.)

The reference referred to by Elder McConkie in Doctrines of Salvation includes the following statement:

The Nephites did not officiate under the authority of the Aaronic Priesthood. They were not descendants of Aaron, and there were no Levites among them. There is no evidence in the Book of Mormon that they held the Aaronic Priesthood until after the ministry of the resurrected Lord among them, but the Book of Mormon tells us definitely, in many places, that the priesthood which they held and under which they officiated was the Priesthood after the holy order, the order of the Son of God. This higher priesthood can officiate in every ordinance of the gospel, and Jacob and Joseph, for instance, were consecrated priests and teachers after this order. (Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 3:87.)

ALMA 7:10

Was the Savior born "at Jerusalem"?

Alma said that the Savior should be "born of Mary, at Jerusalem which is the land of our forefathers." (Alma 7:10.) Inasmuch as the Savior was evidently born at Bethlehem, not in Jerusalem, how should we interpret Alma's statement? At first glance the statement appears to be in error. However, archaeological evidences that have come forth since the Book of Mormon was published indicate that in 600 B.C. Bethlehem was probably a part of the "greater" land of Jerusalem. In this connection, it is of interest to note that the Book of Mormon refers to the land of Jerusalem, not the city; also, Bethlehem is only about six miles from the city of Jerusalem. (If you desire additional information on this subject, read An Approach to the Book of Mormon, pp. 81-82, by Hugh Nibley.)

ALMA 7:14

"Be born again"

Alma indicated that a person must be "born again" in order to inherit the kingdom of heaven. (Alma 7:14.) Concerning the importance of this rebirth, Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written:

. . . To gain salvation in the celestial kingdom men must be born again (Alma 7:14); born of water and of the Spirit (John 3:1-13); born of God, so that they are changed from their "carnal and fallen state, to a state of righteousness," becoming new creatures of the Holy Ghost. (Mosiah 27:24-29.) They must become newborn babes in Christ (1 Pet. 2:2); they must be "spiritually begotten" of God, be born of Christ, thus becoming his sons and daughters. (Mosiah 5:7.)

The first birth takes place when spirits pass from their pre-existent first estate into mortality; the second birth or birth "into the kingdom of heaven" takes place when mortal men are born again and become alive to the things of the Spirit and of righteousness. The elements of water, blood, and Spirit are present in both births. (Moses 6:59-60.) The second birth begins when men are baptized in water by a legal administrator; it is completed when they actually receive the companionship of the Holy Ghost, becoming new creatures by the cleansing power of that member of the Godhead.

Mere compliance with the formality of the ordinance of baptism does not mean that a person has been born again. No one can be born again without baptism, but the immersion in water and the laying on of hands to confer the Holy Ghost do not of themselves guarantee that a person has been or will be born again. The new birth takes place only for those who actually enjoy the gift or companionship of the Holy Ghost, only for those who are fully converted, who have given themselves without restraint to the Lord. Thus Alma addressed himself to his "brethren of the church," and pointedly asked them if they had "spiritually been born of God," received the Lord's image in their countenances, and had the "mighty change" in their hearts which always attends the birth of the Spirit. (Alma 5:14-31.)

Those members of the Church who have actually been born again are in a blessed and favored state. They have attained their position, not merely by joining the Church, but through faith (1 John 5:1), righteousness (1 John 2:29), love (1 John 4:7), and overcoming the world. (1 John 5:4.) "Whosoever is born of God doth not continue in sin; for the Spirit of God remaineth in him; and he cannot sin, because he is born of God, having received that holy Spirit of promise." (Inspired Version, 1 John 3:9.) (Mormon Doctrine, 2d ed., pp. 100-1.)

Elder Mark E. Petersen has also emphasized the importance of this rebirth:

Unless a man is born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. I do not believe that a person will ever see the Kingdom of God unless he is born again. . . . That birth of the spirit means something more than most of us normally realize. Through proper teaching, a conviction is born in our soul. Faith develops. Through it we see how important it is to become like Christ. We see ourselves as we are in contrast to a Christlike soul. A desire for a change-over is born within us. The change-over begins. We call it repentance. Through our faith and as part of our conversion or change from one state to another, we begin to see sin in its true light. . . . We strive with all our souls to become like the Savior. (Address to seminary and institute of religion personnel, BYU, July 11, 1956.)

President David O. McKay has indicated that a real rebirth also involves a change in feeling:

. . . No man can sincerely resolve to apply to his daily life the teachings of Jesus of Nazareth without sensing a change in his own nature. The phrase, "born again," has a deeper significance than many people attach to it. This changed feeling may be indescribable, but it is real. Happy the person who has truly sensed the uplifting, transforming power that comes from this nearness to the Savior, this kinship to the Living Christ. (Conference Report, April 1962, p. 7.)

ALMA 10:2

The writing upon the wall of the temple

In his introduction, Amulek mentions he is "the son of Giddonah, who was the son of Ishmael, who was a descendant of Aminadi . . . who interpreted the writing which was upon the wall of the temple, which was written by the finger of God." (Alma 10:2.) This is the only time Aminadi is mentioned, and our present Book of Mormon gives no further details concerning the writing written by the finger of God upon the wall of the temple. Evidently an account of this incident was recorded on the large plates of Nephi, but Mormon did not include it in his abridgment.

ALMA 10:3

Lehi is a descendant of Manasseh

In further identifying himself, Amulek mentioned that his forefather Aminadi "was a descendant of Nephi, who was the son of Lehi . . . who was a descendant of Manasseh, who was the son of Joseph who was sold into Egypt. . . ." (Alma 10:3.) Earlier in the Book of Mormon it was mentioned that Lehi was a descendant of Joseph. (1 Nephi 5:14.) However, Joseph had two sons, Manasseh and Ephraim, and this is the first time the Book of Mormon indicates that Lehi was a descendant of Joseph's eldest son, Manasseh.

Some students of the Book of Mormon have wondered how descendants of Joseph were still living in Jerusalem in 600 B.C. when most members of the tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh were taken into captivity by the Assyrians about 721 B.C. A scripture in 2 Chronicles may provide a clue to this problem. This account mentions that in about 941 B.C. Asa, the king of the land, gathered together at Jerusalem all of Judah and Benjamin "and the strangers with them out of Ephraim and Manasseh." (2 Chronicles 15:9.) These "strangers. . . out of Ephraim and Manasseh" who were gathered to Jerusalem in approximately 941 B.C. may have included the forefathers of Lehi and Ishmael.

Concerning the fact that Ishmael was also a descendant of Joseph, Elder Erastus Snow said:

Whoever has read the Book of Mormon carefully will have learned that the remnants of the house of Joseph dwelt upon the American continent; and that Lehi learned by searching the records of his fathers that were written upon the plates of brass, that he was of the lineage of Manasseh. The Prophet Joseph informed us that the record of Lehi was contained on the 116 pages that were first translated and subsequently stolen, and of which an abridgement is given us in the first Book of Nephi, which is the record of Nephi individually, he himself being of the lineage of Manasseh; but that Ishmael was of the lineage of Ephraim, and that his sons married into Lehi's family, and Lehi's sons married Ishmael's daughters, thus fulfilling the words of Jacob upon Ephraim and Manasseh in the 48th chapter of Genesis, which says: "And let my name be named on them, and the name of my fathers Abraham and Isaac; and let them grow into a multitude in the midst of the land." Thus these descendants of Manasseh and Ephraim grew together upon this American continent, with a sprinkling from the house of Judah, from Mulek descended, who left Jerusalem eleven years after Lehi, and founded the colony afterwards known as Zarahemla and found by Mosiah—thus making a combination, an intermixture of Ephraim and Manasseh with the remnants of Judah, and for aught we know, the remnants of some other tribes that might have accompanied Mulek. And such have grown up on the American continent. (Journal of Discourses, 23:184-85.)

ALMA 11:3-19

The Nephite monetary system

The monetary system used by the Nephites is briefly explained by Mormon as he recounts the story of Alma and Amulek in the city of Ammonihah. The basic unit is a senine of gold (or a senum of silver, which has the same value). If a value of "1" is attributed to this unit, the monetary system of the Nephites might be summarized as follows: Leah equals 1/8; shiblum = 1/4; shiblon = 1/2; antion of gold = 1 1/2; senum of silver or senine of gold = 1; amnor of silver or seon of gold = 2; ezrom of silver or shum of gold = 4; onti of silver or limna of gold = 7. One senine of gold (or senum of silver) = wages of a judge for one day. The Nephite monetary system was based on a barley standard, with a senine of gold or a senum of silver equal to a measure of barley. (Alma 11:7.)

ALMA 11:32-37

Can God save (or redeem) people "in their sins"?

Amulek taught that God cannot save people "in their sins." The Lord can save (or redeem) them from their sins after they have repented, but he cannot save them in their sins because they have not repented of their wickedness. (Read also Helaman 5:10-11.)

ALMA 11:41

The status of the wicked

Amulek said to Zeezrom, ". . . the wicked remain as though there had been no redemption made, except it be the loosing of the bands of death." (Alma 11:41.) In essence, Amulek is saying that the wicked are all resurrected, but they are not redeemed into the presence of God unless they repent of their sins and become spotless before him. (See also Mosiah 16:5; 3 Nephi 27:19-20.)

ALMA 11:41-45

The temporal death and permanent resurrection of the body

The Book of Mormon uses the adjective temporal when referring to the death of the body, and the adjective spiritual when referring to a separation from God because of sin. Concerning the temporal or physical death that will come upon every person who has lived on this earth, President Joseph F. Smith has written:

Every man that is born into the world will die. It matters not who he is, nor where he is, whether his birth be among the rich and the noble, or among the lowly and poor in the world, his days are numbered with the Lord, and in due time he will reach the end. We should think of this. Not that we should go about with heavy hearts or with downcast countenances; not at all. I rejoice that I am born to live, to die, and to live again. . . . I am speaking now of the temporal death, the death of the body. All fear of this death has been removed from the Latter-day Saints. They have no dread of the temporal death, because they know that as death came upon them by the transgression of Adam, so by the righteousness of Jesus Christ shall life come unto them, and though they die they shall live again. Possessing this knowledge, they have joy even in death, for they know that they shall rise again and shall meet again beyond the grave. They know that the spirit dies not at all; that it passes through no change, except the change from imprisonment in this mortal clay to freedom and to the sphere in which it acted before it came to this earth. (Joseph F. Smith, Conference Report, October 1899, p. 70.)

However, every person will be resurrected from this physical death, or, as Amulek phrased it, "all shall be raised from this temporal death. The spirit and the body shall be reunited again in its perfect form . . . they can die no more; their spirits uniting with their bodies, never to be divided." (Alma 11:42-43, 45.) President Charles W. Penrose has explained the immortal qualities of the resurrected body as follows:

. . . we are told in the Book of Mormon, as well as in the Doctrine and Covenants, that in the resurrection from the dead, when all shall be raised, "every man in his order," the spirit and the body will be joined together, and they will "not die after;" we are there told that the resurrection will come to all mankind, the great and the small, the good and the bad, all races and tribes and beings who are of the seed of Adam will be raised from the dead, and their bodies will not die after. (Conference Report, October 1911, p. 50.)

The exact type of body that resurrected beings will have after the resurrection has not been made clear in the scriptures except that it will be an immortal, glorified body animated by spirit. For example, the Book of Mormon prophets clearly teach that the actual physical body will be resurrected; "both limb and joint shall be restored to its proper frame, even as we now are at this time." (Alma 11:43). Unfortunately, the teachings in the New Testament concerning a resurrected body have been misinterpreted by many Christian theologians; thus many churches teach that the actual physical body is not resurrected. Concerning the false teachings of many of the Christian churches, President Joseph Fielding Smith has said:

These modern blind teachers of the blind have a very false understanding of what is meant by a spiritual body. They have based their conclusion on the statement that Paul makes that the body is raised a spiritual body, and that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God. They cannot conceive in their minds a body raised from the dead, being composed of flesh and bones, quickened by spirit and not by blood. When Paul spoke of the spiritual body he had no reference at all to the spirit body and there they have made their mistake. They have confused the spiritual body, or, in other words, the body quickened by the spirit, with the body of the spirit alone. They think that those who believe in the resurrection of the literal body believe that it shall be raised again, quickened by blood, which is not the case. I want to read another verse from the Doctrine and Covenants: (Sec. 88:15-20, 25-30, quoted.)

After the resurrection from the dead our bodies will be spiritual bodies, but they will be bodies that are tangible, bodies that have been purified, but they will nevertheless be bodies of flesh and bones, but they will not be blood bodies, they will no longer be quickened by blood but quickened by the spirit which is eternal and they shall become immortal and shall never die. (Conference Report, April 1917, pp. 62-63.)

ALMA 12:3

God knows all our thoughts

Amulek said to Zeezrom: "[God] knows all thy thoughts, and thou seest that thy thoughts are made known unto us by his Spirit." (Alma 12:3.) This gift of discernment is one of the gifts of the Holy Spirit, and it is through the proper use of this gift that the evils and designs of wicked men are made known to the prophets of God. In further explanation of this principle, Ammon, one of the sons of Mosiah, said: "[God] knows all the thoughts and intents of the heart; for by his hand were they all created from the beginning." (Alma 18:32.)

ALMA 12:14

Of what will we be judged at the final judgment?

Alma and Benjamin both state we shall be judged of our words, our works, and our thoughts. (Alma 12:14; Mosiah 4:30.) Elsewhere in the Book of Mormon it is made clear that we shall also be judged of our responsibilities concerning the welfare of others. (Jacob 1:18-19; Mosiah 2:20-28, 36-41; Mosiah 4:19-30.) Perhaps the most difficult area of judgment for people to understand is that which deals with our thoughts. Yet the Savior very clearly taught that we shall be responsible for what we think (Matthew 5:27-28), and this truth has also been taught by other prophets (1 Chronicles 28:9; Job 42:2; Psalm 94:11; Romans 2:16). The following statements by two of the Presidents of the Church in this dispensation are interesting in this regard:

In reality a man cannot forget anything. He may have a lapse of memory; he may not be able to recall at the moment a thing that he knows or words that he has spoken; he may not have the power at his will to call up these events and words; but let God Almighty touch the mainspring of the memory and awaken recollection, and you will find then that you have not even forgotten a single idle word that you have spoken! I believe the word of God to be true, and, therefore, I warn the youth of Zion, as well as those who are advanced in years, to beware of saying wicked things, of speaking evil, and taking in vain the name of sacred things and sacred beings. Guard your words, that you may not offend even man, much less offend God. (Joseph F. Smith, quoted in Latter-day Prophets Speak [Bookcraft, 1948], pp. 56-57.)

We read something like this, "But I say unto you, that every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the day of judgment." Now, this is a remarkable declaration. . . . God has made each man a register within himself, and each man can read his own register, so far as he enjoys his perfect faculties. This can be easily comprehended.

Let your memories run back, and you can remember the time when you did a good action, you can remember the time when you did a bad action; the thing is printed there, and you can bring it out and gaze upon it whenever you please. . . . Where do you read all this? In your own book. You do not go to somebody else's book or library, it is written in your own record, and you there read it. Your eyes and ears have taken it in, and your hands have touched it; and then your judgment, as it is called, has acted upon it—your reflective powers. Now, if you are in possession of a spirit or intellectuality of that kind, whereby you are enabled to read your acts, do you not think that that being who has placed that spirit and that intelligence within you holds the keys of that intelligence, and can read it whenever he pleases? Is not that philosophical, reasonable, and scriptural? I think it is. . . . Well, then, upon this principle we can readily perceive how the Lord will bring into judgment the actions of men when he shall call them forth at the last day. (John Taylor, Journal of Discourses, 11:77-78.)

If I had time to enter into this subject alone, I could show you upon scientific principles that man himself is a self-registering machine, his eyes, his ears, his nose, the touch, the taste, and all the various senses of the body are so many media whereby man lays up for himself a record which perhaps nobody else is acquainted with but himself; and when the time comes for that record to be unfolded all men that have eyes to see, and ears to hear will be able to read all things as God Himself reads them and comprehends them, and all things, we are told, are naked and open before Him with whom we have to do. (John Taylor, quoted in Latter-day Prophets Speak, p. 57.)

The Book of Mormon clearly teaches that God knows our thoughts (Alma 18:32) and that we shall be held responsible for them.

ALMA 12:16-22

For information on the topic of spiritual death, read the material listed after 2 Nephi 9:6-12.

ALMA 13:9, 14-19

Who or what is "without beginning of days or end of years"?

Melchizedek is one of the most misinterpreted persons in the Bible. He lived approximately 2000 B.C., was a contemporary of Abraham, and was one of the most righteous men who ever lived on the earth. Yet little is known about him, and the little that is said about him in the Bible has been misunderstood by most biblical scholars. For example, in the book of Hebrews we read the following concerning this great prophet:

For this Melchisedec, king of Salem, priest of the most high God . . .

To whom also Abraham gave a tenth part of all; first being by interpretation King of righteousness, and after that also King of Salem, which is, King of peace;

Without father, without mother, without descent, having neither beginning of days, nor end of life; but made like unto the Son of God; abideth a priest continually. (Hebrews 7:1-3.)

Some biblical scholars have interpreted these verses to mean that Melchizedek was born without a mother or a father! In other words, they believe that the words "without father, without mother, without descent, having neither beginning of days nor end of life" refer to Melchizedek. That these words do not refer to Melchizedek, but instead refer to the priesthood he held, is made clear in both the Doctrine and Covenants and the Book of Mormon. Section 84 of the Doctrine and Covenants contains the following statement concerning the priesthood of God: " . . . Abraham received the priesthood from Melchizedek, who received it through the lineage of his fathers. . . . Which priesthood continueth in the church of God in all generations, and is without beginning of days or end of years." (D&C 84:14, 17.) Concerning this high priesthood the Book of Mormon states, . . . "which calling, and ordinance, and high priesthood, is without beginning or end—Thus they become high priests forever, after the order of the Son, the Only Begotten of the Father, who is without beginning of days or end of years." (Alma 13:8-9.)

ALMA 13:18

Melchizedek reigned "under his father"

The statement that Melchizedek reigned "under his father" should not necessarily be interpreted to mean that he reigned at the same time his father was king or even while his father was living. The term "under his father" evidently is a Hebrew idiom meaning that he "takes the place of his father" or "reigns in his father's stead." (For several examples of similar terminology in the Bible, see Genesis 36:33-39.)

ALMA 14:11

The destruction of the righteous

It is difficult for mortals—who see events only through eyes that are restricted by time—to see things in their proper relationship so far as the eternities are concerned. Thus, because we as mortals have only limited vision it is understandable why we sometimes desire or wish for things in this life that would not be for our best welfare in the eternities to come. For example, if we had unlimited power and followed our mortal feelings, we would probably never suffer pain, or disease, or even death. But would this be the best thing for us in eternity?

It appears only natural that Amulek should plead with Alma to exercise the power of the priesthood and save the righteous people from being burned to death. However, Alma, through the impressions of the Spirit, was able to see things through the eyes of eternity and thus said: "The Spirit constraineth me that I must not stretch forth mine hand; for behold the Lord receiveth them up unto himself, in glory; and he doth suffer . . . that the people may do this thing unto them, according to the hardness of their hearts, that the judgments which he shall exercise upon them in his wrath may be just." (Alma 14:11.)

Essentially this same idea is expressed by a later Book of Mormon prophet, who says: "For the Lord suffereth the righteous to be slain that his justice and judgment may come upon the wicked; therefore ye need not suppose that the righteous are lost because they are slain; but behold, they do enter into the rest of the Lord their God." (Alma 60:13.)

Concerning the fact that we should live righteous lives and then leave the final judgment to God as to what should be done with our lives, President Spencer W. Kimball has said:

Now, we find many people critical when a righteous person is killed, a young father or mother is taken from a family, or when violent deaths occur. Some become bitter when oft-repeated prayers seem unanswered. Some lose faith and turn sour when solemn administrations by holy men seem to be ignored and no restoration seems to come from repeated prayer circles. But if all the sick were healed, if all the righteous were protected and the wicked destroyed, the whole program of the Father would be annulled and the basic principle of the Gospel, free agency, would be ended.

If pain and sorrow and total punishment immediately followed the doing of evil, no soul would repeat a misdeed. If joy and peace and rewards were instantaneously given the doer of good, there could be no evil—all would do good and not because of the rightness of doing good. There would be no test of strength, no development of character, no growth of powers, no free agency, no Satanic controls.

Should all prayers be immediately answered according to our selfish desires and our limited understanding, then there would be little or no suffering, sorrow, disappointment, or even death; and if these were not, there would also be an absence of joy, success, resurrection, eternal life, and godhood. ("Tragedy or Destiny," Improvement Era, March 1966, pp. 180, 210.)

ALMA 18:9

Horses and chariots

Two major questions have been raised by anti-LDS critics of the Book of Mormon concerning the statement that there were horses and chariots on the American continents before the time of Christ (Alma 18:9). These critics have maintained: (1) no horses existed on the American continents before the time of Columbus, and (2) the people who lived on the American continents did not know the principle of the wheel before the coming of Columbus. However, since the publication of the Book of Mormon, considerable archaeological evidence has come forth to reinforce its claims that there were horses on the American continents before the time of Columbus and that these early peoples did know the principle of the wheel.

ALMA 18:13

Meaning of the word "Rabbanah"

The Lamanite word "Rabbanah," meaning "powerful or great king," is strikingly similar to other Semitic words having essentially the same meaning. For example, the New Testament word rabboni clearly refers to one who is a leader (John 20:16). Also the word rabbi, which is used frequently by Jewish people, designates "one who teaches or leads." That the spoken language of both the Nephites and the Lamanites is derived from the Hebrew is made quite clear in several places in the Book of Mormon. In fact, even as late as the fourth century A.D. one Book of Mormon prophet said, ". . . if our plates had been sufficiently large we should have written in Hebrew." (Mormon 9:33.)

ALMA 18:23

Possible meaning of the word "guile"

Although the word guile is frequently used to mean "deceitful cunning" or "treachery," it can also denote the use of strategy. It is evidently used in the latter sense in Alma 18:23; in other words, Ammon planned or used strategy in arranging the questions he asked King Lamoni.

ALMA 19

Abish, the Lamanitish woman

If for no other reason, Abish, the Lamanitish woman, is distinguished because her actual name appears in the Book of Mormon. She is one of only three women in the entire Nephite-Lamanite-Mulekite-Jaredite records to have her name in the Book of Mormon. The other two are Sariah, the wife of Lehi (1 Nephi 2:5), and Isabel, the harlot (Alma 39:3).

The brief account of the conversion of Abish is not clear. The statement that Abish had been converted "unto the Lord for many years, on account of a remarkable vision of her father" (Alma 19:16) may have two possible interpretations. One interpretation is that Abish herself had this vision and in her vision she saw her father. Another possible interpretation is that the vision was actually had by the father of Abish. Regardless of which interpretation is correct, this conversion of Abish plays an important role in converting large numbers of Lamanites.

ALMA 20:2-3

The four sons of Mosiah and their missionary companions

The Book of Mormon does not specifically state how many missionary companions accompanied the four sons of Mosiah on their long-term mission (about fourteen years!—see Mosiah 28:1, 8-9; Alma 17:6; Alma 16:21); yet the record clearly indicates there were additional missionaries (Mosiah 28:1; Alma 22:35), and at least two of them, Muloki and Ammah, are mentioned by name (Alma 20:2-3).

ALMA 21:2

The wicked Amalekites and Amulonites

The Amalekites are mentioned for the first time in Alma 21:2; the exact source of their name is never made clear in the Book of Mormon. The Amulonites mentioned here are the descendants and the followers of Amulon, the wicked priest of King Noah. (Mosiah 23:31-35; Mosiah 24:3-4) Both of these groups of people believed in the "order of the Nehors" (Alma 21:4; read also Alma 1:2-6, 15-16), and they were so hardened in wickedness that only one Amalekite and no Amulonites were converted by the four sons of Mosiah and their companions (Alma 23:14).

ALMA 22:18

What does it mean "to give away" all one's sins?

The king of the Lamanites promised the Lord, "I will give away all my sins to know thee." (Alma 22:18.) As is evident in his subsequent life, the king was promising the Lord that he would repent of all of his sins, forsake them, and start keeping the commandments of God. Some students of the Book of Mormon have wondered concerning the miraculous and almost instantaneous conversions of King Lamoni (Alma 18:40-43 and 19:1-36) and the king of the Lamanites (Alma 22:15-23). However, it is possible for people to be immediately converted to the gospel if they are sincere in wanting to repent of their sins and in learning the truth. Concerning how long it takes a person to repent, Heber C. Kimball said:

On the day of Pentecost, when Peter proclaimed the Gospel, about 3,000 souls were added to the Church that day. How long did it take them to repent? No longer than they were willing to believe, and put away their sins, with a determination to forsake them, and not sin again. (Journal of Discourses, 1:36.)

ALMA 22:32

The narrow neck of land

One of the most widely quoted verses concerning the geography of Book of Mormon lands is Alma 22:32, wherein the historian states that "the land of Nephi and the land of Zarahemla were nearly surrounded by water, there being a small neck of land between the land northward and the land southward." Earlier in this verse the historian mentions that "it was only the distance of a day and a half's journey for a Nephite, on the line Bountiful and the land Desolation, from the east to the west sea."

Some students of the Book of Mormon interpret this verse to mean that the entire narrow neck of land separating the land northward from the land southward could be traversed by a Nephite in a day and a half. However, a careful reading of this verse does not necessarily justify this conclusion. The historian's statement concerning a line "from the east to the west sea" does not necessarily mean the same as though he had said that the line existed from the east sea to the west sea. The statement may mean that it was a day and a half's journey for a Nephite from the east of the line to the west sea.

In Helaman 4:7 the author mentions this same area again: "And there they did fortify against the Lamanites, from the west sea, even unto the east; it being a day's journey for a Nephite, on the line which they had fortified." Again, note that the word sea does not follow the word east. Also, a Nephite can now travel this distance in only one day's journey, and it is quite clear the distance being covered is "the line which they had fortified" and not necessarily the distance between two seas.

ALMA 23:17

Possible meanings of the term "Anti-Nephi-Lehi"

The Lamanites converted by the four sons of Mosiah and their missionary companions took upon themselves the name of "Anti-Nephi-Lehies." (Alma 23:17; Alma 24:1-5.) The "Nephi-Lehi" part of the title probably had reference to the lands of Nephi and Lehi (or the people then living in those lands) rather than to the descendants of Nephi or Lehi.

However, Dr. Hugh Nibley has found "a Semitic and common Indo-European root corresponding to anti that means 'in the face of' or 'facing,' as of one facing a mirror, and by extension either 'one who opposes' or 'one who imitates.' " (Quoted in Eldin Ricks, Book of Mormon Study Guide, p. 63.) Thus the term "Anti-Nephi-Lehies" might refer to those who imitate the teachings of the descendants of Nephi and Lehi.

ALMA 24:16-17

A possible source for a tradition of the American Indians

The converted Lamanites (Anti-Nephi-Lehies) refused to take up their arms against their brethren because, as they stated, "it has been all that we could do, (as we were the most lost of all mankind) to repent of all our sins." (Alma 24:6, 11.) As part of a covenant with God that they would give up their own lives rather than shed the blood of anyone else in time of war, they "took their swords, and all the weapons which were used for the shedding of man's blood, and they did bury them up deep in the earth." (Alma 24:17.) It is entirely possible that this interesting incident could have served as the source of the "bury-the-hatchet" tradition of showing peace, which was a common practice among some of the tribes of American Indians when Columbus and other white men came to their lands.

ALMA 24:19

Problems of writing on plates of ore

Mormon wrote his abridgment of the large plates of Nephi on "plates of ore" that he had made with his own hands. He does not mention the technique used in writing the language characters on the metal plates (etching, embossing, etc.), but students have sometimes wondered how Mormon could correct something he had already written. Alma 24:19 might give us some clue to this matter. Concerning the converted Lamanites, Mormon had written that "they buried their weapons of peace." Then, evidently realizing that he had not intended exactly what he had written, he added "or they buried the weapons of war, for peace." Other examples of similar changes in the Book of Mormon are found in Mosiah 7:8, Alma 50:32, Helaman 3:33, and 3 Nephi 16:4.

ALMA 29:8

The Lord giveth to all nations that which "he seeth fit that they should have"

Sometimes it is difficult to understand why some groups of people are given so much more knowledge than other groups, especially when one remembers we are all children of our Heavenly Father and thus are spiritual brothers and sisters to each other. However, we should remember that we will be judged according to that knowledge and those opportunities which we have. Thus, simply because one group of people has less knowledge or understanding than another does not mean they are less worthy or righteous. Alma says: " . . . the Lord doth grant unto all nations, of their own nation and tongue . . . all that he seeth fit that they should have." (Alma 29:8.) We should not presume to judge why God deals with nations the way that he does, but should acknowledge that this is all done in the wisdom and justice of God.

ALMA 30:6-59

Some of the teachings of Korihor, the anti-Christ

The teachings of the anti-Christs in the Book of Mormon are essentially the same, although Korihor adds a few teachings to those proposed by Nehor. Some of the major teachings of Korihor are: (1) No man can know of anything which is to come—Alma 30:13. (2) Prophecies are simply foolish traditions—Alma 30:14. (3) "Ye cannot know of things which ye do not see" Alma 30:15. (4) There is no such thing as sin and, therefore, there is no need for an atonement and you do not receive a remission of your sins—Alma 30:16-17. (5) There is no existence after death—Alma 30:18. (6) God is "a being who never has been seen or known, who never was nor ever will be"—Alma 30:28.

In essence, Korihor denies the existence of God, the need for a Savior, the power of the priesthood, and the power of prophecy. He apparently accepts only those things which he can perceive through the five physical senses.

ALMA 30:6, 12, 30-59

Was Korihor an agnostic or an atheist?

The position of the agnostic is "I don't know whether or not there is a God, but I don't believe there is; furthermore, I don't believe anyone can know that there is a God." The atheistic position is "I know there is not a God." This position cannot be defended by reason or logic, for how can a person know there is no God unless he has the power of God to see everything and everywhere in the entire universe at one time? Perhaps Alma had this fallacy in mind when he told Korihor, "I know that thou believest, but thou art possessed with a lying spirit." (Alma 30:42. Italics added.) Korihor's position in Alma 30:48 is essentially that of the agnostic: "I do not deny the existence of a God, but I do not believe that there is a God."

Inasmuch as it is impossible to prove there is not a God, some people have also tried to argue that it is impossible to prove there is a God. However, this argument does not necessarily follow. God can be, and has been, proven to many people. James E. Talmage suggests that "the evidence upon which mankind rest their conviction regarding the existence of a Supreme Being, may be classified for convenience of consideration under the three following heads: (1) the evidence of history and tradition, (2) the evidence furnished by the exercise of human reason, (3) the conclusive evidence of direct revelation from God." (Articles of Faith, p. 30.) The Book of Mormon is primarily concerned with the highest or most conclusive evidence—direct revelation from God.

ALMA 30:29-30

The trial of Korihor

When the people resisted Korihor and his teachings, they "caused that he should be bound; and they delivered him up into the hands of the officers." (Alma 30:29.) The officers before whom Korihor was taken included Alma (who was the religious leader) and Nephihah ("the chief judge who was governor over all the land"—Alma 30:29). The fact that Korihor was brought before Alma would seem to indicate that Korihor was or had been a member of the church.

ALMA 31:13-18, 26-35

How should we pray?

Several places in the scriptures the prophets have warned us to avoid "vain repetition" in our prayers and have encouraged us to pray according to our needs and sincere feelings. This chapter contains classic examples both of what we should not do and what we should do when praying. The example of a wrong prayer is the memorized, rote prayer of the apostate Zoramites. (Alma 31:15-18.) The example of an effective prayer is the humble and sincere petition of Alma. (Alma 31:26-35.)

ALMA 31:15-18

The unvarying prayer of the apostate Zoramites

Notice how many elements of apostasy are indicated in the set prayer of the apostate Zoramites: (1) They believe God is a spirit only (verse 15). (2) They do not believe in the divinity of Jesus Christ (verse 16). (3) They do not accept the teachings of the prophets because the "tradition" of their brethren "was handed down to them by the childishness of their fathers"; nevertheless, they readily accepted some of the false teachings or "traditions" which had been passed down by other people (verse 16). (4) They believe in "double predestination"—i.e., God has "elected" them to be saved, but he has elected everyone else to be cast down to hell (verses 17 and 18). Also, note other common practices of religious groups in a state of apostasy: the repetition of memorized prayers in worship, and the relegation of religion to a "Sunday" activity (verses 22 and 23).

ALMA 31:21

The Rameumptom or holy stand

The name of the holy stand of the apostate Zoramites, upon which they stood when they offered their weekly prayer, was the "Rameumptom." Although this name may look strange in English, it has appropriate Semitic roots recognizable to students of Semitic languages. The preface "ram" is frequently used to indicate a high place. For example, later in the Book of Mormon we read of the hill Ramah. Also, in modern Israel are the town of Ramallah (located in the tops of the Judean hills just north of Jerusalem) and Rameem (which literally means "the heights" and is located on the top of the hills near the Lebanese border).

ALMA 32:10-11

Which day of the week is the "right" day to worship God?

Each day of the week is used by one or more religious groups as the "official" day of worship. In the United States, Saturday and Sunday are the major days of worship: Saturday for the Jewish groups and the Seventh-day Adventists, Sunday for the Catholic and most of the Protestant churches. The prophet Alma indicates that we should worship God at all times and should not restrict our worship of him to just one day a week. He also clearly indicates we do not have to be in a synagogue or church in order to worship God.

ALMA 32:12-14

What does it mean to be "compelled to be humble"?

Whenever people do not humble themselves before God or even think of God except in times of dire need or danger, they are being "compelled to be humble" through the seriousness of the circumstance. Such people are more blessed than those who never think of God, but how much better it would be for them if they were humble and prayerful before God at all times—in prosperity as well as in poverty, in health as well as sickness.

ALMA 32:17-43

Alma's teachings on the subject of faith

Perhaps the definition of faith most widely quoted by Latter-day Saints is the one given by Alma: "Faith is not to have a perfect knowledge of things; therefore if ye have faith ye hope for things which are not seen, which are true." (Alma 32:21.) This definition is even more complete and meaningful than the definition given by Paul as recorded in our present New Testament: "Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen." (Hebrews 11:1.)

It is interesting to note that both of these prophets include hope as an element of faith; yet, as Alma points out, faith is more than mere hope or the "desire to believe." (Alma 32:26-27.) On the other hand, faith is not knowledge, "for if a man knoweth a thing" he has no need to exercise faith or even to believe, for "he knoweth it." (Alma 32:18.) Alma's comparison of faith to the planting of a seed beautifully and clearly illustrates this principle. (Alma 32:28-43.) One of the best expositions of the distinctions between belief, faith, and knowledge is that given by Elder James E. Talmage:

The terms faith and belief are sometimes regarded as synonyms; nevertheless each of them has a specific meaning in our language, although in earlier usage there was little distinction between them, and therefore the words are used interchangeably in many scriptural passages. Belief, in one of its accepted senses, may consist in a merely intellectual assent, while faith implies such confidence and conviction as will impel to action. Dictionary authority justifies us in drawing a distinction between the two, according to present usage in English; and this authority defines belief as a mental assent to the truth or actuality of anything, excluding, however, the moral element of responsibility through such assent, which responsibility is included by faith. Belief is in a sense passive, an agreement or acceptance only; faith is active and positive, embracing such reliance and confidence as will lead to works. Faith in Christ comprises belief in Him, combined with trust in Him. One cannot have faith without belief; yet he may believe and still lack faith. Faith is vivified, vitalized, living belief.

. . . Neither belief nor its superior, actual knowledge, is efficient to save; for neither of these is faith. If belief be a product of the mind, faith is of the heart; belief is founded on reason, faith largely on intuition . . .

The mere possession of knowledge gives no assurance of benefit therefrom. It is said that during an epidemic of cholera in a great city, a scientific man proved to his own satisfaction, by chemical and microscopical tests, that the water supply was infected, and that through it contagion was being spread. He proclaimed the fact throughout the city, and warned all against the use of unboiled water. Many of the people, although incapable of comprehending his methods of investigation, far less of repeating such for themselves, had faith in his warning words, followed his instructions, and escaped the death to which their careless and unbelieving fellows succumbed. Their faith was a saving one. To the man himself, the truth by which so many lives had been spared was a matter of knowledge. He had actually perceived, under the microscope, proof of the existence of death-dealing germs in the water; he had demonstrated their virulence; he knew of what he spoke. Nevertheless, in a moment of forgetfulness he drank of the unsterilized water, and soon thereafter died, a victim to the plague. His knowledge did not save him, convincing though it was; yet others, whose reliance was only that of confidence or faith in the truth that he declared, escaped the threatening destruction. He had knowledge; but, was he wise? Knowledge is to wisdom what belief is to faith, one an abstract principle, the other a living application. Not possession merely, but the proper use of knowledge constitutes wisdom. (Articles of Faith, pp. 96-100.)

ALMA 33:3-17

The strong testimonies of Zenos and Zenock

The prophets Zenos and Zenock are mentioned several times in the Book of Mormon, and each time they are mentioned we learn something new about these remarkable prophets. In 1 Nephi 19:10-17 we read of the strong and clear witness of these prophets concerning the divine mission of Jesus Christ, and here in Alma 33:17 we learn that at least one of these prophets, Zenock, sealed his testimony with his life, for the people of his day "stoned him to death."

ALMA 33:19

A "type" of the coming of Jesus Christ

In his discourse on the coming life and mission of Jesus Christ, Alma mentions the testimonies of several earlier prophets concerning this event, including this statement about Moses: ". . . he was spoken of by Moses; yea, and behold a type was raised up in the wilderness, that whosoever would look upon it might live. And many did look and live." (Alma 33:19.)

The "type" mentioned by Alma evidently refers to the brass serpent that was lifted up on a pole by Moses when he was leading the people of Israel out of Egypt. This symbol is discussed later in the Book of Mormon; see the material listed after Helaman 8:13-15.

ALMA 34:9-16

For a discussion of the major points covered in these verses, see the material listed after Mosiah 3:15-27

ALMA 34:32-35

Is it possible to repent after death?

We should not conclude from these statements by Amulek that it is impossible for a person to repent once he has left this earth life. Other scriptures indicate that repentance may be obtained under certain conditions beyond the veil of mortality. For example, Peter mentions that after the crucifixion of Jesus Christ, the Savior "preached unto the spirits" of those who had died during the days of Noah (1 Peter 3:18-20) so that they "might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit" (1 Peter 4:6). However, we do not know the full conditions of repentance in the post-earthly spirit world, and, as Brother Talmage has stated, ". . . to suppose that the soul who has wilfully rejected the opportunity of repentance in this life will find it easy to repent there is contrary to reason. To procrastinate the day of repentance is to deliberately place ourselves in the power of the adversary." (Articles of Faith, p. 115.)

ALMA 34:33

What is the "night of darkness" wherein no labor can be performed?

Amulek warns us not to procrastinate the day of our repentance, because if we do not improve our time while in this life, "then cometh the night of darkness wherein there can be no labor performed." (Alma 34:33.) The "night of darkness" referred to by Amulek is that period of a person's existence when he loses the will to repent. Thus when a person loses the desire to repent or decides he is not going to repent, then his "night of darkness" has come whether it is in this life or in the life to come.

ALMA 34:34-35

Danger of deathbed repentance

Several weaknesses and dangers are inherent in the doctrine of deathbed repentance. One of these is that we never know when we are going to die; therefore, there may not be time to repent. Furthermore, as Amulek warns us, "Ye cannot say, when ye are brought to that awful crisis [death], that I will repent, that I will return to my God. Nay, ye cannot say this; for that same spirit which doth possess your bodies at the time that ye go out of this life, that same spirit will have power to possess your body in that eternal world." (Alma 34:34.) Then Amulek counsels us to repent of our sins so that we will be prepared for death whenever it should come. Essentially this same advice is given by President Lorenzo Snow:

All men and women who are worthy to be called Latter-day Saints should live hour by hour in such a way that if they should be called suddenly from this life into the next they would be prepared. The preparation should be such that we should not fear to be called away suddenly into the spirit life. It is our privilege to so live as to have the spirit of light and intelligence to that extent that we shall feel satisfied that all will be well if we should be called away at any hour. (Conference Report, October 1899, p. 2.)

ALMA 36:6-10

Is there a discrepancy between Alma 36:10 and Mosiah 27:23?

Some readers of the Book of Mormon have claimed there is a discrepancy in the accounts of the conversion of Alma as recorded in Mosiah 27:23 and Alma 36:10. It is true that one account mentions "two days and two nights" and the other says "three days and three nights," but there is no apparent discrepancy because they are not referring to exactly the same thing. In the account in the book of Mosiah the time element clearly refers to the period of fasting by the priests; no exact length of time is indicated for Alma's unconscious state. Note the major details of the account: After Alma was confronted by an angel and realized the enormity of his sins, he fell to the earth almost as if dead. Then he was carried to his father in this helpless condition. The father of Alma then called in the priests of the church and "after they had fasted and prayed for the space of two days and two nights, the limbs of Alma received their strength, and he stood up." (Mosiah 27:22-23. Italics added.) In the account in the book of Alma, however, the term "three days and three nights" clearly refers to the total time Alma could not open his mouth nor use his limbs. (Alma 36:10.)

ALMA 36:14

The "murder" of spiritual life

In recounting his sinful past to his son Helaman, Alma said that he had "murdered" many people, and then he adds, "or rather led them away unto destruction." (Alma 36:14.) As Alma mentions later to his son Corianton, the murder of a human physical body is a grave sin. However, an even more serious sin is to murder the spiritual life of a person or, in other words, to purposely lead one away from the saving principles of the gospel. Concerning such people Alma says: ". . . whosoever murdereth against the light and knowledge of God, it is not easy for him to obtain forgiveness." (Alma 39:6.)

ALMA 37:23, 38

Use of the words "Gazelem" and "Liahona"

Two interesting words that appear for the first time in the book of Alma are Gazelem (Alma 37:23) and Liahona (Alma 37:38). Possible meanings of these two words are given by Reynolds and Sjodahl as follows:

Gazelem is a name given to a servant of God. The word appears to have its roots in Gaz—a stone, and Aleim, a name of God as a revelator, or the interposer in the affairs of men. If this suggestion is correct, its roots admirably agree with its apparent meaning—a seer.

Liahona. This interesting word is Hebrew with an Egyptian ending. It is the name which Lehi gave to the ball or director he found outside his tent the very day he began his long journey through the "wilderness" after his little company had rested for some time in the Valley of Lemuel. (1 Nephi 16:10; Alma 37:38)

L is a Hebrew preposition meaning "to," and sometimes used to express the possessive case. Iah is a Hebrew abbreviated form of "Jehovah," common in Hebrew names. On is the Hebrew name of the Egyptian "City of the Sun." . . . L-iah-on means, therefore, literally, "To God is Light"; or, "of God is Light." That is to say, God gives light, as does the Sun. The final a reminds us that the Egyptian form of the Hebrew name On is Annu, and that seems to be the form Lehi used. (Commentary on the Book of Mormon, 4:162, 178.)

ALMA 37:35-37

Learn wisdom—learn to keep the commandments of God

The word wisdom in the Book of Mormon is used to denote the wise or effective use of knowledge; it not only concerns the acquisition of knowledge, but also the right use of knowledge. To Alma some of the best advice he could leave his son Helaman was to "learn wisdom in thy youth; yea, learn in thy youth to keep the commandments of God." (Alma 37:35.) Wise indeed is the person who will learn the commandments of God and then obey them so he can receive the promised blessings.

ALMA 37:38-46

"It is . . . easy to give heed to the word of Christ"

The Liahona was given to Lehi and his colony to direct them in their journey to the promised land. All they needed to do was exercise faith in God, and the Liahona would show the direction they were to go. Alma compares living the laws of the gospel with following the guidance of the Liahona: ". . . it is as easy to give heed to the word of Christ, which will point to you a straight course to eternal bliss, as it was for our fathers to give heed to this compass, which would point unto them a straight course to the promised land." (Alma 37:44.) Thus Alma indicates it is relatively easy to heed the word of Christ—just keep the commandments. However, he warns Helaman and also us not to "be slothful because of the easiness of the way." (Alma 37:46.)

ALMA 38:9-14

The counsel of Alma to his son Shiblon

Although Alma's counsel to his son Shiblon occupies only one brief chapter in the Book of Mormon, yet it is filled with good advice for young people of all times and places. Among other things, Alma counsels Shiblon (and, indirectly, all of us): (1) to "learn wisdom . . . that there is no other way or means whereby man can be saved, only in and through Christ"; (2) to teach the word of God; (3) to "be diligent and temperate in all things"; (4) to be humble—not to boast of wisdom or strength; (5) to "use boldness, but not overbearance"; (6) to bridle the passions; (7) to refrain from idleness; (8) to pray with sincerity of heart and not "to be heard of men"; (9) to acknowledge unworthiness before God and to ask him for forgiveness of sin.

ALMA 39:3

Isabel, the harlot

The harlot Isabel is one of only three women mentioned by name in our present Book of Mormon from the entire Nephite-Lamanite-Mulekite-Jaredite records. The other two women mentioned are Sariah, the wife of Lehi (1 Nephi 2:5), and Abish, the Lamanite woman (Alma 19:16).

ALMA 39:1-6

The sins of murder and adultery

Although the Lord has not provided an extensive list of sins in the order of their severity, he has indicated the following as the three most grievous or serious sins a person can commit on this earth: (1) the unpardonable sin of denying the Holy Ghost once it has had place in you, (2) murder, or the shedding of innocent blood, and (3) unchastity. The unpardonable sin will be discussed in greater detail in the next note. Concerning murder, the authorities of the Church have published the following brief statement:

One of the most serious of all sins and crimes against the Lord's plan of salvation is the sin of murder or the destruction of human life. It seems clear that to be guilty of destroying life is the act of "rebellion" against the plan of the Almighty by denying an individual thus destroyed in mortality, the privilege of a full experience in this earth-school of opportunity. It is in the same category as the rebellion of Satan and his hosts and therefore it would not be surprising if the penalties to be imposed upon a murderer were to be of similar character as the penalties meted out to those spirits which were cast out of heaven with Satan. (Quoted in Doxey, The Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, 1:240.)

The teaching of the Church is equally strong on the sin of unchastity or adultery, as is indicated by the following statement by Joseph Fielding Smith:

I call your attention to this statement by the Prophet Joseph Smith: "If a man commit adultery, he cannot receive the celestial kingdom of God. Even if he is saved in any kingdom, it cannot be the celestial kingdom."

Of course, a man may, according to the Doctrine and Covenants, 132:26, receive forgiveness, if he is willing to pay the penalty for such a crime: that is he "shall be destroyed in the flesh, and shall be delivered unto the buffetings of Satan unto the day of redemption," which is the time of the resurrection. We cannot destroy in the flesh, so what the Lord will require in lieu thereof, I do not know. . . .

We have been taught that adultery is a crime second only to the shedding of innocent blood. We cannot treat it lightly. For a man to destroy another man's home is too serious an offense to be readily forgiven. Such a man should not be permitted to come back in the Church, under any circumstances, at least until years have elapsed. He should be placed on probation for that length of time to see if he can, or will, remain clean. Even then I confess I do not know what disposition the Lord will make of him. To permit him to come back within a short time has a very evil effect upon other members of the Church who begin to think that this enormous crime is not so serious after all. . . .

If a man thinks the Lord has placed upon him a seal by which he is exempt from his transgressions and is bound to inherit eternal life, no matter what he does, as long as he does not commit murder, or shed innocent blood, or deny the Holy Ghost, he is in the gall of bitterness, as a Nephite prophet would have said.

No man is promised salvation who is not cleansed from all his sins, and if a man sins deliberately, thinking he is exempt, he will be damned! (Doctrines of Salvation, 2:93-94, 99.)

ALMA 39:4-7

What is the difference between an "unpardonable" and an "unforgivable" sin?

In the counsel to his son Corianton, Alma indicates that the three most serious sins a person can commit on this earth are (1) the sin against the Holy Ghost, (2) murder—the shedding of innocent blood, and (3) unchastity. The Lord indicates the seriousness of all these sins in his revelations to Joseph Smith as recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants. The most serious of these sins is to deny the Holy Ghost and become a son of perdition. The Lord has defined this sin in these words:

Thus saith the Lord concerning all those who know my power, and have been made partakers thereof, and suffered themselves through the power of the devil to be overcome, and to deny the truth and defy my power—

They are they who are the sons of perdition, of whom I say that it had been better for them never to have been born;

For they are vessels of wrath, doomed to suffer the wrath of God, with the devil and his angels in eternity;

Concerning whom I have said there is no forgiveness in this world nor in the world to come—

Having denied the Holy Spirit after having received it, and having denied the Only Begotten Son of the Father, having crucified him unto themselves and put him to an open shame.

These are they who shall go away into the lake of fire and brimstone, with the devil and his angels—

And the only ones on whom the second death shall have any power. (D&C 76:31-37.)

This is an unpardonable sin because it cannot be paid for (or pardoned) either by the sinner himself or through the atonement of Jesus Christ.

The second most serious sin is to commit murder—that is, to willfully shed innocent blood. Concerning this sin, the Lord has said: "Thou shalt not kill; and he that kills shall not have forgiveness in this world, nor in the world to come." (D&C 42:18.) Thus this is an unforgivable sin, which means that Jesus Christ cannot pay for (or "atone for" or "forgive") the penalty demanded by the broken law. This sin is a pardonable sin, however; that is, the sinner can eventually make full payment himself, and be received into a state of pardon. Apparently one reason this sin is unforgivable is that forgiveness is based upon repentance, and a murderer cannot fully repent of his sin for he cannot make restitution of the life he has taken.

The third most serious sin is unchastity. The Lord has said, "Thou shalt not commit adultery; and he that committeth adultery, and repenteth not, shall be cast out. But he that has committed adultery and repents with all his heart, and forsaketh it, and doeth it no more, thou shalt forgive; But if he doeth it again, he shall not be forgiven, but shall be cast out." (D&C 42:24-26.) Thus adultery is both pardonable and forgivable, but if committed again after a person understands the law it is unforgivable.

The word pardon as used in the scriptures means to be sanctified, to be clean, to reach a point where a broken law has no further claim upon the sinner. Thus the most serious sin is unpardonable because the law will always have a claim upon the sinner, and the sinner will always remain unclean; he cannot ever regain the presence of God, for "no unclean thing can enter into his kingdom." (3 Nephi 27:19.) All unpardonable sins are of necessity also unforgivable.

The word forgiveness as used in the scriptures indicates one is "given something before." Thus when a person repents of a sin, Jesus Christ, through his atonement, pays for (or atones for) part of the broken law before the person makes full payment. Thus he is "fore-given" that part of the penalty paid for by Jesus Christ. Forgiveness is possible only upon repentance; thus those who refuse to repent "remain as though there had been no redemption made, except it be the loosing of the bands of death." (Alma 11:41; read also D&C 19:15-20.)

ALMA 39:9

What does it mean to "cross yourself"?

In his patriarchal blessing to his son Corianton, Alma says: "I would that ye should repent and forsake your sins, and go no more after the lusts of your eyes, but cross yourself in all these things; for except ye do this ye can in nowise inherit the kingdom of God. Oh, remember, and take it upon you, and cross yourself in these things." (Alma 39:9.) The question is sometimes asked concerning the meaning of the expression "cross yourself in all these things." Some people evidently read into this statement something that is not intended; they think it pertains to the practice of physically drawing a cross as it is done by members of some Christian churches.

The meaning of the expression "cross yourself" is clarified in other scriptures. For example, 3 Nephi 12:30 says: "For it is better that ye should deny yourselves of these things, wherein ye will take up your cross, than that ye should be cast into hell." In Matthew 16:24 the Savior says, "If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me." Both of these scriptures indicate that to "cross yourself" means to deny yourself. In the Inspired Version of the New Testament the Savior makes it absolutely clear that this is the meaning of the term: "And now for a man to take up his cross, is to deny himself all ungodliness, and every worldly lust, and keep my commandments." (Matthew 16:26.)

ALMA 40:11-14

Where is the post-earthly spirit world?

Alma's statement that "the spirits of all men" upon death "are taken home to that God who gave them life" apparently does not mean that the post-earthly spirit world is in the actual, physical presence of God the Father. Concerning this statement by Alma, Brigham Young has said:

It reads that the spirit goes to God who gave it. Let me render this Scripture a little plainer; when the spirits leave their bodies they are in the presence of our Father and God; they are prepared then to see, hear and understand spiritual things. But where is the spirit world? It is incorporated within this celestial system. Can you see it with your natural eyes? No. Can you see spirits in this room? No. Suppose the Lord should touch your eyes that you might see, could you then see the spirits? Yes, as plainly as you now see bodies . . . (Ludlow, Latter-day Prophets Speak, p. 26.)

Concerning the location of the post-earthly spirit world, President Young has said further:

When you lay down this tabernacle, where are you going? Into the spiritual world. . . . Where is the spirit world? It is right here. Do the good and evil spirits go together? Yes, they do. Do they both inhabit one kingdom? Yes, they do. Do they go to the sun? No. Do they go beyond the boundaries of the organized earth? No, they do not. They are brought forth upon this earth, for the express purpose of inhabiting it to all eternity. Where else are you going? No where else, only as you may be permitted. (Ibid., p. 26.)

The above two statements by Brigham Young would indicate that the post-earthly spirit world is not the same place as the world of resurrected beings. This is also the teaching of Parley P. Pratt:

The world of resurrected beings, and the world of spirits, are two distinct spheres, as much so as our own sphere is distinct from that of the spirit world.

Where then does the spirit go, on its departure from its earthly tabernacle? It passes to the next sphere of human existence, called the world of spirits, a vail being drawn between us in the flesh, and that world of spirits. Well, says one, is there no more than one place in the spirit world? Yes, there are many places and degrees in that world, as in this. Jesus Christ, when absent from his flesh, did not ascend to the Father, to be crowned, and enthroned in power. Why? Because he had not yet a resurrected body, and had therefore a mission to perform in another sphere. Where then did he go? To the world of spirits . . . (Journal of Discourses, 1:9.)

Heber C. Kimball, a member of the First Presidency for many years, suggested that we will never go back to the actual presence of God the Father until we are fully worthy of this honor.

When we escape from this earth, we suppose we are going to heaven? Do you suppose you are going to the earth that Adam came from? that Eloheim came from? where Jehovah the Lord came from? No. When you have learned to become obedient to the Father that dwells upon this earth, to the Father and God of this earth, and obedient to the messengers He sends—when you have done all that, remember you are not going to leave this earth. You will never leave it until you become qualified, and capable, and capacitated to become a father of an earth yourselves. (Ibid., p. 356.)

ALMA 40:12

The status of people in the post-earthly spirit world

Alma is told by an angel of God that there are two major divisions in the post-earthly spirit world: (1) paradise, which is "a state of rest, a state of peace" (Alma 40:12), and (2) outer darkness, where the "spirits of the wicked, yea, who are evil" go and there shall be "weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth, and this because of their own iniquity" (Alma 40:13).

Even those who go into paradise will not know perfect happiness, however. Perfect joy or happiness is possible only in a resurrected state, as is indicated in this statement from the Doctrine and Covenants: "For man is spirit. The elements are eternal, and spirit and element, inseparably connected, receive a fulness of joy; And when separated, man cannot receive a fulness of joy." (D&C 93:33-34.)

Essentially this same idea is taught by Orson Pratt:

When our spirits leave these bodies, will they be happy? Not perfectly so. Why? Because the spirit is absent from the body; it cannot be perfectly happy while a part of the man is lying in the earth. How can the happiness be complete when only a part of the redemption is accomplished? You cannot be perfectly happy until you get a new house. You will be happy, you will be at ease in paradise; but still you will be looking for a house where your spirit can enter, and act as you did in former times, only more perfectly, having superior powers. Consequently, all the holy men that have lived in days of old, have looked forward to the resurrection of their bodies; for then their glory will be complete. (Journal of Discourses, 1:289-90.)

ALMA 40:14-26

A clarification of the teachings of Alma on the resurrection

Alma admits he is not sure whether or not all of the people who died before the resurrection of Jesus Christ will be resurrected before any of the people who died after the time of Christ. (Alma 40:18-21.) However, he says, "I give it as my opinion, that the souls and the bodies are reunited, of the righteous, at the resurrection of Christ." (Alma 40:20.) Alma is correct, of course, in this assumption. Other prophets in the Book of Mormon make it clear that the righteous who have died will be resurrected at the time of the resurrection of the Savior. For example, Abinadi prophesied as follows:

And now, the resurrection of all the prophets, and all those that have believed in their words, or all those that have kept the commandments of God, shall come forth in the first resurrection; therefore, they are the first resurrection.

They are raised to dwell with God who has redeemed them; thus they have eternal life through Christ, who has broken the bands of death.

And these are those who have part in the first resurrection; and these are they that have died before Christ came, in their ignorance, not having salvation declared unto them. And thus the Lord bringeth about the restoration of these; and they have a part in the first resurrection, or have eternal life, being redeemed by the Lord.

And little children also have eternal life.

But behold, and fear, and tremble before God, for ye ought to tremble; for the Lord redeemeth none such that rebel against him and die in their sins; yea, even all those that have perished in their sins ever since the world began, that have wilfully rebelled against God, that have known the commandments of God, and would not keep them; these are they that have no part in the first resurrection. (Mosiah 15:22-26.)

Thus Abinadi makes it very clear that the wicked will have no part in the first resurrection; the wicked, no matter when they lived, will have to wait until the final resurrection. The term "first resurrection" is used in the scriptures as a synonym for "the resurrection of the just." Thus, if one comes forth the first opportunity he has to be resurrected after he dies, he comes forth in the morning of his first resurrection.

ALMA 40:23

The resurrection of the body

The prophets of the Book of Mormon definitely teach that all mankind will be resurrected from the dead. One of the best descriptions of this resurrected body is provided by Alma wherein he states: "the soul shall be restored to the body, and the body to the soul; yea, and every limb and joint shall be restored to its body; yea, even a hair of the head shall not be lost; but all things shall be restored to their proper and perfect frame." (Alma 40:23.)

The prophets of this dispensation have also taught that the actual, physical body will be resurrected and, through the law of restoration, will essentially become perfect. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught the following concerning the resurrected body:

As concerning the resurrection, I will merely say that all men will come from the grave as they lie down, whether old or young; there will not be "added unto their stature one cubit," neither taken from it; all will be raised by the power of God, having spirit in their bodies, and not blood. Children will be enthroned in the presence of God and the Lamb with bodies of the same stature that they had on earth, having been redeemed by the blood of the Lamb; they will there enjoy the fulness of that light, glory and intelligence, which is prepared in the celestial kingdom. "Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord, for they rest from their labors and their works do follow them." [Revelation 14:13.] (History of the Church, 4:555-56.)

Concerning the process of restoring a body to a state of perfection in the resurrection, President Joseph F. Smith has written:

The death that came by the fall of our first parents is eradicated by the resurrection of the Son of God, and you and I cannot help it. You will come forth from your graves, these same mortal bodies as they are now, bearing the marks just as much as Christ's body bore the marks that were upon him. They will come forth from their graves, but they will be immediately immortalized, restored to their perfect frame, limb and joint. And the poor, unfortunate creature who has lost a leg or an arm or a finger will have it restored to its proper frame, every joint to its place, and every part to its part, and it will be made perfect (Alma 40:23), for that is the law of restoration that God has instituted by which His own purpose cannot fail, by which his own designs concerning His children must be consummated. Now this is the restoration I believe in. . . . What is more desirable than that we should meet with our fathers and our mothers, with our brethren and our sisters, with our wives and our children, with our beloved associates and kindred in the spirit world, knowing each other, identifying each other by the marks we knew in the flesh and by the associations that familiarize each to the other in mortal life? What do you want better than that? What is there for any religion superior to that? I know of nothing. . . . (Doxey, The Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants [Deseret Book Co., 1963], 3:168.)

Melvin J. Ballard has also provided a description of the resurrected body:

The fact of the resurrection does not depend upon a man's belief or unbelief. It is a fact, whether he believes it or not. But man's state in the resurrection is established by himself; hence the part we can play in planning a glorious resurrection. He has laid down terms by which he will return this house to us not as it was, old and decrepit, but strong, and vigorous and beautiful, for I believe with the prophets, that in the resurrection from the dead, whether it shall take place immediately at the resurrection or thereafter when the restitution of all things comes, there will be no maimed or crippled bodies. (Alma 40:23.)

When you see men and women in the resurrection, we shall see them in the very bloom of their glorious manhood and womanhood, and he has promised all who would keep his commandments and obey the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, the restoration of their houses, glorified, immortalized, celestialized, fitted to dwell in the presence of God.

To those who cannot subscribe to those terms, and yet obey others, the lesser law, Jesus has promised a terrestrial body, not so glorious, and yet immortal and eternal, and still to those who cannot do so much, but only obey in part, a telestial body suited to the kingdom in which they dwell. Thus we fix our status in that resurrection, though the resurrection is a fact without our action. Our action makes it either glorious—the resurrection of the just; or the resurrection of the unjust. (Sermons and Missionary Services of Melvin J. Ballard [Deseret Book Co., 1949], p. 186.)

President Joseph Fielding Smith also indicated that in the resurrection all things will be restored to their proper and perfect frame:

A little sound thinking will reveal to us that it would be inconsistent for our bodies to be raised with all kinds of imperfections. Some men have been burned at the stake for the sake of truth. Some have been beheaded, and others have had their bodies torn asunder; for example, John the Baptist was beheaded and received his resurrection at the time of the resurrection of our Redeemer. It is impossible for us to think of him coming forth from the dead holding his head in his hands; our reason says he was physically complete in the resurrection. He appeared to the Prophet Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery with a perfect resurrected body.

When we come forth from the dead, our spirits and bodies will be reunited inseparably, never again to be divided, and they will then be assigned to the kingdom to which they belong. All deformities and imperfections will be removed, and the body will conform to the likeness of the spirit, for the Lord revealed, "that which is spiritual being in the likeness of that which is temporal; and that which is temporal in the likeness of that which is spiritual; the spirit of man in the likeness of his person, as also the spirit of the beast, and every other creature which God has created." (D&C 77:2.) (Doctrines of Salvation, 2:289.)

ALMA 41:10

What is the basis of Alma's statement "wickedness never was happiness"?

Every law has both a blessing and a punishment affixed to it. Whenever the law is obeyed, a blessing is given that results in happiness (joy). Whenever the law is disobeyed, a punishment is given which results in unhappiness (misery). Thus "wickedness never was happiness" and it never will be. (See 2 Nephi 2:13.) Samuel the Lamanite included the same thought in these words to the wicked Nephites: " . . . ye have sought all the days of your lives for that which ye could not obtain; and ye have sought for happiness in doing iniquity, which thing is contrary to the nature of that righteousness which is in our great and Eternal Head." (Helaman 13:38. Italics added.)

ALMA 42:12-25

For a discussion of "The Relationship of the Laws of Justice and Mercy to the Atonement of Jesus Christ," see the material listed under Mosiah 3:15-27.

ALMA 42:22

Who or what "inflicteth the punishment" demanded by a broken law?

Inasmuch as every law has both a punishment and a blessing affixed to it, punishments (or miseries) are the natural result of disobedience to the law, whereas blessings are the natural results of obedience. Thus, when a person transgresses a law (or sins) and suffering or punishment results, he brings upon himself the suffering and the "law inflicteth the punishment." (Read Helaman 14:30-31.) It is foolish to blame God for our suffering, for if all men were 100 percent righteous there would be no suffering. The following analogy might help to illustrate this point: If you counsel a person not to touch a hot stove or he will be burned, and he then disregards your counsel, touches the hot stove, and is burned, what caused him to be burned—you or the stove? Likewise, if the Lord commands you not to do a certain thing or you will suffer, and you then disregard the counsel of the Lord, commit the sin, and then suffer, who caused your suffering—the Lord, or your willful disobedience of divine law?

ALMA chapters 43-62

The Nephite-Lamanite wars of 74-61 B.C.

One of the most difficult aspects of the reading of this part of the book of Alma is to keep in mind the battlefronts, cities, and leaders involved in each war. The first skirmish in the long struggle took place between Zerahemnah (the Lamanite leader) and Moroni and Lehi (two of the chief Nephite leaders). The account of this struggle is recorded in Alma 43-44. The second phase of the battle occurred when the new Lamanite king, Amalickiah, sent his armies down to attack the Nephite cities of Noah and Ammonihah; however, the Lamanites were quickly and decisively defeated.

The main war started when "Amalickiah did himself come down, at the head of the Lamanites." (Alma 51:12.) There are two major fronts in this war. The battle on the eastern front (chapters 51-52, 53:1-7, 54-55, 59-62) concerns the cities of Lehi, Morianton, Omner, Gid, Mulek, Nephihah, and Bountiful. The Nephite leaders are Teancum, Lehi, and Moroni (after he helps fortify the land in the south and the west); the Lamanite leaders are Amalickiah, Jacob, and Ammoron (who soon leaves for the west front for several years and then returns). The battle on the west sea coast (chapters 53:8-23; 56-58) involves the cities of Zeezrom, Cumeni, Antiparah, Judea, Manti, and the "city by the sea." The Nephite leaders here are Helaman, Antipus, Gid, and Teomner; the only Lamanite leader named is Ammoron.

It is well to keep in mind that you are not reading about the battles in chronological order. Many of the battles on the eastern front that you read about first actually occurred after some of the major battles on the western front. For example, the "decoy method" of capturing cities was employed by Helaman and Antipus in their attempt to recapture the city of Antiparah on the western front (Alma 56:20, 27-57) before it was used successfully by Moroni and Teancum in recapturing the city of Mulek on the eastern front (Alma 52:19-26).

Mormon inserted a series of letters that help to keep us informed of the proceedings on the two fronts. Note particularly (1) Moroni's letter to Ammoron and Ammoron's angry reply—chapter 54; (2) Helaman's lengthy letter to Moroni—chapters 56-58; (3) Moroni's two letters to Pahoran—chapters 59:3 and 60; and (4) Pahoran's answer to Moroni— chapter 61.

ALMA 43:13

The "Lamanites" of about 74 B.C.

For hundreds of years the descendants of Lehi had been divided into two major groups, the Nephites and the Lamanites. These terms were originally used to denote those who followed after the first two major leaders, Nephi and Laman. However, by the period of 74 B.C., several dissident and apostate Nephite groups had joined with the Lamanites and had become known as Lamanites. Thus the historian says the Lamanites "were a compound of Laman and Lemuel, and the sons of Ishmael, and all those who had dissented from the Nephites, who were Amalekites and Zoramites, and the descendants of the priests of Noah." (Alma 43:13.)

The "descendants of the priests of Noah" in this verse refer to Amulon and his brethren, and their descendants. (See Mosiah 23:31-32.) The Zoramites refer to the apostate Nephites who had previously lived in the land of Antionum. The Book of Mormon does not provide any further information concerning the apostate group known as the "Amalekites." The "Amlicites" were another apostate Nephite group that previously had joined with the Lamanites. (See Alma 2 and 3.) However, the Amlicites are not mentioned in this new listing, and whether or not they have any connection with the Amalekites is not made clear.

ALMA 43:17-19

Military strategy and techniques used by Moroni

Notice the new and surprising military strategy and techniques used by Moroni in these military campaigns. Moroni prepared his people with breastplates, arm-shields, thick clothing, and shields to protect their heads. (Alma 43:19.) He also fortified the Nephite cities by having the people cast up "heaps of earth round about all the cities . . . And upon the top of these ridges of earth he caused that there should be timbers . . . built up to the height of a man. . . . And he caused that upon these works of timbers there should be a frame of pickets built . . . and they were strong and high. And he caused towers to be erected that overlooked those works of pickets, and he caused places of security to be built upon those towers." (Alma 50:1-4.) In actual battle, Moroni often used decoy and encircling tactics to confuse and defeat the enemy. (Alma 43:27-35.)

Moroni may have obtained some of his new ideas on warfare from Mosiah's translation of the twenty-four gold plates of Ether, which contained an account of the wars and contentions of the people of Jared. (See Alma 37:23-29.) If so, this may have given him an advantage over the Lamanites, because they did not have access to this record.

ALMA 43:45-47

Justification for defensive warfare

Although the Nephites were commanded by the Lord not to begin a war, they were also counseled by him: "Inasmuch as ye are not guilty of the first offense, neither the second, ye shall not suffer yourselves to be slain by the hands of your enemies." (Alma 43:46.) The Lord further instructed the Nephites: "Ye shall defend your families even unto bloodshed." (Alma 43:47.) Thus the Nephites felt justified in resisting the invasion of the Lamanites, so long as the Nephites were fighting for their lives, their homes, and their liberty.

ALMA 44:12-14

A brief note concerning the "scalping" of Zerahemnah

The question might be raised as to whether or not the "scalping" of the Lamanite leader, Zerahemnah, might have led to the scalping tradition of the American Indian. (Alma 44:12-14.) However, recent evidence would seem to indicate the American Indian did not have a scalping tradition until after the coming of the white man—that is, until the seventeenth century A.D. Apparently it was the white man who started the scalping custom, when some of the early colonists offered money for the scalps or hair of dead Indians. In order to get even with the evil white men who killed Indians just for their scalps (in much the same way as they would kill a buffalo for its hide), the Indians started to kill and scalp the whites in return.

ALMA 45:19

Was Moses translated?

Joseph Fielding Smith answers this question "Yes" in these words: "Moses, like Elijah, was taken up without tasting death, because he had a mission to perform . . . and it had to be performed before the crucifixion of the Son of God, and it could not have been done in the spirit." (Doctrines of Salvation, 2:107, 110.) President Smith is referring here to the mission Moses performed on the mount of transfiguration when he appeared to the Savior and to Peter, James, and John. (See Matthew 17:1-13.)

Alma 45:19 would also seem to indicate that Moses was translated, wherein it states that Moses "was taken up by the Spirit, or buried by the hand of the Lord." These words also help to explain the real meaning of Deuteronomy 34:5-6, which states that the Lord "buried" Moses.

ALMA 46:12-24

Moroni's Title of Liberty

One of the most fascinating stories in the entire Book of Mormon is the account of Moroni and the Title of Liberty, which he used to rally the Nephites in defense of their lands and liberty. This story is filled with types, shadows, and idiomatic expressions foreign to most of us in the modern world, but they were not strange to the ancient eastern mind, as is indicated in the following quotation from Dr. Hugh Nibley:

To the modern and the western mind all this over-obvious dwelling on types and shadows seems a bit overdone, but not to the ancient or Oriental mind. The whole Arabic language is one long commentary on the deepseated feeling, so foreign to us but so characteristic of people who speak synthetic languages, that if things are alike they are the same. . . .

One of the most remarkable aspects of the story is the manner in which Moroni sought to stir up patriotic fervor by appealing to ancient and traditional devices. He connected the whole business of the rent garment with the story of the tribal ancestors Jacob and Joseph, and suggested that ". . . those who have dissented from us . . ." were the very ". . . remnant of the seed of Joseph . . ." to which the dying Jacob prophetically referred. [Alma 46:27.] It was not merely a resemblance or a type, but the very event foreseen by the patriarch of old. . . .

In the tenth century of our era the greatest antiquarian of the Moslem world, Muhammad ibn-Ibrahim ath-Tha'labi, collected in Persia a great many old tales and legends about the prophets of Israel. . . . Among other things, Tha'labi tells a number of stories, which we have not found anywhere else, about Jacob and the garment of Joseph. In one, Joseph's brethren bring his torn garment to their father as proof that he is dead, but Jacob after examining the garment, ("and there were in the garment of Joseph three marks of tokens when they brought it to his father") declares that the way the cloth is torn shows him that their story is not true. . . .

. . . aside from the great symbolic force of the tale, there can be no doubt that the story told by Moroni as one familiar to all the people actually was one that circulated among the Jews in ancient times. . . . It was totally unknown to the world in which Joseph Smith lived.

These interesting little details are typical apocryphal variations on a single theme, and the theme is the one Moroni mentions; the rent garment of Joseph is the symbol both of his suffering and his deliverance, misfortune and preservation. Such things in the Book of Mormon illustrate the widespread ramifications of the Book of Mormon culture, and the recent declaration of Albright and other scholars that the ancient Hebrews had cultural roots in every civilization of the Near East. This is an acid test that no forgery could pass; it not only opens a window on a world we dreamed not of, but it brings to our unsuspecting and uninitiated minds a first glimmering suspicion of the true scope and vastness of a book nobody knows. (An Approach to the Book of Mormon, pp. 171-80.)

ALMA 46:23-27

Joseph's coat of many colors

The Book of Mormon provides the biblical scholar with additional information on the famed "coat of many colors" which was given to Joseph by his father, Jacob. The Bible does not mention what happened to Joseph's coat after it was smeared with blood by Joseph's brothers and taken to Jacob, but according to the Book of Mormon, the coat was preserved, and, miraculously, part of the coat never decayed. The Book of Mormon account is partially substantiated by the following story by the great Moslem historian, Muhammad ibn-Ibrahim ath-Tha'labi, concerning what took place when Joseph finally met his brothers in Egypt:

And when Joseph had made himself known unto them (his brethren) he asked them about his father, saying, "What did my father after (I left)?" They answered, "He lost his eyesight (from weeping)." Then he gave them his garment (qamis, long outer shirt). According to ad-Dahak that garment was of the weave (pattern, design) of Paradise, and the breath (spirit, odor) of Paradise was in it, so that it never decayed or in any way deteriorated (and that was) a sign (omen). And Joseph gave them that garment, and it was the very one that had belonged to Abraham, having already had a long history. And he said to them, "Go, take this garment of mine and place it upon the face of my father so he may have sight again, and return (to me) with all your families." And when they had put Egypt behind them and come to Canaan their father Jacob said, "Behold, I perceive the spirit (breath, odor) of Joseph, if you will not think me wandering in my mind and weakheaded from age . . ." (for, he knew that upon all the earth there was no spirit [breath, odor]) of Paradise save in that garment alone. . . . And as-Sadi says that Judah said to Joseph, "It was I who took the garment bedaubed with blood to Jacob, and reported to him that the bear had eaten Joseph; so give me this day thy garment that I might tell him that thou art living, that I might cause him to rejoice now as greatly as I caused him to sorrow then." And Ibn-Abbas says that Judah took the garment and went forth in great haste, panting with exertion and anxiety . . . and when he brought the garment he laid it upon his face, so that his sight returned to him. And ad-Dahak says that his sight returned after blindness, and his strength after weakness, and youth after age, and joy after sorrow. (Quoted in Nibley, An Approach to the Book of Mormon, pp. 178-79.)

ALMA 46:40

The fevers at "some seasons of the year"

Very little information is provided in the Book of Mormon concerning the climate where the Nephites and Lamanites lived. However, some scholars have assumed that the reference to fevers that occurred at certain seasons of the year in the land of Zarahemla might indicate this particular land was in a tropical or semitropical area. However, as noted by the historian, the effects of these fevers were not too serious "because of the excellent qualities of the many plants and roots which God had prepared to remove the cause of diseases." (Alma 46:40.)

ALMA 48:14

Nephites not to wage offensive war

Although the Nephites were permitted by the Lord to fight for their rights and liberties when attacked by the Lamanites (see Alma 43:46-47), nevertheless they had been warned by the Lord "never to give an offense, yea, and never to raise the sword except it were against an enemy, except it were to preserve their lives." (Alma 48:14.) (For further information concerning the teachings of the Lord and the prophets on war, see the materials listed after 3 Nephi 3:20-21.)

ALMA 51:26

The capture of the city of Nephihah

Although the historian of this part of the record mentions in Alma 51:25 that the Lamanites decided not "to go against the city of Nephihah to battle," in the next verse the historian records that the Lamanites went on "taking possession of many cities, the city of Nephihah, and the city of Lehi . . . ," etc. Although it is not clear whether or not the historian intended to include the city of Nephihah in this list, it is evident that the city is captured later by the Lamanites. (See Alma 59:7-9.)

ALMA 53:6

A puzzling reference to the "land of Nephi"

Concerning one of Moroni's exploits against the Lamanites, the historian writes: "And it came to pass that Moroni had thus gained a victory over one of the greatest of the armies of the Lamanites, and had obtained possession of the city of Mulek, which was one of the strongest holds of the Lamanites in the land of Nephi. . . . " (Alma 53:6. Italics added.) The reference to the city of Mulek as "one of the strongest holds of the Lamanites in the land of Nephi" is puzzling because the city of Mulek is evidently located in the greater land of Zarahemla. (See Alma 51:26.)

Here are three possible explanations of this puzzle: (1) Perhaps this land is being called "the land of Nephi" by the Lamanites because they now possess it as they also possess the land of Nephi in the south. (2) The Nephites could have a "land of Nephi" in the north, although such a land has not been mentioned before and is not mentioned later. (3) The phrase "in the land of Nephi" might be used to identify those particular Lamanites mentioned in the verse and to differentiate them from Lamanites living in other parts of the country.

ALMA 53:8

The west sea is now to the south

When the Nephites first landed in the promised land, they gave names to some of the seas and lands around them. At that time the sea to the west of their landing place was evidently called the "west sea." Later, Nephi left this land, took his followers, and went northward where they settled in the land of Nephi. The descendants of Nephi and his group lived there for several hundred years. Then Mosiah, under the inspiration of the Lord, led a group of Nephites even farther north to the land of Zarahemla. The major group of the Nephites is now located in the land of Zarahemla, far north of the original landing place. Thus, the original "west sea" is actually far to the south of where they are now living, and they refer to "the west sea, south." (Alma 53:8.)

ALMA 54:24

The false claim of the Lamanites to the right of government

One reason listed by Ammoron (the apostate Nephite who has now become the leader of the Lamanites) for waging his war against the Nephites is that he wants "to avenge" the wrongs of the Lamanites and "to maintain and to obtain their rights to the government." (Alma 54:24.) When Lehi died soon after arriving in the promised land, Laman and his followers felt they should succeed him as the rulers of the colony because Laman was the eldest son of Lehi and Sariah. However, the Lord designated the righteous Nephi as the new leader. Thus for hundreds of years the Lamanites had passed down the tradition that the Nephites had "robbed them" by taking away their right to the government. (For further information on the false traditions of the Lamanites, see the material listed after Mosiah 10:12-17.)

ALMA 56:46-48; 57:25-26

The 2,000 stripling sons of Helaman

One of the great war stories in the Book of Mormon is the account of the 2,000 young warriors who are descendants of Lamanite converts and who fight under the leadership of Helaman in the war between the Lamanites and the Nephites. The parents of these warriors had taken a covenant not to take up arms against their enemies, and Helaman would not allow them to break this covenant. However, the sons of these people had not entered into the covenant; therefore, they were willing to go to battle. Because of their great faith, valor, and courage, these young warriors were protected by the Lord through several battles, and not one lost his life.

This story is frequently told to illustrate the importance of correct teaching in the home and the blessings that come from honoring parents. These young men told Helaman that "they had been taught by their mothers, that if they did not doubt, God would deliver them." Then they added: "We do not doubt our mothers knew it." (Alma 56:47-48.)

In a letter to Moroni, Helaman attributes the success and preservation of his warrior sons to the power of God and to their faith: "And we do justly ascribe it [their preservation] to the miraculous power of God, because of their exceeding faith in that which they had been taught to believe—that there was a just God, and whosoever did not doubt, that they should be preserved by his marvelous power." (Alma 57:26.)

ALMA 60:13

For information on why the Lord might suffer the righteous to be slain, read the material listed after Alma 14:11

ALMA 63:5-8

Hagoth, the shipbuilder

Several migrations from the land southward into the land northward took place in the decade between 60 and 50 B.C. Some of these immigrants and many of their supplies were shipped into the land northward on ships built by Hagoth. However, in about 55 B.C. Hagoth and "many more people" entered into a ship, started for the land northward, and were never heard of again. (Alma 63:7.)
