Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Book of Mormon ( 1976)

HELAMAN

HELAMAN

1:2-34; 2:1-2 The new chief judges

The reign of judges began in the year 92 B.C. of the Christian calendar, and from then until 52 B.C. only three chief judges had served: Alma the younger, Nephihah, and Pahoran. However, in the year 52 B.C. Pahoran died and within the next two years three additional chief judges were selected: (1) Pahoran the second was selected to succeed his father, but he was murdered by Kishkumen (Helaman 1:9); (2) Pacumeni succeeded Pahoran the second, but he was killed by Coriantumr in war (Helaman 1:21); (3) Helaman the second (the son of Helaman who was the son of Alma the younger) then became the new chief judge (Helaman 2:1-2).

HELAMAN 2:2-14

The band of Gadianton

The introduction to the band of Gadianton (also known as the "Gadianton Robbers") would indicate that this group was organized by Kishkumen. However, upon the death of Kishkumen, "Gadianton, who was exceeding expert in many words, and also in his craft, to carry on the secret work of murder and of robbery . . . became the leader of the band of Kishkumen." (Helaman 2:4.)

Gadianton then led his followers into the wilderness, and they are not mentioned again in the record for several years. But, as Mormon promised, "more of this Gadianton shall be spoken hereafter." (Helaman 2:12.)

HELAMAN 3:16

The meaning of the term "Lamanite" about 45 B. C.

In the days of Helaman, the word Lamanite was being used to refer to the wicked people who had joined with the blood descendants of Laman and his early followers. Thus the wicked who joined with the Lamanites were "no more called the Nephites, becoming wicked, and wild, and ferocious, yea, even becoming Lamanites." (Helaman 3:16.)

It is quite evident that some of the Lamanites converted by Nephi and Lehi in the prison were really apostate Nephites, for Aminadab said that they had had the gospel preached unto them by "Alma, and Amulek, and Zeezrom." (Helaman 5:41.) So far as the Book of Mormon relates, the only missionary venture engaged in by these three men together was to the apostate Zoramites who were then living in the land of Antionum. (Alma 31:3-6.)

HELAMAN 4:7

For information on the narrow neck of land and the line of fortification, see the material listed after Alma 22:32.

HELAMAN

4:11-13 Pride—one cause of war

Although the Book of Mormon lists several causes of war (wickedness, greed, personal ambition, selfishness, etc.), one of the most frequently listed causes is pride. Perhaps it should be obvious how pride could lead to war, because pride causes a person to feel he is better than others. Therefore, when a person or a nation is lifted up in "the pride of their hearts" they feel others should not have the same rights and privileges they have; thus they are willing to fight either to prevent other people from getting these rights or to gain other privileges for themselves.

HELAMAN 5:10-11

Jesus Christ can redeem people from their sins

When Alma and Amulek were doing missionary work in the city of Ammonihah, the investigator Zeezrom asked Amulek if God could save people in their sins. "And Amulek answered and said unto him: I say unto you he shall not, for it is impossible for him to deny his word. . . . And I say unto you again that he cannot save them in their sins; for I cannot deny his word, and he hath said that no unclean thing can inherit the kingdom of heaven; therefore, how can ye be saved, except ye inherit the kingdom of heaven? Therefore, ye cannot be saved in your sins." (Alma 11:34, 37.)

Many years after the above experience Helaman explained these teachings of Amulek to his sons Nephi and Lehi, as follows:

And remember also the words which Amulek spake unto Zeezrom, in the city of Ammonihah; for he said unto him that the Lord surely should come to redeem his people, but that he should not come to redeem them in their sins, but to redeem them from their sins.

And he hath power given unto him from the Father to redeem them from their sins because of repentance; therefore he hath sent his angels to declare the tidings of the conditions of repentance, which bringeth unto the power of the Redeemer, unto the salvation of their souls. (Helaman 5:10-11)

Thus Jesus Christ cannot redeem people in their sins (because they are still wicked), but he can redeem them from their sins (because they have repented from them).

HELAMAN 5:21

The prison in the land of Lehi-Nephi

During their missionary journey to the Lamanites, Nephi and Lehi are thrown into the same prison "in which Ammon and his brethren were cast by the servants of Limhi." (Helaman 5:21.) Thus we find that Nephi and Lehi are doing missionary work in the land of Lehi-Nephi, because this is where Ammon and his brethren were thrown into prison by King Limhi. (See Mosiah 7:2-7.)

HELAMAN 5:41

The identification of the apostate Zoramites

The Book of Mormon does not expressly give the identity of the people who are in the prison at the time of the miraculous manifestation mentioned in Helaman 5. However, a clue as to who these people were is given by Aminadab when he said unto them, "You must repent, and cry unto the voice, even until ye shall have faith in Christ, who was taught unto you by Alma, and Amulek, and Zeezrom." (Helaman 5:41.) The only time Alma and Amulek and Zeezrom were on a missionary trip together was to the apostate Zoramites who were then living in the land of Antionum. (See Alma 31:1-8.) The Zoramites later fled from this area and joined with the Lamanites in the greater land of Nephi, and from this statement by Aminadab we learn they have now occupied the land of Lehi-Nephi, which had just been deserted by Limhi and his people.

Again, the Book of Mormon proves to be a very complex book but also a wonderfully consistent one.

HELAMAN 6:10; 8:21

Were all the sons of King Zedekiah killed?

Zedekiah was the king of Judah at the time Lehi and his colony fled from Jerusalem. (1 Nephi 1:4.) A few years later when the Babylonians besieged Jerusalem, they "slew the sons of Zedekiah before his eyes." (2 Kings 25:7.) Most people have assumed all of the sons of Zedekiah were killed at that time; however, the Book of Mormon records that the sons of Zedekiah were slain "all except it were Mulek." (Helaman 8:21.)

HELAMAN 6:13

Fine-twined linen

The term "fine-twined linen" was evidently used quite extensively by the Hebrews; it appears nine times in the Book of Mormon and is used thirty-two times in the biblical book of Exodus. It is not clear what material was used to make the linen mentioned in the Book of Mormon. Hunter and Ferguson discuss this problem as follows:

The Book of Mormon makes reference to "linen," without qualifying it. It may be that the early Nephites had flax-linen. On the other hand, flax . . . was not found in America at the time of the Conquest . . . The present scientific view is that linen from flax did not exist in ancient America. Cotton, of course, was commonly used in ancient Middle America. However, the word for linen would have been in the vocabulary of settlers coming from Jerusalem in 600 B.C. It occurs many times in the Old Testament. However, Bible scholars have suggested that the various Hebrew words that have been translated "linen" in the Old Testament are, for the most part, of uncertain meaning, and in some cases varieties of cotton are meant. In the United States today we sometimes refer to cotton products as "linen." Thus, perhaps the Nephites did not have flax, but rather used their word for "linen" in a broader sense.

The Hebrew background of the Nephites is reflected by its use. (Milton R. Hunter and Thomas Stuart Ferguson, Ancient America and the Book of Mormon [Oakland: Kolob Book Co., 1950], pp. 316-17.)

HELAMAN 6:25-30

The origin of the secret oaths

In his farewell instructions to his son Helaman, Alma warns him to withhold from the Nephites those references from Jaredite history pertaining to "all their oaths, and their covenants, and their agreements in their secret abominations; yea . . . ye shall keep these secret plans of their oaths and their covenants from this people." (Alma 37:27, 29.) But in Helaman 6, which covers a period about fifty years later than Alma's instructions to his son, it is obvious that the Nephites (especially the Gadianton Robbers) are in possession of these secret oaths and covenants. The historian hastens to inform us, however, that these "secret oaths and covenants did not come forth unto Gadianton from the records which were delivered unto Helaman; but behold, they were put into the heart of Gadianton by that same being who did entice our first parents to partake of the forbidden fruit." (Helaman 6:26.) In subsequent verses the historian makes it clear that these secret oaths and covenants came from the devil, "he who is the author of all sin." (Helaman 6:30.)

HELAMAN 7:7

The good old days

The prophet Nephi (the son of Helaman) apparently believes in the sayings that "the grass is always greener on the other side of the fence" and "the good old days are best." After he and his teachings are rejected by the people, Nephi laments:

Oh, that I could have had my days in the days when my father Nephi first came out of the land of Jerusalem, that I could have joyed with him in the promised land; then were his people easy to be entreated, firm to keep the commandments of God, and slow to be led to do iniquity; and they were quick to hearken unto the words of the Lord—

Yea, if my days could have been in those days, then would my soul have had joy in the righteousness of my brethren. (Helaman 7:7-8.)

However, students of the Book of Mormon probably remember that all things were not perfect during this early time period. This was the time of bitter hatred between the Lamanites and Nephites when they finally broke away from each other. In fact, Jacob (the brother of Nephi, who had grown up during this period) expressed his feelings concerning this same period as follows: ". . . we being a lonesome and a solemn people, wanderers, cast out from Jerusalem, born in tribulation, in a wilderness, and hated of our brethren, which caused wars and contentions; wherefore, we did mourn out our days." (Jacob 7:26.)

HELAMAN 8:13-15

The "brazen serpent" lifted up by Moses

According to the Bible, when the people of Israel were being bitten by serpents and some of the people were dying, the Lord commanded Moses to make a serpent "and set it upon a pole: and it shall come to pass, that every one that is bitten, when he looketh upon it, shall live. And Moses made a serpent of brass, and put it upon a pole, and it came to pass, that if a serpent had bitten any man, when he beheld the serpent of brass, he lived." (Numbers 21:8-9.) That is the end of the account in the Bible. However, the account in the Book of Mormon indicates that when Moses lifted up the brazen serpent he did "bear record that the Son of God should come. And as he lifted up the brazen serpent in the wilderness, even so shall he be lifted up who should come. And as many as should look upon that serpent should live, even so as many as should look upon the Son of God with faith, having a contrite spirit, might live, even unto that life which is eternal." (Helaman 8:14-15).

The Savior also indicated that the "brazen serpent lifted up by Moses" was a type (shadow, or example) of his own crucifixion when he said: "And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up: That whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have eternal life." (John 3:14-15.)

Some scholars of the Book of Mormon have wondered if this story of the serpent as given in the book of Helaman did not account for the "serpent motif" in the art and architecture of some of the American Indian cultures. Also, it is of interest to note that one of the names given by some of the American Indians to the great white God who appeared out of the eastern sky was the name of Quetzalcoatl, which literally means the bird-serpent, or the serpent of precious plumage.

HELAMAN 8:19-20

References to ancient prophets not mentioned in the Bible

Four ancient prophets whose writings do not appear in our present Bible are mentioned in the Book of Mormon. These four prophets and the Book of Mormon references to them are as follows: (1) Zenos, who is mentioned 12 times in the Book of Mormon, in 1 Nephi 19:10, 12, 16; Jacob 5:1; 6:1; Alma 33:3, 13, 15; 34:7; Helaman 8:19; 15:11; and 3 Nephi 10:16; (2) Zenock, who is mentioned five times in the Book of Mormon, in 1 Nephi 19:10; Alma 33:15; 34:7; Helaman 8:20; and 3 Nephi 10:16; (3) Neum, who is mentioned once in the Book of Mormon, in 1 Nephi 19:10; (4) Ezias, who is mentioned once in the Book of Mormon, in Helaman 8:20. The reference in Helaman 8:19-20 to three of these prophets seems to indicate they lived sometime between the "days of Abraham" and the time of Isaiah.

HELAMAN 8:21

Mulek and the tribe of Judah

Mulek was the son of Zedekiah, the king of Judah, who was spared at the time of the Babylonian captivity and who later came to the Americas. The descendants of Mulek were included among the people of Zarahemla, and later they were numbered among the Nephites. Thus, among the combined Nephite-Lamanite-Mulekite peoples are represented at least three of the twelve tribes of ancient Israel: (1) the tribe of Manasseh, represented by the descendants of Lehi; (2) the tribe of Ephraim, represented by the descendants of Ishmael; (3) the tribe of Judah, represented by the descendants of Mulek. (For further information concerning the lineage of Lehi, Ishmael, and Mulek, see the material listed after Helaman 6:10 and after Alma 10:3.)

HELAMAN 10:6-9

The sealing power of the priesthood

Because of the righteousness and great faith of Nephi, the Lord promised him: "Behold, I give unto you power, that whatsoever ye shall seal on earth shall be sealed in heaven; and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven; and thus shall ye have power among this people." (Helaman 10:7.) This is the same sealing power of the priesthood that was later promised by the Savior to Peter on the eastern continent: "And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven." (Matthew 16:19.) This sealing power can be used not only to seal things on earth so they will be sealed in heaven (such as priesthood ordinances, marriages, etc.), but also actually to "seal the heavens" so it cannot rain. This power was used by Nephi during the drought mentioned in Helaman 11:4-17.

HELAMAN 10:16-17

Nephi went forth "in the Spirit"

The term "in the Spirit," which is used to indicate how Nephi taught the people, evidently means that Nephi went forth "by the power of the Spirit." It does not mean Nephi's body was separated from his spirit; rather it probably means he was protected in his missionary work by the power of the Spirit.

HELAMAN 12:2-8

Mormon's lament on human frailties

When Mormon reviews the wickedness of the people who were living shortly before the birth of Christ, he points out that "at the very time" the Lord prospers the people with riches and other blessings, "then is the time that they do harden their hearts, and do forget the Lord their God." (Helaman 12:2.) Thus, after observing that the people do not keep the commandments of the Lord, Mormon laments: "O how great is the nothingness of the children of men; yea, even they are less than the dust of the earth. For behold, the dust of the earth moveth hither and thither, to the dividing asunder, at the command of our great and everlasting God." (Helaman 12:7-8.)

This statement should not be interpreted that Mormon believes men are worth even less than the dust of the earth. Rather Mormon is saying that men sometimes appear to be less wise than the dust of the earth. When the Lord tells the dust of the earth to move, it obeys, whereas when the Lord tells men to do something, they frequently do not obey.

HELAMAN 13-16

The prophecies of Samuel the Lamanite

Inasmuch as there are no quotation marks in the entire Book of Mormon, it is sometimes a little difficult to tell exactly where a direct quotation begins and ends. In verses 8 through 20 of chapter 13 of Helaman, Samuel is apparently quoting directly from the words of an angel. The remainder of Samuel's sermon was "put into his heart" by the Lord. (Helaman 13:5.) Thus his entire sermon was given under the influence of the Lord, and it contains the following remarkable prophecies in rather detailed form:

Samuel's final warning to the Nephites was that the Lord would "utterly destroy them" unless they repented of their sins. (Helaman 15:17.) Some of the people heeded this warning by Samuel, and they sought out Nephi, confessed their sins, and desired to be baptized. (Helaman 16:1.) Others, however, did not believe the words of Samuel; they became angry at him and tried to kill him. (Helaman 16:2, 6-8.)

HELAMAN 13:38

Happiness is not obtained through doing iniquity

Samuel the Lamanite reminds the wicked people of his day: ". . . ye have sought all the days of your lives for that which ye could not obtain; and ye have sought for happiness in doing iniquity, which thing is contrary to the nature of that righteousness which is in our great and Eternal Head." (Helaman 13:38.) Samuel's teachings are very similar to those of Alma the younger ("wickedness never was happiness"—Alma 41:10), and to those of Lehi (2 Nephi 2:11-27).

(For further information on this subject, including a diagram showing the relationship between wickedness and unhappiness, see the material listed after 2 Nephi 2:11-27.)

HELAMAN 14:12

Who was the "Creator of all things from the beginning"?

Jesus Christ is referred to as the "Creator of all things from the beginning." (Helaman 14:12.) In fact, Jesus Christ once introduced himself to the Nephites as follows: "Behold, I am Jesus Christ the Son of God. I created the heavens and the earth, and all things that in them are." (3 Nephi 9:15. See also Moses 1:33 and 2:1; and D&C 45:1-3.) (For further information on Jesus Christ as the Creator see the material listed after 3 Nephi 9:15.)

HELAMAN 14:15-17

The spiritual deaths

The Book of Mormon mentions two major types of spiritual death. The term "first spiritual death" refers to the original transgression of Adam and Eve when they were cast out of the Garden of Eden and to the condition which comes upon a person when he commits his first sin. Jesus Christ atoned for the first spiritual death of Adam and Eve, and each individual person can be redeemed from his "first spiritual death" upon the conditions of repentance. However, the "second spiritual death" is much more serious. This term is used in the Book of Mormon to refer to a death which takes place after physical death wherein the person is "cut off again as to things pertaining to righteousness." (Helaman 14:18.) This second spiritual death refers essentially to the state or condition of those who become sons of perdition. (For further information on the use of the term spiritual death in the Book of Mormon, see the material listed after 2 Nephi 9:6-12.)

HELAMAN 14:25

"Many graves shall be opened . . . and many saints shall appear"

Samuel the Lamanite prophesied that on the American continents at the time of the resurrection of Jesus Christ "many graves shall be opened, and shall yield up many of their dead; and many saints shall appear unto many." (Helaman 14:25.) This prophecy is not only literally fulfilled later in the Book of Mormon, but also, during his appearance to the righteous Nephites, the resurrected Jesus Christ instructed that an account of the fulfillment of this prophecy should be written in their records. In fact, the Savior says he commanded Samuel the Lamanite to prophesy concerning this event. (See 3 Nephi 23:9-13.)

A similar event of graves being opened also occurred on the eastern continent at the time of the resurrection of the Savior: "And the graves were opened; and many bodies of the saints which slept arose, and came out of the graves after his resurrection, and went into the holy city, and appeared unto many." (Matthew 27:52-53.)

HELAMAN 14:30-31

The importance of free agency

Samuel the Lamanite warns us that when we disobey God we cannot use the excuse that we were forced to commit sin. He says:

. . . remember, my brethren, that whosoever perisheth, perisheth unto himself; and whosoever doeth iniquity, doeth it unto himself; for behold, ye are free; ye are permitted to act for yourselves; for behold, God hath given unto you a knowledge and he hath made you free.

He hath given unto you that ye might know good from evil, and he hath given unto you that ye might choose life or death; and ye can do good and be restored unto that which is good, or have that which is good restored unto you; or ye can do evil, and have that which is evil restored unto you. (Helaman 14:30-31.)

This gift of free agency is one of the greatest gifts ever given to man by God. It is true that without free agency man could not be condemned in the justice of God, but it is also true that without it man could not be blessed for keeping the laws. President David O. McKay has explained the value and importance of free agency as follows:

A fundamental principle of the gospel is free agency, and references in the scriptures show that this principle is (1) essential to man's salvation; and (2) may become a measuring rod by which the actions of men, of organizations, of nations may be judged.

"Therefore," we are told in the scripture, "cheer up your hearts, and remember that ye are free to act for yourselves—to choose the way of everlasting death or the way of eternal life." (2 Nephi 10:23.) . . .

"My independence is sacred to me," said Brigham Young, "it is a portion of that same Deity that rules in the heavens. There is not a being upon the face of the earth who is made in the image of God, who stands erect and is organized as God is, that would be deprived of the free exercise of his agency so far as he does not infringe upon other's rights, save by good advice and a good example." (Discourses of Brigham Young, 1943 ed., p. 62.)

The history of the world with all its contention and strife is largely an account of man's effort to free himself from bondage and usurpation.

Man's free agency is an eternal principle of progress, and any form of government that curtails or inhibits its free exercise is wrong. Satan's plan in the beginning was one of coercion, and it was rejected because he sought to destroy the agency of man which God had given him.

When man uses this God-given right to encroach upon the rights of another, he commits a wrong. Liberty becomes license, and the man, a transgressor. It is the function of the state to curtail the violator and to protect the individual.

Next to the bestowal of life itself, the right to direct our lives is God's greatest gift to man. Freedom of choice is more to be treasured than any possession earth can give. It is inherent in the spirit of man. It is a divine gift to every normal being. Whether born in abject poverty or shackled at birth by inherited riches, everyone has the most precious of all life's endowments—the gift of free agency, man's inherited and inalienable right. It is the impelling source of the soul's progress. It is the purpose of the Lord that man becomes like him. In order for man to achieve this, it was necessary for the Creator first to make him free. To man is given a special endowment, not bestowed upon any other living thing. God gave to him the power of choice. Only to the human being did the Creator say: ". . . thou mayest choose for thyself, for it is given unto thee; . . ." (Moses 3:17.) Without this divine power to choose, humanity cannot progress.

With free agency, however, there comes responsibility. If man is to be rewarded for righteousness and punished for evil, then common justice demands that he be given the power of independent action. A knowledge of good and evil is essential to man's progress on earth. If he were coerced to do right at all times or helplessly enticed to commit sin, he would merit neither a blessing for the first nor punishment for the second. Man's responsibility is correspondingly operative with his free agency. Actions in harmony with divine law and the laws of nature will bring happiness, and those in opposition to divine truth, misery. Man is responsible not only for every deed, but also for every idle word and thought.

Freedom of the will and the responsibility associated with it are fundamental aspects of Jesus' teachings. Throughout his ministry he emphasized the worth of the individual and exemplified what is now expressed in modern revelation as "his work and his glory." (Moses 1:39.) Only through the divine gift of soul freedom is such progress possible. (Conference Report, October 1965, pp. 7-8.)
