Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Book of Mormon ( 1976)

THIRD NEPHI

Origin of the title "Third Nephi"

In the first edition of the Book of Mormon, the book that is now known by the title of "Third Nephi" was known only as "The Book of Nephi the son of Nephi, who was the son of Helaman." This original title was used until the edition of 1879 when, at the recommendation of Orson Pratt, the heading "Third Nephi" was added before the title of this book and the words "Fourth Nephi" were added before the title of the book that follows.

3 NEPHI 1:1

A meaning of the term "A.D. 1"

The chronological material listed on the bottom of each page in the Book of Mormon did not appear in the first edition. These chronological notes were first added in the edition of 1920 at the recommendation of a committee headed by Elder James E. Talmage. The abbreviation B.C. is used to designate the number of years before the time of Christ. The abbreviation A.D. (from the Latin Anno Domini, meaning "in the year of our Lord") is used to indicate the number of years since the birth of Christ. Note that this calendar system does not go through a zero number. Thus the year before the birth of Christ is 1 B.C. and the year in which the Savior is born is A.D. 1. According to the calendar systems previously used by the Nephites, the year A.D. 1 occurs in the ninety-second year of the reign of judges (the record says the "ninety and first year had passed away") and in the six hundredth year from the time Lehi left Jerusalem. (3 Nephi 1:1.)

3 NEPHI 1:2-3

The disappearance of Nephi the son of Helaman

The great leader Nephi about whom we read so much in the book of Helaman turned the record over to his son Nephi at the beginning of this new book and then "departed out of the land, and whither he went, no man knoweth." (3 Nephi 1:3.) The disappearance of Nephi the son of Helaman is somewhat similar to the disappearance seventy-three years earlier of his great-great-grandfather, Alma the younger. The Book of Mormon provides no further information concerning what became of these two great prophets.

3 NEPHI 1:12-14

The statement of the Savior the day before his birth

The day before the Savior was born on the eastern continent, he spoke to the prophet Nephi on this continent and said:

Lift up your head and be of good cheer; for behold, the time is at hand, and on this night shall the sign be given, and on the morrow come I into the world . . .

. . . to do the will, both of the Father and of the Son—of the Father because of me, and of the Son because of my flesh. And behold, the time is at hand, and this night shall the sign be given. (3 Nephi 1:13-14.)

This pre-birth statement of the Savior again indicates something concerning the nature and power of pre-earthly beings. Also, the Savior's statement that he was to do the will "of the Father because of me" evidently refers to his status as the first born spiritual child of our Heavenly Father. His statement that he is coming into the world to "fulfill all things" and to do the will "of the Son because of my flesh" evidently refers to his coming mission on earth as the Savior and Redeemer of the world.

3 NEPHI 1:24-25

The law of Moses not fulfilled at the birth of the Savior

About five hundred years before the birth of the Savior, Nephi the son of Lehi had prophesied that at the coming of the Christ the law of Moses "shall be fulfilled." (2 Nephi 25:24.) Thus at the sign of the birth of Christ, some of the descendants of Nephi claimed "it was no more expedient to observe the law of Moses" because according to their interpretation of the scriptures the law of Moses had been fulfilled. (3 Nephi 1:24.) However, it was made known unto them "that the law was not yet fulfilled, and that it must be fulfilled in every whit." (3 Nephi 1:25.)

Later, during the three days between his crucifixion and resurrection, the Savior spoke to the righteous Nephites living on the American continent and said "in me is the law of Moses fulfilled." (3 Nephi 9:17.) Still later the resurrected Savior appeared to the Nephites and taught, ". . . verily I say unto you, one jot nor one tittle hath not passed away from the law, but in me it hath all been fulfilled." (3 Nephi 12:18.) Evidently the law of Moses was fulfilled by the Savior at the time of his crucifixion and resurrection.

(For further information on the topic "The Relationship Between the Law of Moses and the Atonement of Jesus Christ" see the material listed after 2 Nephi 25:20-30.)

3 NEPHI 2:5-8

The Nephite calendar systems

The Nephites used three systems of reckoning time: (1) The first method was to determine the number of years since father Lehi left Jerusalem; this system was used from 600 B.C. to 92 B.C. (Mosiah 29:44-47; Alma 1:1.)

(2) The second method was to calculate the number of years from the beginning of the reign of the judges; this system was used for about 100 years, from 91 B.C. to A.D. 9. (3 Nephi 2:5-7.)

(3) The last method was to "reckon their time from this period when the sign was given, or from the coming of Christ" (3 Nephi 2:7-8); this system was used for the remainder of their record.

3 NEPHI 3:20-21

Is war ever justified?

Although the Gadianton Robbers had threatened to come to battle against the Nephites "on the morrow month," when the Nephites asked their military leader Gidgiddoni to attack the robbers first, Gidgiddoni said: "The Lord forbid; for if we should go up against them the Lord would deliver us into their hands." (3 Nephi 3:21.) This counsel of the Lord not to wage offensive war has apparently been given to people of all dispensations, as is indicated in this statement in the Doctrine and Covenants:

Behold, this is the law I gave unto my servant Nephi, and thy fathers, Joseph, and Jacob, and Isaac, and Abraham, and all mine ancient prophets and apostles.

And again, this is the law that I gave unto mine ancients, that they should not go out unto battle against any nation, kindred, tongue, or people, save I, the Lord, commanded them.

And if any nation, tongue, or people should proclaim war against them, they should first lift a standard of peace unto that people, nation, or tongue;

And if that people did not accept the offering of peace, neither the second nor the third time, they should bring these testimonies before the Lord; Then I, the Lord, would give unto them a commandment, and justify them in going out to battle against that nation, tongue, or people.

And I, the Lord, would fight their battles, and their children's battles, and their children's children's, until they had avenged themselves on all their enemies, to the third and fourth generation.

Behold, this is an ensample unto all people, saith the Lord your God, for justification before me. (D&C 98:32-38.)

This principle is also the teaching of the Church at this time, as is indicated in the following statement by President George Q. Cannon:

We must proclaim peace; do all in our power to appease the wrath of our enemies; make any sacrifice that honorable people can to avert war, with all its horrors, entailing as it does dreadful consequences so numerous that they cannot be mentioned. It is our duty, I say, as a nation. The influence of the Latter-day Saints should be used in this direction. We should seek to quell these feelings of anxiety to fight and to shed blood. Our influence should go forth like oil poured upon the troubled waters, quieting the waves of discontent and wrath that are aroused by this fearful spirit. . . .

Not only ought we to extend the offering of peace the first time to a nation that proclaims war against us, but again the second time; and if that should be rejected, again the third time; and if it be rejected the third time, then:

"They should bring these testimonies before the Lord."

Go to the Lord and say, "Here are our testimonies. We have offered peace the first time; we have offered it twice; we have offered it three times; but our offerings are rejected, and this nation is determined to have war with us. Now we bring these testimonies before thee, Lord." . . .

I do not look for our nation to do this. It is scarcely to be expected, in the nature of things, that they would do it. But it is the true principle, and we as a people should use our influence for this purpose. Our prayers should ascend to God; our petitions should ascend to the government of our nation to do everything that honorable people can to avert war. We have no fear of the effect of the combinations against us. . . . But the promise of God is that if we will do right as a nation, if we will serve Him, they shall not have power over us, or be able to bring us into bondage; and in the end we shall prevail. This is a glorious promise which is made to the inhabitants of the land. . . .

To us as Latter-day Saints these principles are of the utmost importance. I do not want to see our young men get filled with the spirit of war and be eager for the conflict. God forbid that such a spirit should prevail in our land, or that we should contribute in any manner to the propagation of a spirit of that kind! But one may say, "Is it not our duty to defend our country and our flag? Is it not our duty to maintain the institutions which the Lord has given to us?" Certainly it is. And it is no part of cowardice to take the plan that the Lord has pointed out. No man need be afraid that the Lord or any just man will look upon him as a coward. (Conference Report, April 1898, pp. 86-87.)

The principle behind this counsel apparently is related to the principle of repentance, as is indicated in this statement by President Joseph Fielding Smith:

The law of forgiveness and retribution . . . applies to individuals and to families, as well as to the Church at large. We are under commandment to forgive our enemies and suffer their abuses and smiting the first time and second time, also the third time. This is to be done in patience, and in humility and prayer, hoping that the enemy might repent. If the enemy come upon us for the fourth time we are justified in meting out retribution, but even then there is to come a reward if we patiently endure, and the Lord will reward us abundantly. For all these abuses we will be rewarded if we endure them in patience. Perchance the enemy may repent, and that we should most sincerely desire. This may to the most ordinary human being be a hard law to follow; but nevertheless it is the word of the Lord. One of the best illustrations of this spirit of enduring wrong rather than retaliating is found in the story of the people of Ammon in the Book of Mormon. Because they refused to take up arms to defend themselves, but would rather lay down their lives than shed blood even in their own defense, they brought many of their enemies to repentance and to the kingdom of God. [Alma 24:17-25; 27:3.] This is the doctrine of Jesus Christ as taught in the Sermon on the Mount. [Matt. 5:21-22, 43-44.] If all peoples would accept this doctrine there could be no war, and all difficulties could be adjusted in righteousness. This doctrine was taught, so the Lord declared, to his people anciently. There are many things in the Old Testament in relation to the wars and battles of the Israelites in the meagre record which has come down to us, which are made to appear to us that these people were cruel and vengeful, but the Lord says they went out to battle when they were guided by prophets and the spirit of revelation when the Lord commanded them. (Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation [Salt Lake City: The Council of the Twelve Apostles, 1953], 1:434-35.)

3 NEPHI 5:8-12

The writings of Mormon are only a small abridgment

When Mormon abridged the material from the large plates of Nephi over to his own plates, he said he did not write "even a hundredth part" of that which was written in their records, including the large plates. Thus, apparently our present Book of Mormon consists of only about one percent of the original Nephite record.

3 NEPHI 5:20

Lehi's disappearance from Jerusalem was secret

When Lehi and his colony left Jerusalem in about 600 B.C., their leaving was evidently kept secret from the other people in Jerusalem. Mormon tells us concerning Lehi's departure, "no one knew it save it were himself and those whom he brought out of that land." (3 Nephi 5:20.)

3 NEPHI 6-7

The "reign of judges" replaced by other forms of government

Between A.D. 26 and 30 the people became very wicked, and "the church was broken up in all the land save it were among a few of the Lamanites who were converted unto the true faith." (3 Nephi 6:10-14.) The "chief judges, and they who had been high priests and lawyers" entered into a covenant to destroy "the people of the Lord" and to "destroy the governor, and to establish a king over the land, that the land should no more be at liberty but should be subject unto kings." (3 Nephi 6:21-30.) This secret society did not succeed in establishing a king over the land; but "they did destroy upon the judgment seat, yea, did murder the chief judge of the land." (3 Nephi 7:1.) The people were so divided they could not agree on a form of centralized government, so "they did separate one from another into tribes, every man according to his family and his kindred and his friends; and thus they did destroy the government of the land." (3 Nephi 7:2.)

3 NEPHI 6:10-15

The apostasy from the church in about A.D. 30

Despite the miraculous signs given at the birth of Christ, within thirty years many members of the church had apostatized. Apparently the beginning cause of this apostasy was the pride of the people. Because of this pride "the people began to be distinguished by ranks, according to their riches and their chances for learning. . . . And thus there became a great inequality in all the land, insomuch that the church began to be broken up." (3 Nephi 6:12, 14.) Apparently pride is the first slope down on the "roller coaster" so far as both apostasy and war are concerned. When people start to believe they are better than others, then they start ridiculing and persecuting other people, and apostasy and war are the inevitable results.

3 NEPHI 7:2-3

The people were divided into tribes

It is of interest to note that when the central government was destroyed, the people divided "into tribes, every man according to his family and his kindred and friends." (3 Nephi 7:2.) The strong family ties indicated here are reminiscent of the emphasis of the early Hebrews on the family. After the appearance of the resurrected Jesus Christ to these people, they again have a strong central government for over three hundred years. However, after that time, the government begins to disintegrate and by the close of the Book of Mormon almost complete anarchy exists. Apparently after A.D. 400 the people divide into tribes again, for this is the system of government they had when the white man came almost 1,000 years later.

3 NEPHI 7:18-20

The great faith and power of Nephi the son of Nephi

The prophet Nephi of approximately A.D. 32 was so righteous and had such great faith that "angels did minister unto him daily." (3 Nephi 7:18.) Although Nephi used this power to try to bless his people (he even raised his own brother from the dead), the wicked people "were angry with him because of his power." (3 Nephi 7:20.) Thus, despite the great signs and miracles that had been performed for the people, they still disbelieved. Once again this indicates that signs do not convert unless the conversion of faith follows.

3 NEPHI 8:5

An exact date for the crucifixion of Jesus Christ

The New Testament account of the crucifixion of Christ would seem to indicate that the Savior was crucified the very week he became thirty-three years of age. The Book of Mormon not only substantiates this account, but also provides us with an exact date of the crucifixion. According to the Nephite calendar system, the Savior was crucified "in the thirty and fourth year, in the first month, on the fourth day of the month." (3 Nephi 8:5.) Although we are not certain when the first month of the Nephite calendar would occur, if the Nephites were using the same calendar system as the Hebrews, the first month would be in the spring of the year sometime between about the middle of March and the middle of April.

3 Nephi 9:15

Jesus Christ is the Creator of the heavens and the earth

While the body of the Savior lay in the tomb on the eastern continent, he spoke to the righteous Nephite survivors on the western continent and introduced himself with these words: "Behold, I am Jesus Christ the Son of God. I created the heavens and the earth, and all things that in them are." (3 Nephi 9:15.) The concept that Jesus Christ created the heavens and the earth was taught earlier in the Book of Mormon by Samuel the Lamanite when he identified the Savior as "Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Father of heaven and of earth, the Creator of all things from the beginning." (Helaman 14:12.)

Other scriptures also teach that Jesus Christ created both the heavens and the earth. In Moses 1:33 God the Father (Eloheim) states: "And worlds without number have I created; and I also created them for mine own purpose; and by the Son I created them, which is mine Only Begotten."

Also, in the Doctrine and Covenants the Savior introduces himself to the members of the Church in this dispensation as follows: "Hearken, O ye people of my church, to whom the kingdom has been given; hearken ye and give ear to him who laid the foundation of the earth, who made the heavens and all the hosts thereof, and by whom all things were made which live, and move, and have a being." (D&C 45:1.)

3 NEPHI 9:17

How to become sons and daughters unto Christ

After introducing himself as the Creator of the heavens and earth, the Savior informs the people "as many as have received me, to them have I given to become the sons of God; and even so will I to as many as shall believe on my name." (3 Nephi 9:17.) The Savior's statement in this scripture is quite similar to a statement he made to the Brother of Jared over 2,000 years earlier as a pre-earthly spirit: "In me shall all mankind have light, and that eternally, even they who shall believe on my name; and they shall become my sons and my daughters." (Ether 3:14).

King Benjamin also taught his people how they could become the sons and daughters of Christ. After telling his people about the life and mission of the Savior, he encouraged his people to enter into a covenant to accept Christ and to serve him (this covenant evidently included the ordinance of baptism). Then he said: ". . . because of the covenant which ye have made ye shall be called the children of Christ, his sons, and his daughters; for behold, this day he hath spiritually begotten you." (Mosiah 5:7.)

3 NEPHI 10:16-17

The Nephites are descendants of the Prophets Zenos and Zenock

The prophets Zenos and Zenock are quoted several times by the prophets of the Book of Mormon. A possible reason for this propensity in quoting them becomes evident in this reading assignment: the Nephites are descendants of the prophets Zenos and Zenock! The historian records: ". . . the prophet Zenos did testify of these things, and also Zenock spake concerning these things, because they testified particularly concerning us, who are the remnant of their seed." (3 Nephi 10:16. Italics added.) (For additional information on the prophets Zenos and Zenock, see the material listed after Helaman 8:19-20.)

3 NEPHI 11

The time of the appearance of the resurrected Jesus Christ to the Nephites

Some readers of the Book of Mormon disagree as to the exact time of the appearance of the resurrected Jesus Christ to the Nephites in the land Bountiful. One view is that he came to the American continent immediately after his resurrection; a second opinion is that he came about forty days after his resurrection at the time of his "ascension into heaven" on the eastern continent; a third view is that he came almost a year after his resurrection. The statements that refer to this problem are as follows:

And it came to pass in the thirty and fourth year, in the first month, on the fourth day of the month, there arose a great storm, such an one as never had been known in all the land. (3 Nephi 8:5.)

And it came to pass that in the ending of the thirty and fourth year, behold, I will show unto you that the people of Nephi who were spared, and also those who had been called Lamanites, who had been spared, did have great favors shown unto them, and great blessings poured out upon their heads, insomuch that soon after the ascension of Christ into heaven he did truly manifest himself unto them—

Showing his body unto them, and ministering unto them; and an account of his ministry shall be given hereafter. Therefore for this time I make an end of my sayings. (3 Nephi 10:18-19.)

Other verses that might indirectly throw light on this question are 3 Nephi 11:1-3 and 3 Nephi 19:1-5.

3 NEPHI 11

The Indian title or name of Quetzalcoatl

Many American tribes have a tradition of the appearance of a great white God to their ancestors of many years ago. The name or title frequently given to this personage, especially among the QuichÃ© tribes of Central America, is Quetzalcoatl, which literally means "bird-serpent" or "serpent of precious plumage." It is interesting to speculate that perhaps this title was given to the resurrected Jesus Christ because he had been lifted up on a cross as the serpent had been lifted up on a stick by Moses. (Helaman 8:13-16. See also Numbers 21:6-9 and John 3:14.) Also, he appeared to them by descending out of the sky like a bird. (3 Nephi 11:8.) This theory might also explain why the very first thing the Savior did after his appearance to the Nephites was to invite the people to feel the prints of the nails in his hands and feet that they might know that "it was he, of whom it was written by the prophets, that should come." (3 Nephi 11:14-15.)

3 NEPHI 11:16-21

The meaning of the word "Hosanna"

At the time of the appearance of the resurrected Jesus Christ to the Nephites, the multitude went forth, felt the resurrected body of the Savior, and testified that "it was he, of whom it was written by the prophets, that should come" and then cried out "with one accord, saying: Hosanna!" (3 Nephi 11:15-16.) The word Hosanna is a transliteration of a Hebrew word of supplication which means in essence "Oh, grant salvation." Evidently the people were asking the Savior to teach them the way to salvation; thus it is not surprising that he immediately teaches them the basic principles and ordinances of the gospel.

3 NEPHI 11:21-34

The teachings of the Savior on baptism

Baptism is perhaps the most basic and fundamental of all the ordinances in the gospel of Jesus Christ. Yet, the teachings on baptism in the New Testament must not be too clear, for wide diversities exist among Christian churches concerning such fundamentals as: (1) the necessity and purpose of baptism, (2) the age of baptism, (3) whether or not priesthood power is necessary to baptize, (4) the mode or method of baptism, and (5) the words to be used in the baptismal prayer.

However, the Savior clarifies many of the essential concepts on baptism in a few brief verses in the Book of Mormon. In chapter 11 of 3 Nephi, he indicates: (1) baptism is for the remission of sins (verse 23), (2) thus a person who is baptized should be old enough to repent of his sins (verse 23), (3) priesthood authority or power is needed in order for a person to baptize (verses 21-22), (4) baptism should be performed by immersion (verses 23-27), and (5) the person baptizing should say the words: "Having authority given me of Jesus Christ, I baptize you in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen" (verse 25).

Some students have raised the question as to why the words of the baptismal prayer in the Book of Mormon differ slightly from the prayer listed in the Doctrine and Covenants. In this dispensation the Lord has counseled us to use these words in baptizing a person, after calling the candidate by name: "Having been commissioned of Jesus Christ, I baptize you in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen." (D&C 20:73.) The only difference in the two prayers is the introductory statement. In the Book of Mormon the disciples were counseled to say "having authority given me of Jesus Christ," whereas in this dispensation we are told to say "having been commissioned of Jesus Christ."

One possible explanation for this difference may be associated with the problem of translation. For example, it is not always possible to translate exact words into other languages; thus, the baptismal prayer is not exactly the same in all languages. Another possibility for explaining this difference is that the disciples in the Book of Mormon received their authority directly from Jesus Christ; therefore, they rightfully could say "having authority given me of Jesus Christ." However, in this dispensation priesthood bearers have been given the power to baptize from John the Baptist, who was commissioned by Jesus Christ to come to earth and restore this authority. Therefore, in this dispensation we use the words "having been commissioned of Jesus Christ."

3 NEPHI 12-14

Contributions of the Book of Mormon to a correct understanding of the Sermon on the Mount

It is perhaps safe to say that the Sermon on the Mount is the most quoted and the least understood of all the teachings of Jesus. The translation of Matthew's account of this sermon in our present New Testament (Matthew 5-7) has caused many people to raise questions concerning the authenticity of the sermon. They ask such questions as the following: Why did the Savior teach that people were better off being poor in spirit than not poor in spirit, or that they were more blessed mourning than not mourning? When he said "Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they shall be filled," with what are they to be filled: hunger, thirst, or righteousness? Also, why did he counsel the people to "take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink; nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on"? What if all people literally followed this admonition? Who would plant and harvest the crops, feed the children, manufacture the clothes, etc. It is evident there is something wrong with the translation of the Sermon on the Mount in our present New Testament.

When the resurrected Jesus Christ appeared to the Nephites, he gave them the same sermon. In fact, he specifically told the Nephites, "Behold, ye have heard the things which I taught before I ascended to my Father." (3 Nephi 15:1.) However, the account of this sermon in the Book of Mormon is much more complete and makes much more sense than the New Testament account. For example, in the Book of Mormon the Savior prefaced his sermon by indicating the teachings that were to follow applied only to those who would "come down into the depths of humility and be baptized . . . [and] be visited with fire and with the Holy Ghost, and . . . receive a remission of their sins." (3 Nephi 12:2.) Then he related these prerequisite conditions to each of the Beatitudes that followed: "Yea, blessed are the poor in spirit who come unto me, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. And again, blessed are all they that mourn, for they shall be comforted." (3 Nephi 12:3-4. Italics added.) This more complete version of the sermon changes the entire emphasis of the Beatitudes. Here the Savior is not saying "you are more blessed if you mourn than if you do not mourn," but he is saying "If you are called upon to mourn, then you are blessed if you come unto me, are baptized, receive the Holy Ghost, etc." Thus, if you do truly hunger and thirst after righteousness, you shall be filled "with the Holy Ghost." (3 Nephi 12:6.)

It is also of interest to note that each of the Beatitudes in the Book of Mormon begins with the coordinating conjunction "and," which helps to relate them back to the introductory statement.

3 NEPHI 12:1-2

The introductory verses to the Sermon on the Mount

Before delivering the Sermon on the Mount on the eastern continent and his similar sermon to the Nephites, the Savior stated that what he was about to say pertained to those who were willing to believe in his words, "come down into the depths of humility and be baptized" so that they could "be visited with fire and with the Holy Ghost," and could "receive a remission of their sins." (3 Nephi 12:2. See also Matthew 5:3-4 of the Inspired Version.)

Unfortunately, this introductory statement does not appear in either the King James or the Catholic version of the Bible. Thus most Christians have a misconception as to the meaning of the Sermon on the Mount. They assume that this sermon was meant either for the whole world or for only the chosen disciples. However, the Book of Mormon and the Inspired Version of the Bible indicate that the major parts of this sermon were intended for all those who were willing to accept Christ and keep his commandments.

3 NEPHI 12:3-11

The Beatitudes

The Beatitudes in the Book of Mormon are listed in the same order as those in the New Testament. However, some significant differences of wording should be noted:

3 NEPHI 12:22

The meaning of the word "raca"

In the New Testament the Savior counseled his followers: ". . . whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause shall be in danger of the judgment: and whosoever shall say to his brother, Raca, shall be in danger of the council." (Matthew 5:22.) The Savior's teachings on this subject in the Book of Mormon are the same except the phrase "without a cause" is deleted. The word raca is used in both accounts, however, and students often wonder what this word means. In the original Semite tongue raca means vain or empty. Thus, the Savior is telling us not to call other people by such derogatory titles.

3 NEPHI 12:31-32

The teachings of the Savior on divorce

Divorce was definitely discouraged by Jesus Christ. In the New Testament when the Pharisees asked "Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife for every cause?" the Savior replied: "Have ye not read, that he which made them at the beginning made them male and female, And said, For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife: and they twain shall be one flesh? Wherefore they are no more twain, but one flesh. What therefore God hath joined together, let not man put asunder." (Matthew 19:4-6.) Then the Pharisees asked, "Why did Moses then command to give a writing of divorcement, and to put her away?" (Note: Moses did not "command" divorce, but in Deuteronomy 24:1-4 he required a man to give his wife a bill of divorcement if he should separate from her or should "send her out of his house.") And Jesus answered: "Moses because of the hardness of your hearts suffered you to put away your wives; but from the beginning it was not so. And I say unto you, Whosoever shall put away his wife, except it be for fornication, and shall marry another, committeth adultery: and whoso marrieth her which is put away doth commit adultery." (Matthew 19:8-9.)

It should be remembered that the "putting away of a wife" referred to by Jesus was not equal to a legal divorce. As James E. Talmage has indicated, "Jesus announced no specific or binding rule as to legal divorces; the putting away of a wife, as contemplated under the Mosaic custom, involved no judicial investigation or action by an established court." (Jesus the Christ, p. 474.)

These same ideas on marriage and divorce are included in the Savior's statement in the Book of Mormon. Divorce (or permanent separation) is not good; but if a couple decides to separate permanently, they should follow the legal procedures. This requirement is equally applicable to the man or the woman, for if a man "puts away his wife" but does not give her a legal divorce, he causes both her and any subsequent husband she might marry to commit adultery. (3 Nephi 12:31-32; compare Matthew 5:31-32; 19:3-9; Luke 16:18.) In this regard, it is well to remember that the word divorce as used by the Savior in 3 Nephi 12:32 is not a legal term; it simply implies a separation or "putting away." The legal term used by the Savior is "writing of divorcement." (3 Nephi 12:31.)

3 NEPHI 12:48

The Savior said, ". . . ye should be perfect even as I"

In closing a major part of the Sermon on the Mount on the eastern continent, the Savior said: "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect." (Matthew 5:48.) To the Nephites, the Savior makes a significant addition: "Therefore I would that ye should be perfect even as I, or your Father who is in heaven is perfect." (3 Nephi 12:48.) When the Savior delivered this sermon on the eastern continent, he was just beginning his ministry; he had not yet brought about the atonement in the Garden of Gethsemane nor had he been resurrected from the dead. Thus, at that time he was not perfect in every sense. However, when he appeared to the Nephites as a glorified, resurrected God of glory, then he could rightfully counsel them to be perfect "even as I."

3 NEPHI 13:9-13

The Book of Mormon account of "the Lord's Prayer"

A comparison of the Lord's Prayer in the Book of Mormon (3 Nephi 13:9-13) and the New Testament (Matthew 6:9-13) indicates these changes: (1) the personal pronoun who is used in the Book of Mormon to refer to God rather than the impersonal pronoun which; (2) the term "Thy kingdom come" is omitted from the Book of Mormon account, perhaps because the church (or "kingdom") had already been established among the Nephites; (3) the Book of Mormon says "on" earth rather than "in" earth; (4) the sentence "Give us this day our daily bread" is omitted from the Book of Mormon account. The remainder of the two prayers is the same.

Some Latter-day Saints have raised the question as to why the clause "Lead us not into temptation" appears in the Book of Mormon account whereas the Prophet Joseph Smith apparently later changed this in his inspired revision of the Bible to read "And suffer us not to be led into temptation." The following statement is a possible answer to this question:

Few of the present generation can comprehend the attitude of the Protestant Christian world to the Bible at the time the Book of Mormon was published. Every word in it was regarded as sacred and the word of God. The people worshipped the book rather than the Author. Such was the condition of the minds of those to whom the latter-day gospel was carried. Therefore, not to put fresh obstacles in the way of the honest, or further hurt their susceptibilities, the Lord, in his divine wisdom and loving kindness, permitted those portions of the Bible that were incorporated in the Book of Mormon to appear in the identical language to which the people were accustomed. It was only when a change was absolutely necessary that he permitted it. If this supposition be correct, then in no case would this precaution have to be observed more strictly than in the utterances of the Redeemer himself, as, for instance, in the Lord's prayer.

To show how clearly the text of the Old Testament has been followed, we draw attention to some peculiarities in the extracts from the prophecies of Isaiah that appear in the Book of Mormon. In the second verse of the twenty-second chapter of the second book of Nephi, the word Jehovah appears with every letter capitalized. It is so printed in the Bible where this same verse occurs. (Isa. 12:2.) Elsewhere in the Book of Mormon the word appears with only the first letter a capital. In the same chapter (verse 6.) Zion is spelled Sion; in all other places it is spelled with a Z. But in this place it is copied letter for letter from the corresponding verse in Isaiah (12:6.) In Isaiah (6:2, 6.) the double plural—both Hebrew and English—appears in the word seraphions. It so appears when quoted in the Book of Mormon. The word silverlings appears (II Nephi 17:23.) in the reproduction of Isaiah 7:23. Now silverlings were as unknown to English speaking people at the time the Book of Mormon was translated as they were to the Nephites. These are small things, but they have weight when considered in this connection.

Another thing that must be remembered: it was not until considerably later in the history of the Prophet Joseph Smith, that it was shown to him that the more correct translation of this portion of the prayer would be, "Suffer us not to be led into temptation." (Improvement Era, 4:306-7.)

3 NEPHI 13:14-15

Forgive others

At the end of the Lord's Prayer, the Savior reminds the Nephites that if they are to pray sincerely "forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors" (3 Nephi 13:11), they must be willing to forgive others: "For, if ye forgive men their trespasses your heavenly Father will also forgive you; But if ye forgive not men their trespasses neither will your Father forgive your trespasses." (3 Nephi 3:14-15.)

President Spencer W. Kimball has explained what it means to forgive others:

Remember that we must forgive even if our offender did not repent and ask forgiveness. . . .

It frequently happens that offenses are committed when the offender is not aware of it. Something he has said or done is misconstrued or misunderstood. The offended one treasures in his heart the offense, adding to it such other things as might give fuel to the fire and justify his conclusions. Perhaps this is one of the reasons why the Lord requires that the offended one should make the overtures toward peace. . . .

To the Nephites the Lord said:

". . . if . . . thy brother hath aught against thee—Go thy way unto thy brother, and first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come unto me with full purpose of heart, and I will receive you." (3 Nephi 12:23-24.)

And to the disciples in Judea he said:

"Therefore if thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there rememberest that thy brother hath ought against thee;

"Leave there thy gift before the altar and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift." (Matt. 6:23-24.)

Do we follow that commandment or do we sulk in our bitterness, waiting for our offender to learn of it and to kneel to us in remorse?

And this reconciliation suggests also forgetting. Unless you forget, have you forgiven? . . .

The Lord forgets when he has forgiven, and certainly must we. He inspired Isaiah to say:

"I, even I, am he that blotted out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins." (Isaiah 43:25.)

And again in our dispensation, he said:

"Behold, he who has repented of his sins, the same is forgiven; and I, the Lord, remember them no more." (D&C 58:42.)

And we are instructed by him that:

". . . thou shalt forgive him with all thine heart . . ." (D&C 98:45.)

No bitterness of past frictions can be held in memory if we forgive with all our hearts. (Conference Report, October 1949, pp. 132-33.)

3 NEPHI 13:25-26

Some specific teachings of the Savior to his disciples

The way the Sermon on the Mount appears in the present King James Version would indicate that the entire sermon was given either to the whole world or to the Savior's chosen disciples only, depending on the interpretation placed upon Matthew 5:1-2. However, the Book of Mormon indicates that although most of the sermon was intended for the multitude, at least a portion of it was intended only for the chosen leaders. In the New Testament there is no break between the teachings "Ye cannot serve God and mammon" and "Therefore I say unto you, Take no thought for your life," etc. (Matthew 6:24-25.) However, in the Book of Mormon the Savior pauses between these two statements, turns from the multitude, and speaks only to "the twelve whom he had chosen." (3 Nephi 13:25.) The next ten verses are directed only to these chosen leaders.

3 NEPHI 15:4-8

The Savior gave the law to Moses . . . and later fulfilled it

Jesus identifies himself as the God who gave the law to Moses on the Mount of Sinai: "Behold, I am he that gave the law." (3 Nephi 15:5.) Furthermore, he indicates that through his atonement in the Garden of Gethsemane and at the time of his resurrection he fulfilled the law that he had given unto Moses. (3 Nephi 15:4-8.)

3 NEPHI 15:11-24

"Other sheep I have which are not of this fold"

During his earthly ministry, the Savior taught the people on the eastern continent as follows: "And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd." (John 10:16.) In teaching the Nephite disciples, the resurrected Jesus Christ relates this teaching on the eastern continent; then he said concerning the Nephites, ". . . ye are they of whom I said: Other sheep I have which are not of this fold." (3 Nephi 15:21.) Thus the appearance of the resurrected Christ to the Nephites at least partially fulfilled his promise that his "other sheep" should hear his voice.

3 NEPHI 16:1-3; 17:4

The promised appearance of the Savior to the lost tribes of Israel

After teaching the Nephites concerning his prophecy that he had "other sheep" that were not of the fold at Jerusalem, he then said to the Nephites: "And verily, verily, I say unto you that I have other sheep which are not of this land, neither of the land of Jerusalem . . . they of whom I speak are they who have not as yet heard my voice; neither have I at any time manifested myself unto them. But I have received a commandment of the Father that I shall go unto them . . . therefore I go to show myself unto them." (3 Nephi 16:1-3.)

In the next chapter he makes it clear that these "other sheep" not of the land of Jerusalem nor of the Americas are the lost tribes of Israel. Therefore, he says, ". . . now I go unto the Father, and also to show myself unto the lost tribes of Israel, for they are not lost unto the Father, for he knoweth whither he hath taken them." (3 Nephi 17:4.)

Earlier in the Book of Mormon (2 Nephi 29:11-14), the Lord promises that in the mouths of three great scriptural witnesses the divinity of Christ would be established. It is of interest to note that evidently the resurrected Jesus Christ appeared to all of the peoples who were to write these great scriptural witnesses. He appeared as a resurrected being to the Jews, from whom we get the Bible; he appeared as a resurrected being to the Nephites, from whom we get the Book of Mormon; and he promises here that he is going to appear as a resurrected being to the lost tribes of Israel, from whom shall come the third great scriptural witness.

3 NEPHI 17:14-15

A prayer by the Savior

Although the Savior undoubtedly frequently prayed while he was on the earth, only a few of his prayers are listed in the scriptures. One account of his praying is in 3 Nephi 17:14-25, and the witnesses of this prayer testified: "The eye hath never seen, neither hath the ear heard, before, so great and marvelous things as we saw and heard Jesus speak unto the Father; And no tongue can speak, neither can there be written by any man, neither can the hearts of men conceive so great and marvelous things as we both saw and heard Jesus speak; and no one can conceive of the joy which filled our souls at the time we heard him pray for us unto the Father." (3 Nephi 17:16-17.) Perhaps this description helps explain why we do not have more accounts in the scriptures of the prayers of the Savior; even for the righteous Nephites the experience was so overpowering that "they were overcome." (3 Nephi 17:18.)

3 NEPHI 18:1-2

The sacrament of the Lord's Supper

The Book of Mormon account of the sacrament of the Lord's Supper greatly clarifies the four accounts given in the New Testament. (See Matthew 26:26-29; Mark 14:22-25; Luke 22:19-20; and 1 Corinthians 11:24-27.) Also, the account in the Book of Mormon (3 Nephi 18:1-12) would indicate that the Catholic doctrine of real presence (or transubstantiation) is not true. The Catholics define their doctrine as follows:

The Catholic Church has always interpreted the words: "This is My Body; This is My Blood," which occur in the four accounts of the Last Supper, in a strictly literal sense. No explanation of these simple words can make their meaning clearer. . . .

The doctrine of the Real Presence is undoubtedly a great mystery like the Creation, the Blessed Trinity and the Incarnation, but it is not impossible, because it does not imply any self-contradiction. If God can create the universe out of nothing, why cannot He change the substance of bread and wine into His Body and Blood? . . .

Non-Catholics declare the doctrine of the Real Presence impossible, because they think it involves a self-contradiction. They suppose that it requires the same thing to be both bread and not bread at the same time. This is not the Catholic teaching. After Consecration the species of bread is not really bread, but the Body of Christ, for the substance of the bread has been changed into the substance of Christ's Body. What is not changed is the "accidents or the sensible qualities of the bread; viz., its color, taste," etc. But the reality of a thing lies in its substance, the invisible part of it, not in the accidents, or visible part. . . .

This is certainly a mysterious doctrine, hard to understand, because there is nothing like it in all our experience. But the mysteries of Christianity are all unique, because they pertain to divine things. (The Question Box [Houston: The Question Box, 1950], pp. 251, 254-55.)

The Book of Mormon, however, indicates that when we partake of the emblems of the sacrament we should do so in remembrance of the body and the blood of Jesus Christ; we are not partaking of the actual flesh and blood of the Savior. Also, the Lord has said:

Listen to the voice of Jesus Christ, your Lord, your God, and your Redeemer, whose word is quick and powerful. For, behold, I say unto you, that it mattereth not what ye shall eat or what ye shall drink when ye partake of the sacrament, if it so be that ye do it with an eye single to my glory—remembering unto the Father my body which was laid down for you, and my blood which was shed for the remission of your sins. (D&C 27:1-2.)

The Book of Mormon also clarifies the following points concerning the sacrament:

3 NEPHI 18:15-25

Some teachings of the Savior on prayer

The best recorded sermon on prayer given by the Savior is found in the Book of Mormon, 3 Nephi 18. In eleven brief verses the Savior gives the following counsel and reasons for praying: We should pray because he has set the example (verse 16); we should pray lest we should enter into temptation (verse 18); we should pray so that we will not be led away captive by the devil (verse 15); we should pray "unto the Father" in the name of Jesus Christ (verse 19); we should pray for things which are right for us (verse 20); we should pray in faith (verse 20); we should pray with our families so that our wives and children may be blessed (verse 21); we should meet together and pray often (verse 22); we should pray for others to meet with us (verse 23); we should pray as an example for others (verse 24).

3 NEPHI 18:28-29

Do not partake of the sacrament unworthily

The Savior counseled his disciples to see that no unworthy person partook of the sacrament, "For whoso eateth and drinketh my flesh and blood unworthily eateth and drinketh damnation to his soul." (3 Nephi 18:29.) This same admonition that we are not to partake of the sacrament unless we are worthy and are willing to keep the commandments of the Lord has been given to us in this dispensation. (See D&C 46:4.)

Concerning the evil of partaking of the sacrament unworthily, President David O. McKay has said: "To partake of the sacrament unworthily is to take a step toward spiritual death. No man can be dishonest within himself without deadening the susceptibility of his spirit. Sin can stun the conscience as a blow on the head can stun the physical senses. He who promises one thing and deliberately fails to keep his word, adds sin to sin. On natural principles such a man 'eats and drinks condemnation to his soul.' " (Conference Report, October 1929, pp. 14-15.)

3 NEPHI 18:36-39

The disciples receive the power to give the Holy Ghost

When the Savior left his disciples after his first appearance to them, "he touched with his hand the disciples whom he had chosen, one by one, even until he had touched them all, and spake unto them as he touched them. . . . the disciples bare record that he gave them power to give the Holy Ghost. And I will show unto you hereafter that this record is true." (3 Nephi 18:36-37.)

Evidently the pronoun I in this quotation refers to the historian Mormon when he promises "I will show unto you hereafter that this record is true"; that is, Mormon is going to show later in his record that the Savior did give the disciples the power to bestow the Holy Ghost. Some persons might question whether or not Mormon does indicate this later in his record. However, it is of interest to note that as soon as Moroni starts writing, he gives us the exact wording of the prayer of the Savior on this occasion. (See Moroni 2.)

3 NEPHI 19:4, 11-13

The baptism of the twelve Nephite disciples

The question has sometimes been raised by readers of the Book of Mormon as to why the Nephite disciples had to be rebaptized when it was quite evident that they had already received the ordinance of baptism. The record indicates that the twelve disciples desired most that "the Holy Ghost should be given unto them." (3 Nephi 19:9.) They prayed to the Father for this blessing; then Nephi "went down into the water and was baptized. And he came up out of the water and began to baptize. And he baptized all those whom Jesus had chosen. And . . . when they were all baptized and had come up out of the water, the Holy Ghost did fall upon them, and they were filled with the Holy Ghost and with fire." (3 Nephi 19:11-13.)

Concerning the baptism of the Nephites at this particular time, President Joseph Fielding Smith has written: "When Christ appeared to the Nephites on this continent, he commanded them to be baptized, although they had been baptized previously for the remission of their sins. . . . The Savior commanded Nephi and the people to be baptized again, because he had organized anew the Church under the gospel. Before that it had been organized under the law. For the same reason Joseph Smith and those who had been baptized prior to April 6, 1830, were again baptized on the day of the organization of the Church." (Doctrines of Salvation, 2:336.)

3 NEPHI 19:20-23

A prayer given by the Savior

With the exception of the Lord's Prayer, which he gave to us as an example, the scriptures contain very few personal prayers of the Savior. However, a notable exception to this is 3 Nephi 19:20-23, which contains the exact words of a personal prayer given by the Savior. This prayer is a classic example for several reasons. First, the prayer is very personal. This brief prayer of only four verses contains forty personal pronouns used by the Savior. Also, the prayer contains the thanks of the Savior to our Heavenly Father (verse 20) and a petition to the Father for a future blessing (verse 21). Another interesting feature of this prayer is that the Savior explains to the Father why the Nephites are praying directly to him rather than to the Father: ". . . they pray unto me because I am with them." (3 Nephi 19:22.) Elsewhere the Savior clearly taught that we should pray unto the Father in the name of the Savior. (See 3 Nephi 18:20.)

3 NEPHI 19:28-29

How we may become one with the Father and the Son

One of the most disputed doctrines of Christianity involves the characteristics of God and the other members of the Godhead. Because of certain statements in the New Testament indicating that members of the Godhead are one, some theologians have taught that the members of the Godhead are one in substance. However, a careful reading of the New Testament indicates this is not the meaning. For example, in his great prayer of supplication, the Savior prays to the Father for his chosen disciples and then adds: "Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me through their word; That they all may be one; as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us: that the world may believe that thou hast sent me. And the glory which thou gavest me I have given them; that they may be one, even as we are one." (John 17:20-22. Italics added.)

It is clear from this scripture that the Savior is not praying for the people to become one in substance with him and the Father. This statement is further clarified by the Savior in the Book of Mormon where he indicates again that he is praying for all those who will believe on him. Then he adds: "Father, I pray not for the world, but for those whom thou hast given me out of the world, because of their faith, that they may be purified in me, . . . that I may be glorified in them." (3 Nephi 19:29.)

Thus the way we may become one with the Father and the Son is to keep the commandments of the Lord so that we might be sanctified or purified and be worthy to have their presence with us.

3 NEPHI 20:6-7

The miracle of providing the bread and wine for the sacrament

A miracle has been defined as the use of natural law in a way that is not fully understood. In this sense the term miracle could be used to describe electricity, for no scientist professes to understand all the laws upon which electricity is based. Certainly the Savior's providing bread and wine for the sacrament could be termed a miracle. The Savior did not circumvent natural law; rather, he used the law in a way we do not fully understand. Many people can make bread by taking wheat and adding other ingredients such as yeast and sugar; this process also requires the presence of the ingredients plus heat and time. However, Jesus Christ, the Creator of the heavens and the earth, was able to apply these natural laws almost instantaneously. That is, although there was no bread present, he was able to reach out his hands, gather the elements, and break bread that could be used in the sacrament.

3 NEPHI 20:14-16

A remnant of Jacob to be given great power in the last days

The Savior taught the righteous Nephites that several generations after his appearance to them their descendants would become wicked again; finally the Gentiles would be brought to occupy the lands that had been given for the inheritance of the Nephites. However, the Savior also tells the Nephites that "if the Gentiles do not repent after the blessing which they shall receive, . . . Then shall ye, who are a remnant of the house of Jacob, go forth among them; and ye shall be in the midst of them who shall be many; and ye shall be among them as a lion among the beasts of the forest, and as a young lion among the flocks of sheep, who, if he goeth through both treadeth down and teareth in pieces, and none can deliver." (3 Nephi 20:15-16.) Later in his sermon the Savior repeats this prophecy (3 Nephi 21:12); then he says: "wo be unto the Gentiles except they repent." (3 Nephi 21:14.)

A possible interpretation of this prophecy has been given by Daniel H. Wells as follows:

To add to the sufferings and great calamities of the American nation, they will be greatly distressed by the aborigines, who will "marshall themselves, and become exceeding angry," and vex them "with a sore vexation." This event, we believe, may not take place in its fulness until the nation has been greatly weakened by the death of millions in their own revolutionary battles. To what extent the Indians will have power over the nation, is not stated in this revelation; but from what Jesus informed their forefathers at the time of his personal ministry among them, as recorded in the Book of Mormon, they will have power in a great measure over the whole nation. In speaking upon this subject, Jesus prophesies as follows:

"Therefore, it shall come to pass, that whosoever will not believe in my words, who am Jesus Christ, which the Father shall cause him" (Joseph Smith) "to bring forth unto the Gentiles, and shall give unto him power that he shall bring them forth unto the Gentiles, (it shall be done even as Moses said) they shall be cut off from among my people who are of the covenant; and my people, who are a remnant of Jacob, shall be among the Gentiles, yea, in the midst of them, as a lion among the beasts of the forest, as a young lion among the flocks of sheep, who, if he go through, both treadeth down and teareth in pieces, and none can deliver." [3 Nephi 21:11-12.]

. . . It appears more improbable, now, to the people of the United States, that the Indians should ever become so powerful an enemy and so dreadful a scourge to them, . . . that they would ever engage in so dreadful a civil war as that now raging. Yet this will as surely be fulfilled as have the other portions of this prophecy. (Millennial Star, 27:187.)

3 NEPHI 20:29-31, 46

Prophecies of the Savior now in the process of fulfillment

Many prophecies of the Savior concerning the house of Israel have already been fulfilled. Some of these were fulfilled before the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, but many of them have been fulfilled since the publication of this holy scripture. However, others of these prophecies of the Savior are now in the process of fulfillment and still others are in the future.

For example, in verse 29 the Savior promises that in the last days the house of Israel should be gathered together to "the land of their fathers for their inheritance, which is the land of Jerusalem, which is the promised land unto them forever, saith the Father." (3 Nephi 20:29.) This prophecy was made by the Savior in A.D. 34 and it was published in the Book of Mormon in 1830. Yet it was not until 1948, 118 years after the publication of the Book of Mormon, that the modern state of Israel was established and these people could gather home to the land of their inheritance.

Also, in verse 30 the Savior prophesies: "And it shall come to pass that the time cometh, when the fulness of my gospel shall be preached unto them." Again, the great missionary program of the Church was not organized in 1830 when the Book of Mormon was published. However, since that time the gospel has been taken to many peoples upon the earth, including many of the Jewish people. In verse 31 the Savior continues: "And they shall believe in me, that I am Jesus Christ, the Son of God, and shall pray unto the Father in my name." So far this prophecy has been only partially fulfilled; the acceptance of Jesus Christ by the Jewish people as a whole is still in the future.

3 NEPHI 21:1-7, 9, 12, 22-29

Teachings of the Savior on the gathering of Israel

This statement by the Savior is one of the most significant statements in all scripture concerning the gathering of Israel in the last days. It is of particular significance because (1) it is given by the resurrected Jesus Christ himself, (2) he clearly indicates that these aspects of the gathering are to take place in the last days, and (3) the gathering of Israel includes much more than the gathering of the Jewish people to the land of Israel.

Elder LeGrand Richards has pointed out the major concepts that are included in these brief verses:

In considering the above declaration, it should be remembered that the Book of Mormon was published and given to the world in 1830, the year the Church was organized, when Joseph Smith was only twenty-four years old. And yet this statement covers all the essential points with respect to the gathering of latter-day Israel, to wit:

3 NEPHI 21:4

The destiny of America

Elder Mark E. Petersen has explained the significance of this verse as follows:

I take you back now to the time when the Savior was ministering in America. I hope that each one of you will read 3 Nephi 21. It is extremely significant. It is meaningful to us as Americans and as Latter-day Saints who live right now. You will recall that the Savior was talking to the Nephites about the Gentiles who would occupy this country in the latter days. He talked about the destiny of America, and explained why there would be a United States. Among other things, he said this:

" . . . it is wisdom in the Father that they [the Gentiles in this country] should be established in this land, and be set up as a free people by the power of the Father. . . ."

Then he gives the reason. He had been talking about the gospel; he had been talking about the predictions; he had been talking about . . . the records which eventually became the Book of Mormon. He said that this great modern nation of the Gentiles should be established on this land as a free people. And now I quote directly:

". . . that these things might come forth from them unto a remnant of your seed, that the covenant of the Father may be fulfilled which he hath covenanted with his people, O house of Israel." (3 Nephi 21:4.)

That is the reason there is an America. That is the destiny of America. The Almighty kept this land free from other people until such time as he was ready to establish our nation. . . .

So, . . . this is God's land. He raised it up specially as he has raised up no other nation. He has given us our flag. So far as I am concerned the flag of the United States is the flag of Almighty God.

Old Glory to me stands for everything that the gospel of Christ stands for, because Old Glory was raised up because there was to be a restoration of the gospel. I cannot separate my flag and my religion. I would fight for my flag as I would fight for my religion. (BYU Speeches of the Year, 1968.)

3 NEPHI 21:22-26

Who shall build the "New Jerusalem" of the last days?

The "New Jerusalem" of the last days will be built on the American continent by (1) "the remnant of Jacob," (2) the Gentiles who "shall come into the covenant and be numbered among . . . the remnant of Jacob," and (3) "as many of the house of Israel as shall come." (3 Nephi 21:22-25. Read also 3 Nephi 20:22; Ether 13:1-12.) After quoting extensively from chapters 20 and 21 of 3 Nephi, President Marion G. Romney explained the role of the "remnant of Jacob" in building the New Jerusalem:

From these declarations by Jesus, it is certain that the believing, repentant, righteous, faithful Indians shall be among "the remnant of Jacob" who are to build the New Jerusalem to which the Savior will come.

As early as 1831 the Lord assured the Prophet Joseph that "before the great day of" his coming should arrive "Jacob shall flourish in the wilderness, and the Lamanites shall blossom as the rose." (D&C 49:24.)

Some fifty-seven years ago, Hyrum M. Smith and Janne M. Sjodahl, commenting on this prophecy, wrote:

"The American Indians are, indeed, flourishing today. On Government reservations they enjoy a measure of prosperity beyond the dreams of their fathers. In Indian Territory they have attained a high degree of both civilization and prosperity. Indians now occupy Government offices and seats in legislative assemblies, in schools and pulpits, and in every walk of life. They are flourishing. This is all the more remarkable because at one time the general belief was that they were a vanishing race. When the United States became an independent nation, the number of Indians in North America was estimated at three millions, and in the year 1876 at only one million three hundred thousand. In 1907 the decrease had been checked, and an increase to one million four hundred and seventy-four thousand was reported. Only a prophet inspired by God could have foreseen such a decided turn in the tide of Indian affairs." (D&C Commentary, p. 287.)

In 1849, Orson Pratt wrote:

" . . . the fulness of the gospel, with its heavenly powers and blessings is now in the midst of many powerful tribes or nations of Israel or Indians; and thus has the prophecy of Jesus been in part fulfilled. The remainder of this great prophecy will soon come to pass, and then many of the Indian nations will become a civilized and Christian people, after which the Indians, who are the remnant of Joseph, will build [Had I been writing this I should have said, "Will assist in building"] the city called the New Jerusalem or Zion, being assisted by the Gentile Saints.

"If the Gentile Saints had built up the city of Zion in Jackson county, Missouri, before the gospel had been taken from among that nation, and before many of the Indian nations became converted, it would have falsified the prediction of Jesus in the Book of Mormon.

"The converted remnants of Joseph are to be the principal actors in the great work of the building up of the city of Zion [I believe this is true. I also believe that the said "remnants of Joseph" include the descendants of Ephraim]; after which the Indian nations will be gathered in one to the city of Zion and the surrounding country; then the powers of heaven will be revealed, and Jesus will descend in his glory and dwell in the midst of Zion." (Millennial Star, October 1, 1849, p. 293.)

That the Lord will continue to bless and prosper the Indians and all the rest of us in preparing Zion for the coming of the Savior, I humbly pray, in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen. (BYU Speeches of the Year, 1972.)

3 NEPHI 22:1-3

The desolate cities of the Gentiles to be inhabited

In describing some of the events of the last days including the destructions to come upon the Gentiles if they do not repent, the Savior quotes from chapter 54 of Isaiah. Among the prophecies contained in this chapter is the promise to the house of Israel that in the last days "thy seed shall inherit the Gentiles and make the desolate cities to be inhabited." (3 Nephi 22:3. See also Isaiah 54:3.)

3 NEPHI 22:15-17

Prophecies concerning the house of Israel in the last days

An additional prophecy by Isaiah (and repeated here by the Savior) concerns the gathering of the house of Israel in the last days. Isaiah warns the house of Israel that after they are gathered together, the nations of the earth "shall surely gather together against thee, not by me; whosoever shall gather together against thee shall fall for thy sake. . . . No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper." (3 Nephi 22:15, 17.) Some biblical scholars have assumed that the prophecies in Isaiah were fulfilled before the coming of Jesus Christ. However, the fact that the Savior quotes these prophecies from Isaiah 54 and relates them to the events of the last days would indicate they pertain to the dispensation of the fulness of times.

3 NEPHI 23:7-14

The value of the scriptures

It is of interest to note how important the scriptures are in the eyes of the Lord. The resurrected Jesus Christ not only read the records of the Nephites and asked the people to do the same, but he also commanded that an important element that had been omitted should be added to the records to make them complete. (3 Nephi 23:7-14.) Thus he was not only supporting the testimony of his servant, Samuel the Lamanite, but he was also helping to make the scriptures complete in and of themselves so far as testimony is concerned.

3 NEPHI 24-25

The prophecies of Malachi

Malachi, the last writer in our present Old Testament, lived approximately 400 B.C. Since his writings were not included on the brass plates of Laban, the Savior gave the words of Malachi to the Nephites. The angel Moroni also referred to these prophecies during his first visit with Joseph Smith, but he changed them as follows:

For behold, the day cometh that shall burn as an oven, and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly shall burn as stubble; for they that come shall burn them, saith the Lord of Hosts, that it shalt leave them neither root nor branch.

And again, he quoted the fifth verse thus: Behold, I will reveal unto you the Priesthood, by the hand of Elijah the prophet, before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord.

He also quoted the next verse differently: And he shall plant in the hearts of the children the promises made to the fathers, and the hearts of the children shall turn to their fathers. If it were not so, the whole earth would be utterly wasted at his coming. (Joseph Smith 2:37-39.)

It should be noted that Moroni's alterations of the Bible and Book of Mormon texts were probably for emphasis and clarification rather than correction.

3 NEPHI 24:8-10

A reference to tithing

Although the Nephites evidently lived the law of tithing, the only definite reference to this subject in the Book of Mormon appears in the Savior's quotation from Malachi:

Will a man rob God? Yet ye have robbed me. But ye say: Wherein have we robbed thee? In tithes and offerings. . . .

Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in my house; and prove me now herewith, saith the Lord of Hosts, if I will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing that there shall not be room enough to receive it. (3 Nephi 24:8, 10. See also Malachi 3:8, 10.)

3 NEPHI 25:5-6

The coming of Elijah

Malachi closes his book with the statement by the Savior that "before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord" Elijah should come to "turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a curse." (3 Nephi 25:5-6. See also Malachi 4:5-6; Joseph Smith 2:37-39.

Many biblical scholars have assumed that the prophesied "second coming of Elijah" took place during the lifetime of the Savior when Elijah appeared on the Mount of Transfiguration. (See Mark 9:4.) However, the fact that the Savior quoted this prophecy to the Nephites after his resurrection would indicate the fulfillment was still in the future. Also, a careful wording of this scripture indicates that the prophesied coming of Elijah pertained not to the first coming of the Savior, but to his second coming; Malachi said that Elijah the prophet should be sent before the coming of "the great and dreadful day of the Lord." The first coming of the Savior was a great day, but it was not dreadful; however, the second coming of the Savior will be both a great day (for the righteous) and a dreadful day (for the wicked).

Final proof that this prophecy pertains to the last days is found in the statement by Joseph Smith that on September 21, 1823, the angel Moroni quoted this prophecy and said it was about to be fulfilled. (See Joseph Smith 2:36-40.) Most Latter-day Saints believe this prophecy was fulfilled on April 3, 1836, when Elijah appeared in the Kirtland Temple and restored the sealing powers of the priesthood. The Doctrine and Covenants records the following concerning this visitation:

. . . another great and glorious vision burst upon us; for Elijah the prophet, who was taken to heaven without tasting death, stood before us, and said:

Behold, the time has fully come, which was spoken of by the mouth of Malachi—testifying that he [Elijah] should be sent, before the great and dreadful day of the Lord come—

To turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers, lest the whole earth be smitten with a curse—

Therefore, the keys of this dispensation are committed into your hands; and by this ye may know that the great and dreadful day of the Lord is near, even at the doors. (D&C 110:13-16.)

3 NEPHI 26:2-11

Only a few of the teachings of the Savior are found in the Book of Mormon

In teaching the gospel to the righteous Nephites, the Savior explains why the fulness of the gospel has not been revealed to all the people upon the earth. Mormon then explains why he did not write all of the statements of the Savior into his own record: "And now there cannot be written in this book even a hundredth part of the things which Jesus did truly teach unto the people; . . . these things . . .are a lesser part of the things which he taught the people; . . . I was about to write them, all which were engraven upon the plates of Nephi, but the Lord forbade it, saying: I will try the . . . faith of my people." (3 Nephi 26:6, 8, 11.)

In explanation as to why he did not allow his greater truths to be revealed, the Savior said that it was "expedient" to give his lesser teachings first to try the faith of the people. Then he warns: "And if it so be that they will not believe these things, then shall the greater things be withheld from them, unto their condemnation." (3 Nephi 26:10.)

3 NEPHI 26:21 and 27:1-8

The name of the true church of Jesus Christ

In answer to a question among the disciples as to what the name of the church should be, the Savior said that the church should be called after his name if it is established by him, and if it is built upon his gospel. (3 Nephi 27:8.) The Savior also reminds his disciples of the scripture that says, ". . . ye must take upon you the name of Christ." (3 Nephi 27:5.) Thus the name of the true church is The Church of Jesus Christ. However, to differentiate the true church of Christ on the earth now from the church established during the meridian of time, the Savior has directed that in this dispensation the name of his church should be The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. (D&C 115:4.)

3 NEPHI 27:13-18

The atonement of Jesus Christ

In explaining his gospel to the Nephites of about A.D. 34, the resurrected Jesus Christ also explained why it was necessary for him to come here upon this earth and atone for sin and provide for the resurrection. Concerning this dual contribution of the Savior and Redeemer of mankind, B. H. Roberts has written:

The effect of Adam's transgression was to destroy the harmony of things in this world. As a consequence of his fall man is banished from the presence of God—a spiritual death takes place and man becomes sensual, devilish, unholy, is cursed, we say, with a strong inclination to sinfulness. Man is also made subject to a temporal death, a separation of the spirit and body. Much might have been gained by this union of his spirit with his body of flesh and bone could it have been immortal, but that is now lost, by this temporal death, this separation of spirit and body. These conditions would have remained eternally fixed as the result of the operation of law—inexorable law, called "the justice of God," admitting of nothing else; for the law was given to eternal beings and by them violated, and man is left in the grasp of eternal justice, with all its consequences upon his head and the head of his progeny. And the justice of the law admitted the conditions, admitted that the penalties affixed should be effective, but this is justice—stern, unrelenting justice; justice untempered by mercy. But mercy must in some way be made to reach man, yet in a way also that will not destroy justice; for justice must be maintained, else all is confusion—ruin. If justice be destroyed—if justice be not maintained—"God will cease to be God." Hence mercy may not be introduced into the divine economy of this world without a vindication of the broken law by some means or other, for divine laws as well as human ones are mere nullities if their penalties be not in force.

The penalty of the law then, transgressed by Adam, must be executed, or else an adequate atonement must be made for man's transgression. This the work of the Christ. He makes the atonement. He comes to earth and assumes responsibility for this transgression of law, and gathers up into his own soul all the suffering due to the transgression of the law by Adam. All the suffering due to individual transgression of law—the direct consequences of the original transgression—from Adam to the end of the world.

The burden of us all is laid upon him. He will bear our griefs and carry our sorrows. He will be wounded for our transgressions, and be bruised for our iniquities. The chastisement of our peace will be upon him; on him is laid the iniquity of us all; by his stripes shall we be healed. That is to say, having gathered into himself all the suffering and sorrows due to all the sinning that shall be in the world, he is able to dictate the terms upon which man may lay hold of mercy—by which mercy may heal his wounds—and these terms he names in the conditions of the gospel, the acceptance of which brings complete redemption. The Christ brings to pass the resurrection of the dead. The spirit and the body are eternally reunited; the temporal death—one of the effects of Adam's transgression—is overcome. There is no more physical death; the "soul"—the eternally united spirit and body are now to be immortal as spirit alone before was immortal. The man so immortal is brought back into the presence of God, and if he has accepted the terms of the gospel by which he is redeemed from the effects of his own, as well as from Adam's transgression, his spiritual death is ended, and henceforth he may be spiritually immortal as well as physically immortal—eternally with God in an atmosphere of righteousness—the spiritual death is overcome.

Such I make out to be the Book of Mormon doctrine of the atonement, and the redemption of man through the gospel. (New Witnesses for God, 3:216-18.)

For additional review on the important subject of the atonement, re-read the materials following 2 Nephi 9:6-9 and Mosiah 3:15-27.

3 NEPHI 27:13-21

A review of the gospel of Jesus Christ

One of the conditions to be met by the true church is that it should be based upon the gospel of Christ. After explaining this point to his disciples, the Savior then reviews the gospel of Jesus Christ. One of the high points of all scripture is found in 3 Nephi 27:13-21 wherein the Savior outlines the essential doctrines of the gospel and explains their importance. He then summarizes the gospel in one brief statement: "Now this is the commandment: Repent, all ye ends of the earth, and come unto me and be baptized in my name, that ye may be sanctified by the reception of the Holy Ghost, that ye may stand spotless before me at the last day. Verily, verily, I say unto you, this is my gospel . . ." (3 Nephi 27:20-21.)

Thus a major purpose of the gospel is to provide those principles and ordinances which enable us to become sanctified and worthy to live again in the presence of our Heavenly Father. Concerning the importance of the atonement of Jesus Christ and the gospel plan of salvation, President Marion G. Romney has said:

The atonement of the Master is the central point of world history. Without it, the whole purpose for the creation of earth and our living upon it would fail. . . .

From the days of Adam to the days of Jesus Christ, every people who understood the gospel offered blood sacrifices, using animals or birds without blemish. This they did in contemplation of the great event which was to take place in the Meridian of Time.

When Jesus was about to go through that terrible suffering incident to the atonement, he took his disciples with him to the Passover. . . .

Jesus then went into the Garden of Gethsemane. There he suffered most. He suffered greatly on the cross, of course, but other men had died by crucifixion; in fact, a man hung on either side of him as he died on the cross. But no man, nor set of men, nor all men put together, ever suffered what the Redeemer suffered in the Garden. He went there to pray and suffer. One of the New Testament writers says that it ". . . was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground." (Luke 22:44.)

In this dispensation the Lord, calling upon the people to repent, tells them that unless they repent they must suffer even as he suffered. He describes that suffering in these words:

"Which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit—and would that I might not drink the bitter cup, and shrink—

"Nevertheless, glory be to the Father, and I partook and finished my preparations unto the children of men." (D&C 19:18-19.)

. . . I cannot here discuss with you in detail what the atonement of the Savior means to us. But without it, no man or woman would ever be resurrected. . . . And so all the world, believers and nonbelievers, are indebted to the Redeemer for their certain resurrection, because the resurrection will be as wide as was the fall, which brought death to every man.

There is another phase of the atonement which makes me love the Savior even more, and fills my soul with gratitude beyond expression. It is that in addition to atoning for Adam's transgression, thereby bringing about the resurrection, the Savior by his suffering paid the debt for my personal sins. He paid the debt for your personal sins and for the personal sins of every living soul that ever dwelt upon the earth or that ever will dwell in mortality upon the earth. But this he did conditionally. The benefits of this suffering for our individual transgressions will not come to us unconditionally in the same sense that the resurrection will come regardless of what we do. If we partake of the blessings of the atonement as far as our individual transgressions are concerned, we must obey the law.

And it is perfectly just that we are required to obey it because through the fall of Adam, man's free agency was preserved. We had nothing to do with death's coming into the world; death came as a consequence of Adam's fall. But we have everything to do with our own acts. When we commit sin, we are estranged from God and rendered unfit to enter into his presence. No unclean thing can enter into his presence. We cannot of ourselves, no matter how we may try, rid ourselves of the stain which is upon us as a result of our own transgressions. That stain must be washed away by the blood of the Redeemer, and he has set up the way by which that stain may be removed. That way is the gospel of Jesus Christ. The gospel requires us to believe in the Redeemer, accept his atonement, repent of our sins, be baptized by immersion for the remission of our sins, receive the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands, and continue faithfully to observe, or do the best we can to observe, the principles of the gospel all the days of our lives. (Conference Report, October 1953, pp. 34-36.)

3 NEPHI 27:19-20

The fulness of the gospel

In the Doctrine and Covenants, section 20, verses 8-10, the Lord has said that the Book of Mormon contains "the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles and to the Jews also." Many people have raised the question as to how the Book of Mormon could actually contain the fulness of the gospel when it doesn't even refer to such important ordinances as the temple endowment and marriage for eternity. Concerning this question, Joseph Fielding Smith has written:

First of all, let us consider what the Lord means by "a fulness of the gospel." He did not mean to convey the impression that every truth belonging to exaltation in the kingdom of God had been delivered to the Nephites and was recorded in the Book of Mormon, to be delivered to Gentiles and Jews in this dispensation. Neither would this statement imply that every truth belonging to the celestial kingdom and exaltation therein was to be found within the covers of the Book of Mormon. There are many truths belonging to the exaltation that have not been revealed, nor will they be revealed to man while he is in mortality. We must concede it to be a fact that there are many things related to the exaltation which cannot be received now and do not concern mortal men. These truths were not given to the Nephites; neither can they be given to us in this present day, for they do not in any way apply to the needs of the mortal condition, nor could we comprehend them while we are in mortality. These things belong to the kingdom of God and will be revealed to those who attain to the celestial exaltation.

. . . The fulness of the gospel then, as expressed in the Doctrine and Covenants, has reference to the principles of salvation by which we attain unto this glory. Therefore the Lord has revealed in the Book of Mormon all that is needful to direct people who are willing to hearken to its precepts, to a fulness of the blessings of the kingdom of God. The Book of Mormon then, does contain all the truths which are essential for Gentiles and Jews or any other people, to prepare them for this glorious exaltation in the celestial kingdom of God.

It is beyond dispute, or should be, that the Book of Mormon teaches that the first principles of the gospel are, faith in God; repentance from sin; baptism for the remission of sins; the gift of the Holy Ghost, obedience to divine law and that man cannot be saved in ignorance of these divine truths. It teaches that "wickedness never was happiness," and that no man can be saved without repentance of sin. (Answers to Gospel Questions, 3:95-97.)

President Charles W. Penrose has also written on this subject:

Now, some of our brethren have taken up quite a discussion as to the fulness of the everlasting gospel. We are told that the Book of Mormon contains the fulness of the gospel, that those who like to get up a dispute, say that the Book of Mormon does not contain any reference to the work of salvation for the dead, and there are many other things pertaining to the gospel that are not developed in that book, and yet we are told that book contains "the fulness of the everlasting gospel." Well, what is the fulness of the gospel? You read carefully the revelation in regard to the three glories, section 76, in the Doctrine and Covenants, and you find there defined what the gospel is. There God, the Eternal Father, and Jesus Christ, His Son, and the Holy Ghost, are held up as the three persons in the Trinity—the one God, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, all three being united and being one God. When people believe in that doctrine and obey the ordinances which are spoken of in the same list of principles, you get the fulness of the gospel for this reason: If you really believe so as to have faith in our Eternal Father and in his Son, Jesus Christ, the Redeemer, and will hear Him, you will learn all about what is needed to be done for the salvation of the living and the redemption of the dead.

When people believe and repent and are baptized by Divine authority, and the Holy Ghost is conferred upon them as a gift, they receive the everlasting gospel. We used to call it, and it is now called in the revelations, the "Gift of the Holy Ghost," the Holy Ghost, the spirit that proceeds from the presence of the Father throughout the immensity of space, which guides, directs, enlightens, which is light in and of itself, which is the spirit of intelligence, the "light of truth. . . ." (Conference Report, April 1922, pp. 27-28.)

3 NEPHI 28

Were the twelve Nephite disciples really apostles?

Although the words disciple (one who follows) and apostle (one who is sent) have distinct and separate meanings, the two terms are used somewhat interchangeably in the New Testament. The Book of Mormon tends to use the word disciple except when referring to the apostles who were called by Jesus when he lived on the earth on the eastern continent. In fact, apostle is used in only sixteen verses in the entire Book of Mormon. In some of the verses the word apostle refers to John the Beloved (1 Nephi 14:20, 24, 25, 27); in others it refers to the twelve selected by Jesus on the eastern continent (1 Nephi 11:34-36; 12:9; 13:24, 26, 39, 40, 41); and in the other verses it is used in a more general sense (Mormon 9:18; Ether 12:41; Moroni 2:2). It is doubtful that the word apostle is ever used in the Book of Mormon to refer to the chosen twelve of the Nephites. However, Joseph Fielding Smith indicates that they were apostles in the sense that they were special witnesses of the Savior. His statement follows:

The twelve men chosen by our Savior among the Nephites are called disciples in the Book of Mormon. . . .

While in every instance the Nephite twelve are spoken of as disciples, the fact remains that they had been endowed with divine authority to be special witnesses for Christ among their own people. Therefore, they were virtually apostles to the Nephite race, although their jurisdiction was . . . eventually to be subject to the authority and jurisdiction of Peter and the twelve chosen in Palestine. According to the definition prevailing in the world an apostle is a witness for Christ, or one who evangelizes a certain nation or people. "A zealous advocate of a doctrine or cause." Therefore the Nephite twelve became apostles, as special witnesses, just as did Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times.

When the Savior taught the Nephites he informed them that he had "other sheep" which were not of the Nephites, neither of the land of Jerusalem, and these also were to hear his voice and be ministered to by him. It is reasonable for us to conclude that among these others who were hidden from the rest of the world, he likewise chose disciples—perhaps twelve—to perform like functions and minister unto their people with the same fulness of divine authority. (Answers to Gospel Questions, 1:121-22.)

Also, the Prophet Joseph Smith, in a letter written dated March 1, 1842, refers to some of the teachings of the Book of Mormon: "This book also tells us that our Savior made His appearance upon this continent after His resurrection; that He planted the Gospel here in all its fulness, and richness, and power, and blessing; that they had Apostles, Prophets. . . ." (History of the Church, 4:538.)

This statement by the Prophet would also indicate that the term apostle could rightfully be used in referring to the chosen twelve Nephite leaders.

3 NEPHI 28:1-8, 13-17, 37-40

The nature of translated beings

One of the beliefs of the Latter-day Saints that help to make them a "peculiar people" in the eyes of others is that concerning translated beings; that is, Latter-day Saints believe there are people now living on the earth whose physical bodies have been changed or "translated" into another order or state of existence. Although this doctrine is almost unique with Latter-day Saints, it should not be so, for it is clearly taught in the New Testament. After his resurrection, Jesus Christ appeared to some of his disciples at the sea of Tiberias. He counseled his disciples and commanded Peter to "feed my sheep." Then Peter asked the Master concerning the future mission of John the Beloved. The account of the conversation is written in the book of John as follows:

Peter . . . saith to Jesus, Lord, and what shall this man do?

Jesus saith unto him, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? follow thou me.

Then went this saying abroad among the brethren, that that disciple should not die: yet Jesus said not unto him, He shall not die; but, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? (John 21:21-23.)

A more complete account of this experience is given in the Doctrine and Covenants (section 7), but the New Testament account is sufficiently clear to indicate that John the Beloved was to live on the earth until the Savior should come in his glory.

The Savior gave the three Nephite disciples in the Book of Mormon the same promise he had given earlier to John: ". . . ye shall never taste of death; but ye shall live to behold all the doings of the Father unto the children of men, even until all things shall be fulfilled according to the will of the Father, when I shall come in my glory with the powers of heaven. And . . . ye shall be changed in the twinkling of an eye from mortality to immortality; and then shall ye be blessed in the kingdom of my Father." (3 Nephi 28:7-8.)

This statement has raised the question in the minds of some readers as to whether or not John and the three Nephite disciples are still mortal—that is, must these men still suffer a physical death? The answer to this question is "Yes; they are still mortal, for they still must die." The Savior clearly indicated this when he told the three Nephite disciples, "when I shall come in my glory ye shall be changed in the twinkling of an eye from mortality to immortality." (3 Nephi 28:8. Italics added.) Thus their spirits will be separated from their bodies (which is physical death) but will come back into their bodies (which is their resurrection) in the "twinkling of an eye"—that is, almost immediately.

Some people are confused on this subject by the following two statements by the Savior: ". . . ye shall never taste of death . . . ye shall never endure the pains of death." (3 Nephi 28:7-8.) These statements do not mean the same as though the Savior had said "Ye shall never die." This is made clear in a revelation by the resurrected Jesus Christ to the Prophet Joseph Smith: "And it shall come to pass that those that die in me shall not taste of death, for it shall be sweet unto them; And they that die not in me, wo unto them, for their death is bitter." (D&C 42:46-47. Italics added.) In other words, death will be either a sweet or a bitter experience for people: if they are righteous, death will be a sweet experience—they will not taste of death nor feel the pains of death; if they are wicked, death will be a bitter experience. But both groups of people must die. As Paul stated, "For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." (1 Corinthians 15:22.)

Joseph Fielding Smith has written the following concerning the present mortal condition of John the Beloved and the three Nephite disciples: ". . . translated beings are still mortal and will have to pass through the experience of death . . . although this will be instantaneous. . . . Translated beings have not passed through death; that is, they have not had the separation of the spirit and the body." (Answers to Gospel Questions, 1:165; 2:46.)

And finally, the Prophet Joseph Smith has indicated that translated beings have future missions to perform: "Translated bodies cannot enter into rest until they have undergone a change equivalent to death. Translated bodies are designed for future missions." (History of the Church, 4:425.)

3 NEPHI 29:8

Latter-day Saints are not to ridicule the people of the house of Israel

The gospel of Jesus Christ invokes us to love our neighbor as ourselves, and if all mankind lived this commandment there would be no persecution or hatred of other peoples. The Savior knew that some groups of people would be persecuted, including the Jewish people. However, he told the Nephites that in the last days he would remember the covenants made with the house of Israel. Therefore, he tells the Nephites and us: "Yea, and ye need not any longer hiss, nor spurn, nor make game of the Jews, nor any of the remnant of the house of Israel." (3 Nephi 29:8.)
