Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Book of Mormon ( 1976)

FOURTH NEPHI

TITLE OF "FOURTH NEPHI"

For information concerning the origin of the title of "Fourth Nephi," see the material listed after Title of Third Nephi.

4 NEPHI 14

New disciples ordained

As the original twelve Nephite disciples chosen by the Savior passed away, new disciples were chosen to take their place. This practice evidently continued as long as the Nephites were righteous enough to have a church organization amongst them. The three Nephite disciples who were promised by the Savior that they should live on the earth until his second coming (3 Nephi 28:4-8) apparently continued to work with the people for several hundred years; both Mormon and Moroni were ministered to by them (Mormon 8:11).

4 NEPHI 19-21, 47

Evidences of long life among the Nephites

Several instances could be cited to indicate that many of the Nephites lived to a rather old age. For example, Jacob, the son of Lehi, was born during the eight-year trek from Jerusalem to Bountiful—that is, between 600 B.C. and 592 B.C. Jacob's son Enos died sometime after 420 B.C. (Enos 25.) Thus the lives of Jacob and his son Enos covered at least 172 years. Other examples can be taken from the book of Fourth Nephi. The four historians who wrote during the period covered by the book of Fourth Nephi and the approximate number of years each of them had the record are as follows: (1) Nephi (the son of the Nephi who was a disciple of Jesus Christ)—from about A.D. 34 to A.D. 111 (see the subtitle of the book of Fourth Nephi and 4 Nephi 18-19); (2) Amos (the son of the historian Nephi mentioned above)—from A.D. 111 to A.D. 194 (4 Nephi 19-21); (3) Amos (the son of Amos listed above)—from A.D. 194 to A.D. 306 (4 Nephi 21, 47); (4) Ammaron (the brother of Amos mentioned in 3, above)—from A.D. 306 until A.D. 321, when he hid up the records in the hill Shim (4 Nephi 47-49; Mormon 1:3).

The life expectancy of the people was quite long during this period; the first historian kept the record for 77 years, the second for 84 years, and the third for 112 years! Of course, their age when they obtained the record would have to be added to the figures listed above to determine their age at the time of death.

4 NEPHI 20, 36-39

New meaning of the terms "Nephites" and "Lamanites"

During the golden age of the people of Lehi after the appearance of the resurrected Jesus Christ there were no people known as ". . . Lamanites, nor any manner of -ites." (4 Nephi 17.) However, approximately A.D. 194 there was "a small part of the people who had revolted from the church and taken upon them the name of Lamanites; therefore there began to be Lamanites again in the land." (Verse 20.)

In A.D. 231 "there arose a people who were called the Nephites, and they were true believers in Christ . . . therefore the true believers in Christ, and the true worshipers of Christ . . . were called Nephites. . . . And it came to pass that they who rejected the gospel were called Lamanites." (Verses 36-38.)

The terms Nephites and Lamanites for the remainder of the Book of Mormon are determined by this division, which had taken place by A.D. 231. In other words, the Lamanites of the last two hundred years of Book of Mormon history are descendants of those who revolted against the true church of Christ between about A.D. 194 and 231.

4 NEPHI 24-27

The steps of apostasy

The small book of Fourth Nephi provides a classic example of the steps that lead to apostasy. In the first part of this book the historian tells of an almost perfect society. In fact, he says concerning these people: ". . . surely there could not be a happier people among all the people who had been created by the hand of God." (Verse 16.) However, by the end of this brief book the historian has to record that "both the people of Nephi and the Lamanites had become exceeding wicked one like unto another. And it came to pass that the robbers of Gadianton did spread over all the face of the land; and there were none that were righteous save it were the disciples of Jesus." (Verses 45-46.)

Significantly the historian records step by step the things that led the people from the state of nearly perfect happiness to a state of exceeding wickedness:

(1) A small part of the people revolted from the church—verse 20.

(2) The people became "exceeding rich"—verse 23.

(3) Some of the people began to be "lifted up in pride, such as the wearing of costly apparel"—verse 24.

(4) After the people were built up in pride, "from that time forth they did have their goods and their substance no more common among them"—verse 25.

(5) The people began to be divided into classes—verse 26.

(6) The people began to "build up churches unto themselves to get gain, and began to deny the true church of Christ"—verse 26.

(7) Many churches were established "which professed to know the Christ, and yet they did deny the more parts of his gospel"—verse 27.

(8) These churches which professed to know Christ did administer "that which was sacred [the sacrament] unto him whom it had been forbidden because of unworthiness. And this church did multiply exceedingly because of iniquity, and because of the power of Satan who did get hold upon their hearts"—verses 27-28.

(9) Another church was established "which denied the Christ; and they did persecute the true church of Christ. . . . and they did despise them because of the many miracles which were wrought among them"—verse 29.

(10) ". . . the people did harden their hearts and seek to kill" the few remaining righteous people, including the three Nephite disciples—verse 31.

(11) The "wicked part of the people began again to build up the secret oaths and combinations of Gadianton"—verse 42.

(12) And finally, the people became "proud in their hearts" and "vain like unto their brethren," thus "both the people of Nephi and the Lamanites had become exceeding wicked one like unto another. . . . and there were none that were righteous save it were the disciples of Jesus"—verses 43-46.
