Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Book of Mormon ( 1976)

MORMON

MORMON 1:1-7

The boyhood of Mormon

Mormon does not provide us with very much information concerning his boyhood, but the scanty details he does provide indicate:

Elder Sterling W. Sill has written concerning the boyhood and manhood of Mormon as follows:

Mormon has an interesting and remarkable history. At age 15, like Samuel at Shiloh, he received a personal visitation from the Lord. And at age 16 he was launched upon what so far as I can find was the greatest military career in history, stretching as it did over a period of 58 years. (Mormon 1:15, 2:16.)

It is interesting to imagine the kind of qualities that a young man would need to have to attract a personal visit from the Lord at such a young age, and then when only sixteen years old to win for himself the leadership of a great national army.

Mormon possessed in great abundance the qualities that make a leader believed in, loved and followed, only one of these will be mentioned here and that was that Mormon had to be restrained in his desire to preach the gospel. If you would like to develop a good fault, here is one of the best I know of. Most of us have to be coaxed and begged and reminded to do our duty. Mormon had to be held back. (Mormon 1:16-17.)

. . . No one had to push Mormon, neither were his abilities confined to one field. He was a prophet, general, author, historian, and almost the last survivor of a great civilization. . . . If you think it an inspiration that a 16 year old boy could win the leadership of a great national army what would you think of a man between the ages of 65 and 74 who was still the best man among his entire people for this top position of leadership, and in those days the general marched at the head and not in the rear of his troops. (Mormon 6:11) It is one thing to shoot a guided missile at an enemy a thousand miles away, but it is quite another thing to meet the enemy face to face, and with a sword or a battle axe, take on all comers, old and young, on any basis they might choose to elect; and still be in there fighting at age 74. No weakling or coward survives a test like that. His leadership and great skill in battle must have been an inspiration to those fortunate companions in arms who were privileged to fight at his side . . .

Mormon impresses his greatness upon us in many ways. He was a greater general than Washington. Washington led a little Revolutionary army for just a few months, and the total American dead was 4,435. . . .

Mormon was a greater statesman than Lincoln. Lincoln undoubtedly received inspiration from God during the years that he was trying to hold the Union together, but Mormon talked with God directly over this long period.

Mormon was a greater author than Shakespeare. Shakespeare wrote a great literature, much of which is good and much of which is bad. But Mormon wrote by direct command of God a literature which if followed would save the world. (The Upward Reach [Bookcraft, 1962], pp. 248-49, 252-54.)

MORMON 1:15-16

Mormon "was visited of the Lord"

Mormon writes in his record the following brief statement concerning one of the greatest events in his life: ". . . being fifteen years of age and being somewhat of a sober mind, therefore I was visited of the Lord, and tasted and knew of the goodness of Jesus." (Mormon 1:15.) This statement indicates that he was evidently the recipient of a personal visitation by the Savior.

MORMON 2:17-18

Mormon abridges his own record from the large plates of Nephi

When Ammaron turned the responsibility of the records over to Mormon, he indicated that Mormon should "engrave on the plates of Nephi all the things that [he] had observed concerning his people." (Mormon 1:4.) Thus Mormon's major record of the events of his day was written on the large plates of Nephi. However, later in his life he was commanded by the Lord to make a separate set of plates, the plates of Mormon. He then abridged onto his own plates all of the writings from the large plates of Nephi, including his own writings. Concerning his writings on these two sets of plates, Mormon said: "And upon the plates of Nephi I did make a full account of all the wickedness and abominations; but upon these plates [the plates of Mormon] I did forbear to make a full account of their wickedness and abominations . . ." (Mormon 2:18.)

Earlier in his writings, Mormon indicated he did not write on the plates of Mormon even one hundredth part of the things that were written on the large plates of Nephi. (3 Nephi 26:6-8.)

MORMON 3:10 and 4:4

Mormon's teachings on war

After Mormon had led his armies to victory in at least three major encounters, the Nephites

began to boast in their own strength, and began to swear before the heavens that they would avenge themselves of the blood of their brethren who had been slain by their enemies.

And they did swear by the heavens, and also by the throne of God, that they would go up to battle against their enemies, and would cut them off from the face of the land. (Mormon 3:9-10.)

When the Nephite soldiers decided to attack the Lamanites first, Mormon refused to lead them in offensive war. This position was not only justified by earlier teachings of the prophets and the counsel of the Lord (see 3 Nephi 3:20-21; Alma 43:46; Alma 48:14), but was also vindicated by subsequent events: the Nephite armies began to be defeated from that time forth. (For further information on the teachings of the Book of Mormon concerning war, read the material listed after 3 Nephi 3:20-21.)

MORMON 3:17-22

God's system of providing judges

Although Jesus Christ is the eventual judge of all mankind, he has established a system of judges to help him in this responsibility. For example, Mormon indicates that the twelve apostles of the Savior on the eastern continent are to judge the twelve tribes of Israel. (Mormon 3:18.) Thus the twelve Nephite disciples on the American continent are to be judged by the twelve apostles on the eastern continent (see 1 Nephi 12:9-10; Mormon 3:19), and in turn these twelve Nephite disciples will judge the "remnant of the people," which refers to the descendants of Lehi and Ishmael.

MORMON 4:10-12

The thirst for blood and war

Once the Nephite soldiers started to wage offensive war they soon became so bloodthirsty they were concerned only with the taking of human life. Thus both the Nephites and Lamanites became obsessed with the desire to kill. Concerning this situation Mormon writes:

And it is impossible for the tongue to describe, or for man to write a perfect description of the horrible scene of the blood and carnage which was among the people, both of the Nephites and of the Lamanites; and every heart was hardened, so that they delighted in the shedding of blood continually.

And there never had been so great wickedness among all the children of Lehi, nor even among all the house of Israel, according to the words of the Lord, as was among this people. (Mormon 4:11-12.)

The leaders of this dispensation have also warned against the dangers of starting an offensive war. President Charles W. Penrose has said:

Now if a nation essays to go forth against another nation for the purpose of conquest, to gain territory, to grasp something that does not belong to that nation, then the nation thus assailed has the right to resist even to the shedding of blood, as it was in this land in the war for independence. But we have to be careful as to what spirit we are guided by. If we want to go out to battle, to encroach upon other peoples' liberties and rights, to gain their lands, to destroy their property without any right or reason, that is one thing; but if somebody comes against us to destroy us and our property and our homes and our rights and our privileges, either on land or sea, then we have the right under the divine law to rise for our own protection and take such steps as are necessary. But, . . . we Latter-day Saints must watch ourselves and not give way to passion and desire to shed blood and to destroy, for that is the power of the evil one. We do not want to imitate any nation that is bent on a policy of destruction, to destroy where they cannot rule, to break down and trample under foot where they cannot dominate. If we have that desire, it is the spirit of the wicked one. . . .

There is a very great difference between arising to go forth for conquest, for blood, for plunder, to gain territory and power in the earth, and in fighting to defend our own possessions in the spirit of justice and righteousness and equity, and standing up like men for those things that we have a right to contend for. (Conference Report, April 1917, pp. 21-22.)

(For further information concerning the teachings of modern prophets on this subject, read the material listed after 3 Nephi 3:20-21.)

MORMON 5:14

One purpose of the Book of Mormon is to persuade the Jews to believe in Jesus Christ

Several purposes for the coming forth of the Book of Mormon have been listed within the book itself. However, one purpose listed frequently is that the Book of Mormon is to help persuade "the unbelieving of the Jews . . . that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the living God; that the Father may bring about, through his most Beloved, his great and eternal purpose, in restoring the Jews, or all the house of Israel, to the land of their inheritance, which the Lord their God hath given them, unto the fulfilling of his covenant." (Mormon 5:14.)

This purpose is also listed by Moroni in the section that now comprises the title page of the Book of Mormon: "Which is to show unto the remnant of the House of Israel what great things the Lord hath done for their fathers; and that they may know the covenants of the Lord, that they are not cast off forever—And also to the convincing of the Jew and Gentile that JESUS is the CHRIST, the ETERNAL GOD, manifesting himself unto all nations."

MORMON 6:11

How long did the "battle of Cumorah" last?

The Book of Mormon is not absolutely clear on this point. It states that the battle of Cumorah started when "three hundred and eighty and four years had passed away," that is, A.D. 385. (Mormon 6:5.) After the battle was completed and the Lamanites had killed most of the Nephites, Mormon took the Nephite survivors with him and they "did behold on the morrow, when the Lamanites had returned unto their camps," the terrible scene of destruction. (Mormon 6:11, 15.) This could mean "on the morrow" after the battle was completed, regardless of how long the battle lasted.

MORMON 6:11-15

The number of Nephite fatalities

In order to compare the number of fatalities among the Nephites at the battle of Cumorah with the fatalities among the U.S. citizens in the major wars of this country, the following information is provided:

Figure 1: U.S. Casualties

Figure 2: World Casualties

MORMON 7:8-9

The Book of Mormon and the Bible testify of each other

Chapter 7 of the "book of Mormon" is the last chapter written by Mormon himself. In virtually the concluding verses of this chapter, Mormon bears his testimony concerning the importance of the record he has written. Unfortunately, many students of the Bible do not realize the significance and importance of Mormon's statement because he uses pronouns to refer to the Bible and the Book of Mormon. In the following quotation of Mormon's writings, the exact scripture referred to will be inserted in brackets:

Therefore repent, and be baptized in the name of Jesus, and lay hold upon the gospel of Christ, which shall be set before you, not only in this record [the Book of Mormon] but also in the record which shall come unto the Gentiles from the Jews, which record shall come from the Gentiles unto you [the Bible].

For behold, this [the Book of Mormon] is written for the intent that ye may believe that [the Bible]; and if ye believe that [the Bible] ye will believe this also [the Book of Mormon] and if ye believe this [the Book of Mormon] ye will know concerning your fathers, and also the marvelous works which were wrought by the power of God among them. (Mormon 7:8-9.)

(For further information concerning the Bible and the Book of Mormon as scriptural witnesses, see Appendix A, "The Book of Mormon as Part of God's System of Witnesses.")

MORMON 8:2-5

Were all of the Nephites destroyed except Moroni?

The two key words to consider in this question are Nephites and destroyed.

It is well to remember that the word Nephite apparently had a different meaning near the close of the Book of Mormon than it did before A.D. 231. (See 4 Nephi 20, 36-39.) From approximately 544 B.C. to A.D. 34 (Jacob 1:13-14) the term Nephite referred either to the descendants of Nephi and those who went with him into the wilderness (2 Nephi 5:5-8) or to those who joined with this group. From about A.D. 34 to nearly A.D. 194, there were not "any manner of -ites" among the descendants of Lehi. (4 Nephi 17.) By A.D. 194, however, a group of people revolted from the church and took upon themselves the name of Lamanites (4 Nephi 20), and by A.D. 231 those who had remained true to the church became known as Nephites (4 Nephi 36). For the remainder of the Book of Mormon, the term Nephite apparently refers to the descendants of those who had been faithful in A.D. 231.

Concerning whether or not all of the Nephites were destroyed, Hugh Nibley has written the following:

Are there not many Latter-day Saints who will insist that every American of pre-Columbian descent must be a Lamanite because, forsooth, there were once Nephites and Lamanites, and the Nephites were destroyed? Yet the Book of Mormon itself makes such an interpretation impossible. The Nephites were destroyed, we are told, but . . . what does the Book of Mormon mean by "destroyed"? The word is to be taken, as are so many other key words in the book, in its primary and original sense: "to unbuild; to separate violently into its constituent parts; to break up the structure." To destroy is to wreck the structure, not to annihilate the parts. Thus in 1 Nephi 17:31 we read of Israel in Moses' day that, "According to his word he did destroy them; and according to his word he did lead them . . ." bringing them together after they had been "destroyed," i.e., scattered, and needed a leader. "As one generation hath been destroyed among the Jews," according to II Nephi 25:9, ". . . even so they have been destroyed from generation to generation according to their iniquities." A complete slaughter of any one generation would of course be the end of their history altogether, but that is not what "destroyed" means. Of the Jews at Jerusalem Nephi says (1 Nephi 17:43), "I know that the day must shortly come that they must be destroyed, save only a few. . . ." Later, "after the Messiah hath arisen from the dead . . . behold Jerusalem shall be destroyed again . . ." (II Nephi 25:15). In these two cases what actually happened was that the Jews were all scattered "save a few only" that remained in the land. The Israelites upon entering the Promised Land, we are told, drove out "the children of the land, yea, unto the scattering them to destruction" (1 Nephi 17:32). Here it is plainly stated that the destruction of the Canaanites was their scattering—as is known to have been the case. Likewise of the Nephites: ". . . and after thy seed shall be destroyed, and dwindle in unbelief, and also the seed of thy brethren, behold these things shall be hid up" (1 Nephi 13:35), where both Nephites and Lamanites dwindle in unbelief after they have been destroyed.

Only once in the Book of Mormon do we read of a case of annihilation, when we are specifically told that "every living soul of the Ammonihahites was destroyed" (Alma 16:9), where not only the social structure but each individual is undone. In other instances the Lord promises that he will not utterly destroy the descendants of Lehi's youngest son, Joseph (II Nephi 3:3), or of Lemuel (id., 4:9), and even Nephi is told that God "will not suffer that the Gentiles will utterly destroy the mixture of thy seed which are among thy brethren" (1 Nephi 13:30), even though the promises and fulfillment were that the Nephites should be "destroyed" (Ether 8:21), and even though Moroni can say: "there is none, save it be Lamanites" (Ether 4:3). (Lehi in the Desert and the World of the Jaredites, pp. 240-42.)

Also, it is of interest to note that the Lord has referred to Nephites in this dispensation. (See D&C 3:16-19.)

MORMON 8:26-41

Conditions of the last days

After the death of Mormon, his son Moroni writes the last two chapters (chapters 8 and 9) in his father's book, the "book of Mormon." Moroni evidently intends at first that these chapters should conclude his father's record; therefore, he outlines why the record is to be published in the last days and also prophesies the conditions existing when the book is to come forth. According to Moroni's prophecy, the Book of Mormon was to come forth in a day when:

Behold, the Lord hath shown unto me great and marvelous things concerning that which must shortly come, at that day when these things shall come forth among you.

Behold, I speak unto you as if ye were present, and yet ye are not. But behold, Jesus Christ hath shown you unto me, and I know your doing. (Mormon 8:34-35.)

MORMON 9:1

Moroni's address to unbelievers

As indicated in the preceding note, Moroni at first evidently intended this chapter to be the last one in the entire Book of Mormon. Thus he addresses himself to "those who do not believe in Christ." (Mormon 9:1.) Then in a powerful, logical, and forceful manner he outlines the major teachings of the gospel of Jesus Christ and indicates why all men must understand and apply these principles if they are to find the peace and happiness they desire. He says the gospel is not restricted to a chosen few, but is available "unto all, even unto the ends of the earth." (Mormon 9:21.) Finally he concludes a portion of his address with this stirring statement:

. . . I speak unto you as though I spake from the dead; for I know that ye shall hear my words.

Condemn me not because of mine imperfection, neither my father, because of his imperfection, neither them who have written before him; but rather give thanks unto God that he hath made manifest unto you our imperfections, that ye may learn to be more wise than we have been. (Mormon 9:30-31.)

MORMON 9:32-34

The script of the plates of Mormon

Moroni's statement in Mormon 9:32-34 pertains to the plates of Mormon and does not necessarily pertain to the small plates of Nephi from which we get the first 132 pages in our present Book of Mormon. Concerning the script of the plates of Mormon, Moroni says: ". . . we have written this record according to our knowledge, in the characters which are called among us the reformed Egyptian, being handed down and altered by us, according to our manner of speech." (Mormon 9:32.) He seems to indicate in the following verse that the Nephites are still speaking a version of Hebrew, for he admits that "if our plates had been sufficiently large we should have written in Hebrew; but the Hebrew hath been altered by us also." (Mormon 9:33.)
